THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2010-846
ANTHONY HAYES
v.
SOUTHERN NEW HAMPSHIRE MEDICAL CENTER
Argued: September 22, 2011
Opinion Issued: November 29, 2011
Smith-Weiss Shepard, P.C., of Nashua (Melissa S. Penson on the brief
and orally), for the plaintiff.
Welts, White & Fontaine, P.C., of Nashua (George H. Thompson, Jr. on
the brief and orally), for the defendant.
CONBOY, J. The appellant, Anthony Hayes (Anthony), appeals an order
of the Superior Court (Lynn, C.J.) denying his petition to enjoin sheriff’s sale
and finding valid and executable the prejudgment attachment of the appellee,
Southern New Hampshire Medical Center (SNHMC), on certain rental property
owned by him. We affirm.
The following undisputed facts are drawn from the record and Southern
New Hampshire Medical Center v. Hayes, 159 N.H. 711 (2010). The petitioner
and his wife, Karen, were married in 1977. S. N.H. Med. Ctr., 159 N.H. at 713.
In 2006, Karen, who did not have health insurance, received emergency
medical treatment at SNHMC for complications stemming from alcoholism,
resulting in a balance due of $85,238.88. Id.
In November 2006, SNHMC filed suit in superior court against the
Hayeses for Karen’s unpaid medical expenses. At the same time, SNHMC
petitioned to attach a portion of the couple’s real estate. See id. When SNHMC
initiated its civil action, the Hayeses owned, as joint tenants with rights of
survivorship, two unencumbered parcels of real estate – a rental property in
Amherst (the Amherst property) and their primary residence in Merrimack (the
Merrimack property). The attachment petition was granted and it was recorded
on November 30, 2006. In January 2007, SNHMC petitioned to attach another
parcel of the couple’s real estate. This petition was also granted, and the
attachment was subsequently recorded.
By order of March 28, 2007, the Trial Court (Brennan, J.) granted
SNHMC’s motion for summary judgment against Karen in the amount of
$85,238.88, plus costs, but denied the motion as to Anthony. See id. at 714.
Following a bench trial, the Trial Court (Smukler, J.) entered judgment against
Anthony in the same amount – $85,238.88 – under the doctrine of necessaries.
See id. Both judgments were appealed. Id. at 713. On February 11, 2010, we
affirmed the grant of summary judgment against Karen, but reversed the
judgment entered against Anthony and remanded the matter for a new trial.
Id. at 713, 716, 721.
During the pendency of these proceedings, on January 18, 2007, the
Hayeses were divorced pursuant to a stipulated agreement. Under its terms,
each was responsible for his or her own medical expenses not covered by
insurance. Id. at 713. Specifically, “Karen was responsible for paying the debt
to SNHMC as well as any other medical debts or bills.” Id. (brackets omitted).
Karen received one automobile valued at $1,200 and her bank account with a
balance of $0.00. Id. Anthony was awarded the Merrimack and Amherst
properties, which he acknowledged were subject to SNHMC’s attachments. See
id. Pursuant to their stipulation, on January 22, 2007, Karen quitclaimed the
Amherst and Merrimack properties to Anthony. On August 25, 2007, Karen
died.
In the spring of 2010, SNHMC obtained limited probate administration
for the purpose of requesting a writ of execution to “proceed with a Sheriff’s
sale on . . . [the Amherst property] in order to satisfy its judgment against
Karen W. Hayes.” On July 20, 2010, the superior court issued a writ of
execution for $88,849.59. Subsequently, the sheriff’s sale for the Amherst
property was scheduled for November 30, 2010.
2
On November 29, 2010, Anthony filed a Petition to Enjoin Sheriff’s Sale
and for Declaratory Judgment. The Trial Court (Nicolosi, J.) enjoined the sale,
contingent upon Anthony posting adequate security, and scheduled a further
hearing. After that hearing, the Trial Court (Lynn, C.J.) concluded that
“SNHMC’s attachment of Karen Hayes’s interest in the Amherst property
remains valid and that SNHMC is entitled to execute against the property to
satisfy its judgment against her.”
On appeal, Anthony contends that, because Karen quitclaimed her
interest in the property prior to entry of final judgment against her, the trial
court erred as a matter of law when it failed to find that Karen’s death
terminated SNHMC’s prejudgment attachment. SNHMC counters that the trial
court’s order was supported by the evidence and was not erroneous as a matter
of law. Specifically, SNHMC maintains that Karen voluntarily severed the joint
tenancy when she quitclaimed the Amherst property to Anthony, creating fee
simple title in Anthony subject to its attachments.
We will affirm the trial court’s factual findings unless they are
unsupported by the evidence and will affirm the trial court’s legal rulings
unless they are erroneous as a matter of law. Sutton v. Town of Gilford, 160
N.H. 43, 55 (2010).
A joint tenancy with right of survivorship is a unique type of property
ownership. Joint tenants are said to have a unity of title and of interest as well
as of possession. See Wentworth v. Remick, 47 N.H. 226, 226 (1866). Each
joint tenant has full ownership rights. 17 C. Szypszak, New Hampshire
Practice, Real Estate § 5.03, at 100 (2003). The distinguishing feature of a
joint tenancy is the survivorship right, by which a surviving joint tenant
succeeds to the entire real estate upon the death of the other joint tenant. See
id.; see also Boissonnault v. Savage, 137 N.H. 229, 231 (1993). However, a
joint tenant may alienate or convey her interest in the property, and thereby
defeat the right of survivorship. Boissonnault, 137 N.H. at 231; see also
Mulvanity v. Nute, 95 N.H. 526, 528 (1949). Here, Anthony concedes that
Karen severed the joint tenancy when she conveyed to him, by quitclaim deed,
her interest in the Amherst property. Accordingly, as a result of the severance
of the joint tenancy, Anthony had no right of survivorship upon Karen’s death.
See 17 C. Szypszak, supra § 5.03, at 100 (“If a joint tenant conveys his or her
interest in the property, the joint tenancy is said to be severed and the owners
become tenants in common.”); see also Wentworth, 47 N.H. at 227. Anthony
also concedes that Karen quitclaimed her interest subject to SNHMC’s
attachment. Nevertheless, Anthony maintains that Karen’s death extinguished
SNHMC’s attachment on the Amherst property.
Relying on Roaf v. Champlin, 79 N.H. 219 (1919), Anthony urges us to
“[f]ocus[] upon and follow[] Karen’s interest” at the time SNHMC attached the
3
property. He contends that “when SNHMC attached the Amherst property then
jointly owned by Karen and Anthony Hayes, it could only attach the interest
that Karen had in that property” and “[b]ecause, at the time of the attachment,
Karen’s interest in the Amherst property was that as a joint tenant with right of
survivorship, and the attachment was based upon that same interest, the
attachment terminated at the moment of her death.”
In Roaf, the plaintiff creditor attached real estate in which the debtor
held a remainder interest. Id. at 221. Before the debtor obtained his
remainder interest, however, the tenants of the life estate legally conveyed the
real estate to a third party. Id. We held that “[t]he plaintiff, by his attachment
of all the real estate of [the debtor], could not acquire any greater interest than
[the debtor] had.” Id. Accordingly, because the debtor’s remainder interest
never materialized, the plaintiff acquired no interest by attaching the real
estate. Id. at 224.
Anthony asserts that, here, as in Roaf, since the creditor’s attachment
was conditioned upon the debtor’s continued interest in the property, SNHMC’s
attachment is similarly contingent on Karen’s continued interest in the
Amherst property. Just as the conveyance extinguished the debtor’s remainder
interest in Roaf and consequently the creditor’s attachment, Anthony argues
Karen’s death terminated her interest and in turn SNHMC’s attachment.
Roaf, however, is distinguishable. Unlike the debtor in Roaf, who only
had a future interest in the subject property, at the time of SNHMC’s
attachment, Karen had a present, alienable interest in the property; namely, an
undivided one-half interest. See Rodman v. Young, 141 N.H. 236, 238 (1996)
(“It is the [debtor’s] interest in the real estate at the time the attachment was
originally made, and the lien resulting therefrom, that controls . . . .”).
Therefore, unlike the creditor in Roaf, SNHMC did not attach a contingent
interest. Thus, we are not persuaded by Anthony’s assertion that we should
“[f]ocus[] upon and follow[] Karen’s interest” and disregard her inter vivos
conveyance to Anthony, which defeated his right of survivorship.
Anthony further argues that this case is controlled by Beland v. Estey,
116 N.H. 8 (1976), and that the trial court erred in finding Beland
distinguishable. Relying on Beland, he argues that Karen’s death extinguished
SNHMC’s attachment since a sheriff’s sale was not conducted prior to her
death. We agree with the trial judge that Beland is distinguishable.
In Beland, the plaintiffs became “creditors” of the defendant, Bernard
Estey, within the terms of RSA chapter 545 (the predecessor of the Uniform
Fraudulent Transfer Act, RSA chapter 545-A), when their property, on which
Bernard was working, was damaged by fire allegedly caused by his negligence.
Id. at 8. Several months later, Bernard conveyed to his wife his interest in
4
property they held jointly. Id. at 8-9. The plaintiffs then brought a bill in
equity to set aside as fraudulent Bernard’s conveyance to his wife. Id. at 8.
The trial court dismissed the plaintiffs’ bill, finding the conveyance did not
violate the statute. We did not indicate whether the trial court stated reasons
for its finding. Id. Subsequently, during the pendency of the appeal, Bernard
died. Id.
In affirming the trial court’s dismissal order, we explained that if we
upheld the plaintiffs’ contention that the conveyance was fraudulent as a
matter of law,
[the] plaintiffs would be entitled to have it set aside to enable them
to levy on Bernard’s interest in the property as it stood before the
conveyance. During the joint lives of the defendants Bernard’s
share was subject to attachment by the plaintiffs. The interest
attached is similar to a life estate with a contingent remainder in
fee depending upon which joint tenant survived. However, to
obtain this interest plaintiffs would have had to obtain a judgment,
levy thereon and sell Bernard’s interest during his lifetime.
Id. at 9 (citations omitted). The record established, however, that this did not
happen. Id. Further, there was no evidence that Bernard’s wife was subject to
any claims by the plaintiffs. Id. We concluded, therefore, that at Bernard’s
death, his wife became the sole owner of the property free and clear of any
interest of the plaintiffs. Id.
Anthony argues that, similar to the plaintiffs in Beland, SNHMC did not
obtain a judgment, levy thereon, and sell Karen’s interest in the Amherst
property during her lifetime. Thus, he contends, the condition of the
attachment, Karen’s survival, was not satisfied, and therefore it lapsed.
Anthony fails to acknowledge, however, the key distinction between Beland and
this case. Here, SNHMC’s prejudgment attachment was obtained and recorded
during Karen’s lifetime and while she held the property jointly with her
husband.
RSA 511:17 (2010) provides:
No attachment of any interest in real estate shall be defeated by
any change in the nature of the debtor’s right thereto, as by
redemption of a mortgage or other encumbrance or the execution
to the debtor of any conveyance pursuant to a contract, but the
whole interest of the debtor, upon such change, shall be held by
the attachment.
5
See, e.g., In the Matter of Jasper-O’Neil & O’Neil, 149 N.H. 87, 88-89 (2003);
LeBlanc v. Berube, 141 N.H. 597, 598 (1997); Rodman, 141 N.H. at 238;
Beland v. Goss, 68 N.H. 257, 258 (1894). Thus, when Karen severed the joint
tenancy and conveyed her interest in the property to her husband, she did so
subject to SNHMC’s attachment. See 4 R. Wiebusch, New Hampshire Practice,
Civil Practice and Procedure § 17.24, at 17-29 (2010) (“If the debtor’s interest is
conveyed or extinguished as between the debtor and a third party, the
transaction is nevertheless ineffective to remove the attachment lien from the
property, and the new state of ownership holds title subject to the
attachment.”).
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6