THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Jaffrey-Peterborough District Court
No. 2010-476
JESSIE DESPRES
v.
KEVIN HAMPSEY
Argued: April 13, 2011
Opinion Issued: September 20, 2011
Sheldon, Davis, Wells & Hockensmith, P.C., of Keene (James Romeyn
Davis on the memorandum of law and orally), for the plaintiff.
Fernald, Taft, Falby & Little, P.A., of Peterborough (Mark D. Fernald on
the brief and orally), for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The defendant, Kevin Hampsey, appeals a final stalking
protective order, see RSA 633:3-a (2007), issued against him by the Jaffrey-
Peterborough District Court (Runyon, J.). We affirm.
The trial court found, or the record supports, the following facts. The
plaintiff, Jessie Despres, and her three children resided in an apartment for
which the defendant’s company is the property manager. She testified that the
defendant frequently stopped by or walked into her apartment unexpectedly,
and that he made sexual comments and advances toward her. She recounted
a specific incident that occurred in March 2010, when she called the defendant
because her basement had flooded. After checking the basement, the two went
outside. The plaintiff testified that she was in her pajamas and felt
uncomfortable, and that the defendant “made comments on how he wished he
would have caught [her] in less clothes and then proceeded to kiss [her] in [her]
right ear,” slam his body into hers, and tell her he wanted to have sexual
intercourse with her. She told the court that she felt threatened and
intimidated by the defendant, and that her “kids are intimidated by the
constant drive-by’s, . . . which are . . . followed by either calls or him stopping
in.”
The trial court found:
[The defendant’s] behavior constituted a “course of conduct”
under RSA 633:3-a, II, (a), (2) & (3) & (b), in that on two or more
occasions when the defendant had no legitimate official purpose for
doing so, he entered the plaintiff’s apartment unannounced and
without prior consent and confronted her there, when she was not
dressed, with sexual remarks that would cause a reasonable
person to fear for her safety; and further, that such unannounced
entries would cause the plaintiff’s minor children to fear that such
intrusions by an unwelcome stranger could occur unexpectedly at
any time.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in: (1) failing
to make findings of two or more specific acts that constitute stalking; (2)
making findings that are unsupported by the record; (3) failing to weigh the
credibility of the witnesses; and (4) issuing a stalking order where “most of [the
plaintiff’s] allegations were too vague and non-specific for [him] to respond to.”
This appeal raises issues of statutory interpretation and sufficiency of
the evidence. “In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters
of the legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as
a whole.” Fisher v. Minichiello, 155 N.H. 188, 191 (2007).
We first examine the language of the statute, and, where possible,
we ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used.
When the language of a statute is clear on its face, its meaning is
not subject to modification. We will neither consider what the
legislature might have said nor add words that it did not see fit to
include.
Walker v. Walker, 158 N.H. 602, 605 (2009) (quotation omitted). With respect
to sufficiency of the evidence claims, we review them “as a matter of law and
2
uphold the findings and rulings of the trial court unless they are lacking in
evidential support or tainted by error of law.” Fisher, 155 N.H. at 190. “We
view the evidence in the light most favorable to the plaintiff” and “accord
considerable weight to the trial court’s judgments on the credibility of
witnesses and the weight to be given testimony.” Id.
The statute at issue provides, in pertinent part:
I. A person commits the offense of stalking if such person:
(a) Purposely, knowingly, or recklessly engages in a course of
conduct targeted at a specific person which would cause a
reasonable person to fear for his or her personal safety or the
safety of a member of that person’s immediate family, and the
person is actually placed in such fear;
. . . .
II. As used in this section:
(a) “Course of conduct” means 2 or more acts over a period of
time, however short, which evidences a continuity of purpose. A
course of conduct shall not include constitutionally protected
activity, nor shall it include conduct that was necessary to
accomplish a legitimate purpose independent of making contact
with the targeted person. A course of conduct may include, but
not be limited to, any of the following acts or a combination
thereof:
. . . .
(2) Following, approaching, or confronting [the targeted] person,
or a member of that person’s immediate family.
(3) Appearing in close proximity to, or entering the person’s
residence, place of employment, school, or other place where the
person can be found, or the residence, place of employment or
school of a member of that person’s immediate family.
RSA 633:3-a.
The defendant first contends that “the trial court made a general finding
that ‘on two or more occasions when the defendant had no legitimate official
purpose for doing so, he entered the plaintiff’s apartment unannounced and
without prior consent.’” He argues that this finding is insufficient because the
3
“court found only that a category of actions had happened, without making any
findings of specific acts.”
We have held that “when issuing a stalking order in response to a civil
petition filed pursuant to RSA 633:3-a, III-a, the trial court must make findings
on the record that a defendant engaged in two or more specific acts over a
period of time, however short, which evidences a continuity of purpose.”
Fisher, 155 N.H. at 193 (quotation omitted). That holding established
conformity between the requirements for civil stalking orders under RSA 633:3-
a and protective orders under RSA chapter 173-B, as directed by RSA 633:3-a,
II-a. See id. We reasoned that “in order to be consistent with our
interpretation of RSA 173-B:5 in [Fillmore v. Fillmore, 147 N.H. 283 (2001)], we
must conclude that RSA 633:3-a, II(a), which also contains an enumerated list
of prohibited conduct, likewise requires specific findings of the course of
conduct, which is defined as two or more acts.” Id. Thus, we required that the
trial court identify two or more specific acts that constitute prohibited conduct
as enumerated in the statute; we did not mandate any more specificity than
what the statute itself requires.
Accordingly, we are unpersuaded by the defendant’s argument, with
respect to the finding that he had entered the plaintiff’s apartment
“unannounced and without prior consent,” that he “is left wondering when the
incidents might have occurred.” Neither the statute nor our case law requires
the plaintiff to provide the specific dates upon which the prohibited acts
occurred; rather, the statute requires “2 or more acts over a period of time,
however short.” RSA 633:3-a, II(a); cf. In the Matter of Sawyer & Sawyer, 161
N.H. 11, 16 (2010) (noting that while our case law “mandate[s] that the
misconduct prompting a domestic violence petition not be too distant in time,”
it does not “oblige[] a plaintiff seeking a temporary protective order to set forth
the specific dates upon which he or she allegedly suffered abuse”).
The defendant likens this case to Kiesman v. Middleton, 156 N.H. 479
(2007), in which we vacated a stalking order because the trial court failed to
make specific findings. Kiesman, 156 N.H. at 481-82; see South v. McCabe,
156 N.H. 797 (2008) (vacating stalking order in light of Kiesman). Kiesman is
distinguishable. There, “[t]he final stalking order, which was issued on a
standardized form, [gave] no indication of the facts upon which the trial court
relied in issuing the order, nor the reasoning.” Kiesman, 156 N.H. at 481.
Here, the trial court attached to its order two single-spaced pages of narrative
findings and rulings summarizing the plaintiff’s and defendant’s testimony and
concluding that on two or more occasions the defendant engaged in the
prohibited conduct set forth in RSA 633:3-a, II (2) and (3) by entering “the
plaintiff’s apartment unannounced and without prior consent and confronted
her there.” This finding is sufficient under Fisher.
4
The defendant next challenges the sufficiency of the evidence to support
the court’s finding that “on two or more occasions when the defendant had no
legitimate official purpose for doing so, he entered the plaintiff’s apartment
unannounced and without prior consent and confronted her there, when she
was not dressed, with sexual remarks that would cause a reasonable person to
fear for her safety.” The defendant contends that this finding is “unsupported
by the evidence where [the plaintiff] presented no evidence that [he] had ever
entered her apartment when she was not dressed, nor did [she] testify to any
incident where [he] entered her apartment unannounced and made sexual
remarks.” He contends that while the plaintiff testified that more than once
the defendant had stopped by her apartment “right when [she] got out of the
shower,” “there was no testimony that on those occasions [he] had entered the
apartment unannounced, or that she was undressed.” He also notes that while
the plaintiff testified that he made sexual comments to her when he came to
check on flooding in her basement, that visit was not unannounced, but rather
at her request.
We agree with the defendant that no direct evidence was adduced of any
incident presenting all of the circumstances stated in the finding; namely,
unannounced and unwelcome entry, the plaintiff being undressed, and the
defendant making sexual remarks. The trial court appears to have
summarized and condensed the evidence into a single finding. Nevertheless,
we conclude that the evidence supports the court’s finding that the defendant’s
“behavior constituted a ‘course of conduct’ under RSA 633:3-a, II, (a), (2) & (3).”
Pursuant to RSA 633:3-a, II(a)(3), a “course of conduct” may include
“entering the [targeted] person’s residence.” The plaintiff testified that “a few
weeks ago . . . [the defendant] also chose to walk in because the landlord
noticed that her water bill had gone up. So he showed up unexpectedly, like he
always does, and walked in.” She recounted another incident following a visit
from a code enforcement officer. She testified that although “the issue was
taken care of” and “[e]verything was all set,” the defendant “showed up at [her]
house, where he once again just walked in, came there for no -- but to scream
at [her].” This testimony supports the trial court’s finding that “on two or more
occasions when the defendant had no legitimate official purpose for doing so,
he entered the plaintiff’s apartment unannounced and without prior consent
and confronted her there.” Even assuming the evidence would not establish
that each time the defendant entered the plaintiff’s apartment unannounced
and confronted her, she also was undressed and the defendant made sexual
remarks, the other elements of the trial court’s finding are sufficient, as a
matter of law, to establish a course of conduct.
The record also supports a finding that, on other occasions, the
defendant encountered the plaintiff when she was less than fully dressed and
made sexual comments to her. While these circumstances, as noted above,
5
need not be part of the specific acts proven under RSA 633:3-a, II(a)(3), they do
provide context and support for the plaintiff’s fear of the defendant. See RSA
633:3-a, I (requiring that the course of conduct be such as “would cause a
reasonable person to fear for his or her personal safety or the safety of a
member of that person’s immediate family”). Indeed, the plaintiff stated that
she felt threatened not only by the defendant’s sexual advances, but by his
access to her apartment. She testified: “I don’t sleep at night. The man has a
key and can enter my house whenever he wants. So I’m afraid to be there
because he walks in whenever he wants.” She later stated that “it’s just not
the sexual comments or advances. Kevin Hampsey walking in my apartment
anytime he wants to, I take that as a threat.”
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred in finding that the
plaintiff and her children were afraid of him. He first challenges that finding in
light of testimony that the real reason for the plaintiff’s stalking petition was
her fear of being evicted. Specifically, the defendant cites the testimony of the
plaintiff’s friend, Jenny Motuzas, that the reason “why this is finally all coming
forth now [is] because she was scared of getting kicked out when she has three
children.” He further contends that the finding is unsupported by the evidence
where the plaintiff called the defendant instead of his business partner when
she had issues with the apartment and habitually failed to pay her rent on
time, prompting the defendant to come to collect it. He argues that if the
plaintiff “were truly afraid of [him], she would have sought to avoid contact with
[him], not call him repeatedly” and would have timely paid her rent.
As noted previously, the court had before it the plaintiff’s testimony
regarding her and her children’s fear of the defendant. “It was within the trial
court’s discretion to resolve conflicts in the testimony, measure the credibility
of witnesses, and determine the weight to be given evidence.” N.H. Dep’t of
Envtl. Servs. v. Marino, 155 N.H. 709, 717-18 (2007). We cannot say, on this
record, that the court erred.
The defendant nevertheless argues that the trial court erroneously “made
no findings as to the credibility of the witnesses.” We agree with the plaintiff,
however, that the trial court’s order shows that “of necessity, [it] weighed the
evidence and found Ms. Despres more credible than Mr. Hampsey.” For
instance, the court “conclud[ed] that whether the defendant makes a habit of
entering other tenants’ premises without permission, which the defendant
provided several witnesses to deny, he did so at the plaintiff’s apartment, for
the purpose of having the contact with her that the plaintiff described.”
Finally, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in issuing a civil
stalking order against him where the plaintiff’s allegations were too vague and
nonspecific for him to defend against. He asserts that “[w]hen the trial court
asked [the plaintiff] to be more specific as to dates and times when [the
6
defendant] had entered her house unannounced and without consent, she was
unable to provide any testimony as to specific incidents, specific dates, or
specific times,” so that all he could do in response “was provide a general
denial.”
As noted above, the plaintiff is not required to allege or prove the specific
dates upon which the acts constituting a “course of conduct” occurred. See
RSA 633:3-a, II(a); cf. Sawyer, 161 N.H. at 16. The plaintiff testified to at least
two specific incidents of unwanted entry by the defendant, one related to the
landlord’s water bill and the other to a visit by a code enforcement officer.
Moreover, the defendant himself testified regarding both specific incidents,
claiming that each time he knocked on the door. The record does not support
the defendant’s claim that the plaintiff’s allegations were too vague and
nonspecific for him to defend against.
Affirmed.
DUGGAN and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
7