THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Grafton
No. 2010-179
B.V. BROOKS & a.
v.
TRUSTEES OF DARTMOUTH COLLEGE
Argued: February 10, 2011
Opinion Issued: April 12, 2011
Wadleigh, Starr & Peters, P.L.L.C., of Manchester (Eugene M. Van Loan,
III and Stephen J. Judge on the brief, and Mr. Van Loan orally), for the
petitioners.
McLane, Graf, Raulerson & Middleton, P.A., of Manchester (Bruce Felmly
on the brief), and Sullivan & Cromwell LLP, of New York, New York (Richard C.
Pepperman, II on the brief and orally), for the respondents.
Upton & Hatfield, LLP, of Portsmouth (Russell F. Hilliard on the brief), for
the Association of Alumni of Dartmouth College, as amicus curiae.
Zalkind, Rodriguez, Lunt & Duncan LLP, of Boston, Massachusetts
(Harvey Silverglate and Ruth O’Meara-Costello on the brief), and Bernstein,
Shur, Sawyer & Nelson, P.A., of Manchester (Andru H. Volinsky on the brief),
for Professor Todd J. Zywicki, as amicus curiae.
DALIANIS, C.J. The petitioners, seven Dartmouth College alumni and
members of the Association of Alumni of Dartmouth College (Association),
appeal the order of the Superior Court (Vaughan, J.) granting summary
judgment to the respondents, the Trustees of Dartmouth College (Trustees), on
the petitioners’ petition for declaratory and equitable relief. The petitioners
argue that the trial court erroneously ruled that some of their claims were
barred by the doctrine of res judicata and that they lacked standing to bring
their remaining claims. We affirm.
I. Background
The relevant facts follow. The Dartmouth College Board of Trustees was
created by charter in 1769. Brzica v. Trustees of Dartmouth College, 147 N.H.
443, 452 (2002). At that time, there were twelve trustees and vacancies were
filled by a majority vote of trustees. Id. In 1891, in separate meetings, the
board of trustees and the Association approved a new method of electing
trustees. The petitioners refer to the new method of election as the “1891
Agreement,” although, in fact, the board and the Association never created or
signed a written agreement memorializing their approval of the new election
method. See id.
The new method allowed the Association to nominate suitable persons
for five trusteeships (Alumni Trustees). See id. Another five trustees (Charter
Trustees) were to be nominated by the board. The Governor of New Hampshire
and the President of the college occupied the remaining two trusteeships,
serving as ex officio trustees.
Although the total number of trustees increased in 1961 and 2003, the
number of Alumni Trustees remained equal to the number of Charter Trustees.
The parties refer to this as “parity.” In September 2007, however, the board
voted to expand its size by adding new Charter Trustees. New Alumni Trustees
were not added, thus making the number of Alumni and Charter Trustees
unequal. As a result, Alumni Trustees comprised only one-third, and no longer
one-half, of the non-ex officio trustees on the board.
In response, the Association sued the Trustees for breach of contract,
breach of implied-in-fact contract and promissory estoppel. The breach of
contract claims alleged that the Trustees breached an express or implied-in-
fact contract to maintain parity between Alumni and Charter Trustees; the
promissory estoppel count alleged that, even in the absence of a contract, the
Trustees were barred by promissory estoppel from eliminating parity.
2
In June 2008, the alumni elected a new executive committee for the
Association. In the campaign preceding the election, two slates of candidates
ran against one another, the “Unity Slate” and the “Parity Slate.” The Parity
Slate of candidates pledged to continue the lawsuit against the Trustees; the
Unity Slate pledged to dismiss it. The Unity Slate won the election, and
consistent with its campaign promises, adopted resolutions to dismiss the
Association’s lawsuit against the Trustees. Shortly thereafter, the Association
and the Trustees entered into a stipulation to dismiss the Association’s lawsuit
with prejudice. The court approved the stipulation in a June 30, 2008 order.
In November 2008, the petitioners filed the instant lawsuit alleging
claims for breach of contract, breach of implied-in-fact contract and promissory
estoppel. The petitioners’ breach of contract claims allege that the Trustees
breached an express or implied-in-fact contract to maintain parity between
Alumni and Charter Trustees. Their promissory estoppel claim alleges that the
Trustees are barred by that doctrine from eliminating parity. The petitioners
bring their breach of express contract claims either as third-party beneficiaries
of the “1891 Agreement,” or as Association members. They bring their breach
of implied-in-fact contract claim only as third-party beneficiaries of the “1891
Agreement.” They bring their promissory estoppel claim on their own behalf
(neither as third-party beneficiaries of a promise made by the Trustees to the
Association nor as Association members).
The Trustees moved for summary judgment, arguing that dismissal of
the petitioners’ lawsuit was warranted because: (1) it is barred by the doctrine
of res judicata; and (2) the petitioners lack standing to sue to enforce the
alleged “1891 Agreement” between the trustees and the Association. The trial
court ruled that res judicata barred the petitioners’ claims for breach of
contract based upon their status as Association members and barred their
promissory estoppel claim. Because the court found that the petitioners were
not, in fact, third-party beneficiaries of the “1891 Agreement,” the court ruled
that they could not prevail upon their breach of contract claims brought in that
capacity. This appeal followed.
II. Discussion
We review the trial court’s rulings on summary judgment by considering
the affidavits and other evidence in the light most favorable to the non-moving
party. See S. N.H. Med. Ctr. v. Hayes, 159 N.H. 711, 715 (2010). If this review
does not reveal any genuine issues of material fact, i.e., facts that would affect
the outcome of the litigation, and if the moving party is entitled to judgment as
a matter of law, we will affirm. Id. We review the trial court’s application of law
to fact de novo. Id.
3
A. Res Judicata
We first address whether the trial court erred when it ruled that res
judicata barred the petitioners’ promissory estoppel and breach of express
contract claims, which they brought as Association members. The applicability
of res judicata is a question of law, which we review de novo. Meier v. Town of
Littleton, 154 N.H. 340, 342 (2006). Res judicata precludes the litigation in a
later case of matters actually decided, and matters that could have been
litigated, in an earlier action between the same parties for the same cause of
action. Id. For the doctrine to apply, three elements must be met: (1) the
parties must be the same or in privity with one another; (2) the same cause of
action must be before the court in both instances; and (3) a final judgment on
the merits must have been rendered in the first action. Id. We address each
element in turn, limiting ourselves to the specific arguments the petitioners
have briefed on appeal.
1. Same Parties
It is undisputed that the petitioners were not parties to the Association’s
lawsuit against the Trustees. “Although generally res judicata does not apply
to nonparties to the original judgment, this rule is subject to exceptions.”
Sleeper v. Hoban Family P’ship, 157 N.H. 530, 533 (2008). One exception
concerns “a variety of pre-existing substantive legal relationships between the
person to be bound and a party to the judgment.” Taylor v. Sturgell, 553 U.S.
880, 894 (2008) (quotation and brackets omitted). “The substantive legal
relationships justifying preclusion are sometimes collectively referred to as
‘privity.’” Sleeper, 157 N.H. at 534 (quotation omitted); Sturgell, 553 U.S. at
894 n.8. Qualifying relationships include unincorporated associations and
their members. See Restatement (Second) of Judgments § 61 (1982)
(Restatement); see also Headwaters, Inc. v. U.S. Forest Service, 399 F.3d 1047,
1053 (9th Cir. 2005).
Pursuant to Section 61 of the Restatement, “[i]f under applicable law an
unincorporated association is not treated as a jural entity distinct from its
members, . . . [a] judgment in an action by or on behalf of members of the
association is binding on the members in accordance with the rules stated in
§§ 41 and 42.” Restatement, supra § 61(1)(a). Under the Restatement, as a
rule, “[a] person who is not a party to an action but who is represented by a
party is bound by and entitled to the benefits of a judgment as though he were
a party.” Restatement, supra § 41(1). If, on the other hand, “under applicable
law an unincorporated association is treated as a jural entity distinct from its
members, a judgment for or against the association has the same effects with
respect to the association and its members as a judgment for or against a
corporation, as stated in § 59.” Restatement, supra § 61(2). Under Section 59
of the Restatement, generally speaking, “a judgment in an action to which a
4
corporation is a party has no preclusive effects on a person who is an officer,
director, stockholder, or member of a non-stock corporation.” Restatement,
supra § 59.
Thus, under the Restatement, if the applicable law treats an
unincorporated association as a jural entity, then, as a rule, a judgment
against the association will not have preclusive effect on an association
member. By contrast, if the applicable law does not treat an unincorporated
association as a jural entity, then, in general, a judgment against the
association will have preclusive effect. See Restatement, supra § 35 comment d
at 353-54.
New Hampshire adheres to the traditional common law view that an
association is not a jural entity distinct from its members, except as may be
specifically provided by statute. See Shortlidge v. Gutoski, 125 N.H. 510, 513
(1984); see also Restatement, supra § 61 comment a at 118-20 (explaining
difference between common law view that unincorporated association is
aggregate of individuals and modern view that unincorporated association is
entity apart from its individual members). In Shortlidge, we held: “A voluntary
association, except as provided for by statute, see RSA 292:12-14
(unincorporated associations deemed corporations for receiving and using
donations), has no legal existence apart from the members who compose it.”
Shortlidge, 125 N.H. at 513 (emphasis added).
The statutes to which Shortlidge referred specifically provide that for
some purposes, an unincorporated association is a jural entity, which means
that it may sue and be sued just as a corporation may sue and be sued. See
RSA 292:12-:14 (2010). For instance, while at common law, an unincorporated
association had no ability to hold property, see Restatement, supra § 61
comment a at 118, RSA 292:12 specifically provides that unincorporated
“societies or lodges of Elks, Knights of Columbus, . . . or other similar fraternal
organizations shall be corporations” for the purpose of taking, holding,
managing or using any gifts or grants made to them. Under RSA 292:12, these
organizations, societies and lodges “may sue and be sued in regard to such
property in said corporate capacity.”
Because New Hampshire law does not treat an unincorporated
association as a jural entity unless specific statutes provide that it be so
treated, and because no statute that requires an unincorporated association to
be treated as a jural entity applies to this case, whether the petitioners are
bound by the judgment in the Association’s lawsuit is governed by Sections 41
and 42 of the Restatement. See Restatement, supra § 61(1)(a).
Pursuant to Restatement § 41(1)(b), a person is represented by a party
who is “[i]nvested by the person with authority to represent him in an action.”
5
“A person represented by a party to an action is bound by the judgment even
though the person himself does not have notice of the action, is not served with
process, or is not subject to service of process.” Restatement, supra § 41(2).
The Restatement explains that a representative may be constituted as
such through “some transaction antedating the litigation wherein the
representative is given authority to manage and safeguard” another’s interests.
Restatement, supra § 41 comment a at 394. “In such circumstances, the
authority and responsibility to represent the [represented party] in litigation is
a concomitant of the representative’s general managerial authority and
responsibility for the matter entrusted to him.” Restatement, supra § 41
comment a at 394. Such “[p]rivately constituted representatives” include “[a]
trustee of a trust,” who, by “virtue of his nomination by the settlor,” has
“authority to represent the estate, and the interests of those who are its
beneficiaries.” Restatement, supra § 41 comment b at 394. However,
“[f]iduciary authority and responsibility for management of interests of others
may repose in relationships other than a trust.” Restatement, supra § 41
comment b at 395. “One such relationship . . . is that of the managing officers
of an unincorporated association with regard to association property and
contracts.” Restatement, supra § 41 comment b at 395.
Here, the petitioners are bound by the judgment in the Association’s
lawsuit against the Trustees because of the relationship between the
Association and its members. Although the petitioners contend that they never
personally gave the Association’s executive committee the authority to dismiss
its lawsuit against the Trustees, this is not required. The Association’s
executive committee had the authority to act as it did because it is the
managerial arm of the Association and, as such, had “the requisite authority,
and generally the exclusive authority, to participate as a party” on behalf of the
Association’s members. Restatement, supra § 41 comment a at 394.
The petitioners contend that, notwithstanding the Restatement, “under
New Hampshire law, both an unincorporated association and its members may
sue to enforce the association’s contracts.” To support this assertion, they rely
upon Kessler v. Gleich, 156 N.H. 488, 492-94 (2007), in which we ruled that a
limited partner could bring a declaratory judgment proceeding against a
general partner directly, and did not have to proceed through a derivative
action. Res judicata was not an issue in Kessler, and, thus, Kessler is no
support for the petitioners’ argument.
The petitioners also argue that because “the undisputed facts establish
that the[y] . . . had no involvement whatsoever in the Prior Lawsuit,” they
cannot be or should not be deemed to be in privity with the Association. This
argument is based upon a different exception to the general rule that res
judicata does not apply to nonparties to the original judgment. Under this
6
exception, “a nonparty is bound by a judgment if she assumed control over the
litigation in which that judgment was rendered.” Sturgell, 553 U.S. at 895
(quotation and brackets omitted); see Restatement, supra § 39; see also Daigle
v. City of Portsmouth, 129 N.H. 561, 571 (1987). Here, the petitioners are
deemed to be in privity with the Association because of their relationship with
the Association, not because they assumed control over the Association’s
lawsuit.
Without citing any authority, the petitioners assert that “the normal rule
that mere membership in an unincorporated association constitutes an implied
grant of authority to the managing officers thereof to represent [association
members] with respect to association business presumes some type of
voluntary action upon the part of association members in joining the
association.” They argue that the “normal rule” does not apply to them
because they became members of the Association automatically upon
graduating from Dartmouth College. We consider this argument insufficiently
developed, and decline to address its merits. See Sabinson v. Trustees of
Dartmouth College, 160 N.H. 452, 459 (2010).
With respect to their promissory estoppel claim, in particular, the
petitioners contend that their right to bring such a claim “vested” and cannot
be divested by the stipulation between the Trustees and the Association. We
consider this argument to be insufficiently developed for appellate review as
well. See id.
The petitioners argue that the executive committee lacked the authority
to settle the Association’s lawsuit by agreeing to dismiss it with prejudice,
because, by so doing, the committee “cancell[ed]” the 1891 Agreement, and
such a cancellation can be effected only by a vote of the Association’s members.
They reason that because the 1891 Agreement was originally adopted by the
Association by a vote of its members, and because “over the years, when
changes have been made to the procedures to be used by the Association for
the election of Alumni Trustees, these changes have been adopted by its
members,” the executive committee could not take action to “cancel” the 1891
Agreement absent a vote by the membership.
The petitioners do not point to any provision in the Association’s
Constitution, however, that precludes the executive committee from acting as it
did. In fact, the Association’s Constitution specifically confers upon the
executive committee authority over “the general interests of the Association.”
The petitioners also argue that because the Association’s Constitution
“presupposes [the] existence” of the 1891 Agreement, settling the Association’s
lawsuit and thereby “cancel[ling]” the 1891 Agreement is tantamount to
amending the Association’s Constitution. The executive committee lacks the
7
authority, the petitioners assert, to amend the Association’s Constitution. The
Trustees contend that the Bricker doctrine precludes us from considering the
merits of the petitioners’ argument. See Bricker v. N.H. Medical Society, 110
N.H. 469, 470 (1970). Under the Bricker doctrine, “[j]udicial interference in the
internal affairs of associations is strictly limited and will not be undertaken in
the absence of a showing of injustice or illegal action and resulting damage to
the complaining member.” Id.
We need not decide whether the Bricker doctrine applies because the
petitioners’ argument is based upon a faulty premise. The Association’s
Constitution is silent as to the 1891 Agreement, and we disagree with the
petitioners that it “presupposes” the Agreement’s existence. Accordingly, we do
not construe it to preclude the executive committee from agreeing to release its
claims against the Trustees based upon the 1891 Agreement.
2. Same Cause of Action
To the extent that the petitioners contest the second element of res
judicata, whether their causes of action for breach of express contract and
promissory estoppel are the “same” as the Association’s claims for breach of
contract and promissory estoppel, their challenge fails. We have defined a
“cause of action” as “all theories on which relief could be claimed on the basis
of the factual transaction in question.” Eastern Marine Const. Corp. v. First
Southern Leasing, 129 N.H. 270, 275 (1987). Here, the same factual
transaction -- the change in the composition of the board of trustees -- forms
the basis of the Association’s and the petitioners’ claims. Thus, the second
element is met.
3. Final Judgment on the Merits
The petitioners concede that a voluntary dismissal with prejudice
generally constitutes a final judgment on the merits. See Cathedral of the
Beechwoods v. Pare, 138 N.H. 389, 391 (1994) (stipulated dismissal with
prejudice is “on the merits” for res judicata purposes). They argue, however,
that the dismissal at issue should not be considered a final judgment for res
judicata purposes because it was a product of collusion, the stipulation was
executed without proper authority, and, as a contract, the stipulation fails
because the Association received no consideration for its agreement to
terminate its lawsuit.
Of these arguments, we address only the first on its merits. The
petitioners’ second contention, that the stipulation for dismissal was executed
without proper authority, is a reiteration of their prior argument that the
executive committee lacked authority to settle the Association’s lawsuit, which
we have already addressed. We decline to address the merits of the petitioners’
8
third contention, that the stipulated dismissal with prejudice cannot constitute
a final judgment for res judicata purposes because it lacks consideration,
because, although they are the appealing parties, they have failed to provide a
record sufficient for us to review this argument. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop.
Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004). The record does not contain evidence to
establish that there was no consideration exchanged between the Association
and Trustees, such as a copy of a settlement agreement between them. We
cannot tell, for instance, whether Dartmouth College’s payment of some of the
Association’s legal fees was part of a negotiated settlement. Absent a more
complete record, which it was the petitioners’ obligation to produce, we cannot
ascertain whether, as they contend, the stipulated dismissal was unsupported
by consideration.
We focus, therefore, upon the petitioners’ first contention, that the
stipulated dismissal with prejudice is not a final judgment for res judicata
purposes because it was the product of collusion. Restatement § 75 governs
when a nonparty may be able to set aside a judgment rendered to a party to
whom the nonparty is bound through relationship. Section 75(2) provides: “A
person bound by a judgment by virtue of having a relationship with a party . . .
may obtain relief from the judgment if the party representing him failed to
prosecute or defend the action with due diligence and reasonable prudence and
the opposing party was on notice of facts making that failure apparent.”
The rationale for this rule is as follows:
The proposition that a non-party may be bound by a
judgment through representation rests on the premise that the
representative will adequately protect the non-party’s interests. In
the relationships referred to in §§ 29, 41-61, but not in others, it is
thought that the fiduciary responsibilities imposed on the
representative or the correspondence between his interests and
those of the represented person, or both, sufficiently assure the
protection of the represented person. . . . Under the concept of
representation, it also follows that the represented person cannot
ordinarily attack the judgment by which he is bound. If he were
freely able to attack the judgment, his joinder in the first instance
would become practically necessary and the representative device
would be ineffectual.
The question concerning relief from the judgment is not
simply whether the represented person is to have any remedy at all
for a judgment adversely determining his interests; it is whether he
is to have the remedy of setting aside the judgment. . . .
9
It is clear that the represented party should be able to set
aside a judgment that was procured by collusion between the party
representing him and the opposing party. No worthy interest is
served by sustaining such a judgment, and both private and public
interests would be violated if the judgment were given effect in the
face of such an attack. . . .
When the representative’s mismanagement of the action
cannot be said to amount to collusion, the question of giving relief
is more complicated. . . .
Restatement, supra § 75 comments b-d, at 210-11; see Restatement, supra
§ 42 comment f at 411 (“[A] judgment is not binding on the represented person
where it is the product of collusion between the representative and the
opposing party.”).
The petitioners argue that the Association’s mismanagement of its
lawsuit against the Trustees amounted to collusion, and, thus, enables them to
set aside the judgment. However, the undisputed facts upon which the
petitioners rely, such as that counsel for the Association and counsel for the
Trustees jointly drafted the stipulation and cooperated with one another in
filing it with the court, do not demonstrate the type of fraudulent or collusive
conduct that justifies barring enforcement of a judgment against a nonparty.
See State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. v. Paynter, 593 P.2d 948, 951 (Ariz. Ct. App.
1979) (“[T]he type of fraudulent and collusive conduct which might bar
enforcement of a judgment against the defendant’s insurer” ordinarily
“involve[s] collusion by the plaintiff and the insured with respect to the
institution of the lawsuit in an effort to defraud the insurance company.”);
Damron v. Sledge, 460 P.2d 997, 1001 (Ariz. 1969) (settlement collusive when
defendant “agrees to perjure himself and testify falsely to statements that are
untrue” and plaintiff is a party to this agreement); cf. Bedford School Dist. v.
Caron Constr. Co., 116 N.H. 800, 802-03 (1976) (describing as having
“collusive characteristics,” “Mary Carter” agreements, which are “contract[s] by
which one co-defendant secretly agrees with the plaintiff that, if such
defendant will proceed to defend himself in court, his own maximum liability
will be diminished proportionately by increasing the liability of the other co-
defendants). Accordingly, we reject the petitioners’ assertion that the
stipulated dismissal with prejudice is not a final judgment because it was the
product of collusion. We hold that the Association’s voluntary dismissal of its
lawsuit with prejudice constitutes a final judgment on the merits for res
judicata purposes and that the petitioners are bound by that judgment.
10
B. Third-Party Beneficiary Claims
Having concluded that res judicata bars the petitioners’ promissory
estoppel claim and their claim for breach of express contract, which they
brought as Association members, we turn next to whether the trial court erred
when it ruled that they lacked standing to bring their breach of express or
implied-in-fact contract claims as third-party beneficiaries. For the purposes
of this discussion, we assume, without deciding, that the 1891 Agreement was,
in fact, an enforceable contract between the Association and the Trustees.
The third-party beneficiary doctrine is an exception to the general rule
that a non-party to a contract has no remedy for breach of contract. Arlington
Trust Co. v. Estate of Wood, 123 N.H. 765, 767 (1983). “Third-party
beneficiaries are nonparties to a contract who are nevertheless allowed to sue
to enforce it because the parties intended them to have that right.” MacGregor
v. Rutberg, 478 F.3d 790, 794 (7th Cir. 2007) (applying Illinois law).
A third-party beneficiary relationship exists if: (1) the contract calls for a
performance by the promisor, which will satisfy some obligation owed by the
promisee to the third party; or (2) the contract is so expressed as to give the
promisor reason to know that a benefit to a third party is contemplated by the
promisee as one of the motivating causes of his making the contract. Tamposi
Associates v. Star Mkt. Co., 119 N.H. 630, 633 (1979). “A benefit to a third
party is a ‘motivating cause’ of entering into a contract only where the promisee
intends to give the beneficiary the benefit of the promised performance.”
Grossman v. Murray, 144 N.H. 345, 348 (1999) (quotation omitted); see
Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 302(1)(b) (1981).
“Unless the performance required by the contract will directly benefit the
would-be intended beneficiary, he is at best an incidental beneficiary.”
Grossman, 144 N.H. at 348 (quotation omitted). The fact that a third party is
to receive some benefit through the performance of the contract does not make
that party a third-party beneficiary of the contract. See id. Thus, for instance,
as we explained in Numerica Savings Bank v. Mountain Lodge Inn, 134 N.H.
505, 512 (1991), all shareholders are not third-party beneficiaries of contracts
between their corporations and other parties merely because “[e]very act which
benefits a corporation will benefit, indirectly, its shareholders.” Rather, under
Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 302(1)(b), which we adopted in Grossman,
144 N.H. at 458, “the promise and its circumstantial setting must evince an
intent on the part of the promisee to confer the benefit of promised
performance on the would-be beneficiary.” Public Service Co. of N.H. v.
Hudson Light & Power, 938 F.2d 338, 342 (1st Cir. 1991). “In such cases, if
the beneficiary would be reasonable in relying on the promise as manifesting
an intention to confer a right on him to enforce the promise, he is an intended
11
beneficiary.” Id. (quotation, brackets and emphasis omitted); see Restatement
(Second) of Contracts, supra § 302 comment d at 442.
In other words, it is not enough that the “contract manifests the parties’
intention to confer upon [a third party] the benefit of the promised
performance.” Paglin, Criteria for Recognition of Third Party Beneficiaries’
Rights, 24 New Eng. L. Rev. 63, 69 (1989). Rather, the contract must show
“that the parties considered the third party’s legal status and intended to
confer upon him a right to sue the promisor.” Id. “The contractual intent to
recognize a right to performance in the third person is the key.” Broadway
Maintenance Corp. v. Rutgers, 447 A.2d 906, 909 (N.J. 1982). “If that intent
does not exist, then the third party is only an incidental beneficiary, having no
contractual standing.” Id. “[O]rdinarily a person’s entitlement to sue to
enforce a contract to which she’s not a party must be expressed in the contract
rather than implied. Parties to a contract are naturally reluctant to empower a
third party to enforce their contract, and so courts hesitate to infer such a
power.” MacGregor, 478 F.3d at 794 (quotation and citations omitted).
The petitioners do not point to anything in the record demonstrating that
the parties to the 1891 Agreement intended to confer upon each individual
alumnus the right to enforce it. Absent such evidence, we agree with the trial
court that the petitioners lack standing as third-party beneficiaries to sue to
enforce the 1891 Agreement.
Affirmed.
DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
12