THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2011-516
SUSAN JEFFERY
v.
CITY OF NASHUA
Argued: March 13, 2012
Opinion Issued: June 12, 2012
Molan, Milner & Krupski, PLLC, of Concord (Richard E. Molan on the
brief, and John S. Krupski orally), for the plaintiff.
Jackson Lewis LLP, of Portsmouth (Debra Weiss Ford and Elizabeth J.
Baker on the brief, and Ms. Baker orally), for the defendant.
CONBOY, J. The plaintiff, Susan Jeffery, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Tucker, J.) granting summary judgment in favor of the
defendant, the City of Nashua (City), on her wrongful discharge and breach of
contract claims. We affirm.
The following facts are drawn from the record. In 1977, the plaintiff
began working in the City’s payroll department. In or around 1998, she
became the City’s risk manager. In 2004, the plaintiff became concerned that
her direct supervisor, Maureen Lemieux, did not understand the budgetary
process because “she wanted to level fund the health line items” in the City’s
2005 fiscal year budget. The plaintiff raised her concerns with Lemieux
“dozens of times,” but Lemieux responded that “she was comfortable with her
numbers.”
In April 2005, the City discovered that the health insurance line item was
underfunded. Consequently, the Board of Aldermen convened an ad hoc
health care budget committee to investigate the circumstances leading up to
the shortfall. The plaintiff alleges that between her two interviews with the
committee, she was summoned to a meeting with the mayor, at which he asked
her whether she, as department manager, should be held responsible for the
budget shortfall. The plaintiff refused to accept responsibility, explaining that
she had tried to prevent the error by raising her concerns with Lemieux and
others. The plaintiff also alleges that on a separate occasion, the mayor
suggested that they “all share the blame,” but she refused his suggestion.
In November 2005, the committee issued its final report, concluding that
the City’s budget shortfall was a consequence of its insufficient “long term
experience with self funded Health Insurance account” and its lack of training
and educational opportunities for staff. In the report, the committee also made
specific recommendations, some of which were the plaintiff’s responsibility to
implement as risk manager. The plaintiff did not implement all of the
committee’s recommendations.
At some point in 2005, the plaintiff noticed that her relationship with
Lemieux was becoming strained. Although she concedes Lemieux never said or
did “anything” to her, she contends that “things were very tense.” As a result,
she became fearful that she would be discharged.
In February and March 2006, the plaintiff received two written warnings
from Lemieux. Prior to these warnings, she had never been “written up” in her
twenty-nine years of employment with the City. Following the second warning,
the risk management department was reorganized and some of the plaintiff’s
job duties and supervisory responsibilities were shifted to the newly created
position of deputy risk manager. In June 2006, Lemieux conducted the
plaintiff’s performance evaluation, wherein she noted several areas requiring
improvement. Consequently, Lemieux denied the plaintiff a raise.
In September 2006, the City learned that checks totaling almost one
million dollars were left unsecured in the plaintiff’s department, in violation of
the City’s Cash Control and Handling Policy. As a result, she was placed on a
one week unpaid disciplinary suspension. In addition, she was demoted from
risk manager to employee benefits specialist. Shortly after being notified of
these latest disciplinary actions, the plaintiff took a leave of absence under the
2
Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA), see 29 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq. (2009 &
Supp. 2011). On December 21, 2006, while still on FMLA leave, the plaintiff
submitted a letter of resignation, stating her decision to retire early. The letter
indicated that the effective date of her resignation was December 31, 2006.
On December 29, 2009, three years and eight days after her letter of
resignation, the plaintiff brought suit against the City, alleging constructive
discharge and breach of contract. The City moved for summary judgment,
arguing, among other things, that her claims were untimely. The trial court
granted the City’s motion, and this appeal followed.
A moving party is entitled to summary judgment “if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with
the affidavits filed, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact
and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.” RSA
491:8-a, III (2010). In reviewing the trial court’s grant of summary judgment,
we consider the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly
drawn from them, in the light most favorable to the non-moving party.
Waterfield v. Meredith Corp., 161 N.H. 707, 709 (2011). If our review of that
evidence discloses no genuine issue of material fact, and if the moving party is
entitled to judgment as a matter of law, we will affirm the grant of summary
judgment. Id. “[T]he adverse party may not rest upon mere allegations or
denials of his pleadings, but his response, by affidavits or by reference to
depositions, answers to interrogatories, or admissions, must set forth specific
facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial.” RSA 491:8-a, IV (2010).
We review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de novo.
Waterfield, 161 N.H. at 709.
I. Constructive Discharge
The plaintiff first argues that the trial court erred by ordering judgment
against her on her constructive discharge claim based upon its finding that
this claim is barred by the three-year statute of limitations applicable to
personal actions. See RSA 508:4, I (2010) (providing that, subject to the
discovery rule exception, “all personal actions, except actions for slander or
libel, may be brought only within 3 years of the act or omission complained of
. . . .”). A cause of action arises, thereby triggering the running of the three-
year period, once all the elements necessary for such a claim are present.
Singer Asset Finance Co. v. Wyner, 156 N.H. 468, 477-78 (2007). Although we
have held that to establish liability for constructive discharge, a plaintiff must
show that her employer rendered her working conditions so difficult and
intolerable that a reasonable person would feel forced to resign, Porter v. City of
Manchester, 151 N.H. 30, 42 (2004), we have not decided when such a claim
accrues.
3
The plaintiff acknowledges that “the majority of jurisdictions hold that
the limitations period begins to run when the employee has given notice of
intent to resign.” Here, the plaintiff gave such notice on December 21, 2006,
more than three years before filing suit. Nevertheless, citing Mac’s Shell
Service v. Shell Oil Products, 130 S. Ct. 1251 (2010), she urges us to adopt a
rule “that the statute of limitation begins to run on the actual date of
termination,” which she asserts here is the date she selected as the effective
date of her resignation, December 31, 2006. She contends that this rule “will
serve . . . the purposes of the statute of limitations,” and “comport[] with the
constitutional mandate of access to justice.”
In Mac’s Shell Service, franchisees alleged that a petroleum franchisor
violated the Petroleum Marketing Practices Act (Act), 15 U.S.C. §§ 2801 et seq.
(2009), by constructively terminating service-station franchises and
constructively failing to renew franchise relationships. Mac’s Shell Service, 130
S. Ct. at 1254. Despite their claims, however, none of the franchisees
abandoned their franchises or rejected renewal agreements. Id. at 1254-55.
Addressing the constructive termination claim first, the Supreme Court
analyzed the Act’s provision that “‘no franchisor . . . may . . . terminate any
franchise,’ except for an enumerated reason and after providing written The supreme court
rejected the plaintiff’s argument and affirmed the district court’s dismissal of
his claims as time-barred. Id. at 387-88. Adopting the reasoning of the New
Jersey Superior Court in Daniels, 773 A.2d at 721, the court explained:
The harm has been done when the employee feels compelled to
resign. In short, in an actual termination situation, the retaliatory
action which starts the running of the period of limitations is the
separation from work. In a constructive discharge situation, the
retaliatory action is the creation of intolerable conditions which a
reasonable employee cannot accept. The conditions become
intolerable when the employee tenders his or her resignation.
Thus, by definition, the act of discrimination cannot occur any
later than the date of resignation.
Whye, 102 P.3d at 387 (quotations omitted). Thus, the court concluded, “the
cause of action accrues and the statute of limitations begins to run when the
plaintiff tenders his or her resignation or announces a plan to retire.” Id.; see
Patterson v. State, Dept. of Health, 256 P.3d 718, 725 (Idaho 2011) (plaintiff’s
5
claim for constructive discharge arose “when she provided unequivocal notice
of her intent to resign”).
We find the reasoning in these cases persuasive. Whereas in a wrongful
discharge action, the action triggering the limitations period is the separation
from work, here, “the retaliatory action is the creation of intolerable conditions
which a reasonable employee cannot accept.” Daniels, 773 A.2d at 721. Thus,
once “a reasonable employee is compelled to resign due to the employer’s
action,” a constructive discharge has occurred, and “the act of discrimination
cannot occur any later than the date of resignation.” Id.; see id. at 722 (noting
“[t]here are no reported decisions that have held that a constructive discharge
claim accrues after the employee tenders a resignation.”). We conclude,
therefore, that an action for constructive discharge accrues when the employee
tenders the resignation or retirement