THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2010-059
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
CHRISTOPHER NEWCOMB
Argued: February 10, 2011
Opinion Issued: April 12, 2011
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Jacqueline J. Rompre, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Lothstein Law Office, PLLC, of Concord, (Theodore Lothstein on the brief
and orally), for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, Christopher Newcomb, appeals a decision
of the Superior Court (Lewis, J.) denying his motion to suppress evidence
obtained as a result of his arrest for criminal trespass and the subsequent
inventory search of his rented U-Haul truck. We reverse and remand.
The record supports the following facts. On February 25, 2008, the
Kensington Police Department received a report that two men with a U-Haul
truck were parked at 9 Old Amesbury Road. A neighbor of the property owners
told police that no one was supposed to be on the property because the owners
were out of town. Captain Jeremiah O’Sullivan arrived at the home and
observed the truck in the driveway, backed up to a closed garage door. The U-
Haul was a “box-like truck, with an interior section for passengers and a
separate section in the back for item storage and transporting.”
As O’Sullivan approached, he heard the defendant yell something and
then get into a car parked on the property. Seconds later, O’Sullivan saw a
man’s head pop out from behind the U-Haul and quickly dart back behind it.
That man, Timothy Dzenowagis, then came out from behind the truck and
approached O’Sullivan. Dzenowagis told O’Sullivan that he was moving and
planned to leave the truck on the property while waiting for his aunt, who
owned the home. When O’Sullivan asked for identification, Dzenowagis
provided a New Hampshire identification card. O’Sullivan testified that
Dzenowagis’s voice was trembling and his hands were shaking. At this point,
O’Sullivan ordered Dzenowagis to put his hands on the cruiser and also
ordered the defendant to get out of the car and put his hands on the cruiser.
The defendant appeared extremely nervous and told O’Sullivan that he had
driven the U-Haul to the property and that the car belonged to a friend from
Newmarket. However, when O’Sullivan asked who drove the car to the
property, neither man responded.
Two neighbors then arrived with a cell phone and told O’Sullivan that the
property owner, Melissa Dzenowagis, wanted to speak to O’Sullivan. O’Sullivan
told the property owner that her nephew and another man were on the
property. The property owner told him that she wanted them arrested and any
vehicles removed from the property. The property owner also stated that she
had told Dzenowagis that he was not allowed on the property and asked
O’Sullivan to check the house because Dzenowagis was likely stealing
something.
At this point, the defendant and Dzenowagis provided O’Sullivan with a
U-Haul rental agreement, which showed that the U-Haul had been rented the
previous night in the defendant’s name. The defendant and Dzenowagis both
told O’Sullivan that nothing was inside the U-Haul. When O’Sullivan stated
that he thought the truck was loaded with furniture, neither the defendant nor
Dzenowagis responded. After the defendant refused consent to search the
truck, O’Sullivan arrested the defendant and Dzenowagis for criminal trespass
and impounded the U-Haul and car.
O’Sullivan then conducted an inventory search of both vehicles because
the men gave conflicting statements regarding what was inside the truck, the
truck was on someone else’s property, and he needed to determine the truck’s
contents prior to bringing it to the police department in order to protect the
safety of the officers and the public. He testified that he conducted inventory
2
searches of both vehicles pursuant to the department’s inventory search policy.
He unlocked the storage space of the U-Haul, which was padlocked, with a key
he found attached to the defendant’s belt. Inside the storage area of the truck,
O’Sullivan observed building materials and copper tubes, pipes and wire. He
immediately ended the search and applied for a search warrant. The affidavit
for the search warrant included a description of the fruits of the inventory
search.
Prior to trial, the defendant filed two motions to suppress, both of which
challenged the admissibility of evidence found in the U-Haul. In the first
motion, he argued that he was arrested without probable cause and that the
search of the U-Haul was not a proper inventory search. In the second motion,
he argued that O’Sullivan’s supporting affidavit did not establish probable
cause to obtain a search warrant. The trial court conducted a consolidated
hearing on the defendant’s motions and similar motions filed by Dzenowagis
and denied them in a written order. The defendant subsequently submitted to
a stipulated facts trial and was found guilty by the trial court.
I
On appeal, the defendant first argues that the police lacked probable
cause to arrest him for criminal trespass. He contends that while O’Sullivan
had reasonable suspicion to temporarily detain him for investigation, the result
of that investigation did not amount to probable cause to arrest him.
Specifically, he asserts that at the time of his arrest there was no probable
cause that he “knew he was not allowed to be on the premises.”
An officer has probable cause to arrest when he has “sufficient,
trustworthy information to warrant a reasonable person to believe that the
arrestee has committed a crime.” State v. Vandebogart, 139 N.H. 145, 163
(1994). In determining whether the police had probable cause, we review
“reasonable probabilities and not the amount of evidence required to sustain a
conviction or to make out a prima facie case.” State v. Jaroma, 137 N.H. 562,
567 (1993) (quotation omitted). We are not bound by mathematical
calculations in making this determination, but instead “must approach the
issue with a concern for the factual and practical considerations of everyday
life on which reasonable and prudent men, not legal technicians, act.”
Vandebogart, 139 N.H. at 163 (quotation omitted).
RSA 635:2, I (2007) provides that “[a] person is guilty of criminal
trespass if, knowing that he is not licensed or privileged to do so, he enters or
remains in any place.” Contrary to the defendant’s argument, at the moment
O’Sullivan placed the defendant under arrest, O’Sullivan had ample evidence
suggesting that the defendant knew he was not allowed on the premises. When
O’Sullivan approached the property, the defendant immediately yelled
3
something and got into a car, which O’Sullivan found to be suspicious. He also
appeared “extremely nervous” throughout his interaction with O’Sullivan, see
State v. Rodrigue, 127 N.H. 496, 498 (1985) (defendant’s “nervous manner”
was a factor supporting probable cause), and admitted that he came to the
property with Dzenowagis. Furthermore, O’Sullivan received a phone call from
the property owner, who told him that Dzenowagis knew he was not allowed on
the property and that she wanted both men arrested. Additionally, O’Sullivan
knew that the defendant rented the U-Haul and drove it to the property.
We again emphasize that probable cause is a commonsense rather than
technical concept and “deals with the reasonable probabilities upon which
officers must act quickly for the protection of society rather than with the proof
beyond reasonable doubt which the State must have to proceed to trial and
conviction.” State v. Hutton, 108 N.H. 279, 287 (1967) (quotation omitted).
Accordingly, these facts, taken as a whole, provided O’Sullivan with probable
cause to arrest the defendant for criminal trespass.
II
The defendant next contends that the inventory search of his rented
U-Haul truck violated Part I, Article 19 of the New Hampshire Constitution and
the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution because the
Kensington Police inventory search policy did not authorize the search of a
padlocked U-Haul truck. He disputes the trial court’s determination that the
locked storage area of a U-Haul truck fits within the meaning of a “trunk” as
used in the department’s inventory search policy. He also asserts that the
search violated the policy because it was not conducted for a non-investigative
purpose.
When reviewing a trial court’s ruling on a motion to suppress, we accept
the trial court’s findings unless they lack support in the record or are clearly
erroneous. State v. Craveiro, 155 N.H. 423, 426 (2007). However, we review
the trial court’s legal conclusions de novo. Id. We decide this case based upon
our interpretation of the New Hampshire Constitution, citing federal cases only
to aid in the analysis. See State v. Pinkham, 141 N.H. 188, 189 (1996).
Because we determine that the search violated the defendant’s rights under the
State Constitution, we need not reach the federal issue. See State v. Ball, 124
N.H. 226, 237 (1983).
Part I, Article 19 of the New Hampshire Constitution provides that every
citizen has “a right to be secure from all unreasonable searches and seizures of
his person, his houses, his papers, and all his possessions.” Warrantless
searches are per se unreasonable unless they fall within the narrow confines of
a judicially crafted exception. Craveiro, 155 N.H. at 426. The State has the
4
burden of proving that a search falls within one of the exceptions. State v.
Denoncourt, 149 N.H. 308, 310 (2003).
Inventory searches fall within a “well-defined exception to the warrant
requirement of the Fourth Amendment.” Colorado v. Bertine, 479 U.S. 367,
371 (1987). Such searches are permissible because they serve important non-
investigative government interests, including protecting an owner’s property
while in the custody of police, insuring against claims of lost, stolen, or
vandalized property, and guarding the police from danger. Denoncourt, 149
N.H. at 311. We have previously recognized that inventory searches are
permissible so long as they are conducted pursuant to a neutral police policy.
Id.; see also Bertine, 479 U.S. at 374 (police conducting an inventory search
must act pursuant to reasonable police regulations). Such a policy reduces
police discretion to search at will and turn an inventory procedure into an
investigative search. Com. v. Garcia, 569 N.E.2d 385, 389 (Mass. 1991).
The relevant portion of the Kensington police inventory search policy
provides:
Whenever a vehicle is subject to police impoundment
(physical custody by this agency) a full inventory search will be
conducted and all items located throughout the vehicle will be
listed on the motor vehicle inventory form in the police report.
An inventory search must be non-investigative, be designed
to protect the interest of the owner, the police and society, and
shall be limited to unlocked areas and/or containers, although a
search may be conducted of the glove compartment and the trunk.
If an officer has probable cause prior to the inventory search, then
a search warrant shall be obtained. If probable cause develops
during the inventory search, the search shall cease and the officer
shall apply for a search warrant.
In determining that the inventory search was permissible, the trial court
acknowledged that the policy did not “expressly discuss an inventory search of
the locked back of a U-Haul vehicle,” but concluded that such a storage area
“may fairly be considered as fitting within the concept or meaning of a ‘trunk’
as that term is used in the policy.” The defendant contends that the trial court
misinterpreted the policy, which demonstrates that the policy gives too little
guidance and too much discretion to police officers in the field. See
Denoncourt, 149 N.H. at 311-12. The State maintains that the search was
consistent with the objectives behind the inventory search policy and did not
exceed the scope of the policy because it provided for the search of a locked
trunk.
5
While the police may be afforded some discretion in conducting inventory
searches when that discretion is exercised in light of standardized criteria, see
Bertine, 479 U.S. at 375-76, an officer must conduct a search according to a
neutral policy, which gives police clear guidance. Denoncourt, 149 N.H. at
311. In this case, Kensington has adopted a policy that provides specific
guidelines for searching locked “areas” and “containers.” The department’s
inventory search policy states that inventory searches “shall be limited to
unlocked areas and/or containers, although a search may be conducted of the
glove compartment and trunk.” (Emphases added.) Thus, the policy generally
prohibits the search of locked areas, but allows for the search of two specific
locked areas – trunks and glove compartments. Kensington could have
adopted more general language directing the police to inventory all
compartments or areas of a vehicle so long as the policy incorporates standard
procedures. However, the department specifically adopted a policy that limits
an officer’s search to only two locked areas and prohibits the search of any
locked area or container that is not a trunk or glove compartment.
The common meaning of a trunk is: “the luggage compartment of an
automobile.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 2456 (unabridged
ed. 2002). While we recognize that a trunk serves some of the same purposes
as the back of a U-Haul truck, the Kensington policy specifically provided only
for a search of a locked trunk, which the back compartment of a U-Haul truck
is not. In particular, a U-Haul truck’s storage space is much larger than the
average trunk and is intended to carry significantly more cargo. Indeed, in this
case, the defendant and Dzenowagis used the truck to transport building
materials and copper pipes. Additionally, unlike a trunk, the storage space
was secured with a padlock and could be accessed only by opening the
padlock. Accordingly, we cannot conclude that the back of a U-Haul truck fits
within the meaning of a trunk.
The State also argues that the search was tailored to the objectives of the
policy and did not exceed the scope of the policy. O’Sullivan testified that he
conducted the search according to the department’s inventory search policy,
which he construed to allow him to search the entire vehicle. Nonetheless, the
plain language of the policy is contrary to O’Sullivan’s understanding of the
proper scope of an inventory search. We again emphasize that Kensington
could have adopted a broader search policy, but chose to narrowly limit
searches of locked areas and containers. See Florida v. Wells, 495 U.S. 1, 4
(1990) (explaining that an inventory search policy may leave some room for
police discretion but may not provide “so much latitude that inventory searches
are turned into a purposeful and general means of discovering evidence of
crime” (quotation omitted)). Accordingly, the search was not conducted
according to the standardized procedures of the Kensington Police Department
and was not a proper inventory search. See Bertine, 479 U.S. at 372; see also
United States v. Lozano, 171 F.3d 1129, 1131 (7th Cir.) (“when an inventory
6
search is carried out in accordance with standard procedures in the local police
department, it tends to ensure that the intrusion is limited”), cert. denied, 528
U.S. 946 (1999).
III
Because the warrantless search of the defendant’s U-Haul violated Part I,
Article 19 of our State Constitution, the information obtained from that search
should be excised from the affidavit in support of the warrant and the
remainder of the affidavit examined to determine whether it establishes
probable cause. See State v. Plch, 149 N.H. 608, 620, cert. denied, 540 U.S.
1009 (2003). The defendant urges us to remand to the trial court to determine
whether the affidavit, absent the illegally obtained evidence, still establishes
probable cause because the trial court has not previously considered the issue.
The State contends that we should excise the tainted information and then
examine the remaining information to determine whether it establishes
probable cause.
It is clear that any evidence obtained from the back of the U-Haul truck
must be excised and cannot be used to establish probable cause for the search
warrant. While we frequently conduct a probable cause analysis without the
issue first being decided in the trial court, see, e.g., State v. Orde, 161 N.H. __
(decided November 30, 2010), we believe that the trial court is best positioned
to make the determination in this case. Even without the illegally obtained
evidence, the affidavit contains other evidence of criminal activity, including a
post-Miranda statement from Dzenowagis and information that Dzenowagis
had recently transported significant quantities of scrap metal in a U-Haul truck
and then sold the metal in Massachusetts. Neither party addressed whether
Dzenowagis’s statement was a fruit of the unlawful search or whether the
defendant has standing to challenge the use of that statement in the search
warrant affidavit. We thus remand to the trial court to make these and other
determinations, including whether the remaining information in the search
warrant affidavit establishes probable cause.
Reversed and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred; LYNN, J.,
concurred in part and dissented in part.
LYNN, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part. I agree with the
majority that Captain O’Sullivan had probable cause to arrest the defendant. I
also agree that, if the inventory search of the U-Haul truck was invalid, it
makes sense in the circumstances of this case to remand to the trial court to
determine whether there was probable cause for the search warrant in the
absence of the information gleaned from the inventory search and to address
7
the standing and “fruits” issues identified by the majority. I disagree, however,
with the majority’s conclusion that the inventory search violated the police
department policy concerning such searches.
The Kensington Police Department’s inventory search policy permits the
search of the trunk of a vehicle even if it is locked. As the majority notes,
“trunk” means “the luggage compartment of an automobile.” Webster’s Third
New International Dictionary 2456 (unabridged ed. 2002) (emphasis added).
But the policy applies to all vehicles, not just to automobiles. A “vehicle” is “a
carrier of goods or passengers.” Id. at 2538; see also RSA 259:122 (2004) (with
certain exceptions not relevant here, statute defines “vehicle” as “every
mechanical device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a way”).
That being the case, I agree with the reasoning of the superior court that,
because the cargo area or “box” of the U-Haul truck is the functional equivalent
of the trunk of an automobile, it was subject to search under the policy even
though it was locked. Indeed, given that the three interests which underlie the
inventory search doctrine, i.e., protection of property, avoidance of liability
claims against the police, and protection of the police and the public from
danger, are heightened – not lessened – in the case of vehicles, such as the
U-Haul truck, which contain larger cargo areas than the trunk of a typical
automobile, it is implausible that the policy was intended to restrict the search
of such areas more narrowly than the search of an automobile trunk. Cf. State
v. Rollins-Ercolino, 149 N.H. 336, 341 (2003) (court will not interpret statute to
require an illogical result); Appeal of Geekie, 157 N.H. 195, 202 (2008) (court
“will not interpret statutory language in a literal manner when such a reading
would lead to an absurd result” (quotation omitted)); Appeal of Town of
Pittsfield, 160 N.H. 604, 606 (2010) (principles of statutory construction govern
interpretation of administrative regulations). It is true that, unlike many
automobiles where the trunk is accessible or can be unlocked from inside the
vehicle, the U-Haul could only be unlocked from the outside. But I fail to see
how this distinction has any bearing on the issue at hand because, under the
policy, a locked trunk can be searched even if it can be unlocked only from
outside the vehicle. In my view, the policy uses the term “trunk” in a
functional or generic sense, to refer to the cargo storage area of a vehicle.
Since the box of the U-Haul truck fits this description, it may be searched even
if locked.
Because I would find that the Kensington police policy allowed Captain
O’Sullivan to inventory the box of the U-Haul truck, I must also address the
defendant’s argument that Captain O’Sullivan violated the policy because he
acted with the purpose to conduct a search for evidence. The short answer to
this argument is that, although the defendant raises it in his appellate brief,
the record contains no indication that he ever raised it before the trial court.
8
For this reason, I need not consider it further. State v. Winward, 161 N.H. ___,
___, 2011 WL 723133, *6 (Feb. 25, 2011) (appellant must demonstrate that
issues raised on appeal were presented to trial court).
For the reasons stated above, I respectfully dissent from that portion of
the majority opinion that holds the inventory search invalid. I, therefore,
would affirm the defendant’s conviction.
9