THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2011-595
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
PATRICK ESCHENBRENNER
Argued: November 27, 2012
Opinion Issued: February 8, 2013
Opinion Modified: March 12, 2013
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Green & Utter, P.A., of Manchester (Philip H. Utter on the memorandum
of law and orally), for the defendant.
LYNN, J. Pursuant to RSA 606:10, III(a) (2001), the State appeals an
order of the Superior Court (Nadeau, C.J.) granting the defendant, Patrick
Eschenbrenner, a new trial on three counts of aggravated felonious sexual
assault, based on the court’s conclusion that the attorneys who represented
him at trial provided ineffective assistance of counsel. We reverse.
I
The following facts are drawn from the record of the trial and the hearing
on the defendant’s motion for a new trial. In October 1998, C.T., a nine year-
old female, told her mother that the defendant had touched her genital area on
numerous occasions. C.T.’s mother reported the allegations to the police, but
four months elapsed before C.T. was interviewed by Officer Lori Stowell of the
Raymond Police Department, who had never before conducted a child sexual
assault investigation. After submitting a report of her February 1999 interview
with C.T., Stowell did not pursue the investigation further.
Approximately seven years later, in 2006, Raymond Police Detective
Richard Labell re-opened the investigation of C.T.’s allegations. In accordance
with policies and procedures developed subsequent to her 1999 interview with
Stowell, C.T. was re-interviewed in 2006 at the Child Advocacy Center (CAC) by
a specially trained interviewer while Labell observed from an adjacent room.
Following the interview, Labell obtained a warrant for the defendant’s arrest.
In a post-arrest interview, the defendant denied that he had ever intentionally
touched C.T.’s genital area. He was thereafter indicted on three counts of
aggravated felonious sexual assault. See RSA 632-A:2, II (Supp. 2012).
The defense theory at trial was that C.T.’s allegations were not credible,
and that if the defendant ever touched C.T.’s genitalia, he did so accidentally
while playing games with her and his daughters. Thus, in his opening
statement, defense counsel characterized C.T.’s accusations as a “story,” said
that if any touchings occurred, they were accidental, and emphasized that no
official action was taken for many years after she first made her allegations.
The State presented four witnesses at trial: C.T., C.T.’s mother, Labell,
and Stowell. C.T., who was eighteen years of age and a ninth-grade student at
the time of trial, testified that when she was eight and nine years old she
frequently went to her grandmother’s house. The defendant was a neighbor of
her grandmother, and C.T. would often play with the defendant’s children.
Sometimes the defendant would join in the play. C.T. described a game they
played where the defendant threw the children into the air and then caught
them and tickled them all over. C.T. indicated that during these games the
defendant would touch her private area, which she described as the part of her
body below the belt that she used “to go pee.” Most of this touching occurred
over her shorts, but on a couple of occasions the defendant touched her under
her shorts but over her underwear, and on one occasion he touched her
underneath her underwear.
C.T. said that she was uncomfortable and scared when the defendant
touched her underneath her underwear and that she told the defendant that
she wanted to stop playing because she had to go to the bathroom. C.T. said
2
that, on this occasion, she left the defendant’s house just as his wife was
pulling into the driveway, and the defendant told C.T. not to tell anyone or she
would get in trouble. C.T. ran home and told her mother what had happened.
C.T.’s mother took her to the police station where they spoke with an officer.
Approximately four months later, C.T. returned to the police station for a taped
interview. C.T. said that, after this interview, she had no further contact with
the police for a long time, and that “[e]verybody called me a liar, and the
neighbors’ kids, [the defendant’s] kids, were telling me I was a home wrecker
and I just wanted to take their daddy away.” In 2006, Detective Labell
contacted C.T. and arranged for her to be interviewed at the CAC.
On cross-examination, C.T. acknowledged that six or seven months after
she told her mother about the defendant touching her, she resumed going to
the defendant’s house to play with his children, although she said she then
usually played “outside away from the adults.” She explained that she
resumed going to the defendant’s house “because everybody had convinced me
that I was overexaggerating about it, it never happened, and it wasn’t the way it
was meant to be, so I went back . . . because they were my friends.”
C.T.’s mother testified that her daughter had told her about being
touched by the defendant, that she brought C.T. to the Raymond police station,
that she later brought her to be interviewed in February 1999, and that
thereafter she heard nothing from the police until Labell contacted her in 2006.
On cross-examination, she admitted to being aware that C.T. continued to play
at the defendant’s house even after C.T.’s disclosure of the touchings and her
February 1999 police interview.
Labell testified that he had extensive experience investigating crimes
against children, described the CAC interview procedure, and explained that he
had observed the interview of C.T. conducted at the CAC. He then testified as
follows:
Q. Okay. And based on that interview, did you do anything next?
A. Yes, I did. Based on the interview, I obtained a warrant for the
arrest of Mr. Eschenbrenner.
Labell then related what the defendant told him during a post-arrest interview
conducted after being advised of his Miranda rights. See Miranda v. Arizona,
384 U.S. 436 (1966). The defendant described C.T. as the oldest freshman at
Raymond High School and “not the brightest girl.” He acknowledged that C.T.’s
grandmother lived across the street from him, that he was aware C.T. had
previously accused him of touching her, and that he knew the police had been
called, although they never interviewed him. He also admitted that he played a
game with C.T. called “airplane,” during which he would catapult the child into
3
the air, catch her when she came down, and then tickle her from her armpits
down to her inner thighs. The defendant said that it was possible he may have
touched C.T.’s private parts while catching her during these games, but he
denied that he had ever done so intentionally. Labell described the defendant’s
demeanor during the interview as “defeated,” and said that at one point the
defendant said, “I’m toast. I’m going to jail. My wife’s dying in the hospital.
I’m being accused of rape and my daughters[] are going to be alone for a very
long time.” When Labell asked the defendant what he meant by rape, the
defendant responded: “I have a girl that’s accusing me of touching her, a cop
that believes it, what do you think.”
Stowell testified that she first became involved in the investigation of
C.T.’s allegations in October 1998. She said that her investigation of C.T.’s
allegations was her first sexual assault case, that her February 1999 interview
with C.T. was “fairly short,” and that she had never before interviewed a child
alleged to be the victim of sexual assault. Stowell also said that, after the
interview, she submitted her report and the interview tape, but did not speak
to anyone else or conduct further investigation. On direct examination, the
prosecutor did not attempt to elicit from Stowell testimony regarding her
opinion of C.T.’s demeanor during the interview.
On cross-examination, Stowell said she believed that the initial referral of
the case to the police came from the New Hampshire Division for Children,
Youth and Families (DCYF). She also testified that, after being assigned the
matter, she made several attempts to contact C.T. and her mother, but was
unsuccessful in doing so until February 1999, when she arranged for an
interview with C.T. and her mother at the police station. Stowell said that
there was no indication that C.T. or her mother had attempted to return to the
police during the four-month period from October 1998 to February 1999, or
that DCYF had conducted any follow-up investigation during this period. In
addition, Stowell testified that, during the interview, C.T. appeared “carefree”
and not emotionally upset about the events she was describing.
On redirect examination, without objection, Stowell gave the following
testimony:
Q. You were asked about [C.T.’s] demeanor during [the February
1999] interview?
A. Yes.
Q. And at the time had you had any specific training regarding
investigating sexual abuse cases involving children?
A. I had not.
4
Q. And subsequent to this, now, have you had training –
A. Yes, I have.
Q. – in dealing with this kind of – and would you draw the same
conclusion today that you did then?
A. No.
Q. Why not?
A. Because I’ve learned from some of the training I’ve received
specifically involving sexual assault and children as the victims in
that, they typically tend to be disassociated from the events that
occurred. It’s almost a self defense mechanism to protect
themselves from it.
Q. So it wouldn’t be unusual for a child to not be emotionally
upset by disclosing these details?
A. Correct.
Q. And have you seen that in your experience since that time?
A. Since then, yes, I have.
Q. And this was your first interview of a child?
A. Yes.
Q. Would you characterize your conclusion as a mistake?
A. Absolutely.
On recross, defense counsel elicited from Stowell that if she had
concerns about her inexperience at the time of the interview, she could have
sought assistance from another police officer or a supervisor. Stowell also
acknowledged that, following the interview of C.T., she submitted a report for
review by a supervisory officer.
In closing argument, defense counsel began by saying: “You heard my
partner start this morning out by telling you that you were going to hear a
story . . . . Now you’ve heard the story and this story doesn’t make sense. And
let me tell you why the story doesn’t make sense.” Counsel then pointed to the
four-month delay between C.T.’s disclosure in October 1998 and the first police
5
interview by Stowell in February 1999, arguing that C.T.’s mother and
grandmother could have been calling the police daily if they were concerned
about hastening the investigation. He described Stowell’s testimony about
C.T.’s “calm, cool, collected” demeanor during the interview and stressed that
the authorities took no action after the interview. He dismissed Stowell’s
explanation on redirect that she lacked experience, and noted that Stowell’s
report had been submitted to her superiors, yet still no action was taken.
Counsel added that, in the years between 1999 and 2006, C.T. and her mother
made “not so much as a phone call . . . to the Raymond Police Department.”
He also emphasized that, despite her testimony about being scared, C.T.
continued to visit the defendant’s house after 1999. Summarizing these points,
counsel argued, “if there was a sexual assault . . . [the investigation] would
have been done six years ago.”
The prosecutor responded in her closing by asserting, “[I]t’s not [C.T.’s]
fault that it took eight years” to investigate the defendant. As to C.T.’s
unemotional demeanor during the 1999 interview, the prosecutor reminded the
jury of Stowell’s testimony that such a reaction by a child sexual assault victim
was not unusual, and argued that C.T. had “no motive to make this up.” The
prosecutor concluded by asking the jury to recall Stowell’s testimony that her
decision not to pursue the case in 1999 was a mistake, and urging the jury not
to “make that same mistake today.”
The defendant was convicted of all three counts of aggravated felonious
sexual assault, and, on direct appeal, we affirmed his convictions in an
unpublished order, see State v. Eschenbrenner, No. 2008-249 (N.H. Feb. 4,
2009).
In January 2011, the defendant moved for a new trial, arguing that his
trial attorneys afforded him ineffective assistance of counsel. Following a
hearing at which only the defendant’s lead trial counsel testified, the superior
court granted the defendant’s motion. The court concluded that a reasonably
competent attorney would have objected to: (1) Labell’s testimony in which,
after explaining his training and experience in child abuse cases, he stated that
he had observed C.T.’s interview at the CAC and thereafter obtained an arrest
warrant for the defendant; and (2) Stowell’s testimony that, based upon the
training she had received since her 1999 interview with C.T., she believed that
her conclusion in 1999 not to pursue the investigation was a mistake. The
court determined that the testimony in question was expert testimony that the
State had not disclosed to the defense before trial, and that both Labell and
Stowell had improperly conveyed to the jury that they believed C.T.’s
allegations. The court found that defense counsel’s failure to object most likely
came from insufficient preparation, was not part of trial strategy, and caused
6
the defendant actual prejudice. After the court denied the State’s motion for
reconsideration, this appeal followed.
On appeal, the State argues that the defendant’s trial attorneys were not
constitutionally ineffective for failing to object to the disputed testimony of
Labell and Stowell. Specifically, the State contends that an objection to
Labell’s testimony would have been futile because it merely provided context
necessary for the jury to understand how Labell came to interview the
defendant and obtain his statements. As to Stowell’s testimony on redirect
examination, the State contends that an objection also would have been
unsuccessful because it was admissible under the doctrine of specific
contradiction. Further, the State argues that Stowell’s redirect examination
testimony did not cause the defendant actual prejudice because no reasonable
probability exists that the outcome of the trial would have been different had
the trial court excluded this testimony.
II
The State and Federal Constitutions guarantee a criminal defendant
reasonably competent assistance of counsel. N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 15; U.S.
CONST. amend. VI; see State v. Kepple, 155 N.H. 267, 269 (2007). “To
demonstrate a violation of this right, the defendant must show that his trial
counsel’s conduct so undermined the proper functioning of the adversarial
process that the trial cannot be relied on as having produced a just result.”
State v. Fecteau, 140 N.H. 498, 500 (1995) (quotation omitted). We examine
the constitutional competency of counsel’s performance under the State
Constitution, and rely upon federal case law to aid in our analysis. State v.
Whittaker, 158 N.H. 762, 768 (2009). “Because the standard for determining
whether a defendant has received ineffective assistance of counsel is the same
under both constitutions, necessarily, we reach the same result under the
Federal Constitution as we do under the State Constitution.” Id.
To assert a successful claim for ineffective assistance of counsel under
the State Constitution, a defendant must show, first, that counsel’s
representation was constitutionally deficient and, second, that counsel’s
deficient performance actually prejudiced the outcome of the case. State v.
McGurk, 157 N.H. 765, 769 (2008). To satisfy the first prong, the defendant
must show that counsel made such egregious errors that he or she failed to
function as the counsel guaranteed by the State Constitution. Id. We afford
broad discretion to trial counsel when determining a trial strategy, id., and we
“indulge a strong presumption that counsel’s conduct falls within the wide
range of reasonable professional assistance.” State v. Hall, 160 N.H. 581, 584-
85 (2010) (quotation omitted). To satisfy the second prong, the defendant must
demonstrate actual prejudice by showing that there is a reasonable probability
that the result of the proceeding would have been different had competent legal
7
representation been provided. McGurk, 157 N.H. at 769. A reasonable
probability is a probability sufficient to undermine confidence in the outcome of
the case. Id.
When we determine that a defendant has failed to meet either prong of
the test, we need not consider the other one. Kepple, 155 N.H. at 270. Both
the performance and prejudice prongs of the ineffectiveness inquiry are mixed
questions of law and fact. Hall, 160 N.H. at 585. Therefore, we will not disturb
the trial court’s factual findings unless they are not supported by the evidence
or are erroneous as a matter of law, and we review the ultimate determination
of whether each prong is met de novo. Id.
We first address the issues regarding Stowell’s testimony and then
consider the impact of Labell’s testimony.
A
The trial court ruled that the defendant’s attorneys should have objected
to Stowell’s redirect testimony because the State had not disclosed her as an
expert witness and because the testimony conveyed to the jury that she
believed C.T. We disagree with the trial court on both points.
First, assuming, without deciding, that Stowell provided expert
testimony, we conclude that any objection to it on the basis that the State had
not disclosed her as an expert witness would not have been successful. The
record reveals that the prosecutor did not elicit any expert testimony from
Stowell during her direct examination. Not until after the defendant’s
attorneys cross-examined Stowell about C.T.’s carefree and unemotional
demeanor during the February 1999 interview did she discuss on redirect
examination the post-interview knowledge she had acquired about the
disassociative behavioral characteristics of child victims of sexual abuse, and
express the view that, in retrospect, she had reached a mistaken conclusion in
not pursuing the investigation. It is important to emphasize that the defendant
makes no claim that his trial counsel were ineffective in choosing to pursue the
aforesaid line of cross-examination.1 Indeed, doing so was obviously crucial to
the defense’s effort to establish that C.T.’s allegations were not credible; and
defense counsel readily acknowledged in his testimony at the new trial motion
hearing that the defense team, including the defendant, was aware that such
cross-examination would open the door “to that type of redirect” the State
1 The defendant did argue in the trial court that his counsel should have objected to Stowell being
allowed to testify at all, but he conceded that this alleged error did not amount to ineffective
assistance of counsel. However, the defendant never asserted below that, given the fact Stowell
did testify as a witness for the State, the cross-examination of Stowell conducted by his trial
counsel constituted ineffective representation.
8
elicited from Stowell.2 The policy underlying expert witness disclosure
requirements is to prevent unfair surprise, see Gulf Ins. Co. v. AMSCO, 153
N.H. 28, 33 (2005), not to thwart fair rebuttal of issues raised during cross-
examination. See O’Donnell v. Moose Hill Orchards, 140 N.H. 601, 604 (1996)
(trial court did not err as a matter of law when it ruled that a party’s failure to
disclose an expert witness did not bar witness’s testimony where opposing
party was prepared for such testimony); Miller v. State, 28 A.3d 675, 686 (Md.
2011) (upholding trial court’s decision to allow expert’s testimony on redirect
examination over a discovery objection because questioning on cross-
examination opened the door to such testimony).
Second, we are not persuaded that the defendant’s attorneys could have
successfully objected to Stowell’s redirect examination testimony on the basis
that it conveyed to the jury that she believed C.T. Assuming, without deciding,
that Stowell’s testimony at least implied that she believed C.T., we conclude
that any objection on this ground would have been unavailing. On cross-
examination of Stowell, the defendant’s attorneys elicited testimony that C.T.
appeared carefree and unemotional during her February 1999 interview, and
emphasized that Stowell discontinued her investigation after the interview. The
clear purpose of this line of cross-examination, as defendant’s trial counsel
admitted, was to convey to the jury the impression that Stowell did not find
C.T. credible. To rebut the misleading impression that Stowell’s opinion had
not changed, the State was entitled to elicit from Stowell on redirect
examination that, based on her training and experience acquired subsequent
to the interview, her original assessment as to the import of C.T.’s demeanor
and resultant conclusion not to pursue the investigation were mistaken. See
State v. Wamala, 158 N.H. 583, 589 (2009) (doctrine of specific contradiction
allows introduction of otherwise inadmissible evidence to counter misleading
impression created by admissible evidence introduced by opponent); State v.
Carlson, 146 N.H. 52, 56 (2001) (same). Furthermore, Stowell did not directly
opine that she believed C.T. was telling the truth; she merely related that she
had learned since her interview with C.T. that child victims of sexual assault
typically exhibit disassociative behavior, and indicated how this new
2 In his memorandum of law, the defendant repeatedly asserts that, at trial, his counsel never
accused C.T. of lying, and that the theory of defense instead was that C.T. had simply
misinterpreted what were, at most, merely inadvertent touchings by the defendant that may
have occurred while playing the airplane game. While we agree that defendant’s trial counsel
made a deliberate tactical decision not to call C.T. a liar before the jury, we do not agree that
the defense theory was limited to the claim that C.T. innocently misinterpreted what had
happened. Such a theory would not have accounted for C.T.’s testimony that the defendant
told her not to tell anyone about the touchings and that she would get in trouble if she did.
Rather, the defendant’s lead trial counsel clearly was correct when he testified that the defense
asked the jury to conclude that C.T.’s “story” was a lie which no one, including Officer Stowell,
C.T.’s mother, and C.T. herself believed to be true, as evidenced by the facts that (1) for seven
years no one thought the investigation worth pursuing, and (2) even after she reported the
touchings to the police, C.T. continued to go to the defendant’s house to play.
9
information persuaded her that her original conclusion not to pursue the
investigation was a mistake. Cf. State v. Cressey, 137 N.H. 402, 412 (1993)
(holding that “State may offer expert testimony explaining the [counterintuitive]
behavioral characteristics commonly found in child abuse victims to rebut any
inferences that a child victim witness is lying”); State v. MacRae, 141 N.H. 106,
110 (1996) (expert testimony that allows a jury to draw inferences that tend to
bolster victim’s credibility is not inadmissible because “[s]o long as the expert
does not render an opinion on the accuracy of the victim’s recitation of facts,
his or her general testimony on the dynamics of sexual abuse does not
prejudice the jury” (quotation omitted)).
Finally, although the defendant’s trial counsel testified that he did not
know that Stowell had received sexual assault training subsequent to her
interview with C.T., he also testified that he and co-counsel considered the
“pros and cons” of cross-examining Stowell and determined that proceeding
with the cross-examination was important to the defendant’s theory of defense,
i.e., that nobody, including Stowell and her supervisors, believed C.T.’s
allegations of abuse. Thus, we are satisfied that the decision to cross-examine
Stowell and expose the defendant to potentially detrimental redirect
examination testimony was a “calculated risk falling within the limits of
reasonable practice.” Fecteau, 140 N.H. at 502 (quotation omitted) (not
constitutionally deficient to open the door to defendant’s prior arrest); State v.
Perron, 122 N.H. 941, 949-50 (1982) (not ineffective assistance to open the
door to bad character evidence of the defendant).3 We cannot say that the
defendant’s attorneys’ performance was constitutionally deficient. Compare
State v. Thompson, 161 N.H. 507, 530-31 (2011) (attorney’s repeated failure to
object was illogical, manifestly unreasonable, and completely irrational).
Because we conclude that the defendant’s attorneys’ failure to object to
3 The defendant argues that the trial court made factual findings: (1) that the “trial strategy”
explanation offered by defendant’s lead trial counsel as the reason for not objecting to Stowell’s
redirect testimony was not credible; and (2) that the “failure to object . . . most likely came from
insufficient preparation.” He contends that we are bound by these findings. The problem with
this argument is that these findings were premised entirely on the trial court’s legal conclusion
that the defendant’s trial counsel could have successfully objected to Stowell’s redirect testimony.
As explained in the text, that conclusion was erroneous, and the court’s reliance on it completely
undercut the basis of its factual findings on the above points.
Moreover, while we readily agree with the defendant that credibility determinations fall within
the province of the trial court, see State v. Ayer, 154 N.H. 500, 519 (2006), the fact remains that it
was the defendant’s burden to establish that his trial counsel’s performance was constitutionally
deficient. The trial court did not find that trial counsel were ineffective because of the nature of
their cross-examination of Stowell; the court faulted counsel only for failing to object to Stowell’s
redirect examination. Even if we entirely discount trial counsel’s testimony as to his trial strategy
explanation, the record is devoid of evidence showing how any amount of further preparation by
trial counsel would have permitted the defendant to successfully exclude Stowell’s redirect
testimony given the theory of defense presented at trial and the cross-examination of Stowell
pursued in support of that theory.
10
Stowell’s redirect examination testimony was not constitutionally deficient, we
need not consider whether it caused the defendant actual prejudice. Kepple,
155 N.H. at 270.
B
Turning to Labell’s testimony, the State’s notice of appeal does not
dispute the trial court’s ruling that a reasonably competent attorney would
have objected to this testimony. Accordingly, the State has waived its
argument that the court erred in reaching this conclusion. Appeal of Keelin B.,
162 N.H. 38, 48 (2011).
However, in addressing the issue of prejudice, the trial court did not
separately analyze the testimony of Labell and Stowell. Instead, the court
found a reasonable probability that the outcome of the trial would have been
different if the relevant portions of both officers’ testimony had been excluded
from evidence. Normally, in such circumstances, a remand to the trial court
would be appropriate to determine whether Labell’s disputed testimony alone
caused the defendant actual prejudice. Here, however, a review of the entire
trial record makes it abundantly clear that there is no reasonable probability
the outcome of the trial would have been different absent the challenged
portion of Labell’s testimony. See State v. Berry, 148 N.H. 88, 92 (2002) (when
“record reveals that a reasonable fact finder necessarily would reach a certain
conclusion, we may decide th[e] issue as a matter of law”).
At most, Labell only indirectly revealed that he regarded C.T. as credible.
He did not inform the jury that he believed C.T., nor did he directly comment
either on her allegations or on her demeanor during the CAC interview. On the
contrary, the most reasonable interpretation of his testimony is that, based on
C.T.’s interview at the CAC and the officer’s background and experience, the
police had sufficient grounds to arrest and question the defendant as to his
version of what occurred. See Gomez v. State, 68 P.3d 1177, 1180-81 (Wyo.
2003) (officer’s testimony that another officer radioed that there was enough
evidence and that the defendant could be arrested “showed only that there was
sufficient evidence to warrant an arrest. . . [and] cannot, therefore, be
accurately characterized as vouching for the truth of the victim’s testimony”).
Such testimony is not prejudicial, and did not become so merely because Labell
also testified about his background and experience and that he obtained an
arrest warrant for the defendant. Compare State v. Reynolds, 136 N.H. 325,
328-29 (1992) (state trooper’s testimony that victim’s contradictory testimony
should not diminish her credibility was not harmless beyond a reasonable
doubt).
We agree with the defendant that the issues of when and why he was
arrested were irrelevant to whether he committed the sexual assaults. Indeed,
11
the trial court specifically instructed the jury that the fact the defendant had
been arrested or indicted could not be considered as evidence of the
defendant’s guilt, and we presume that the jury followed such instructions.
See State v. Pepin, 156 N.H. 269, 279 (2007). But, as the defendant concedes,4
Labell’s testimony about the defendant’s arrest was relevant for an independent
reason – to provide context for the jury to understand how Labell came to
interview the defendant and why, before doing so, he advised the defendant of
his Miranda rights.
For these reasons, and in light of all the testimony presented at trial,
including C.T.’s description of the assaults, we conclude that the defendant’s
attorneys’ failure to object to Labell’s testimony did not cause the defendant
actual prejudice.
Reversed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
4 The defendant agrees that it would have been proper for the State to ask Labell if he interviewed
the defendant and whether the defendant was under arrest at the time.
12