THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Manchester District Court
No. 2011-446
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
DEICY URENA ORTIZ
Argued: October 13, 2011
Opinion Issued: April 10, 2012
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Michael J. Sheehan, of Concord, by brief and orally, for the defendant.
CONBOY, J. The defendant, Deicy Urena Ortiz, appeals the Manchester
District Court’s (Lyons, J.) denial of her motion to withdraw her plea and
vacate her misdemeanor conviction. On appeal, she contends her plea was not
knowing because the court did not advise her of its potential adverse
immigration consequences. We affirm.
The following facts are drawn from the record. The defendant has been a
lawful resident of the United States since 2002. In November 2007, she was
charged with the class A misdemeanor of shoplifting. On November 28, 2007,
she appeared before the Manchester District Court (Lyons, J.) and entered a
plea of nolo contendere. She was not represented by counsel. The defendant
signed a standard acknowledgment and waiver of rights form, which, at the
time, contained no acknowledgment of the potential adverse immigration
consequences of entering either a guilty or nolo plea. During the plea colloquy,
the court did not advise the defendant that her plea could result in adverse
immigration consequences.
In March 2011, the federal government commenced removal proceedings
against the defendant, contending that her shoplifting conviction constituted “a
crime involving moral turpitude,” a deportable offense. See 8 U.S.C. § 1182
(a)(2)(A)(i)(I) (2005). In response, the defendant filed a motion to withdraw her
plea and vacate her conviction. In her motion, she argued that her plea was
not “knowing” because: (1) the court failed to inform her “that a conviction
could subject her to deportation”; and (2) she “was affirmatively misled (albeit
innocently) [by the prosecutor] that there would be no such consequences.”
The State objected.
Acknowledging that it did not advise the defendant of the possible
immigration consequences of her plea, the court concluded that the defendant
raised a “pure issue of law,” and, therefore, there was “no need for a hearing on
the factual basis for [her] request.” The court was not persuaded by the
defendant’s argument that Padilla v. Kentucky, 130 S. Ct. 1473 (2010) (finding
ineffective assistance of counsel where defense counsel failed to advise
defendant that plea could result in deportation), supported “the proposition
that she had a right to such notice of immigration consequences.” Accordingly,
the court denied the motion, concluding that because “[p]ossible immigration
consequence is a collateral and not a direct consequence” of a misdemeanor
conviction, the court was not obligated to provide the Supreme Court addressed “whether, as a matter of federal
law, [the defendant’s] counsel had an obligation to advise him that the offense
to which he was pleading guilty would result in his removal.” Padilla, 130 S.
Ct. at 1478; id. at 1486 (holding “counsel must inform her client whether his
plea carries a risk of deportation”). In addressing this issue, the Court
explained that “[o]ur law has enmeshed criminal convictions and the penalty of
deportation for nearly a century,” and “recent changes in our immigration law
have made removal nearly an automatic result for a broad class of noncitizen
offenders.” Id. at 1481. After acknowledging that it is “‘most difficult’ to
divorce the penalty from the conviction in the deportation context,” and that
the Court is “quite confident that noncitizen defendants facing a risk of
deportation for a particular offense find it even more difficult,” the Court stated
that “[d]eportation as a consequence of a criminal conviction is, because of its
close connection to the criminal process, uniquely difficult to classify as either
a direct or a collateral consequence.” Id. at 1481-82. Consequently, the Court
concluded that whether counsel is constitutionally effective under the Sixth
Amendment turns not on whether counsel advises the defendant of the direct
and collateral consequences of a guilty plea, but rather whether counsel’s
performance was “‘reasonable[ ] under prevailing professional norms.’” Id. at
1482 (quoting Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 688 (1984)).
Despite the defendant’s efforts to link the ineffective assistance of
counsel analysis relied on in Padilla and the due process analysis, the two
differ markedly.
Direct and collateral consequences relate to the trial court’s duty to
ensure that guilty pleas are knowingly and voluntarily entered as a
matter of Fifth Amendment due process, while ineffective
assistance of counsel relates to the defense lawyer’s duty pursuant
to the Sixth Amendment.
. . . .
. . . This approach clarifies that defense counsel may be
ineffective in relation to a guilty plea due to professional duties for
5
the representation of their individual clients that set a standard
different -- and higher -- than those traditionally imposed on trial
courts conducting plea hearings for defendants about whom the
judges often know very little.
Smith, 697 S.E.2d at 183-84 (citations omitted). While Padilla recognized the
importance of removal risks to non-citizen defendants, it “did not extend the
direct consequences doctrine to that issue, or reject the basic distinction
between direct and collateral consequences in determining whether a
defendant’s guilty plea was knowingly and voluntarily entered.” Id. at 184; see
Arizona v. Salazar, No. 2 CA-CR 2010-0296-PR, 2011 WL 285554, at *2 (Ariz.
Ct. App. Jan. 19, 2011) (“Despite the Court’s broad language about the perils of
criminal convictions to non-citizen defendants, it did not ultimately resolve the
disagreement over how to apply the direct/collateral consequences distinction.”
(quotations and brackets omitted)).
The Ninth Circuit’s pre-Padilla analysis in United States v. Amador-Leal
is instructive. In Amador-Leal, the defendant appealed his conviction and
sentence following his guilty plea. Amador-Leal, 276 F.3d at 513. The
defendant challenged whether Fruchtman v. Kenton, 531 F.2d 946 (9th Cir.
1976), which concluded that immigration consequences were collateral, was
still good law. Id. at 513. He argued that since removal was “practically
guaranteed under immigration laws enacted since Fruchtman was decided,”
immigration was no longer collateral. Id. at 514 (quotations omitted).
Accordingly, he argued that because the trial court failed to inform him of the
possibility of removal, his plea did not comport with due process and was
involuntary. Id.
In affirming his conviction, the Ninth Circuit followed Fruchtman and
concluded that despite the recent developments in immigration laws,
deportation remained a collateral consequence. Id. at 515-16. The court
explained that “[t]he distinction between a direct and collateral consequence of
a plea turns on whether the result represents a definite, immediate and largely
automatic effect on the range of the defendant’s punishment.” Id. at 514
(quotation omitted). In addition, the court reasoned that “when, as in the case
of deportation, the consequence in issue was not the sentence of the court
which accepted the plea but of another agency over which the trial judge has
no control and for which he has no responsibility, Rule 11 [of the Federal Rules
of Criminal Procedure] imposes no duty on the District Court to advise a
defendant of such consequences.” Id. (quotations omitted).
In United States v. Delgado-Ramos, 635 F.3d 1237 (9th Cir. 2011) (per
curiam), decided after Padilla, the Ninth Circuit again addressed the due
process issue. In Delgado-Ramos, the defendant appealed his conviction after
the district court failed to inform him of the immigration consequences of his
6
plea during the plea colloquy. Id. at 1238. On appeal, the defendant argued
that Padilla “‘casts doubt’ on the continued force of Amador-Leal.” Id. Holding
that the district court need not advise defendants of potential immigration
consequences, the court noted that “to hold that an intervening Supreme Court
decision has ‘effectively overruled’ circuit precedent, the intervening decision
must do more than simply ‘cast doubt’ on our precedent. Rather, it must
undercut the theory or reasoning underlying the prior circuit precedent in such
a way that the cases are clearly irreconcilable.” Id. at 1239 (quotations
omitted). The court concluded that “[w]hile Padilla’s holding is directly
applicable to [its] Sixth Amendment analysis . . ., it sheds no light on the
obligations a district court may have under Rule 11 and due process.” Id. at
1241. Thus, the court affirmed the defendant’s conviction, concluding the
district court did not err in failing to advise him of possible immigration
consequences of his plea. Id.
While we are mindful of the Supreme Court’s observation in Padilla that
“[d]eportation as a consequence of a criminal conviction is . . . uniquely difficult
to classify as either a direct or collateral consequence,” Padilla, 130 S. Ct. at
1482, we agree with the Ninth Circuit and conclude that Padilla does not speak
to the due process obligations of a trial court accepting a guilty plea. Moreover,
we join the other jurisdictions that have concluded that immigration
consequences are collateral consequences of a plea, and hold that our state’s
constitutional due process protections do not require trial courts to advise
defendants of such potential consequences during plea colloquies.
Accordingly, we conclude that the State has met its burden to demonstrate, to
a clear and convincing degree, that the defendant’s plea was knowing.
We note, however, that effective November 18, 2010, the standard
acknowledgment and waiver of rights form now contains the following
language:
If I am not a citizen of the United States, I understand that
conviction of the crime(s) for which I intend to plead GUILTY may
have immigration consequences, including but not limited to,
deportation from the United States, exclusion from admission into
the United States, or denial of naturalization pursuant to the laws
of the United States.
Although not required, we acknowledge trial courts’ efforts to alert
defendants to these potential consequences, “for there is no question
that immigration consequences of a conviction are important to aliens
contemplating a plea.” Amador-Leal, 276 F.3d at 517. Nevertheless,
because immigration consequences are collateral, the court’s failure here
to advise the defendant of them did not render her nolo contendere plea
unknowing.
7
Because the State Constitution provides at least as much
protection as the Federal Constitution under these circumstances, we
reach the same result under the Federal Constitution as we do under the
State Constitution. See State v. Laforest, 140 N.H. 286, 289 (1995);
Bordenkircher v. Hayes, 434 U.S. 357 (1978); Boykin v. Alabama, 395
U.S. 238, 242 (1969), superseded by statute on other grounds as stated
in United States v. Gomez-Cuevas, 917 F.2d 1521 (10th Cir. 1990).
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS and LYNN, JJ., concurred; DUGGAN, J.,
retired, specially assigned under RSA 490:3, concurred.
8