THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Manchester District Court
No. 2011-164
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
SEAN MCGURK
Argued: February 16, 2012
Opinion Issued: May 11, 2012
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Bernstein, Mello & Chadwick, PLLC, of Nashua (Adam H. Bernstein on
the brief and orally) for the surety.
DALIANIS, C.J. Free Bail Bonds (the surety), appeals orders of the
Manchester District Court (Lyons, J.) forfeiting bonds that guaranteed the
court appearance of the defendant, Sean McGurk. We affirm.
These facts appear in the record. In August and September of 2010, the
surety issued two bonds, on the defendant’s behalf, for $5,000 and $6,000,
respectively. The bonds guaranteed the defendant’s appearance on November
8, 2010. Approximately one month before the defendant’s scheduled
appearance, he was arrested in Vermont and held in custody by the Vermont
Department of Corrections pending trial there for offenses allegedly committed
after the New Hampshire bonds were issued. The surety’s representative then
moved to revoke the defendant’s bail. The trial court did not rule on this
motion, however, until the defendant’s ongoing incarceration prevented him
from appearing as scheduled. At that point, it forfeited bail over the
defendant’s objection.
The surety moved to vacate the forfeiture order and, when its motion was
denied, filed two motions to reconsider, both of which were also denied.
Although the trial court arguably erred when it delayed ruling upon the
surety’s motion to revoke bail until after the defendant’s default, this issue is
not before us. The only issues before us arise out of the trial court’s order
forfeiting the bonds and its denial of the surety’s request for an evidentiary
hearing.
Under the terms of most criminal bail bonds, the obligation of the surety
is to produce the accused whenever necessary in the prosecution of the
charges which have been made against him, or at any stage of the proceedings.
State v. Moccia, 120 N.H. 298, 301 (1980). If the defendant fails to appear,
then under RSA 597:31 (2001), the bond “shall be declared forfeited.”
RSA 597:30 (2001), however, allows a surety to avoid forfeiture in certain
circumstances. It provides in relevant part:
When the sureties in a recognizance, without their fault, are
prevented from surrendering their principal by an act of God or of
the government of the state or of the United States, or by sentence
of law, the superior court, on petition and notice thereof to the
county commissioners and state’s counsel, may discharge them on
such terms as may be deemed just.
RSA 597:30.
As an initial matter, the parties do not dispute that, notwithstanding the
statute’s language, it applies to the district courts as well as the superior court.
We, therefore, assume without deciding that the district court can discharge a
surety under the terms provided in the statute.
To invoke RSA 597:30, “sureties must . . . ma[k]e it appear, not only that
they were prevented from surrendering [the defendant] without their fault, but
also that they were prevented by the act of God, or the government of the
United States or of this state, or by sentence of law.” Lamphire v. State, 73
N.H. 463, 464 (1906) (interpreting a substantially identical prior version of the
statute).
2
Here, the surety does not contend that the defendant’s incarceration in
Vermont is an act of God, the United States, the state of New Hampshire, or a
sentence of law. Rather, it argues that construing the statute to permit a
discharge only under the listed circumstances “conflict[s] with the clear import
of the statute, which is to excuse the surety when surrendering the defendant
is impossible based on an act of government authority.” We disagree.
We interpret statutes in the context of the overall statutory scheme, not
in isolation. State v. McDonald, 163 N.H. 115, 126 (2011). We first look to the
language of the statute, and construe it according to the common and
approved usage of the language unless from the statute it appears that a
different meaning was intended. Id. We will neither consider what the
legislature might have said nor add language that it did not see fit to include.
Id. We review the trial court’s interpretation of a statute de novo. Id.
In this case, the statute’s plain language limits the defenses for sureties
to those listed, each of which “would be a good defence at common law.”
Lamphire, 73 N.H. at 464. The statute, thus, “provide[s] a convenient method
of determining [sureties’] liability” by codifying common law defenses, but “does
not . . . introduce a new ground for releasing . . . sureties.” Id. At common
law, acts of another state’s government failed to excuse the surety’s obligation
to produce a defendant. See Taylor v. Taintor, 83 U.S. 366, 371 (1872) (“If,
after the [bond] is executed, the [defendant] is imprisoned in another State for
violation of a criminal law of that State, it will not avail to protect him or his
sureties.”). Although some jurisdictions have supplanted this rule by statute
or otherwise, many still deny a surety relief under such circumstances. See 8A
Am. Jur. 2d Bail and Recognizance § 169, at 483 (2009).
Thus, because the statute applies only in the enumerated situations, we
cannot construe it to excuse the surety when another state’s government
prevents the defendant’s appearance. To do so would “introduce a new ground
for releasing . . . sureties” that was unavailable at common law, and add
language to the statute that the legislature did not see fit to include. Lamphire,
73 N.H. at 464.
We also reject the surety’s argument that the trial court treated the
bonds as performance rather than appearance bonds. Although the court
noted that the defendant’s failure to appear resulted from his decision to travel
to Vermont and commit crimes, the court’s order makes clear that it forfeited
the bonds because the defendant failed to appear, not because of his criminal
activity. The bonds guaranteed the defendant’s appearance, so this forfeiture
was entirely appropriate. See RSA 597:31.
Finally, the trial court sustainably exercised its discretion when it
declined to hold an evidentiary hearing. We will not disturb an order denying a
3
request for an evidentiary hearing unless a party establishes that it was clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of the party’s case. State v. Korean
Methodist Church of N.H., 157 N.H. 254, 257 (2008). Here, the surety has
failed to establish prejudice because, whatever a hearing might have revealed,
the defendant’s incarceration in Vermont would nonetheless fall outside the
circumstances under which RSA 597:30 permits discharging a surety.
Affirmed.
HICKS, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
4