THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2010-275
WINECELLAR FARM, INC.
v.
LEONA HIBBARD & a.
Argued: April 13, 2011
Opinion Issued: July 21, 2011
Steiner Law Officer, PLLC, of Concord (R. James Steiner on the brief and
orally), for the petitioner.
McNeill, Taylor & Gallo, P.C., of Dover (R. Peter Taylor on the brief and
orally), and Bosen & Associates, PLLC, of Portsmouth (Christopher P. Mulligan
on the brief), for the respondents.
LYNN, J. The petitioner, Winecellar Farm, Inc. (Winecellar), appeals an
order of the Superior Court (Brown, J.) ruling that it was not entitled to: (1) a
decree pro confesso awarding it specific performance to purchase the Bedard
Farm; (2) specific performance to purchase the Bedard Farm under the
doctrine of part performance; and (3) continue haying activity in perpetuity
under a lease agreement. The respondents, thirteen individual heirs of Eva
Bedard’s estate, cross-appeal, arguing that the trial court erred by: (1)
awarding Winecellar a purchase right regarding certain buffalo pastures; and
(2) failing to order Winecellar to turn over lease payments for its use of the
pastures during the litigation. We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand.
I
We set forth the facts surrounding the relationship between Winecellar
and Leo and Eva Bedard, the former owners of the Bedard Farm in Durham, as
found by the trial court or as otherwise supported in the record. The Bedards
were siblings who lived their entire lives on the Bedard Farm until they passed
away in 2006. Neither ever married. In 1992, Craig and Jennifer Rief
purchased Winecellar, a working farm adjacent to the Bedard Farm.
(Hereinafter, Winecellar and the Riefs are used interchangeably.) The Riefs
began living on their property in 1998, and enjoyed a close, friendly
relationship with the Bedards.
The Riefs informed the Bedards on multiple occasions of their interest in
buying the Bedard Farm when the Bedards were ready to sell it and, until that
time, in farming both properties together. They first proposed buying the
property in writing on September 28, 1997, offering to purchase it for $350,000
and to give the Bedards a life tenancy. The offer was not accepted. In
November 2003, Winecellar offered to lease the Bedards’ land, in order to cut
hay, in exchange for a monthly payment of $500 and winter maintenance of
the Bedards’ driveway. A proposed “Land Lease” was attached to the letter; the
Bedards did not sign it.
On May 1, 2004, Winecellar and Ms. Bedard signed a “Memorandum of
Understanding to Harvest Hay” (Haying Agreement), providing that Winecellar
would “harvest hay throughout the appropriate times of the year” from the
Bedard Farm, and maintain and harvest the fields in accordance with certain
practices. In exchange, it would be responsible for maintaining certain access
ways and roadways, including snow removal from the driveway. Additionally,
the Haying Agreement provided: “Bedards agree to allow Winecellar Farm to
continue this activity every year in perpetuity as long as Winecellar Farm
maintains the access ways, roadways and insurance coverage in accordance
with the terms and conditions of this agreement.” Later in 2004, Winecellar
proposed leasing part of the Bedard Farm to pasture buffalo, but the Bedards
declined the offer.
By letter dated July 24, 2004, the Riefs expressed their “apologies [for]
mov[ing] too fast in asking [the Bedards] to lease [them] land for the buffalo,”
and stated: “we would still be interested to lease your land for a monthly
payment (maybe the back field . . .), or eventually buy your property when you
feel the time is right.” The letter also stated:
2
We have always had the impression that you would consider
us when it came time to sell your property and we would pay you
whatever price you wanted. We also respected your need to make
your decision in due time. . . .
. . . Please let us know if you are still considering us as the buyer
of your property — it would mean a lot to our family for our dream
to merge the two farms.
About two months later, by letter dated September 27, 2004, entitled
“Land Lease for Winecellar Farm to pasture buffalo,” the Riefs set forth an
understanding between the parties for Winecellar to use two back fields on the
Bedard Farm to pasture a buffalo herd in exchange for payments of $200 per
month (Pasture Agreement). The Riefs began paying the Bedards $200 per
month, invested a significant amount of money in fencing and other
equipment in order to pasture buffalo on the leased land, and purchased a
number of buffalo. The following year, the Riefs expressed their desire to put
in writing their understanding that they could purchase the Bedard Farm at
some point in the future. A note accompanying the September 2005 “lease
payment” stated in part:
Your property is obviously very meaningful to us for the purpose of
raising buffalo and fulfilling our long-term commitment to keep our
property and yours as working farms. We would not be able to
support the buffalo if we lost access to your property. With that
said, I have greatly appreciated your verbal commitments in the
past to sell us the property at a time and price acceptable to you,
but was hopeful that you would consider documenting this in
writing.
. . . .
. . . I have enclosed a Letter of Understanding that would
document your intention to sell us the property at a time and price
acceptable [to] you. This is not an obligation to sell. It simply
documents the verbal commitment we have made to each other, for
us to purchase your property when you do decide to sell. . . .
I have invested a lot of time and effort in raising the buffalo,
including the purchase of new haying equipment. Having our
intentions in writing would give me peace of mind, as I am sure it
would you too. If this Letter of Understanding is acceptable to you,
please sign one copy and return it to me in the self-addressed
stamped envelope.
3
The attached “Letter of Understanding” set forth terms under which the Riefs
would pay $200 per month in exchange for the Bedards’ promise to sell them
the property “at a time and price acceptable to owner” and for the
opportunity to match any third-party offer. The Bedards did not sign the
letter, and the Riefs continued to pay the Bedards $200 per month.
In January 2006, the Riefs offered to pay “an additional $200 per
month” to fence more land for pasturing the buffalo. Further, they again
sought written confirmation of their ability to purchase the Bedard Farm in
the future; the note accompanying the February “lease payment” stated:
As we have discussed in the past, I would like to acquire your
property when you are ready to sell it to support the buffalo and to
maintain the property as an operating farm. I have enclosed a
Letter of Understanding and an additional $200 for your
consideration. If this is acceptable to you, please sign both copies
of the letter on behalf of yourself and Leo and return one copy to
me in the self-addressed envelop[e].
The attached “Letter of Understanding” provided that “[i]n consideration of the
sum of an additional $200 per month paid under the current land lease (for a
total of $400 per month),” the Bedards would agree to sell their farm to the
Riefs “at a time and price acceptable to Eva Bedard and Leo Bedard.” The
Bedards did not sign the letter. The Riefs thereafter paid the Bedards $400 per
month; they identified each payment as a “land lease payment” until after Eva
Bedard’s death.
On March 11, 2006, Leo Bedard died. Later that month, in a note to Eva
Bedard accompanying the April “lease payment,” the Riefs again expressed
their desire to purchase the property, stating, “As we have discussed on several
occasions, I would like to acquire your property when you are ready to sell it,”
and
You mentioned the other day that you don’t know how you could
possibly repay us for everything — you don’t have to. All I ask is
that you consider us when you do decide to move. If it would help
you, Jennifer and I would be more than happy to buy the property
and let you stay for as long as you would like.
The attached “Letter of Understanding” was identically worded to the January
2006 proposal, with the exception that it did not contain Mr. Bedard’s name.
The document reflects that Mr. Rief, Mrs. Rief and Ms. Bedard all signed the
letter on April 8, 2006. The signed letter shows that “Stephen Hoginski”
witnessed all three signatures. However, Mr. Hoginski was not present when
Ms. Bedard signed the document, but instead signed it as a “witness” hours
4
later outside of her presence. Approximately three months later, on June 27,
2006, Ms. Bedard died. The Riefs subsequently recorded the signed “Letter of
Understanding” in the registry of deeds.
Ms. Bedard’s will executed in December 2005 provides for the Bedard
Farm to pass to her nieces and nephews in accordance with a residual property
clause. In November 2006, Winecellar filed a petition for a preliminary
injunction seeking to preclude her estate from evicting its herd of buffalo and
removing fencing equipment maintained on two pastures on the Bedard Farm.
It alleged that “[t]hree separate written agreements” governed its rights,
including a Haying Agreement, Pasture Agreement and a Purchase and Sale
Agreement executed in April 2006. After the trial court granted the motion for
preliminary injunction, Winecellar filed an amendment seeking to compel the
estate to convey to it the Bedard Farm based on the doctrine of part
performance and on a purchase and sales agreement. In August 2009,
Winecellar filed an emergency motion to add the individual heirs of the estate
as necessary parties and to add a quiet title claim against them. The trial
court ordered the heirs to file a written appearance by a date certain and “a
plea, answer, demurrer or other response” by November 6, 2009. Although the
respondents filed appearances, they did not timely file responsive pleadings.
Subsequently, based on the failure of the heirs to timely file an answer,
Winecellar moved for a decree pro confesso entitling it to purchase the Bedard
Farm for its then-current fair market value. The trial court denied the motion
and also ordered a voluntary nonsuit as to the estate.
In February 2010, following a bench trial, the trial court “declin[ed] to
order the Estate to sell the Bedard Farm to Winecellar[,] [found] that the
Pasturing and Haying Agreements are not enforceable against the Estate,” and
ruled that “Winecellar will be permitted to purchase the buffalo pastures for
their highest and best value if it so chooses.” Winecellar moved for
reconsideration, arguing among other things that the respondents failed to
answer the amended complaint, entitling it to a decree pro confesso on its
request for specific performance. Other than correcting a scrivener’s error in
its order, the trial court denied the motion for reconsideration. Some of the
respondents also filed a limited motion to reconsider, arguing that the court
erred when it granted Winecellar the right to purchase the buffalo pastures and
when it declined to order Winecellar to turn over to the estate the rental
payments for use of the pastures during the pendency of the litigation. The
record before us does not contain the trial court’s order on this motion.
Winecellar appealed, and the respondents cross-appealed.
II
Winecellar first argues that the trial court erred by refusing to grant a
decree pro confesso pursuant to Superior Court Rule 131 when the
5
respondents failed to timely file a response to its motion to add them as
necessary parties and to add a quiet title claim. The respondents contend,
however, that the estate had defended against Winecellar’s claims since the
initial petition was filed in 2006, that Winecellar’s motion did not raise new
allegations that required a responsive pleading, and that they did not object to
being added as parties to the on-going litigation.
When the trial court denied Winecellar’s request for a decree pro
confesso in its motion to reconsider, the court determined: “The failure of the
heirs to answer the amended complaint prejudiced no one. This issue was
raised pretrial. The Court then and now believes such a request is form and
procedure over substance. To close this procedural loophole, the respondents’
Motion to Extend Time to Answer the Final Amended Petition is granted and
the petitioner’s request to correct the decree pro confesso is denied.” We
discern no error in its decision.
Although Superior Court Rule 131 requires a decree pro confesso for a
respondent’s neglect to file an answer ordered by the court, the trial court may
exercise its discretion to set aside such a decree “upon such terms as justice
may require.” Super. Ct. R. 131. Indeed, the trial court may waive the
application of any rule for “good cause” and “as justice may require.” Super.
Ct. R. Preface; see Donnelly v. Eastman, 149 N.H. 631, 633 (2003).
The allegations underlying Winecellar’s request for injunctive relief had
been disputed by the estate from the outset of the litigation, and the
respondents essentially replaced the estate as responding parties. The trial
court found that Winecellar suffered no prejudice from the delayed answer and,
notably, in its brief, Winecellar identifies no prejudice. Indeed, Winecellar
asserted in its motion to add the heirs as parties that its claims against the
estate and the heirs involved the “very same merits.” In short, Winecellar has
failed to establish that the trial court erred in denying the requested decree.
III
Next, Winecellar argues that the trial court erred in failing to grant it
specific performance pursuant to the doctrine of part performance, an
exception to the statute of frauds. It points to its reliance on oral and written
statements made by the Bedards affirming its right to purchase the Bedard
Farm, and to its $200 monthly payments toward the purchase right.
The statute of frauds provides: “No action shall be maintained upon a
contract for the sale of land unless the agreement upon which it is brought, or
some memorandum thereof, is in writing and signed by the party to be
charged, or by some person authorized by him in writing.” RSA 506:1 (2010).
“Its purpose is to promote certainty and to protect from frauds and perjuries in
6
land transactions.” Greene v. McLeod, 156 N.H. 724, 727 (2008) (quotation
omitted). We have recognized, however, that strict enforcement of the statute
of frauds “can produce frustration on the one hand, and unethical conduct on
the other,” and, thus, “the law seeks to alleviate the harshness of the statute
when some operating facts, such as fraud, part performance or other equitable
considerations, are present.” Id. at 728 (quotations and brackets omitted).
Winecellar does not claim any writings between the parties were
sufficient to satisfy the statute of frauds. Rather, it relies on the doctrine of
part performance to seek specific performance of the oral promise it claims the
Bedards made to sell it the Bedard Farm. “The part performance doctrine is a
judicial device intended to prevent the terms of a formal statute from doing
grave injustice.” Id. (brackets and quotations omitted). The doctrine
“effectively withdraws contracts from the operation of the statute of frauds,
when application of the statute would result in fraud or irreparable injury on
the purchaser who has performed his part of the agreement.” Id. (citation,
brackets, and quotations omitted). The doctrine “is frequently applied to oral
contracts for the sale of real estate, where the purchaser has proceeded, either
in performance or pursuance of the contract, so far to alter his or her position
as to incur an unjust injury and loss.” Id. (quotations and citation omitted).
We consider three factors in analyzing the sufficiency of the acts
performed by the purchaser to determine whether the part performance
doctrine applies. Greene, 156 N.H. at 728-29. We look to whether the acts
are: “(1) in pursuance of the contract and in reasonable reliance thereon,
without notice that the defendant has already repudiated the contract; (2) such
that the remedy of restitution is not reasonably adequate, making it very
unjust for the defendant to hide behind the statute; and (3) one[s] that [are] in
some degree evidential of the existence of a contract and not readily explainable
on any other ground.” Id. at 729 (quotations omitted). “Whether or not
particular acts suffice to constitute part performance is a question of law, and
is therefore subject to de novo review.” Id. (quotations and citations omitted).
However, to the extent a particular element of part performance requires a
finding of fact, we will uphold the trial court’s decision unless it is not
supported by the evidence or is erroneous as a matter of law. Cf. Sutton v.
Town of Gilford, 160 N.H. 43, 58 (2010) (elements of municipal estoppel require
factual determinations that will be upheld unless unsupported by evidence or
legally erroneous); Cardinal Dev. Corp. v. Town of Winchester Zoning Bd. of
Adjustment, 157 N.H. 710, 715 (2008) (trial court’s ruling on applicability of
equitable estoppel will be upheld unless unsupported by evidence or legally
erroneous).
The trial court ruled that the doctrine of part performance did not apply.
It is not clear, however, whether the trial court found that the Bedards made
an oral promise to sell the Bedard Farm to Winecellar. See Humiston v.
7
Bushnell, 118 N.H. 759, 762 (1978) (application of part performance doctrine
presupposes the existence of an oral promise). Because the trial court
addressed Winecellar’s claim of part performance without specifically ruling on
the threshold issue of the existence of an oral promise, we follow the same
course and assume, without deciding, that there was an oral promise for the
sale of the Bedard Farm. Therefore, we review the trial court’s ruling on part
performance as challenged on appeal.
With respect to the reasonable reliance factor of the part performance
doctrine, the trial court found that Winecellar’s reliance on “the alleged oral
promises the Bedards may have made to them was not reasonable,” reasoning
that the Riefs “were fully aware that the agreement should have been in
writing,” expressed concern about being too aggressive in seeking a written
agreement, and presented documents to the Bedards on several occasions to
memorialize in writing the alleged agreement between them, but none of the
documents were ever signed. With respect to the factor relating to evidential
existence of a contract, the trial court ruled that the Riefs’ actions were readily
explainable on a ground other than evidence of the existence of a contract.
Specifically, it determined that Winecellar spent money on setting up the
buffalo pastures when the parties were negotiating, and later under an
agreement, for the pasturing of buffalo on the Bedards’ property.
Winecellar contends that the Bedards’ repeated verbal assurances to sell
it the farm at some point in the future led to the written Haying and Pasture
Agreements, and that in reliance on those agreements and the promise to sell,
it took possession of the haying pastures, invested in fencing, and purchased
buffalo and haying equipment. It argues that the trial court erroneously
concluded that the additional $200 payments it made commencing in January
2006 constituted land lease payments, rather than consideration for the right
to purchase the Bedard Farm. Further, Winecellar points to the April 2006
Letter of Understanding signed by Eva Bedard as evidence of its purchase right
that it claims was established over the preceding years. We note that the trial
court found that Winecellar’s reliance was not reasonable in part because the
Riefs made their investments with knowledge that an agreement to sell the
farm should have been in writing, and Winecellar does not challenge this
finding.
The trial court concluded that Winecellar’s “expenditures on the buffalo
and their accessories are . . . explainable on grounds other than a promise by
the Bedards to sell [it] the Bedard Farm,” and thus that the written agreements
were not dependent on the oral agreement to sell the farm. Winecellar has not
established that these conclusions are unsupported by the evidence or legally
erroneous. For example, the written agreements themselves make no mention
of a promise to sell the farm, and in its July 2004 correspondence, Winecellar
expressed its interest to lease the land to pasture the buffalo “or eventually buy
8
your property when you feel the time is right.” (Emphasis added.) Similarly,
the record supports the conclusion that Winecellar’s possession of a portion of
the farm is readily explainable based on the Haying and Pasture Agreements
alone rather than the existence of an oral promise to sell. See Abbott v.
Baldwin, 61 N.H. 583, 586 (1881) (act of part performance must be such as
would not have been done except by reason of the verbal agreement for the
conveyance of land, “and must [have been] done with a direct view to its
performance; and the agreement set up must appear to be the same with the
one partly performed”).
Winecellar also has failed to establish that the trial court’s conclusion
that the additional $200 monthly payments constituted land lease payments,
not consideration for a purchase right, is unsupported by the record or legally
erroneous. As noted by the trial court, the Bedards did not sign the “Letter of
Understanding” that accompanied the January 2006 note, Winecellar’s own
correspondence described the monies as the “land lease payment[s],” and
Winecellar did not identify the payments as “Land Lease and Purchase
Agreements” until after Ms. Bedard died. Finally, regarding the April 2006
“Letter of Understanding” signed by Ms. Bedard, the trial court refused to
enforce the document because “[t]he Riefs had Ms. Bedard’s signature
witnessed fraudulently, knowing that Mr. Hoginski had not seen Ms. Bedard
sign the document, and then recorded the . . . Letter in the Registry of Deeds.”
Winecellar does not challenge this decision but relies on the document as
evidence of Ms. Bedard’s intent to abide by her alleged promise to sell the farm.
Given the questionable circumstances surrounding its pedigree, we are not
persuaded that this document demonstrates that the trial court erred in ruling
that the doctrine of part performance does not apply.
Accordingly, we affirm the trial court’s decision that the part performance
doctrine did not withdraw any oral contract for the sale of land between it and
the Bedards from the operation of the statute of frauds.
IV
Winecellar next argues that the trial court erred by concluding that the
Haying Agreement is not a perpetual leasehold. It contends that the plain
language of the agreement grants it the right to hay “in perpetuity” consistent
with “the ultimate intent that Winecellar Farm would own the Bedard Farm.”
According to Winecellar, “both the Riefs and the Bedards had justifiable
interests being protected by the perpetual lease” in that “[b]oth desired to
protect the property from development as other than a farm” and “desired to
see the farm continue as an operating farm.” The trial court ruled that the
relied upon language was not enforceable because it would constitute an
unreasonable restraint on alienation of real property. We agree.
9
In considering whether the Haying Agreement constitutes a perpetual
leasehold, we are mindful that “[m]uch of modern property law operates on the
assumption that freedom to alienate property interests which one may own is
essential to the welfare of society.” Horse Pond Fish & Game Club v. Cormier,
133 N.H. 648, 653 (1990) (quotation omitted). We will enforce the parties’
intent to create a perpetual leasehold where the intended restraint is
“reasonable in view of the justifiable interests of the parties.” Id.
“[U]nreasonable restraints will be held invalid.” Id.
“The rule against restraints on alienation is based upon (among other
things) the desirability of keeping property responsive to the current exigencies
of its current beneficial owner and upon the desirability of avoiding the
retardation of the natural development of a community by removing property
from the ordinary channels of trade and commerce.” Ventures Stores v. Pacific
Beach Co., 980 S.W.2d 176, 184 (Mo. Ct. App. 1998) (quotations omitted); see
Metropolitan Transp. v. Bruken Realty, 492 N.E.2d 379, 381 (N.Y. 1986) (the
common law rule against unreasonable restraints serves general purpose of
limiting the power of an owner to create uncertain future estates by forbidding
owners from imposing conditions on conveyances that block the free
disposition of property). However, “[r]igid application of the ancient rule
against restraints on alienation is to be avoided. Surely the courts do not seek
to invalidate bona fide transactions by the imported application of esoteric
legalisms. Our task is not to block the business pathway but to clear it,
defining it by guideposts that are reasonably to be expected.” Carma
Developers v. Marathon Dev. Cal., 826 P.2d 710, 716 (Cal. 1992) (quotation
omitted). Thus, assessing the reasonableness of a challenged restraint involves
balancing the policy of respecting the intent of contracting parties with the
policy of preserving the free alienability of real property: “[A] direct relationship
exists between the justification for enforcement of a particular restraint on the
one hand, and the quantum of restraint, the actual practical effect upon
alienation which would result from enforcement, on the other. Thus, the
greater the quantum of restraint that results from enforcement of a given
clause, the greater must be the justification for that enforcement.” Id. Factors
to be considered when determining whether a particular restraint is
unreasonable include, “its purpose, duration and, where applicable, the
designated method for fixing the purchase price.” Metropolitan Transp., 492
N.E.2d at 381.
In Pope v. Lee, 152 N.H. 296 (2005), we upheld a lease term securing for
a tenant the right to continual renewal of a commercial lease as reasonable in
view of the justifiable interests of the parties. Pope, 152 N.H. at 306-07. The
lease was for a seasonal ice cream and food business, established a lease
payment based on the applicable consumer price index, and included clauses
governing rental increases, adjustments and taxes. Id. at 297-300. When
assessing the reasonableness of the continual renewal right, we considered the
10
justifiable interests at stake in light of the extent of the restraint on the
alienability of the land created by the right of continual renewal clause. Id. at
307. Ultimately, we determined that the continual renewal term did not
foreclose the landowners from selling the premises, stating: “It is not
unreasonable to believe that potential buyers may desire to purchase a
business that is already fully in operation and occupied by a paying tenant.”
Id.
The facts before us stand in stark contrast to Pope. The Haying
Agreement includes no provision for the payment of any rent or property taxes.
Rather, the consideration received by the landowner is the maintenance of “the
access ways and roadways throughout and to the property, including snow
removal from the driveway during winter months.” The only other obligations
placed on Winecellar are the maintenance of the fields and harvesting “in
accordance with practices recommended by the UNH Cooperative Extension,”
and the retention of an umbrella liability insurance policy providing for $1
million in coverage. In exchange, the agreement grants Winecellar a perpetual
right to hay fields on property conveniently located adjacent to its farm
“throughout the appropriate times of the year.”
This agreement, while purporting to grant a significant benefit to the
adjacent farm “in perpetuity,” potentially effects a significant hindrance on the
alienability of the Bedard Farm, not only to any potential purchasers not
wishing to maintain the property as a farm, but even to prospective purchasers
who might desire to continue using it for farming purposes but who wish to use
the fields in question for cultivation of crops, pasturing of animals or other
farm-related use. There is no evidence in the record to suggest, nor do we
believe it reasonable to conclude, that a bona fide purchaser seeking to buy the
Bedard Farm would be willing to do so in light of the existence of the Haying
Agreement. Therefore, while respecting the right of a contracting land owner to
restrict the use of his or her property “to any use that he or she sees fit, within
the confines of the law,” id. at 303, we conclude that Winecellar has failed to
demonstrate that the trial court erred in ruling that the Haying Agreement
constitutes an unreasonable restraint on the alienation of real property.
We briefly address Winecellar’s argument that the heirs’ conduct in
probate court estops them from denying the nature of the Haying Agreement as
a perpetual lease. According to Winecellar, the heirs relied on the perpetual
lease as an encumbrance on the property and realized a tax benefit of over
$400,000 when they failed to object to the amended inventory filed in probate
court. Aside from our conclusion that the Haying Agreement constitutes an
unreasonable restraint on alienation, this argument fails on its merits. The
amended inventory reflects that an appraiser reduced the value of the Bedard
Farm due to “the existence of [the] claimed encumbrance . . . [which] would
allow for the perpetual harvesting of hay from the property by a neighboring
11
farm, thereby negating the highest and best use of the property.” (Emphasis
added.) However, the fact that the heirs acknowledged the impact of the
claimed encumbrance on the value of the property does not equate to
conceding the validity of the claimed encumbrance or its perpetual nature.
V
Turning to the cross-appeal, the respondents argue that the trial court
erred when it awarded Winecellar the right to purchase the buffalo pastures
because it misapplied the law of part performance. We agree.
Despite its ruling that the doctrine of part performance did not apply, the
trial court awarded Winecellar the right to purchase the buffalo pastures it had
been leasing at a price to be determined by an independent appraiser. It ruled:
As to the second prong of the Greene test, pertaining to restitution,
the court understands that Winecellar has invested a significant
amount of money and effort that it will not be able to recoup in
preparing the fields on the Bedard Farm to pasture their buffalo.
Accordingly, Winecellar will be permited to purchase the buffalo
pastures it has been leasing from the Bedard Farm’s owners . . . .
As outlined earlier, the inadequacy of restitution is one of three factors
considered when determining whether the doctrine of part performance
withdraws an oral contract for the sale of land from operation of the statute of
frauds. See Greene, 156 N.H. at 729 (“the remedy of restitution is not
reasonably adequate, making it very unjust for the defendant to hide behind
the statute” (quotation omitted)). However, the point of this factor is that if
restitution is available as a reasonably adequate remedy, this weighs against
allowing the oral contract to be specifically enforced because, in that
circumstance, the award of a monetary recovery provides adequate relief.
Winecellar has not cited, nor are we aware of, any authority supporting the
award of a land transfer based on the inadequacy of restitution where the trial
court has rejected the applicability of the part performance doctrine.
Accordingly, we reverse this award of a purchase right and remand to the trial
court to consider what, if any, monetary relief Winecellar may be entitled to
recover.
VI
One final issue remains. The respondents argue that the trial court
erred by not ordering Winecellar to pay them the lease payments for its use of
the buffalo pastures during the pendency of the litigation. They contend that
the $400 monthly payments under the Pasture Agreement “were held by
[Winecellar’s] counsel pending a determination of the outstanding claims,” and
12
that “the payments should rightfully be turned over to the [respondents] as the
owners of the property [Winecellar] has been occupying under the buffalo land
lease.” Winecellar contends that the respondents rejected the lease payments
it sent to them after Eva Bedard’s death, that there was no agreement between
the parties for counsel to hold the funds, and that the respondents’ claim for
such lease payments was never raised prior to the merits hearing. On the
record presented to us, we conclude that this issue is not ripe for appellate
review.
First, the parties dispute whether they agreed that Winecellar’s counsel
would hold the funds pending a final resolution of the case, and the record
does not permit resolution of the dispute. Additionally, there is no indication
that the lease payment issue was presented to the trial court prior to or during
the merits hearing. Although the respondents requested the payments in a
pleading filed after the merits hearing, the trial court’s decision was silent on
the matter. Some of the respondents raised the issue again in a limited motion
for reconsideration, but we were not provided with the trial court’s ruling on
that motion. Under these circumstances, we leave the issue for the trial court’s
consideration on remand following such further proceedings as the trial court
may deem necessary.
Affirmed in part; reversed in
part; remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
13