THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Coos
No. 2011-776
TOWN OF CARROLL
v.
WILLIAM RINES
Argued: June 13, 2012
Resubmitted: December 7, 2012
Opinion Issued: January 30, 2013
Gardner Fulton and Waugh P.L.L.C., of Lebanon (H. Bernard Waugh, Jr.
on the brief and orally), for the petitioner.
D’Amante Couser Pellerin & Associates, P.A., of Concord (Bruce J.
Marshall on the brief and orally), for the respondent.
CONBOY, J. The respondent, William Rines, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Vaughan, J.) that enjoined him from excavating on certain real
property until he obtained a local use variance from the petitioner, Town of
Carroll (Town), and that imposed civil penalties and attorney’s fees. See RSA
676:17 (2008 & Supp. 2012). We affirm in part, vacate in part, and remand.
The parties stipulated to, or the record supports, the following facts. The
respondent owns two lots and controls two additional lots for excavation
purposes in Carroll’s Residential Business District (R-B district). In October
2009, the Town filed a petition to enjoin him from excavating on all four lots,
contending that he was in violation of RSA chapter 155-E (2002 & Supp. 2012),
as well as the Town’s zoning ordinance. On December 29, 2009, the trial court
approved a stipulation between the parties pursuant to which the respondent
agreed not to excavate during the pendency of the lawsuit unless he obtained a
permit from the planning board and a variance pursuant to the Town’s zoning
ordinance, and posted any required bonds. After the respondent entered into
the stipulation, he continued to remove previously excavated, stockpiled
material from the lots for use on highway projects.
In the spring of 2010, the respondent received approval from the
planning board to subdivide the two lots he owns; thereafter, he began
excavating on those lots. Further court proceedings ensued, resulting in a
court order of June 22, 2010, denying the respondent’s request for ex parte
relief. According to the parties’ agreed upon statement of facts, following that
court order, the respondent “has not severed any further materials from the
ground.”
In June 2011, the trial court held a final hearing on the Town’s original
petition to enjoin the respondent’s excavation activities and recover civil
penalties and attorney’s fees. The trial court found that the respondent
engaged in two types of excavation on the four lots: (1) from the date of the
stipulation, December 29, 2009, until the respondent received subdivision
approval in the spring of 2010, he excavated for highway purposes; and (2)
from the date of subdivision approval to the date on which the respondent
ceased all excavation, June 22, 2010, he excavated either for highway purposes
or for purposes incidental to constructing a building, structure, parking lot, or
way.
Ultimately, the trial court concluded that: (1) both types of excavation
were exempt from the permitting requirements of RSA chapter 155-E; (2) the
Town’s zoning ordinance required the respondent to obtain a variance before
excavating; and (3) RSA chapter 155-E did not preempt the Town’s zoning
ordinance. The court did not find the respondent in contempt for violating the
stipulation. Instead, it enjoined him from excavating on the lots; imposed civil
penalties pursuant to RSA 676:17, I, for the period between December 29,
2009, and June 22, 2010; and awarded mandatory attorney’s fees. The
respondent appealed.
On appeal, the respondent argues that: (1) the trial court erred by
construing the Town’s zoning ordinance to require him to obtain a variance to
excavate in the R-B district; (2) the trial court erred by ruling that RSA chapter
155-E does not preempt the variance requirement; (3) the removal of stockpiled
material does not constitute excavation pursuant to RSA 155-E:1, II (2002); (4)
2
there was insufficient evidence to conclude that the respondent excavated
between December 29, 2009, and June 22, 2010; and (5) the trial court erred
by awarding mandatory attorney’s fees.
The respondent first contends that the trial court erred by construing the
Town’s zoning ordinance to require him to obtain a variance to excavate in the
Town’s R-B district. The interpretation of a zoning ordinance is a question of
law, which we review de novo. Pike Indus. v. Woodward, 160 N.H. 259, 262
(2010). We construe the words and phrases of an ordinance according to the
common and approved usage of the language. Id. When the language of an
ordinance is plain and unambiguous, we need not look beyond the ordinance
itself for further indications of legislative intent. Id.
The ordinance establishes districts, expressly sets forth permitted uses
within each district, and specifies uses that are allowed only by special
exception. See Town of Carroll Zoning Ordinance, art. III, sec. 301, 303.
Excavation is not a use permitted as of right in any district. See id. However,
the ordinance does allow certain excavation activities in the “Residential
(Breton Woods)” and “Industrial” districts by special exception. See id. art. III,
sec. 303.2, 303.4. The ordinance does not expressly allow excavation by
special exception within the R-B district. See id. art. III, sec. 303.3.
The respondent argues that he is not required to obtain a variance
pursuant to the Town’s ordinance because: (1) on its face, the ordinance does
not require a variance; (2) the ordinance regulates gravel pits only; and (3) the
Town has not previously interpreted the ordinance to require an excavation
variance for an approved subdivision.
We reject the respondent’s contention that, because the ordinance does
not expressly require a variance, he is not required to obtain a variance for
highway excavation. The Town’s ordinance is a permissive zoning ordinance.
See id. art. III, sec. 304. That is, it is “intended to prevent uses except those
expressly permitted or incidental to uses so permitted.” Tonnesen v. Town of
Gilmanton, 156 N.H. 813, 815 (2008) (quotation omitted). Article III sets forth
the uses permitted within each district and the uses allowed only upon the
granting of a special exception. Article III neither permits excavation in the R-B
district, nor allows excavation as a special exception. Accordingly, in the
absence of a variance, excavation in the R-B district is generally prohibited.
See New London v. Leskiewicz, 110 N.H. 462, 466 (1970) (defining variance as
the “authority granted to the owner to use his property in a manner otherwise
violative of the zoning regulations”).
Nor is the variance requirement limited to gravel pits, as asserted by the
respondent. The ordinance does not permit, by special exception or otherwise,
3
excavation within the R-B district. As a result, the respondent’s argument is
without merit.
Further, the Town’s prior interpretation of the zoning ordinance is not
relevant to our analysis. We construe the respondent’s argument to assert the
doctrine of administrative gloss, which is a rule of statutory construction. See
Petition of Kalar, 162 N.H. 314, 321 (2011). “Administrative gloss is placed
upon an ambiguous clause when those responsible for its implementation
interpret the clause in a consistent manner and apply it to similarly situated
applicants over a period of years without legislative interference.” Id.
(quotation omitted). However, “a lack of ambiguity in a statute or [an]
ordinance precludes application of the administrative gloss doctrine.”
Anderson v. Motorsports Holdings, 155 N.H. 491, 502 (2007). Here, the Town’s
ordinance is not ambiguous. Thus, we reject the respondent’s argument and
conclude that the trial court did not err by interpreting the Town’s zoning
ordinance to require the respondent to obtain a variance before engaging in
excavation for use in highway projects in the R-B district.
To the extent, however, that the trial court ruled that the respondent was
required to obtain a variance to conduct excavation incidental to the
construction of an otherwise permitted building, we conclude that it erred. As
noted above, a permissive zoning ordinance is “intended to prevent uses except
those expressly permitted or incidental to uses so permitted.” Tonnesen, 156
N.H. at 815 (quotation omitted) (emphasis added). Excavation that is merely
incidental to the construction of an otherwise permitted building is, therefore,
allowable under the ordinance regardless of whether the ordinance expressly
allows the excavation. It is unclear on this record what portion, if any, of the
excavation was incidental to the construction of a building, and whether the
respondent had obtained all necessary state and local permits for the
excavation, see RSA 155-E:2-a, I(a) (2002). As a result, we vacate that portion
of the trial court’s order finding that a variance is required to conduct
excavation incidental to construction of a building, and remand for further
proceedings consistent with this opinion.
We next consider whether RSA chapter 155-E preempts the Town’s
variance requirement. “The preemption doctrine flows from the principle that
municipal legislation is invalid if it is repugnant to, or inconsistent with, State
law.” Forsberg v. Kearsarge Reg’l Sch. Dist., 160 N.H 264, 269 (2010)
(quotation omitted). “Preemption may be express or implied.” N. Country
Envtl. Servs. v. Town of Bethlehem, 150 N.H. 606, 611 (2004). Here, the
respondent argues implied preemption. Implied preemption may be found
when the comprehensiveness and detail of the State statutory scheme evinces
legislative intent to supersede local regulation. Id. State law also impliedly
preempts local law when there is an actual conflict between the two. Id. A
conflict exists when a municipal ordinance or regulation permits that which a
4
State statute prohibits or vice versa. Id. Moreover, even when a local
ordinance does not expressly conflict with a State statute, it will be preempted
when it frustrates the statute’s purpose. Id.
Whether a State statute preempts local regulation is a question of law,
which we review de novo. Guildhall Sand & Gravel v. Town of Goshen, 155
N.H. 762, 764 (2007). “In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final
arbiters of the legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute
considered as a whole.” Id. “We interpret legislative intent from the statute as
written and will not consider what the legislature might have said or add
language that the legislature did not see fit to include.” Id.
We begin with the statute. RSA chapter 155-E regulates local
excavations. The statute delineates those excavations that require permits and
those that are exempt from permitting. See RSA 155-E:2 (2002), :2-a (2002).
Excavations that are not specifically exempt under the statute require a permit.
See RSA 155-E:2. If a permit is required, the owner must “apply to the
regulator in each city or town involved for a permit for excavation.” RSA 155-
E:3 (2002). The statute also requires that excavations comply with
“operational” and “reclamation” standards, whether or not the excavation is
exempt from permitting. See RSA 155-E:4-a, :5, :5-a (2002). With regard to
permit-exempt excavations, those standards are deemed “express standards.”
See RSA 155-E:4-a, :5. With regard to excavations that require a permit, those
standards are deemed “minimum standards,” see id., and such excavations
must also comply with other requirements established by local regulations,
provided such requirements do not conflict with RSA chapter 155-E, see
Guildhall, 155 N.H. at 765.
The trial court found that the respondent’s excavation activities were
permit-exempt under RSA 155-E:2, IV. The respondent does not challenge that
finding. RSA 155-E:2, IV provides, in part:
No permit shall be required . . . for excavation which is
performed exclusively for the lawful construction, reconstruction,
or maintenance of a class I, II, III, IV or V highway by a unit of
government having jurisdiction for the highway or an agent of the
unit of government which has a contract for the construction,
reconstruction, or maintenance of the highway, subject, however,
to the following: . . . .
(b) Such excavation shall not be exempt from local zoning or
other applicable ordinances, unless [the New Hampshire
Transportation Appeals Board, following a hearing, grants the
Department of Transportation or its agent an exemption from local
zoning regulations relative to the excavation], or from the
5
operational and reclamation standards as expressly set forth in
RSA 155-E:4-a, 155-E:5 and 155-E:5-a, which express standards
shall be the sole standards with which such excavations must
comply in order to retain their non-permit status as provided
under this paragraph.
(Emphasis added.)
The respondent contends that because the trial court concluded
that his excavations were permit-exempt, the Town’s variance
requirement is preempted by RSA chapter 155-E. The Town argues,
however, that the plain language of RSA 155-E:2, IV(b) reflects the
legislature’s intent not to preempt its variance requirement for the
respondent’s excavation for highway purposes. We agree with the Town.
RSA chapter 155-E constitutes a comprehensive, detailed scheme
regulating excavations. Arthur Whitcomb, Inc. v. Town of Carroll, 141 N.H.
402, 406 (1996). “The legislature’s purpose in enacting [the statute] was, in
part, to increase the supply of construction materials and decrease the cost of
roads and other governmental infrastructure to the public by curtailing
simultaneous state and local regulations of the same activity.” Id. at 407
(quotation omitted). The statute distinguishes between excavations that
require permits and those that do not. See RSA 155-E:2, :2-a. It further
establishes “minimum” operational and reclamation standards for those
excavations that require permits and “express” standards for those excavations
that are permit-exempt. See RSA 155-E:4-a, :5. This classification “evince[s] a
legislative intent that the standards applied to excavations requiring permits
and those not requiring permits differ.” Guildhall, 155 N.H. at 765.
Because excavations requiring permits are subject only to “minimum”
standards, “it follows that municipalities are not preempted from imposing
more stringent regulations upon those types of excavations.” Id. However, not
all permit-exempt excavations are relieved of the obligation to comply with local
regulation because “[t]he exemptions from local ordinances and regulations
found in [the statute] are not unconditional.” Arthur Whitcomb, 141 N.H. at
407. The statute specifically provides that excavation performed exclusively for
certain highway projects “shall not be exempt from local zoning or other
applicable ordinances, unless [the Department of Transportation or its agent is
granted an exemption],” or from certain statutory operational and reclamation
standards, which “shall be the sole standards with which such excavations
must comply in order to retain their non-permit status.” RSA 155-E:2, IV(b).
Thus, RSA 155-E:2, IV evinces the legislature’s intent to preempt local
regulation of excavation undertaken exclusively for highway construction
purposes only with respect to the statutory operational and reclamation
standards. All other local regulations applicable to highway excavation are not
6
preempted, unless an exemption from those regulations is granted. See RSA
155-E:11, I (Supp. 2012) (“Whenever . . . local regulations differ from the
provisions of [RSA chapter 155-E], the provision which imposes the greater
restriction or higher standard shall be controlling, except that no local
regulation shall supersede the sole applicability of express standards under
RSA 155-E:2, I, III, and IV.”).
The respondent argues that our holdings in Arthur Whitcomb and
Guildhall support the conclusion that RSA chapter 155-E preempts the Town’s
variance requirement. We disagree. In Arthur Whitcomb, a case involving
excavation associated with a permit-exempt stationary manufacturing plant,
see RSA 155-E:2, III, we held that by enacting the statute, the legislature
intended to preempt “only local ordinances and regulations that would have the
effect or intent of frustrating State authority” to regulate the field of excavation.
Arthur Whitcomb, 141 N.H. at 409 (quotation omitted). Given that the
legislature specifically authorized local regulation in connection with highway
excavation, we conclude that such authorized local regulation does not
frustrate State authority.
Indeed, in Arthur Whitcomb, we recognized, by way of example, that with
regard to highway excavation, the statutory provision stating that “[s]uch
excavation shall not be exempt from local zoning or other applicable
ordinances,” RSA 155-E:2, IV(b), is not unconditional. Id. at 407 (emphasis
omitted). We noted, therefore, that such a provision “cannot be deemed
redundant or unnecessary in a statutory scheme that preempts local
legislation.” Id. Likewise, we quoted with approval the trial court’s conclusion
that “the legislature generally intended chapter 155-E to preempt local land
use regulations[,] except where specifically indicated to the contrary.” Id. at
408. Thus, nothing in Arthur Whitcomb vitiates the controlling statutory
provisions in this case. The generally preemptive effect of the statutory scheme
does not invalidate express statutory provisions that authorize local legislation.
In Guildhall, a case involving permit-required excavation, we held that
the legislature did not intend to preempt local regulation of such excavation.
See Guildhall, 155 N.H. at 765. We concluded that “because the legislature
has clearly stated that RSA chapter 155-E contains only ‘minimum’
requirements for excavations that require a permit, it follows that
municipalities are not preempted from imposing more stringent regulations
upon those types of excavations.” Id. Further, we clarified that the Arthur
Whitcomb holding applies only to permit-exempt excavations. See id. at 767.
We also stated, in dicta, that ordinances purporting to regulate permit-exempt
excavations would be preempted. See id. at 767-68. This broad statement,
however, is inconsistent with the underlying reasoning in Arthur Whitcomb,
and is at odds with the express statutory provisions relevant here. Thus, we
7
conclude that neither Arthur Whitcomb nor Guildhall supports the
respondent’s argument.
The respondent next argues that the trial court erred by concluding that
the removal of previously excavated, stockpiled material constitutes
“excavation” pursuant to RSA 155-E:1, II. We need not decide this issue,
however, because even if such conduct does not constitute “excavation” under
the statute, the trial court ruled that this conduct, in the absence of a variance,
violated the Town’s zoning ordinance. The record supports the trial court’s
ruling, and the respondent does not, on appeal, assert that the removal of
previously excavated, stockpiled material is permitted under the ordinance.
Next, the respondent argues that the trial court erred when it determined
that he was subject to penalties under RSA 676:17, I (setting forth penalties for
ordinance violations) for the entire period of his excavation activities. The
respondent’s argument stems from his assertion that he did not violate either
the parties’ stipulation or RSA chapter 155-E. Because the trial court
sustainably found that a variance is required under the ordinance for the
removal of previously excavated, stockpiled material, we reject the respondent’s
argument as it relates to such activity. However, we nonetheless vacate the
trial court’s imposition of statutory penalties because it is unclear the extent to
which they are based upon excavation that may have been conducted
incidental to construction of an otherwise permitted building – which
excavation is allowed under the ordinance without a variance. On remand, the
trial court shall determine the extent to which any excavation was conducted
incidental to such construction and shall revisit the issue of statutory
penalties.
Finally, the respondent contends that the trial court erred by ruling that
the Town is entitled to attorney’s fees as the prevailing party in this case.
Specifically, he contends that the trial court erred in concluding that the award
of attorney’s fees under RSA 155-E:10, II is mandatory. However, the
respondent’s argument stems from a misunderstanding of the trial court’s
order. Although the trial court concluded that attorney’s fees were mandatory,
it did not impose them pursuant to RSA 155-E:10, II; rather, the court imposed
attorney’s fees pursuant to RSA 676:17, II based upon the respondent’s
violation of the zoning ordinance. RSA 676:17, II provides that “the
municipality shall recover its costs and reasonable attorney’s fees actually
expended in pursuing the legal action if it is found to be a prevailing party in
the action.” (Emphasis added.) The award of attorney’s fees pursuant to RSA
676:17, II is mandatory. See Bennett v. Town of Hampstead, 157 N.H. 477,
484 (2008).
Nonetheless, we vacate the trial court’s award of attorney’s fees because,
as with the trial court’s imposition of statutory penalties, it is unclear the
8
extent to which the award is based upon excavation that may have been
conducted incidental to construction of an otherwise permitted building.
Following the trial court’s determination on remand as to the extent to which
the respondent excavated incidental to constructing a building, it shall revisit
the issue of attorney’s fees. See Van Der Stok v. Van Voorhees, 151 N.H. 679,
685 (2005) (where party prevails on some claims and not others, and where
unsuccessful claims are analytically severable, any fee award should be
reduced to exclude time spent on unsuccessful claims).
Affirmed in part; vacated in
part; and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, LYNN and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
9