THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
1st Circuit Court – Berlin Family Division
No. 2011-833
IN RE NAME CHANGE OF ALEXANDER GOUDREAU
Argued: September 13, 2012
Opinion Issued: October 30, 2012
The Crisp Law Firm, PLLC, of Concord (Jack P. Crisp, Jr. on the brief
and orally), for the petitioners.
Law Office of Joshua L. Gordon, of Concord (Joshua L. Gordon on the
brief and orally), for the respondent.
LYNN, J. The respondent, Veronica Goudreau (mother), appeals the
order of the 1st Circuit Court – Berlin Family Division (Carroll, J.), upon the
recommendation of the Marital Master (Barber, M.), granting, in part, the
request of the petitioners, Maurice and Gisele Lemieux, parents and next friend
of Andrew Lemieux (father), to change the name of mother and father’s child.
We affirm.
The following facts are drawn from the record. Father and mother
entered into a romantic relationship in high school. After mother became
pregnant, the couple broke up. According to mother, father reacted negatively
to the pregnancy, told mother that she was crazy for wanting to keep the child,
preferred that mother give the child up for adoption, and did not provide her
with emotional or financial support. Mother later gave birth to a boy and
named him Alexander Bailey Goudreau.
Almost immediately after the child’s birth, the petitioners filed a
parenting petition and an ex parte motion for parenting time with Alexander.
The parenting petition requested a parenting plan allocating parental rights
and responsibilities. The motion for parenting time requested both a specific
date for father to see Alexander and recognition of father’s right to regular
weekly contact with the child. The motion contended that “[father] ha[d] been
adjusting emotionally to the reality of being a father at the age of 15, and [wa]s
prepared, through the assistance of his parents, to accept responsibility and
parent his child.” The court granted the motion.
After the petitioners returned to court alleging that mother had limited
father’s parenting time with Alexander to one hour per week, the court issued a
temporary parenting plan. The plan, among other things, gave mother primary
residential responsibility for Alexander, created a regular weekly schedule for
father to see the child, and ordered that the parents share responsibility for
making major decisions about Alexander. In addition, the court ordered
paternity testing, which subsequently confirmed father’s paternity.
When Alexander was approximately fourteen months old, as the parties
prepared for a hearing on a final parenting plan, the petitioners filed a petition
under RSA 490-D:2, X (2010) to change Alexander’s full name from Alexander
Bailey Goudreau to Alexander Bailey Lemieux. At a hearing on the petition,
mother testified that she had carried Alexander for nine months, loved him very
much, and “deserve[d] just as much as [father] to have [Alexander] have [her]
name.” Father testified that he was conflicted about becoming a father, but
that he was “very satisfied with the road [he] chose, really getting to know [his]
son.” After the hearing, the court granted the petition in part, ordering that the
child’s name be changed from Alexander Bailey Goudreau to Alexander
Goudreau Lemieux. The court reasoned:
The court declines to fault a fifteen year old boy for his reluctance
immediately to accept responsibility for Alexander. The reluctance did
not last beyond Alexander’s birth. The court makes it[s] decision based
on the best interests of Alexander. Alexander has two parents who both
care for him and love him. Andrew Lemieux’s commitment to Alexander
should be demonstrated in Alexander’s name, as should Veronica
Goudreau’s.
On appeal, mother requests that we review de novo the trial court’s order
and restore Alexander’s name to Alexander Bailey Goudreau. She argues that
the best interest standard applied by the trial court is vague, undefined,
arbitrary, and naked; that the standard “usually reflects the custom of giving a
2
child its father’s surname, and therefore reflects sexist social conventions”; and
that even if we affirm the best interest standard applied by the trial court,
father failed to prove that changing Alexander’s name was in the child’s best
interest. Therefore, she requests that we either enumerate specific factors for a
trial court to consider when ruling on a petition for change of name of a child
under RSA 490-D:2, X, or that we adopt a presumption that the name chosen
by the custodial parent is in the child’s best interest.1 We address each
argument and request in turn.
As an initial matter, we reject mother’s argument that we should review
de novo the trial court’s order. We conclude that our discretionary standard of
review of decisions allocating parental rights and responsibilities applies in
child-naming disputes. Historically, we have applied this standard in cases
involving parental disputes over children, including those regarding decision-
making and residential responsibilities. See, e.g., In the Matter of Choy &
Choy, 154 N.H. 707, 713 (2007). Accordingly, “our role is limited to
determining whether it clearly appears that the trial court engaged in an
unsustainable exercise of discretion.” In the Matter of Kurowski & Kurowski,
161 N.H. 578, 585 (2011). “We consider only whether the record establishes
an objective basis sufficient to sustain the discretionary judgment made, and
we will not disturb the trial court's determination if it could reasonably have
been made.” Id. (quotation and citation omitted).
We disagree with mother’s contention that “the law today appears to
require that to change a name the petitioner must show a substantial reason
that the child would be adversely affected by its current name.” This
contention is based upon a misreading of Moskowitz v. Moskowitz, 118 N.H.
199 (1978), a decision pre-dating RSA 490-D:2, X and concerning the motions
of two divorced women to restore their maiden names under a statute that
permitted such restoration. RSA 458:24 (Supp. 1975). Moskowitz is factually
and legally distinguishable, and, therefore, of little value in deciding the case
before us.
Turning to the merits of mother’s arguments, we disagree that the best
interest standard applied by the trial court is vague, undefined, arbitrary, and
naked. Therefore, we decline her request that we enumerate specific factors
that a trial court must consider when ruling on a petition for a change of name
of a child under RSA 490-D:2, X. We do not accept mother’s negative
characterization of the best interest standard. The standard’s elasticity is a
virtue, not a sign of arbitrariness. Our precedent establishes that a child’s best
interests are served when a trial court has broad discretion to consider all
factors bearing on the child’s welfare and is not compelled to treat any single
1 Mother asserts that “one solution when parents cannot agree [on their child’s name] is to simply
hyphenate the parents[’] surnames and give the child a compound name.” We decline to address
this “solution” because mother does not ask us to adopt such a rule.
3
factor as dispositive of the inquiry. See In the Matter of Kurowski & Kurowski,
161 N.H. at 581; In the Matter of Peirano & Larsen, 155 N.H. 738, 748 (2007);
In the Matter of Hampers & Hampers, 154 N.H. 275, 281 (2006). We see no
reason why an enumeration of specific factors that a trial court must consider
would better serve a child’s interests in the context of petitions for a change of
name of a child under RSA 490-D:2, X. Additionally, although we need not
decide this issue to resolve the present case, we note that the best interest
standard for allocating parental rights and responsibilities, RSA 461-A:6, may
apply to petitions to change the name of a child. See RSA 461-A:1, IV (Supp.
2012) (“‘Parental rights and responsibilities’ means all rights and
responsibilities parents have concerning their child.” (emphasis added)).
Regardless of whether RSA 461-A:6 applies, we conclude that trial courts may
consider the factors set forth therein when ruling on such petitions.
Next, we reject mother’s contention that the best interest standard
applied by the trial court “usually reflects the custom of giving a child its
father’s surname, and therefore reflects sexist social conventions.” Mother
cites no decision from any jurisdiction reaching this conclusion. Instead, she
contends that “[n]ormative law says it does not give precedence to the name of
either parent[,]” and cites scholarly commentary observing that the best
interest standard, like almost any other standard, may be abused. See, e.g.,
Omi, The Name of the Maiden, 12 Wis. Women’s L.J. 253, 270 (1997) (arguing
that the standard has been abused to maintain “discriminatory traditions”).
We are not persuaded that the best interest standard applied by the trial court
“usually reflects the custom of giving a child its father’s surname, and therefore
reflects sexist social conventions.”
We also reject mother’s request that we adopt a presumption articulated
by the New Jersey Supreme Court that the name chosen by the custodial
parent is in the child’s best interest. See Gubernat v. Deremer, 657 A.2d 856,
868-69 (N.J. 1995). In crafting this rule, the court noted that “as a result of
the vagueness of [New Jersey’s best interest] standard, judges have proposed
different and frequently conflicting subjective factors for deciding whether a
particular name is in a child’s best interests – factors that lead to inconsistent
resolutions of child-naming cases.” Id. at 868. The record contains no
evidence of such practices in New Hampshire. Moreover, we note that such a
presumption could result in bias in favor of maternal surnames. See Emma v.
Evans, 35 A.3d 684, 688 (N.J. Super. Ct. App Div. 2012) (citing recent
statistics of the U.S. Census Bureau that 82.2% of custodial parents are
mothers); Schroeder v. Broadfoot, 790 A.2d 773, 784 (Md. Ct. Spec. App. 2002)
(finding that presumption in favor of a name chosen by the custodial parent
“would have the practical effect of incorporating a maternal preference because,
maternity being established by nature, custody of an infant almost always is
with his mother”). In accord with the majority of courts from other
jurisdictions, we conclude that no parent should benefit from a presumption in
4
child-naming disputes. See, e.g., In re Wilson, 648 A.2d 648, 650 (Vt. 1994); In
re A.C.S., 171 P.3d 1148, 1151 (Alaska 2007).
Finally, we hold that the trial court sustainably exercised its discretion in
changing the child’s name to Alexander Goudreau Lemieux. The record
supports the trial court’s findings that, at the time of the petition’s filing, both
mother and father cared for, loved, and were committed to Alexander – findings
which mother does not challenge on appeal. Accordingly, we conclude that the
trial court had an objective basis sufficient to sustain its conclusion that
Alexander’s full name should include both parents’ surnames. On appeal “[w]e
consider only whether the record establishes an objective basis sufficient to
sustain the discretionary judgment made, and we will not disturb the trial
court’s determination if it could reasonably have been made.” In the Matter of
Kurowski & Kurowski, 161 N.H. at 585 (quotation and citation omitted).
Although additional fact finding might have aided our review of the trial court’s
order, we conclude that the trial court could reasonably have found that the
name Alexander Goudreau Lemieux was in the child’s best interest.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
5