THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Public Employee Labor Relations Board
No. 2010-764
APPEAL OF TOWN OF DEERFIELD
(New Hampshire Public Employee Labor Relations Board)
Argued: September 21, 2011
Opinion Issued: October 27, 2011
Nolan Perroni Harrington, LLP, of Lowell, Massachusetts (Kevin E. Buck
on the brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Upton & Hatfield, LLP, of North Conway (Robert Upton II on the brief and
orally), for the respondent.
DALIANIS, C.J. The respondent, the Town of Deerfield (Town), appeals a
decision of the New Hampshire Public Employee Labor Relations Board
(PELRB) certifying the petitioner, the New England Police Benevolent
Association, as the exclusive bargaining representative for a bargaining unit
consisting of certain employees in the Town’s police department. We reverse.
The following facts are taken from the record. On March 24, 2010, the
petitioner petitioned for certification, seeking to represent certain employees of
the Town’s police department. The proposed bargaining unit consisted of ten
employees: six full-time patrol officers, two part-time patrol officers, a corporal,
and the department’s secretary. The Town objected to the petition, asserting
that the proposed bargaining unit did not include the statutory minimum of
ten employees because three of its proposed members (one of the part-time
patrol officers, the corporal and the secretary) were not proper members of the
bargaining unit. See RSA 273-A:8, I (2010).
On July 27, 2010, a hearing officer granted the petition for certification,
recognizing the proposed bargaining unit and certifying its composition. The
Town sought review of the hearing officer’s decision on August 13, 2010. The
PELRB denied the Town’s motion and upheld the hearing officer’s decision.
Thereafter, the Town unsuccessfully moved for rehearing. On October 22,
2010, the PELRB certified the petitioner as the representative of the bargaining
unit consisting of six full-time patrol officers, two part-time patrol officers, the
corporal and the department’s secretary. This appeal followed.
We adhere to the standard of review set forth in RSA 541:13 (2007).
Appeal of Univ. System of N.H. Bd. of Trustees, 147 N.H. 626, 629 (2002). To
succeed on appeal, the appealing party must show that the PELRB’s decision is
unlawful, or clearly unjust or unreasonable. Id. The PELRB’s findings of fact
are presumptively lawful and reasonable, and will not be disturbed if they are
supported by the record. Id.; RSA 541:13. “However, we act as the final
arbiter of the meaning of the statute, and will set aside erroneous rulings of
law.” Appeal of Univ. System of N.H. Bd. of Trustees, 147 N.H. at 629; see
Appeal of State Employees’ Assoc. of N.H., 156 N.H. 507, 510 (2007)
(explaining that we no longer accord deference to PELRB’s statutory
interpretation). Moreover, “[t]he ultimate issue of statutory eligibility to be a
member of a bargaining unit . . . is an issue of law which is not subject to
deferential review.” Appeal of Town of Litchfield, 147 N.H. 415, 416 (2002).
Except under circumstances that do not apply here, RSA 273-A:8, I,
requires a bargaining unit to have at least ten employees before the board may
certify it. Appeal of Town of Conway, 121 N.H. 372, 373 (1981), superseded on
other grounds by Laws 1983, 270:2. Certain employees are not counted
towards the ten-employee minimum because they are excluded from the
statutory definition of “[p]ublic employee.” See RSA 273-A:1, IX (2010); see
also Appeal of Town of Conway, 121 N.H. at 373. Among those excluded from
the statutory definition of “[p]ublic employee” are “[p]ersons . . . [who are]
employed seasonally, irregularly or on call.” RSA 273-A:1, IX(d). In addition,
“[p]ersons exercising supervisory authority involving the significant exercise of
discretion may not belong to the same bargaining unit as the employees they
supervise.” RSA 273-A:8, II; see Appeal of East Derry Fire Precinct, 137 N.H.
607 (1993).
The Town argues that the bargaining unit certified in this case contained
fewer than ten employees because one of the part-time patrol officers was an
2
on-call employee and because the corporal was a supervisor within the
meaning of RSA 273-A:8, II. Since the bargaining unit certified contained fewer
than the requisite ten employees, the Town contends that the PELRB acted
unlawfully by certifying it.
For the purposes of this appeal, we will assume, without deciding, that it
was not error to include the corporal in the bargaining unit. Therefore, we
confine our analysis to whether the PELRB erred by including the on-call, part-
time patrol officer in its count of bargaining unit employees.
The hearing officer found that the part-time officer in question worked a
regular schedule until May 1, 2010, when he became “on-call,” and no longer
had a regular shift. The hearing officer concluded that because the officer
worked a regular shift when the petition was filed and when the PELRB
examined the authorization cards pursuant to RSA 273-A:10, IX (2010), he was
properly included in the bargaining unit. As the hearing officer explained, “The
‘snapshot’ of the numerical sufficiency of the proposed bargaining unit is taken
at the time the PELRB examines the authorization cards.” The hearing officer
rejected the Town’s assertion that the ten-employee rule must be met when the
certification order is issued.
Resolving this issue requires that we engage in statutory interpretation.
We are the final arbiters of legislative intent as expressed in the words of a
statute considered as a whole. Appeal of State Employees’ Assoc. of N.H., 158
N.H. 258, 260 (2009). We begin by examining the statutory language itself,
where possible ascribing the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used.
Id. We do not look beyond the language of a statute to determine legislative
intent if the language is clear and unambiguous. Id. Moreover, we interpret
statutes in the context of the overall statutory scheme and not in isolation. Id.
RSA 273-A:8, I, provides, in pertinent part: “The board or its designee
shall determine the appropriate bargaining unit and shall certify the exclusive
representative thereof when petitioned to do so under RSA 273-A:10. . . . [I]n
no case shall the board certify a bargaining unit of fewer than 10 employees
. . . without the prior approval of the governing body of the public employer.”
(Emphasis added.) The plain meaning of this statutory provision is that the
bargaining unit that the PELRB certifies must contain at least ten employees
absent the public employer’s prior approval. If the proposed bargaining unit
contains fewer than ten employees, the PELRB may not certify it. See Appeal of
Town of Conway, 121 N.H. at 373.
Here, the patrol officer in question worked on-call and had no regular
shift by the time of the hearing before the hearing officer. The PELRB,
therefore, erred when it certified the bargaining unit and included this on-call
employee for the purpose of determining whether the requisite number of
3
employees existed. Id.; see Appeal of Town of Litchfield, 147 N.H. at 416-18;
Appeal of Town of Stratham, 144 N.H. 429, 430-31 (1999).
We disagree with the petitioner’s contention that the PELRB could
lawfully decide that as long as there are ten employees in a proposed
bargaining unit when a petition to recognize the unit is filed and the PELRB
examines the authorization cards, the ten-employee rule is satisfied. While we
recognize that the PELRB may adopt rules and practices that “fill in the details
to effectuate the purpose of the statute,” these rules and practices “may not
add to, detract from, or modify the statute which they are intended to
implement.” Appeal of Wilson, 161 N.H. 659, 662 (2011) (quotations omitted).
Nor may they “contradict the terms of a governing statute.” Id. Here, the
governing statute plainly states that the PELRB may not certify a bargaining
unit that contains fewer than ten employees. The PELRB may not modify this
requirement.
Reversed.
DUGGAN, HICKS, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
4