THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2010-458
STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
MICHAEL SOTO
Argued: September 21, 2011
Opinion Issued: November 22, 2011
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Thomas E. Bocian, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Getman, Schulthess & Steere, P.A., of Bedford (Andrew R. Schulman and
Clara E. Lyons on the brief, and Mr. Schulman orally), for the defendant.
LYNN, J. Following a jury trial in Superior Court (Smukler, J.), the
defendant, Michael Soto, appeals his conviction for being an accomplice to
first-degree murder. See RSA 626:8, 630:1-a, I(a) (2007). We affirm.
I
The defendant’s conviction arises out of the fatal shooting of Aaron Kar
in Manchester on the evening of January 2, 2007. On the previous day, a man
named Bill threatened Roney White’s young cousins with a knife at a 7-Eleven
store close to Roney’s home. When Roney learned of the incident from his
cousins, he directed them to identify the man with the knife. Finding Bill
standing outside the store, Roney punched him in the face in retaliation and
fled the scene. Later that night, apparently in response to Roney’s actions, Kar
and his friends drove past a small group of people standing on the street,
which included Roney, his brother Roscoe White, and their friend Anthony
Clagon, and unsuccessfully attempted to hit one of them with a stick from the
moving vehicle. No further encounter between the two groups occurred that
night.
The next day, at around 2:30 p.m., Bill and another person attacked
Roney with a baseball bat as he was walking alone on Nashua Street. Badly
injured, Roney stumbled home to his mother and two brothers, Roscoe and
Raymond Alleyene. Roney’s mother took him to the hospital. Shortly
thereafter, Alleyene, Clagon, and Roscoe met at Roscoe’s house and discussed
the possibility of an armed fight in retaliation for the attack on Roney. After
Roscoe failed to get his own gun to work, he called some friends in Nashua,
asking them to bring a gun.
That evening, the defendant, his brother Sergio, Andrew Gonzalez, and
Clagon’s cousin Kim and her children drove from Nashua to Manchester in a
red Chevrolet Blazer. The men met Clagon, Alleyene, and Roscoe in the room
Roscoe shared with Roney, smoked marijuana, and settled on a plan to find
Roney’s attackers and confront them. After Roscoe confirmed that the
defendant had brought a gun, the six men set out in the Blazer to find Roney’s
attackers. A short time later, they found a group of people whom they
suspected had been involved in Roney’s attack gathered near a dumpster.
After driving past the group once or twice, they parked the Blazer around the
corner and discussed who would do the shooting. They settled on Roscoe as
the shooter based on his blood relationship with Roney. The defendant then
wiped the gun with his shirt, racked the slide to cock it, and handed it to
Roscoe. Roscoe left with a mask on, shot Kar in the leg and abdomen,
returned to the Blazer, and the men drove away. Kar later died from his
wounds.
The jury convicted the defendant of first-degree murder based on his role
as an accomplice in Kar’s death. On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial
court erred: (1) in not giving the jury a provocation manslaughter instruction;
(2) in not giving a reckless manslaughter instruction; and (3) in permitting the
introduction of an audio recording of Roscoe White discussing the crime with
an informant.
2
II
The defendant first argues that the trial court should have instructed the
jury to consider whether the defendant acted under an extreme mental or
emotional disturbance caused by extreme provocation, see RSA 630:2, I(a),
thereby reducing his criminal liability from murder to manslaughter. He
argues that “there was overwhelming evidence to support a jury determination
that Soto had been adequately provoked within the meaning of [the provocation
provision of the manslaughter statute].” We disagree.
The defendant was entitled to the requested jury instruction only if there
was some evidence to support a rational finding in favor of that defense. State
v. Balliro, 158 N.H. 1, 5 (2008) (quotation and brackets omitted). “Some
evidence” requires more than a minutia or scintilla of evidence. Id. “Where . . .
there is simply no evidentiary basis to support the theory of the requested jury
instruction, the party is not entitled to such an instruction, and the trial court
may properly deny the party’s request.” Id. (quotation omitted). We will search
the record for evidence supporting the defendant’s requested jury instruction,
and we will uphold the denial of a requested jury instruction absent an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. Id.
“A person is guilty of manslaughter when he causes the death of another
. . . [u]nder the influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance caused
by extreme provocation but which would otherwise constitute murder.” RSA
630:2, I(a) (2007). Under the common-law rule, to reduce the crime of murder
to manslaughter, the provocation must be so severe or extreme as to provoke a
reasonable person to kill another person out of passion.1 State v. Smith, 123
N.H. 46, 48 (1983). Even if a reasonable person would have committed the act,
still the defendant must have been actually provoked. 2 W. LaFave,
Substantive Criminal Law § 15.2(c), at 506 (2d ed. 2003). And even a
defendant so provoked will not be entitled to a manslaughter instruction where
the time elapsing between the provocation and the killing is such that a
reasonable person would have cooled. Id. § 15.2(d), at 507. “[I]f, from any
circumstances whatever, it appears that the party reflected, deliberated, or
1
Most modern formulations of the common-law “heat of passion” doctrine measure both the
adequacy of the provocation and the severity of the response by a “reasonable person” standard.
2 W. LaFave, Substantive Criminal Law §15.2(b)(10), at 504 (2d ed. 2003). Unlike in the tort
context, however, the reasonable person standard in the provocation context is not a standard of
acceptable, non-blameworthy conduct; rather it is a fiction that stands for a centuries-old
recognition that, in certain extreme circumstances, even an average person of ordinary disposition
may suffer a temporary loss of reason and control. See id. at 495 (“[T]he reasonable man, however
greatly provoked he may be, does not kill.”). Provocation manslaughter is, therefore, a “concession
to human frailty,” reflected in the fact that a person killing under an extreme mental or emotional
disturbance in response to extreme provocation has committed a serious crime – manslaughter –
but not as serious a crime as first or second-degree murder.
3
cooled any period of time before the fatal stroke was given, or if in legal
presumption there was time or opportunity for cooling, the killing will amount
to murder, being attributable to malice and revenge, and not to mental
disturbance.” 40 Am. Jur. 2d Homicide § 60, at 648 (2008).
Before applying these principles to the facts, we note that our case law
has approached provocation manslaughter in two arguably inconsistent ways:
as a lesser-included offense of murder, see State v. Little, 123 N.H. 433, 435
(1983), and as a “defense” to murder, see State v. O’Leary, 153 N.H. 710, 713-
14 (2006); State v. Taylor, 141 N.H. 89, 94-96 (1996). In contrast to our 1983
decision in Little, which referred to provocation manslaughter as a lesser-
included offense of murder, see Little, 123 N.H. at 435-36, in Taylor we referred
to provocation manslaughter as a defense to murder. See Taylor, 141 N.H. at
96. We approved of the jury instructions in Taylor because the trial court
instructed the jury to consider provocation manslaughter alongside both first
and second-degree murder, effectively treating provocation as a defense to both
charges rather than as a lesser-included offense meriting the jury’s attention
only after the jury had fully deliberated on both the first-degree and second-
degree murder charges. See id. Consistent with this holding, in O’Leary, we
concluded that the trial court erred when it instructed the jury to consider the
“lesser-included offense” of provocation manslaughter only after the jury had
first acquitted the defendant of first and second-degree murder; despite this
error, we affirmed the defendant’s conviction because we found the error
harmless. See O’Leary, 153 N.H. at 713-17.
We have never treated provocation manslaughter under RSA 630:2, I(a)
as a true “defense” under the Criminal Code triggering the notice requirements
of Superior Court Rules 98(B) and 101, and we decline to do so today. Rather,
provocation is best understood as a “partial defense” because, unlike
traditional defenses that serve to discharge a defendant’s liability for conduct
that otherwise constitutes a crime, provocation manslaughter comprises a set
of mitigating circumstances that can negate the mens rea required for
intentional murder and, even where they do not have this negation effect, can
warrant a jury in finding the defendant guilty of a separate, less culpable
offense than murder under the Code. See Berman & Farrell, Provocation
Manslaughter as Partial Justification and Partial Excuse, 52 Wm. & Mary L.
Rev. 1027, 1045 (2011) (recognizing this widely-accepted approach). Unlike the
defenses of insanity or self-defense, provocation under RSA 630:2, I(a) only
reduces, but does not eliminate, the punishment for murder,2 based on what
the law conceives as a lesser degree of culpability for acts done under the
2 In our statutes, a person convicted of first-degree murder must be sentenced to life
imprisonment without the possibility of parole. RSA 630:1-a, III (2007). By contrast, a person
convicted of manslaughter may be sentenced to no more than thirty years imprisonment. RSA
630:2, II (2007).
4
influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance in response to extreme
provocation.
Although provocation is only a partial rather than a full defense, because
it can operate both to reduce the mens rea required for murder and to provide
a basis for the jury’s invocation of the community’s sense of compassion, we
conclude that provocation, when properly raised, should be treated similarly to
self-defense. Accordingly, to guide trial courts in the future, we advise that, in
a murder prosecution, the State must prove the absence of provocation beyond
a reasonable doubt when the defendant presents some evidence to support a
rational finding that he caused the death at issue under the influence of
extreme mental or emotional disturbance caused by extreme provocation. See
Mullaney v. Wilbur, 421 U.S. 684, 704 (1975). For example, in a first-degree
murder prosecution under RSA 630:1-a, I(a), where a defendant presents
evidence to support a rational finding of provocation manslaughter, juries
should be instructed that to find the defendant guilty of first-degree murder the
State must prove beyond a reasonable doubt: (1) that the defendant caused
the death of the victim; (2) that he acted “purposely” under the special
definition of that term in RSA 630:1-a, II;3 and (3) that he did not act under the
influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance caused by extreme
provocation. The jury should also be given an acquittal first instruction
indicating that, if the jury finds the defendant not guilty of first-degree murder
pursuant to the foregoing instructions, it should next consider whether the
State has proved, again beyond a reasonable doubt, the elements of second-
degree murder under RSA 630:1-b, I(a): (1) that the defendant caused the
death of the victim; (2) that he acted knowingly; and (3) that he did not act
under the influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance caused by
extreme provocation. Once again, the jury should be given the acquittal first
instruction and told that if it finds the defendant not guilty of second-degree
murder, it should then go on to consider whether he is guilty of provocation
manslaughter, the elements of this offense being: (1) that the defendant
caused the death of the victim; and (2) that the defendant acted either
purposely or knowingly. The jury should also be instructed that, if it reaches
the crime of provocation manslaughter in its deliberations, the defendant may
be found guilty of this crime if the State proves the foregoing two elements
beyond a reasonable doubt even if the jury concludes that the defendant acted
3 The definition of “purposely” found in the first-degree murder statute has two components: (1)
that the defendant’s conscious object was to cause the death of another; and (2) that the
defendant’s acts in furtherance of this object were deliberate and premeditated. See RSA 630:1-a,
II (2007). This specific definition applicable to the first-degree murder offense proscribed by RSA
630:1-a, I(a) is different from the general definition of “purposely” which applies to other crimes in
the Criminal Code. See RSA 626:2, II(a) (2007).
5
under the influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance caused by
extreme provocation.4
Turning now to the circumstances of the instant case, we conclude that
the undisputed facts culminating in Kar’s death reveal no evidence upon which
a provocation instruction was warranted. At least two hours passed between
the moment the defendant learned by telephone that Roney had been attacked
and the moment the defendant and his friends found and killed Kar. In that
time, the defendant located a loaded gun, drove with his friends from Nashua
to Manchester, met with Roscoe and several others at Roscoe’s home, smoked
marijuana, and discussed how to avenge the attack on Roney. The drive to
Manchester took about one-half hour and the discussion in Roney’s home took
at least an additional half-hour. Then, with the defendant’s brother driving,
they set out to find Roney’s assailants on the street. When they found the men
they were looking for, they drove past once or twice, parked around the corner,
and discussed for about seven or eight minutes who would do the shooting.
After the group settled on Roscoe as the shooter, the defendant pulled out a
gun, wiped it off, cocked it, and gave it to Roscoe, telling him the gun was
“smooth.”
This sequence is not consistent with a sudden emotional disturbance
from which the defendant had no time to regain control of his passions. Even
assuming that Kar was the person with Bill during the attack on Roney the day
before, and that such attack both actually and reasonably provoked the
defendant, a reasonable person would not remain in that extreme emotional
state after driving to a different city, meeting with several friends to discuss
how to retaliate, taking the time to smoke marijuana, and again driving to
search for one’s provokers. The law is careful to distinguish a sudden rush of
passion following extreme provocation, on the one hand, from a desire for
revenge, on the other. See State v. Henson, 197 P.3d 456, 464 (Kan. 2008). A
provocation manslaughter instruction is simply not appropriate where, as here,
the defendant has killed after a period of reflection and deliberation during
which a reasonable person’s passions would have cooled. See LaFave, supra
§ 15.2(d), at 507; see also State v. Ramirez, 569 P.2d 201, 213 (Ariz. 1977)
(four and a half hours sufficient to show cool state of mind); Com. v. Colon, 866
N.E.2d 412, 425 (Mass. 2007) (“[W]here the alleged provocation is followed by
at least a few minutes during which the defendant and the victim are
4 The instruction on the elements of provocation manslaughter specified in the text also takes
account of the fact that this offense can be charged as a stand-alone crime. See, e.g., State v.
Darcy, 121 N.H. 220, 221 (1981). That is, in circumstances where the prosecution is prepared
to accept the fact that the defendant meets the criteria for adequate provocation, it can
eliminate the need to disprove this circumstance beyond a reasonable doubt by charging the
defendant only with violating RSA 630:2, I(a). Cf. Patterson v. New York, 432 U.S. 197, 199 n.3
(1977) (quoting New York statute providing that in prosecution for manslaughter, provocation
need not be proved).
6
separated, and then the defendant seeks out the victim, a charge of voluntary
manslaughter based on provocation is not warranted.” (emphasis added)); Com.
v. Keohane, 829 N.E.2d 1125, 1130 (Mass. 2005) (“[E]ven where sufficient
provocation exists, if a defendant leaves the scene of the provocation . . . and
then returns to attack the victim, the defendant is considered to have had
adequate opportunity for his anger to subside.”); People v. Pouncey, 471
N.W.2d 346, 351 (Mich. 1991) (going to safe harbor and retrieving gun
sufficient cooling time).
Equally implausible is the defendant’s contention that he had not
actually cooled off. “[A defendant] cannot have his homicide reduced to
voluntary manslaughter if . . . he has actually cooled off by the time he
commits his deadly act.” LaFave, supra § 15.2(e), at 509. Anger alone is not
sufficient to warrant a provocation instruction; the law requires an extreme
emotional response to a sufficiently provoking event. Washington v. State, 808
N.E.2d 617, 626 (Ind. 2004). Here, the defendant’s actions leading up to the
killing reveal a calm and calculating state of mind, guided not by a sudden,
uncontrollable passion but by a desire to avenge the beating of his friend. See
LaFave, supra § 15.2(a), at 494 (“A passion for revenge, of course, will not do.”
(quotation omitted)). Even after learning of the attack on Roney, driving from
Nashua to Manchester with a gun, meeting his friends to plot a violent
response, and locating Roney’s assailants, the defendant had the presence of
mind to wipe the gun down with his shirt, rack the slide, and advise Roscoe
that the gun was “smooth.” For these reasons, the trial judge acted well within
his discretion in refusing to instruct the jury as to provocation manslaughter.
III
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred by refusing to
instruct the jury on reckless manslaughter as a lesser-included offense of
reckless second-degree murder. In addition to the indictment charging the
defendant with first-degree murder, he also was charged in a separate
indictment with second-degree murder for allegedly recklessly causing the
death of Kar under circumstances manifesting extreme indifference to the value
of human life. See RSA 630:1-b, I(b) (2007).
In general, a defendant charged with one offense is entitled to have the
jury consider any lesser-included offenses. State v. Cameron, 121 N.H. 348,
350 (1981). This rule safeguards criminal defendants’ due process rights by
providing juries an alternative to convicting on only the crime the prosecution
opted to charge and minimizing the risk that juries will make “all or nothing”
decisions. See Beck v. Alabama, 447 U.S. 625, 637-38 (1980). Whether the
defendant is entitled to a lesser-included offense instruction involves a two-part
inquiry: first, the lesser offense must be embraced within the definition of the
greater offense; and second, the evidence adduced at trial must provide a
7
rational basis for a guilty finding on the lesser offense. See State v. Thomas,
154 N.H. 189, 192 (2006).
The State contends that any error in failing to instruct the jury on
reckless manslaughter was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. An error is
harmless only if it is determined, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the verdict
was not affected by the error. State v. Hernandez, 159 N.H. 394, 402 (2009).
The State bears the burden of proving that an error is harmless. Id.
The State concedes, as it must, that reckless manslaughter is a lesser-
included offense of murder. See RSA 630:2, I(b) (2007); State v. Howland, 119
N.H. 413, 416 (1979). We also assume without deciding that the evidence at
trial would have supported a rational conclusion that the defendant acted
merely recklessly (rather than recklessly with extreme indifference to the value
of human life) in giving Roscoe the gun used to kill the victim. In this case,
however, any error in refusing to instruct the jury on reckless manslaughter
was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. The defendant was charged with
two offenses: first-degree murder, requiring that the defendant caused Kar’s
death purposely, see RSA 630:1-a, I(a) (2007); and reckless second-degree
murder, requiring that the defendant caused Kar’s death recklessly under
circumstances manifesting extreme indifference to the value of human life, see
RSA 630:1-b, I(b) (2007). The trial judge instructed the jury as to both
offenses, correctly identifying their elements for the jury’s consideration.
Further, the judge issued an “acquittal first” instruction, telling the jury they
must first acquit the defendant of first-degree murder before considering the
lesser offense of second-degree murder. Because the jury in this case
convicted the defendant of purposeful first-degree murder even though they
had the option of convicting the defendant of the less serious offense of
reckless second-degree murder under circumstances manifesting an extreme
indifference to the value of human life, it follows that the jury would not have
considered the still less serious offense of reckless manslaughter (not involving
extreme indifference to life) even if it had received such an instruction. We
therefore conclude that any error in failing to give such an instruction was
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
IV
Finally, the defendant objects to the admission of a jailhouse recording of
a conversation between Roscoe (who was at the time incarcerated on an
unrelated matter) and a confidential informant. In that recording, Roscoe
confessed to having shot the victim and shared certain details leading up to
and following the shooting. He also told the informant that the gun was
already “cocked back” and referred in the same sentence to “Mike,” which
prompted the informant to ask Roscoe if he meant that “Mikey” – the defendant
– had cocked the gun for him. Roscoe did not intelligibly answer the
8
informant’s question. The defendant argues that this recording contained
inadmissible hearsay and otherwise violated his state and federal confrontation
rights. The State contends that the court properly admitted the recording as a
statement against penal interest, and that any error was harmless.
Assuming without deciding that the admission of the exchange
constituted error, we agree with the State that any such error was harmless.
For an error to be harmless, the State must prove beyond a reasonable doubt
that it did not affect the verdict. Hernandez, 159 N.H. at 402. “An error may
be harmless beyond a reasonable doubt if the alternative evidence of the
defendant’s guilt is of an overwhelming nature, quantity, or weight, and if the
inadmissible evidence is merely cumulative or inconsequential in relation to the
strength of the State’s evidence of guilt.” State v. Thompson, 149 N.H. 565,
567 (2003) (quotation omitted). Here, the recorded conversation tended only to
prove (1) Roscoe’s role as the shooter and his recollections of certain details of
the shooting, and (2) the defendant’s role in cocking the murder weapon for
Roscoe. The defendant does not dispute the former point. As to the latter, the
defendant’s argument is unavailing for two reasons. First, Andrew Gonzalez
testified at trial that the defendant cocked the gun before handing it to Roscoe,
making the disputed portion of the recording cumulative as to that fact.
Second, whether or not the defendant cocked the gun is, on the facts here,
wholly unnecessary to a finding of accomplice liability. Even if that fact lent
some probative weight to the State’s contention that the defendant shared
Roscoe’s intent to kill, the other evidence against the defendant overwhelmingly
implicated him in the scheme to kill Kar. For example, Clagon testified that,
sometime after Roscoe placed a telephone call to Nashua asking the person on
the other end of the line to “bring that thing,” the defendant and his brother
arrived at Roscoe’s home in Manchester. Roscoe asked the defendant, in
person, if he had brought “the thing” and the defendant confirmed that he had.
Clagon and Gonzalez both testified that, after the defendant and his friends
located their targets, they parked around the corner to discuss who would do
the shooting; Gonzalez testified that the defendant volunteered to do it. And,
most importantly, both Clagon and Gonzalez testified that the defendant
handed the gun to Roscoe, who then walked around the corner and shot Kar.
Given this evidence, even absent the disputed portion of the recorded
conversation between Roscoe and the confidential informant, there remained
overwhelming evidence to support a finding of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
9