THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2010-202
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
ROBERT BURKE
Argued: April 21, 2011
Opinion Issued: September 22, 2011
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Thomas E. Bocian, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Pamela E. Phelan, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, Robert Burke, appeals a decision by the
Trial Court (Garfunkel, J.) denying his motion to dismiss the charge of criminal
restraint. See RSA 633:2 (2007). We affirm.
The record reveals the following facts. On the morning of February 2,
2009, eighty-three-year-old Monna Greenstreet was home alone when she saw
the defendant standing in the area between her kitchen and family room. He
was holding a knife and demanded $75,000, which he claimed her husband
had hidden in the house. Greenstreet told the defendant that her husband
kept his money in the bank and not in the house.
The defendant gestured with the knife for Greenstreet to go down the hall
to another room where she sat down on a sofa. Greenstreet was disabled and
had difficulty walking. She had difficulty getting up from a seated position and
had been taught to “lean forward two or three times and push herself up.”
After Greenstreet was seated on the sofa, the defendant then tied her hands
together with “sturdy plastic-coated” wire. While Greenstreet later testified that
the wire was not tied very tight, she told the defendant that the wire was too
tight so that he would loosen the ties, which he did. After approximately thirty
minutes, the defendant took all of the handsets from the Greenstreets’ phones,
took a laptop, and drove off in the Greenstreets’ car. Greenstreet got up from
the sofa, watched the defendant leave the house, and then went to her
neighbor’s home and called the police.
Greenstreet testified that the knife was a kitchen knife with a blade
about three inches wide and twelve inches long. She testified that the
defendant held the knife in a threatening manner, but never verbally
threatened to use it or attempted to use it to harm her. She testified that she
“was a little shaken up,” but she “wasn’t too scared [because] he didn’t seem to
be a man but just a big boy.”
The defendant was subsequently charged with burglary, robbery, theft by
unauthorized taking, criminal restraint, and obstructing the report of a crime.
At the close of the State’s case, the defendant moved to dismiss all of the
charges. With respect to the criminal restraint charge, he argued that the
State had failed to prove that Greenstreet was exposed to “risk of serious bodily
injury.”
The trial court denied the defendant’s motion, ruling that “under the
totality of the evidence . . . a reasonable jury could find that [Greenstreet] was
exposed to risk of serious bodily injury when her hands were tied together.”
The jury subsequently convicted the defendant on several charges. He appeals
only his conviction for criminal restraint.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the State did not prove that the
circumstances of Greenstreet’s confinement exposed her to a risk of serious
bodily injury. The State contends that Greenstreet’s physical limitations made
it difficult for her to get up from a seated position without the use of her hands,
and that by binding her hands together with plastic ties while she was seated,
the defendant exposed her to a risk of serious bodily injury.
To prevail in a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, the defendant
bears the burden of proving that no rational trier of fact, viewing the evidence
2
in the light most favorable to the State, could have found guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt. State v. Crie, 154 N.H. 403, 406 (2006). In reviewing the
evidence, we examine each evidentiary item in the context of all the evidence,
not in isolation. Id. Circumstantial evidence may be sufficient to support a
finding of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Id. Further, the trier may draw
reasonable inferences from facts proved and also inferences from facts found as
a result of other inferences, provided they can be reasonably drawn therefrom.
Id.
Resolution of this issue requires us to engage in statutory interpretation.
“In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of the intent of
the legislature as expressed in the words of a statute considered as a whole.”
State v. Thiel, 160 N.H. 462, 465 (2010) (quotation omitted). “We construe
provisions of the Criminal Code according to the fair import of their terms and
to promote justice.” State v. Kousounadis, 159 N.H. 413, 423 (2009); see RSA
625:3 (2007). We first look to the language of the statute itself, and, if possible,
construe that language according to its plain and ordinary meaning.
Kousounadis, 159 N.H. at 423. “We interpret legislative intent from the statute
as written and will not consider what the legislature might have said or add
language that the legislature did not see fit to include.” Petition of State of N.H.
(State v. Milner), 159 N.H. 456, 457 (2009). “We must give effect to all words in
a statute, and presume that the legislature did not enact superfluous or
redundant words.” Id. “Finally, we interpret a statute in the context of the
overall statutory scheme and not in isolation.” Kousounadis, 159 N.H. at 423.
RSA 633:2, I, provides that a person is guilty of criminal restraint, a
class B felony, “if he knowingly confines another unlawfully in circumstances
exposing him to risk of serious bodily injury.” The State is thus required to
prove three elements: “(1) the actor must act knowingly; (2) the victim must be
exposed to the risk of serious bodily injury; and (3) the act must confine the
victim unlawfully.” State v. Bruce, 132 N.H. 465, 470 (1989). A person is
guilty of false imprisonment, a misdemeanor, “if he knowingly confines another
unlawfully . . . so as to interfere substantially with his physical movement.”
RSA 633:3 (2007).
The only issue on appeal is whether the State proved that the victim was
exposed to a “risk of serious bodily injury.” “Serious bodily injury” is defined
as “any harm to the body which causes severe, permanent or protracted loss of
or impairment to the health or of the function of any part of the body.” RSA
625:11, VI (2007). The parties dispute the meaning of the word “risk.” The
defendant contends that to establish a “risk of serious bodily injury,” the State
must present evidence of “an actual, identifiable risk of serious physical or
mental injury.” To require less, the defendant argues, would render the
element meaningless, resulting in no distinction between felony criminal
restraint and misdemeanor false imprisonment. The State responds by arguing
3
that the plain meaning of the statute requires the State to prove only that the
defendant exposed a victim to “the possibility of severe, permanent, or
protracted loss of or impairment to the health or function of any part of the
body.”
“[W]e will not consider what the legislature might have said or add
language that the legislature did not see fit to include.” Milner, 159 N.H. at
457. Had the legislature intended to require proof of an actual, identifiable
risk, it certainly could have done so. See Ark. Code Ann. § 5-11-103 (2006)
(statute requires proof that defendant exposed the victim to a “substantial risk
of serious physical injury” (emphasis added)); Conn. Gen. Stat. Ann. § 53a-95
(West 2007) (same); Mo. Rev. Stat. § 565.120 (2000) (same); Tenn. Code Ann.
§ 39-13-303 (2010) (same); Tex. Penal Code Ann. § 20.02(c)(2)(A) (West 2011)
(same).
We note the defendant’s concern that a definition of risk that is too broad
may blur the line between criminal restraint and false imprisonment. However
the crime of criminal restraint still requires the State to prove the additional
element of exposure to a risk of serious bodily injury. We are confident that
juries are fully capable of determining whether or not the State has proved this
risk of serious bodily injury and see no reason to rewrite the statute to require
a higher quantum of proof.
At oral argument the State properly conceded that the fact that the
defendant possessed a knife during Greenstreet’s confinement does not affect
the analysis because the defendant never verbally threatened to use the knife,
never held it in close proximity to Greenstreet, and never attempted to harm
her with it. Thus, on these facts, the knife is irrelevant to the element at issue.
In the instant case, the jury heard evidence that Greenstreet was
disabled and had difficulty walking. There was testimony that her husband
had to install a special bar in order to assist her going up and down stairs.
Greenstreet had great difficulty getting up from a seated position and needed to
lean forward two or three times and push herself up with her hands. Viewing
the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, the evidence was sufficient
to show that the defendant bound the hands of an elderly disabled woman who
needed her hands in order to get up from a seated position. It was certainly
foreseeable that Greenstreet would eventually attempt to get up from the sofa,
and considering her physical impairments and the fact that her hands were
bound, it was entirely possible that Greenstreet would lose her balance and
suffer a serious bodily injury. Although we consider this a close case, viewing
the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, we hold that it was
sufficient to establish a risk of serious bodily injury.
Affirmed.
4
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, J., concurred; CONBOY, J., dissented.
CONBOY, J., dissenting. Because I would find the evidence presented by
the State insufficient to establish risk of serious bodily injury, I respectfully
dissent.
A person is guilty of criminal restraint if he “knowingly confines another
unlawfully in circumstances exposing him to risk of serious bodily injury.”
RSA 633:2, I (2007). In dispute is the meaning of the word “risk,” which is not
defined by statute. The State urges us to adopt the dictionary definition of
“risk,” which is “the possibility of loss, injury, disadvantage, or destruction.”
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 1961 (unabridged ed. 2002). But
even accepting the State’s position, the issue centers on the degree of
“possibility” necessary to constitute “risk of serious bodily injury.” In the
State’s view, presumably any possibility, however remote, would constitute
such a risk.
The State argues that because Greenstreet was elderly and had difficulty
standing up from a seated position without the use of her hands, the
defendant’s action in binding her hands while she was seated created a risk
that, if Greenstreet tried to stand up with her hands bound, she might suffer
severe injury or protracted bodily impairment. To read the criminal restraint
statute so broadly, however, effectively eliminates the distinction between
felony criminal restraint and misdemeanor false imprisonment. To the extent
that any possibility of serious bodily injury, however remote, is sufficient to
establish the required risk, then any conduct constituting misdemeanor false
imprisonment arguably could be elevated to felony criminal restraint by simply
positing a scenario under which the victim might have suffered serious bodily
injury as a result of the unlawful confinement.
Here, the State apparently relies upon an attenuated string of
possibilities. First, after her hands were bound, Greenstreet might have
attempted to stand up from her seated position. Then, she might have had
difficulty standing up due to her inability to use her hands. The difficulty she
had standing up might have then caused her to fall in a manner that might
have caused injury. Finally, the resulting injury might have constituted
“serious bodily injury” as defined by statute – that is, “severe, permanent or
protracted loss of or impairment to the health or of the function of any part of
the body.” RSA 625:11, VI (2007). Given this string of possibilities, it is
perhaps telling that the State did not articulate, either in its brief or when
pressed at oral argument, precisely how the risk of serious bodily injury was
created by the defendant’s conduct. Because, in my view, the jury necessarily
engaged in speculation in reaching its verdict, I would reverse the conviction
for felony criminal restraint.
5