THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2011-570
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
DANIEL CASANOVA
Argued: November 28, 2012
Opinion Issued: February 13, 2013
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Susan P. McGinnis, senior
assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Dorothy E. Graham, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
CONBOY, J. Following a jury trial in Superior Court (Colburn, J.), the
defendant, Daniel Casanova, was convicted of attempted kidnapping, see RSA
629:1 (2007); RSA 633:1 (2007), and attempted aggravated felonious sexual
assault (attempted AFSA), see RSA 629:1; RSA 632-A:2 (Supp. 2012). On
appeal, he argues that: (1) he was denied a unanimous jury verdict on the
attempted AFSA charge; and (2) he was entitled to a dismissal of the attempted
kidnapping charge based upon the “merger doctrine.” We affirm in part and
reverse in part.
The jury could have found the following facts. On July 12, 2010, A.T.,
the seven-year-old female victim, and her younger sister were playing on the
porch outside of their home in Nashua. A.T. was wearing a bathing suit.
Across the street there is a bicycle path, portions of which are obstructed from
view by trees and other vegetation. While A.T. was playing, she saw a man,
later identified as the defendant, on a bicycle at the end of her driveway. The
defendant told A.T. and her sister to “come over.” Believing that she knew him,
A.T. approached the defendant.
The defendant led A.T. across the street, along the bicycle path, and into
a small clearing adjacent to the path. The distance between A.T.’s home and
the clearing is approximately 207 feet. Once in the clearing, the defendant
pulled A.T.’s bathing suit bottom down to her feet. A.T. immediately pulled up
her bathing suit bottom and started to leave. The defendant then reached out
and touched her hand before she left; however, A.T. was able to “get away” and
return to her home. Once at home, A.T. informed her mother about what had
occurred.
The defendant was subsequently arrested and charged with attempted
AFSA and attempted kidnapping. Following a jury trial, he was convicted of
both charges. This appeal followed.
The defendant first argues that the trial court denied him a unanimous
verdict on the attempted AFSA charge. The attempted AFSA indictment
alleged, in pertinent part:
[T]hat [the defendant], with the purpose that the crime of [AFSA] be
committed against a child under the age of 13, escorted A.T. (born
in 2003) to an isolated wooded area and pulled down her bathing
suit bottom, which, under the circumstances as he believed them
to be, constituted a substantial step toward the commission of the
crime . . . .
Pursuant to RSA 632-A:2, a person is guilty of AFSA against a child under the
age of thirteen if he either engages in sexual penetration with the child, see
RSA 632-A:2, I(l), or “intentionally touches whether directly, through clothing,
or otherwise, the genitalia of [the child] under circumstances that can be
reasonably construed as being for the purpose of sexual arousal or
gratification,” RSA 632-A:2, II.
At trial, the defendant argued that the jury was required to unanimously
agree which act – penetration or touching for sexual gratification – he intended
to commit. The trial court rejected this argument and instructed the jury that
they “must all agree that the Defendant intended to either engage in sexual
penetration of the other person or in the touching of the other person’s
2
genitalia under circumstances that can be reasonably construed as being for
the purpose of sexual arousal or gratification.” The defendant argues that this
instruction allowed the jury to convict him without being unanimous as to the
elements constituting attempted AFSA because the two variants of AFSA
require different elements. We disagree.
Juries must be unanimous only as to each element of an offense. See
RSA 625:10 (2007); see also State v. Munoz, 157 N.H. 143, 147 (2008). Here,
the defendant was charged with and convicted of attempted AFSA. Attempt is
an inchoate crime that is considered a substantive offense in and of itself.
Munoz, 157 N.H. at 147. The attempt statute requires the State to identify the
intended offense but does not require the State to plead and prove the elements
of the intended offense. State v. Johnson, 144 N.H. 175, 178 (1999). Statutory
variants of AFSA are not elements of the crime of attempted AFSA. See id. at
179. Because penetration and touching for sexual gratification are statutory
variants of AFSA, see id. at 178-79, the jurors were not required to
unanimously find which specific act the defendant intended to commit; it was
sufficient that they unanimously concluded that the defendant intended to
commit either variant. Therefore, we hold that the trial court’s jury instruction
did not deprive the defendant of a unanimous verdict.
Next, the defendant argues that the trial court erred by denying his
motion to dismiss the attempted kidnapping charge. He contends that the
“merger doctrine” prohibits his conviction for attempted kidnapping because
the evidence failed to show that he attempted to confine A.T. in a manner
independent of his efforts to commit attempted AFSA.
A person commits the crime of attempted kidnapping when, “with a
purpose that [kidnapping] be committed, he does or omits to do anything
which, under the circumstances as he believes them to be, is an act or
omission constituting a substantial step toward the commission of the crime”
of kidnapping. RSA 629:1; State v. Bean, 153 N.H. 380, 386 (2006). One
commits the crime of kidnapping “if he knowingly confines another under his
control with a purpose to: . . . [c]ommit an offense against h[er].” RSA 633:1,
I(d).
The Criminal Code does not limit the nature of the confinement
necessary to satisfy RSA 633:1. Consequently, an act of confinement could
overlap with the elements of other crimes, including sexual assault and
robbery, because “detention and sometimes confinement, against the will of the
victim, frequently accompany these crimes.” People v. Levy, 204 N.E.2d 842,
844 (N.Y. 1965). “It is a common occurrence in robbery, for example, that the
victim be confined briefly at gunpoint or bound and detained, or moved into
and left in another room or place.” Id. However,
3
[i]t is unlikely that these restraints, sometimes accompanied by
asportation, which are incidents to other crimes and have long
been treated as integral parts of other crimes, were intended by the
Legislature in framing its broad definition of kidnapping to
constitute a separate crime of kidnapping, even though kidnapping
might sometimes be spelled out literally from the statutory words.
Id.
To rectify this overlap, we recently adopted the “merger doctrine.” See
State v. Brooks, 164 N.H. __, __, 56 A.3d 1245, 1265 (2012). “The merger
doctrine, in this context, prohibits a conviction for kidnapping based upon acts
that fall within the definition of that crime but are merely incidental to another
crime.” Id. at __, 56 A.3d at 1264 (quotation omitted). This doctrine is one of
fairness, see id. at __, 56 A.3d at 1266, prohibiting “distortion of lesser crimes
into much more serious crimes by excess of prosecut[orial] zeal.” People v.
Thomas, 457 N.Y.S.2d 187, 189 (Sup. Ct. 1982). The doctrine, however, is not
“designed to merge ‘true’ kidnappings into other crimes merely because the
kidnappings were used to accomplish ultimate crimes of lesser or greater
gravity.” Id. “Whether restraint and movement are merely incidental to
another crime or support kidnapping as a separate crime is a fact-specific
determination based on the totality of the circumstances.” Brooks, 164 N.H. at
__, 56 A.3d at 1265 (quotation omitted).
The attempted AFSA indictment here alleged two acts: (1) escorting A.T.
into an isolated wooded area; and (2) pulling down her bathing suit bottom.
The defendant’s attempted kidnapping indictment alleged that:
[The defendant] did commit the crime of [attempted kidnapping], in
that [he], with the purpose that the crime of Kidnapping be
committed and the purpose to commit an offense against A.T.
(born in 2003), knowingly attempted to confine A.T. under his
control and did not voluntarily release her, by taking her to an
isolated wooded area, pulling down her bathing suit bottom, and
grabbing her arm when she tried to get away, which, under the
circumstances as he believed them to be, constituted a substantial
step toward the commission of the crime of Kidnapping.
(Emphasis added.) At trial, the evidence generally supported the facts as
alleged in the indictments, with one exception: A.T.’s testimony revealed that
the defendant did not grab her arm, but instead reached out and touched her
hand before she left the wooded area.
4
The defendant argues that the merger doctrine applies because both
charges comprise virtually the same conduct. The defendant contends that the
evidence of his reaching out and touching A.T.’s hand bears only on the alleged
attempt to commit AFSA.
Preliminarily, the State argues that the defendant has neither preserved
nor adequately briefed the merger issue. This argument is not supported by
the record. Below, the defendant moved to dismiss, arguing that the attempted
kidnapping charge was not independent of the attempted AFSA charge. The
court heard argument from both parties on the issue and ultimately denied the
defendant’s motion. As a result, the issue is preserved for review. See State v.
Ayer, 150 N.H. 14, 21 (2003) (“When trial courts have an opportunity to rule on
issues and to correct errors before they are presented to the appellate court,
the preservation requirement is satisfied.”). Further, in his brief, the defendant
makes specific reference to the “merger doctrine” and argues that the
attempted kidnapping charge was not sufficiently independent of the attempted
AFSA charge to constitute a separate offense.
The touchstone under the merger doctrine is “whether the abduction is
so minimal, incidental and inseparable from the underlying crime that it does
not fairly constitute a separate crime of kidnapping.” People v. Blair, 808
N.Y.S.2d 500, 501 (App. Div. 2006). In Blair, the victim was jogging along a
secluded path when the defendant struck her with a stick, pushed her toward
an adjacent wooded area, momentarily restrained her, and told her that she
would die. See id. The defendant was charged and convicted of attempted
kidnapping, attempted murder, and assault. See id. On appeal, the court
concluded that the merger doctrine required reversal of the attempted
kidnapping conviction because the defendant’s acts of pushing the victim a
short distance, grabbing her legs, and restraining her momentarily were
“minimal and part of the assault and attempted murder.” Id.
Similarly, in People v. Wood, the defendant “march[ed] [a] couple down a
deserted road about 150 to 200 feet.” People v. Wood, 407 N.Y.S.2d 271, 271
(App. Div. 1978). “At that point[,] when the couple resisted . . . , he attacked
them with [a] knife.” Id. The defendant was charged with and convicted of two
counts each of attempted murder, kidnapping, robbery, assault, and one count
of grand larceny. See id. at 271-72. On appeal, the court overturned the
defendant’s kidnapping conviction based on the merger doctrine because it
concluded that the defendant’s actions in restraining the two victims were
“intended to enable him to accomplish his overall criminal scheme.” Id. at 272.
Here, we conclude that the defendant’s attempt to confine A.T. was
incidental and inseparable from his attempt to commit AFSA. As in Blair, the
defendant’s act of touching A.T’s hand was “minimal,” see Blair, 808 N.Y.S.2d
at 501, and occurred only moments after A.T. pulled up her bathing suit
5
bottom. See generally People v. Cruz, 745 N.Y.S.2d 528, 531 (App. Div. 2002)
(where restraint and underlying crime are essentially simultaneous, merger will
be found). Further, the State relied upon the fact that the defendant led A.T.
approximately 207 feet from her home to prove both charges. Thus, as in
Wood, the defendant’s actions in attempting to confine A.T. were in furtherance
of the attempted AFSA, supporting a conclusion that the attempted kidnapping
was solely “intended to enable [the defendant] to accomplish his overall
criminal scheme.” Wood, 407 N.Y.S.2d at 272.
The State argues that the merger doctrine does not apply to attempted
kidnapping, but only to the “substantive” crime of kidnapping. We disagree.
We find no support for the argument that the merger doctrine, in this context,
does not apply to inchoate crimes. In fact, the court in Blair applied the
merger doctrine to the inchoate offense of attempted kidnapping. See Blair,
808 N.Y.S.2d at 501. Additionally, the purpose of the merger doctrine –
prohibiting a kidnapping conviction for confinement that is merely incidental to
another crime – is arguably even more germane in the case of attempted
kidnapping, where actual confinement need not be proven. See Levy, 204
N.E.2d at 844.
The State next asserts that the merger doctrine does not apply because
the State did not have to prove that the defendant attempted to confine A.T. for
the purpose of committing an offense against her. See RSA 633:1, I(d).
Alternatively, the State maintains that even if it had such a burden, it proved
that the defendant intended to commit the offense of witness tampering. Our
merger analysis here, however, compares the attempted restraint alleged in the
attempted kidnapping charge with the actions supporting the attempted AFSA
charge. That the State was not required to prove the elements of kidnapping
under RSA 633:1, I(d) to sustain the charge of attempted kidnapping is
irrelevant to our analysis.
Finally, the State contends that because the AFSA and kidnapping
statutes are intended to prohibit different types of criminal activity, the trial
court did not err in failing to apply the merger doctrine. However, by adopting
the merger doctrine, we recognized that it is unlikely the Legislature intended
to criminalize restraint that is integral to other crimes, “even though
kidnapping might sometimes be spelled out literally from the statutory words.”
Levy, 204 N.E.2d at 844. Thus, under our analysis, it is irrelevant whether the
statutes are intended to prohibit different types of criminal activity.
We hold that the trial court erred by denying the defendant’s motion to
dismiss the attempted kidnapping charge based upon the merger doctrine.
Accordingly, we reverse the defendant’s attempted kidnapping conviction.
Any issues raised in the defendant’s notice of appeal but not addressed
6
in his brief are deemed waived. See State v. Locke, 149 N.H. 1, 12 (2002).
Affirmed in part and
reversed in part.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
7