THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2010-120
LORRAINE TESSIER
v.
REGINA S. ROCKEFELLER & a.
Argued: February 10, 2011
Opinion Issued: September 15, 2011
Vincent A. Wenners, Jr., of Manchester, by brief and orally, for the
plaintiff.
Nixon Peabody, LLP, of Manchester (Gordon J. MacDonald and Brian D.
Duffy on the brief, and Mr. MacDonald orally), for the defendants.
CONBOY, J. The plaintiff, Lorraine Tessier, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Abramson, J.) granting the defendants’ motion to dismiss. We
affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand.
The plaintiff brought this action against the defendants, Regina S.
Rockefeller and Nixon Peabody, LLP (Nixon Peabody), alleging the following
facts. The plaintiff is the wife of Thomas Tessier, an attorney who practiced at
the law firm of Christy & Tessier in Manchester. Dr. Frederick Jakobiec hired
Attorney Tessier to handle certain estate matters on his behalf. On or about
June 26, 2006, Attorney Rockefeller, an attorney employed by the firm of Nixon
Peabody, acting on behalf of Dr. Jakobiec, accused Attorney Tessier of
misusing and converting substantial assets of the Jakobiec family to his own
use.
The plaintiff alleges that Attorney Rockefeller met with Attorney Tessier
on numerous occasions and threatened him and, through him, the plaintiff, by
demanding an immediate return of the misappropriated assets. Attorney
Rockefeller stated to Attorney Tessier that if he repaid the money no further
action would be taken against him. If payment was not forthcoming, however,
Attorney Rockefeller would report his malfeasance to, among others, the New
Hampshire Supreme Court Attorney Discipline Office. She also threatened that
criminal proceedings against Attorney Tessier would follow.
As a result of the threats, the plaintiff alleges that she was forced “under
duress” to execute a reverse mortgage on, and the release of her homestead
interest in, the family home in Manchester and a settlement agreement dated
April 2, 2007. She alleges that over the next two years, the defendants
“stripped” her and her husband of their individual and joint interests in all of
their tangible assets, including a jointly held vacation property in Vermont.
Despite the settlement agreement, and without notice to her or her husband,
the defendants reported Attorney Tessier’s actions to his law partner, the
attorney discipline office, and others. In addition, Dr. Jakobiec hired an
attorney to bring suit against Attorney Tessier and to foreclose on the mortgage
that was the subject of the settlement agreement.
As a result of the defendants’ actions, the plaintiff alleges that she
suffered severe emotional and physical distress requiring hospitalization. She
also alleges that she has been deprived of her husband’s care and comfort
because he has suffered emotionally and physically, causing him to seek
psychological and medical treatment. The writ contains specific claims for
abuse of process, tortious interference with advantageous contractual
relationships, breach of the duty of good faith and fair dealing, intentional
infliction of emotional distress, negligent infliction of emotional distress,
respondeat superior liability, and negligent failure to train and supervise. In
addition, as explained below, the factual allegations in the writ set forth a claim
for fraudulent misrepresentation.
The defendants moved to dismiss the plaintiff’s claims, arguing that she
“has not and cannot set forth any legal duty she was owed by the defendants.”
They argued that Attorney Rockefeller “never met or otherwise communicated
with the plaintiff,” and, therefore, “it is simply impossible to construct a legal
duty Attorney Rockefeller or Nixon Peabody owed to the plaintiff, much less a
breach.” Following a hearing, the plaintiff unsuccessfully sought to amend her
2
writ. The court thereafter ruled that the writ failed to state a cause of action
upon which relief may be granted and dismissed it. This appeal followed.
I. Standard of Review
In reviewing a motion to dismiss, our standard of review is whether the
allegations in the plaintiff’s pleadings are reasonably susceptible of a
construction that would permit recovery. Gen. Insulation Co. v. Eckman
Constr., 159 N.H. 601, 611 (2010). “The court must vigorously scrutinize the
complaint to determine whether, on its face, it asserts a cause of action.”
Williams v. O’Brien, 140 N.H. 595, 597 (1995) (emphasis and quotation
omitted).
We assume the [plaintiff’s] pleadings to be true and construe all
reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to [her]. We need
not assume the truth of statements in the [plaintiff’s] pleadings,
however, that are merely conclusions of law. We then engage in a
threshold inquiry that tests the facts in the petition against the
applicable law, and if the allegations constitute a basis for legal
relief, we must hold that it was improper to grant the motion to
dismiss.
Eckman Constr., 159 N.H. at 611 (citations omitted).
As a threshold matter, the defendants argue that we should strike the
plaintiff’s brief and dismiss her appeal for failure to comply with this court’s
rules. They argue that, among other deficiencies, the brief does not contain
citations to the record, and that the plaintiff mischaracterizes what occurred in
the trial court proceedings, asserts “facts” that confuse the roles of the parties,
and alleges “facts” not pleaded or alleged in the plaintiff’s writ or before the trial
court. Regardless of the merits of the defendants’ assertions, however, we
decline to bar the plaintiff’s appeal. Our task is to test the facts as alleged in
the plaintiff’s writ against the applicable law and we will limit our inquiry
accordingly.
The plaintiff argues that the writ sets forth sufficient facts to support the
alleged causes of action. With respect to the claims based on fraudulent
misrepresentation, negligent infliction of emotional distress, and respondeat
superior liability, we agree.
II. Count I
The trial court read count I of the plaintiff’s writ as “simply a recitation of
the facts underlying the plaintiff’s allegations” and concluded that it “does not
3
set forth any cause of action.” We disagree, and hold that count I states a
cause of action for fraudulent misrepresentation.
The plaintiff argues that she “clearly set forth a claim” for duress or
fraud. She also argues that her prayers for relief based upon duress and fraud
are equally clear and pray for the remedies of rescission and compensatory
damages. The plaintiff quotes from her writ where she prays that the court:
. . . Find as a matter of fact and of law that [the] plaintiff’s
payments were made to the defendants involuntarily and as a
result of duress, abuse of process and in breach of contract and of
the defendants’[ ] duties of good faith and fraudulently and that
the defendants be compelled to return to the plaintiff those sums
that they wrongfully extorted from her;
. . . Find as a matter of fact and of law that the settlement
agreement, and other monies paid to the defendants, are rescinded
on the grounds that the same were obtained under duress and
that the moneys paid, property sold, and promissory notes and
mortgage be declared void ab initio and [the] plaintiff restored to
her status quo ante or, alternatively, that the defendants pay [the]
plaintiff compensatory damages.
A. Duress
In New Hampshire, a contract entered into under duress is voidable and
thus duress is a defense to a breach of contract claim. See, e.g., In re Estate of
Hollett, 150 N.H. 39, 42 (2003); King Enterprises v. Manchester Water Works,
122 N.H. 1011, 1013 (1982); Davis v. Smith, 68 N.H. 253, 254 (1894). The
plaintiff’s writ alleges that Attorney Rockefeller’s promises not to report her
husband’s misconduct and her threats of criminal prosecution against him
unless the plaintiff returned the money her husband stole induced the plaintiff
under duress to enter into the settlement agreement with Dr. Jakobiec.
However, even if we agree that the facts set forth in the writ establish duress,
the plaintiff cannot sustain a cause of action seeking contract damages against
these defendants.
Although the plaintiff claims in her writ that she paid money and
property to the defendants pursuant to the settlement agreement, it is
undisputed that the settlement agreement expressly provides that the assets
were to go either to Dr. Jakobiec or to Attorney Rockefeller as trustee of a trust
for his benefit. Because there is no allegation that the defendants received any
of the assets transferred under the settlement agreement and because the
defendants were not parties to the settlement agreement, there are no grounds
for contract damages against them. Rather, any such claim would properly be
4
against Dr. Jakobiec, who is not a named party to this lawsuit. Accordingly,
we affirm the trial court’s ruling that the plaintiff cannot sustain a cause of
action seeking contract damages against the defendants arising out of the
settlement agreement because there was no contract between the plaintiff and
the defendants.
B. Fraudulent Misrepresentation
“‘[O]ne who fraudulently makes a misrepresentation . . . for the purpose
of inducing another to act or to refrain from action in reliance upon it, is
subject to liability to the other in deceit for pecuniary loss caused to him by his
justifiable reliance upon the misrepresentation.’” Gray v. First NH Banks, 138
N.H. 279, 283 (1994) (quoting Restatement (Second) of Torts § 525, at 55
(1977)). “The tort of intentional misrepresentation, or fraud, must be proved by
showing that the representation was made with knowledge of its falsity or with
conscious indifference to its truth and with the intention of causing another
person to rely on the representation.” Patch v. Arsenault, 139 N.H. 313, 319
(1995). “In order to withstand a motion to dismiss, the plaintiff must specify
the essential details of the fraud, and specifically allege the facts of the
defendant’s fraudulent actions.” Jay Edwards, Inc. v. Baker, 130 N.H. 41, 46-
47 (1987) (brackets and quotation omitted).
In count I of the writ, the plaintiff alleges that the defendants, through
Attorney Rockefeller, represented to Attorney Tessier and, through him, to the
plaintiff, that if the misappropriated assets were repaid no further action would
be taken against him, but that if payment was not forthcoming she would
inform the attorney discipline office and criminal proceedings would follow. “A
representation of the maker’s own intention to do or not to do a particular
thing is fraudulent if he does not have that intention.” Restatement (Second) of
Torts § 530, at 64. “Since a promise necessarily carries with it the implied
assertion of an intention to perform it follows that a promise made without
such an intention is fraudulent and actionable in deceit under the rule stated
in § 525. This is true whether or not the promise is enforceable as a contract.”
Id. cmt. c.
The New Hampshire Rules of Professional Conduct require that “[a]
lawyer who knows that another lawyer has committed a violation of the Rules
of Professional Conduct that raises a substantial question as to that lawyer’s
honesty . . . shall inform the appropriate professional authority.” N.H. R. Prof.
Conduct 8.3(a) (emphasis added). Lawyers are deemed to know the Rules of
Professional Conduct. Whelan’s Case, 136 N.H. 559, 563 (1992). As the writ
alleges, “when it appeared that the property of the plaintiff and Attorney Tessier
[was] depleted, the defendants . . . then reported Attorney Tessier’s alleged
malfeasance to the New Hampshire Supreme Court Attorney Discipline Office,
causing him to be suspended from the practice of law and to be the subject of
5
criminal prosecution.” These allegations would support a finding that at the
time Attorney Rockefeller allegedly promised not to report Attorney Tessier’s
misconduct, the defendants knew they had the obligation to do so and, thus,
had no intention of keeping the promise.
The fact that the alleged misrepresentation was not made directly to the
plaintiff does not defeat her cause of action.
The maker of a fraudulent misrepresentation is subject to
liability for pecuniary loss to another who acts in justifiable
reliance upon it if the misrepresentation, although not made
directly to the other, is made to a third person and the maker
intends or has reason to expect that its terms will be repeated or
its substance communicated to the other, and that it will
influence his conduct in the transaction . . . involved.
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 533, at 72-73. This rule “is applicable not only
when the effect of the misrepresentation is to induce the other to enter into a
transaction with the maker, but also when he is induced to enter into a
transaction with a third person.” Id. cmt. c.
The writ alleges that in reliance upon the defendants’ promises not to
report her husband’s misconduct, the plaintiff agreed to execute a reverse
mortgage on, and release her homestead interest in, the family home in
Manchester and the settlement agreement dated April 2, 2007. In her prayer
for relief, the plaintiff states that her payments were made to the defendants
involuntarily and as a result of fraud. We read the facts set forth in the writ as
alleging that the defendants either intended or had reason to expect that the
promises made to Attorney Tessier would be communicated to the plaintiff and
would influence her decision to enter into the settlement agreement with Dr.
Jakobiec.
“The recipient of a fraudulent misrepresentation can recover against its
maker for pecuniary loss resulting from it if . . . he relies on the
misrepresentation in acting . . . and . . . his reliance is justifiable.”
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 537, at 80. Reliance upon a fraudulent
misrepresentation is not justifiable unless the matter misrepresented is
material in that
(a) a reasonable man would attach importance to its
existence or nonexistence in determining his choice of action in the
transaction in question; or
(b) the maker of the representation knows or has reason to
know that its recipient regards or is likely to regard the matter as
6
important in determining his choice of action, although a
reasonable man would not so regard it.
Id. § 538, at 80.
Whether a reasonable person would have regarded the fact
misrepresented to be important in determining her course of action is a
question for the jury, unless the court determines that “the fact misrepresented
is so obviously unimportant that the jury could not reasonably find that a
reasonable [person] would have been influenced by it.” Id. cmt. e. The plaintiff
alleges in her writ that “when faced with the choice of sacrificing her interest in
certain of the joint assets of her family which she had accumulated over forty-
six (46) years of marriage, or watching professional and criminal action taken
against her husband and the exposure of her family to public shame, ridicule
and disgrace,” she agreed to comply with the defendants’ demands against her
share of the family assets. We cannot say, as a matter of law, that the alleged
fact that the defendants misrepresented that they would not report Attorney
Tessier’s misconduct if the plaintiff entered into the settlement agreement was
so “obviously unimportant” to her course of action as to render her reliance
unreasonable. See id.
“A fraudulent misrepresentation is a legal cause of a pecuniary loss
resulting from action or inaction in reliance upon it if, but only if, the loss
might reasonably be expected to result from the reliance.” Restatement
(Second) of Torts § 548A, at 106. The writ alleges that as a result of the
defendants’ actions, the plaintiff has been “strip[ped] . . . on an asset by asset
basis of substantially all of her possessions.” Based upon allegations in the
writ that the defendants, through Attorney Rockefeller, promised not to report
Attorney Tessier’s misconduct in order to induce the plaintiff to enter into the
settlement agreement, we conclude that it could reasonably be expected that
the plaintiff would rely upon such misrepresentation and thereby suffer
pecuniary loss.
Because the plaintiff’s writ specifies the essential details of the alleged
fraud and specifically alleges the defendants’ actions, we hold that the plaintiff
has stated a claim against the defendants for fraudulent misrepresentation
sufficient to withstand a motion to dismiss. See Baker, 130 N.H. at 46-47.
Accordingly, we remand count I to the trial court for further proceedings
consistent with this opinion.
III. Abuse of Process
The writ alleges in count II that the defendants “made improper use of
the civil process of the New Hampshire Supreme Court Attorney Discipline
Office and the criminal process of the New Hampshire Attorney General.”
7
According to allegations in the writ, the defendants misused such processes by
threatening disciplinary and criminal action and promising not to take such
action if the plaintiff paid money she did not owe. The writ alleges that the
plaintiff was damaged thereby in that she was “forced to transfer substantially
all of her assets to the defendants.”
The plaintiff argues that it is unethical for an attorney to use or threaten
to use criminal processes as a means to obtain an advantage in civil litigation.
She argues that the defendants violated Rule 8.3 of the New Hampshire Rules
of Professional Conduct by delaying the reporting of Attorney Tessier’s theft for
nearly one and one-half years and that it “would be inapposite for this Court to
conclude that such unethical conduct did not constitute an abuse of process.”
The defendants respond that the trial court properly dismissed this claim
because: (1) the plaintiff does not allege that any process was instituted by the
defendants against her, rather than against her husband; and (2) reporting
professional misconduct does not constitute the initiation of a judicial process.
Because there is no allegation that they misused the authority or process of
any court after an action was initiated, the defendants argue that no abuse of
process occurred.
“A party claiming abuse of process must prove the following elements:
(1) a person used (2) legal process, whether criminal or civil, (3) against the
party (4) primarily to accomplish a purpose for which it is not designed and (5)
caused harm to the party (6) by the abuse of process.” Long v. Long, 136 N.H.
25, 29 (1992). In order for a party to commit an abuse of process, some court
authority or jurisdiction must be used. See id. at 30 (process is some activity
or procedure involving the exercise of, or depending upon the existence of,
judicial authority). An action for abuse of process is concerned with the
improper use of process after it has been issued. See id. “The gravamen of the
misconduct for which [liability for abuse of process] is imposed is not the
wrongful procurement of legal process or the wrongful initiation of criminal or
civil proceedings. . . . The subsequent misuse of the process, though properly
obtained, constitutes the misconduct for which the liability is imposed.” Id. at
29-30 (quotation omitted).
Set against these legal principles, the facts alleged in the plaintiff’s writ
do not, as a matter of law, constitute a basis for relief in that the plaintiff does
not allege that any legal process was used against her. To the extent that the
plaintiff alleges that the criminal and disciplinary actions against her husband
were instituted to force her to enter into and execute the settlement agreement,
the trial court correctly concluded, “At the time the criminal and disciplinary
proceedings commenced, the plaintiff had already performed because she had
entered into the settlement agreement and the property transfers were
complete. Therefore, the actions could not have been instituted to force her
performance.” We also agree with the trial court that any alleged threat made
8
by Attorney Rockefeller does not constitute an abuse of process because it “in
nowise emanates from or rests upon the authority or jurisdiction of a court,”
an essential element of abuse of process. Amabello v. Colonial Motors, 117
N.H. 556, 559 (1977) (quotation omitted). We affirm the trial court’s dismissal
of count II.
IV. Tortious Interference With Advantageous Contractual Relationships
Count III of the writ appears to allege that the defendants acted in bad
faith by reporting Attorney Tessier’s misconduct, which they had promised not
to do, despite the fact that the plaintiff performed all of her covenants under
the settlement agreement. The trial court characterized count III as alleging:
The settlement agreement does not memorialize all of the terms of
the agreement, including the names of all of the parties to the
agreement. The defendants are parties to the settlement
agreement and entered into the agreement with no intention of
honoring the agreement. The defendants then interfered with the
plaintiff’s settlement agreement with Dr. Jakobiec in an effort to
release the defendants from their obligations under the settlement
agreement.
The trial court concluded that the writ alleges that the defendants breached
their obligations under the settlement agreement, not that they interfered with
the settlement agreement between Dr. Jakobiec and the plaintiff. Because the
plaintiff failed to allege that the defendants intentionally and improperly
interfered with the contractual relationship between her and Dr. Jakobiec, the
trial court ruled that the plaintiff failed to state a basis for relief.
The plaintiff argues that the trial court’s construction of count III as
relating only to the settlement agreement was error. The plaintiff argues that
she “clearly pleads . . . that the defendants wrongfully induced a breach of the
agreement” in that
[t]he defendant[s] entered into two contracts – one oral and the
“Settlement Agreement” – in both their own and in Dr. Ja[k]obiec’s
name. They knew (or should have known) that the contracts were
unenforceable against them. They also knew (or should have
known) that the contracts might have been enforceable against Dr.
Ja[k]obiec. They caused Dr. Ja[k]obiec to breach the contracts,
however, in order to further their own self-interests. They could
not continue to “hide” a million-dollar theft . . . from the Attorney
Discipline Office or the criminal authorities so they made it appear
that the plaintiff breached the agreement (i.e., by failing to collect
the $100,474.30 due from the guarantor, Michael Tessier) and
9
then reported Mr. Tessier, in Dr. Ja[k]obiec’s name, and
presumably advised Dr. Ja[k]obiec to keep the money paid to him
by the plaintiff. The defendants recorded the second mortgage
(and later attempted to foreclose on it), despite the contractual
agreement prohibiting recordation if plaintiff was not in default.
Defendants, despite their agreement with plaintiff, did in fact
report Mr. Tessier to the civil and criminal authorities despite the
fact that plaintiff was not in default of the agreement. The
defendants had no intention of honoring their part of the
agreement, and thereby to allow Dr. Jakobiec to fulfill his
contractual obligations. The defendants acted in bad faith either
to convince Dr. Jakobiec that the plaintiff had breached her
contractual obligations or acted, in his name, and on their own, in
order to avoid their ethical dilemma because of the agreement by
reporting Mr. Tessier to the civil and criminal authorities and
causing their client to retain the plaintiff’s property.
The defendants argue that the plaintiff has failed to allege that the
contractual obligations contained in the settlement agreement were not
performed. As to an alleged oral agreement between the defendants and the
plaintiff, they argue that even if such a contract existed, one cannot interfere
with a contract to which one is a party. Therefore, the defendants argue, the
plaintiff has not identified any facts in the record to support a claim that they
interfered with any contract to which she was a party.
“To establish liability for intentional interference with contractual
relations, a plaintiff must show: (1) the plaintiff had an economic relationship
with a third party; (2) the defendant knew of this relationship; (3) the defendant
intentionally and improperly interfered with this relationship; and (4) the
plaintiff was damaged by such interference.” Hughes v. N.H. Div. of
Aeronautics, 152 N.H. 30, 40-41 (2005) (citation omitted); see Roberts v. Gen.
Motors Corp., 138 N.H. 532, 539 (1994) (claim requires allegations that
defendant wrongfully induced a breach of contract between plaintiff and a third
party). “One who intentionally and improperly interferes with the performance
of a contract . . . between another and a third person by inducing or otherwise
causing the third person not to perform the contract, is subject to liability to
the other for the pecuniary loss resulting to the other from the failure of the
third person to perform the contract.” Restatement (Second) of Torts § 766
(emphasis added). Thus, where contractual obligations were performed, there
can be no claim for tortious interference with contractual relations. See
Alternative Systems Concepts, Inc. v. Synopsy, 229 F. Supp. 2d 70, 73 (D.N.H.
2002).
Despite the expansive argument set forth in the plaintiff’s brief, our task
is to test the facts set forth in the writ against the applicable law. Reading the
10
writ in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, we conclude that there is no
allegation that Dr. Jakobiec failed to perform his contractual obligations under
the April 2, 2007 settlement agreement. As a matter of law, therefore, the writ
fails to set forth facts to support a claim for tortious interference with a
contractual relationship.
Further, even assuming the defendants were parties to the settlement
agreement and interfered with the agreement by reporting Attorney Tessier to
the authorities, tortious interference with a contractual relationship requires
interference by one who is not a party to the contract. We affirm the trial
court’s dismissal of count III for failing to state a basis for granting relief.
V. Breach of the Duty of Good Faith and Fair Dealing
Count IV of the writ alleges that the actions of the defendants were taken
in violation of the duty of good faith and fair dealing implied in all contracts
executed or performed in New Hampshire. The plaintiff argues that she entered
into both an oral and a written contract with the defendants based upon
Attorney Rockefeller’s promise not to report Attorney Tessier’s theft or to
institute criminal proceedings, and that the defendants misrepresented their
intent to perform the contracts as they “had no intention of complying with the
agreements and in fact did not do so.” The plaintiff argues that she “has alleged
oral and written contracts with the defendants” and that the “establishment” of
the contracts must be by evidence presented at trial, not on the pleadings. The
defendants argue that the plaintiff has failed to allege facts sufficient to
establish an oral contract with the defendants because she conceded that there
was no communication between them. They further argue that they were not
parties to the settlement agreement.
Regarding the alleged oral contract, the trial court found that the
plaintiff has not alleged that she was in privity of contract with
Attorney Rockefeller or Nixon Peabody. The plaintiff does not
allege that she ever met with Attorney Rockefeller. The plaintiff
does not even allege that she ever spoke directly with Attorney
Rockefeller . . . . Because the alleged contract was oral and the
plaintiff never met with Attorney Rockefeller, the plaintiff could not
be a party to and could not agree to the terms of the oral contract.
“A valid, enforceable contract requires offer, acceptance, consideration,
and a meeting of the minds.” Durgin v. Pillsbury Lake Water Dist., 153 N.H.
818, 821 (2006) (citations omitted). A meeting of the minds requires that the
agreement be manifest and based upon an objective standard. Id. The plaintiff
does not allege that she had any direct dealings with the defendants. An oral
contract cannot be formed unless there has been a meeting of the minds
between the parties, which could not have occurred where the parties had no
11
relationship with, or contact with, one another. See Hammond v. The Bank of
New York Mellon Corp., No. 08 Civ. 6060 (RMB) (RLE), 2010 WL 2643307, at
*11 (S.D.N.Y. June 25, 2010). We affirm the trial court’s ruling that the
plaintiff has not pleaded facts that support the existence of an oral contract
with the defendants.
Based upon the plain language of the April 2, 2007 settlement
agreement, the trial court found that “there is no ambiguity regarding the
parties to the settlement agreement. The contract lists only Thomas Tessier,
Lorraine Tessier, and Frederick Jakobiec as the parties, and only these persons
evidenced an intent to be bound by the terms of the settlement agreement by
signing the agreement.” We agree that the plaintiff has not alleged facts that
would support a finding that the defendants were parties to the settlement
agreement and, therefore, we affirm the trial court’s dismissal of count IV.
The plaintiff further argues that she moved to amend the writ to correct
perceived deficiencies and that the trial court erred as a matter of law in
denying her motion. The plaintiff sought to amend her writ to add counts IX
and X. The proposed count IX alleges that
the parties entered into a contract, partially verbal (through
communications between the Defendants, the Plaintiff’s husband,
Attorney Thomas Tessier, Mr. Tessier’s lawyer, and others) and
partially in writing, the terms of which were that the Plaintiff would
transfer all her assets to the Defendants in repayment of money
allegedly stolen by her husband and in consideration thereof, that
the Defendants promised they would not report the Plaintiff’s
husband to the New Hampshire Supreme Court’s Attorney
Discipline Office, law enforcement authorities and others; that the
Plaintiff performed her promises; that the Defendants did not
perform their promises, did report the Plaintiff’s husband’s
conduct and, accordingly, breached the contract, causing the
Plaintiff the loss of her assets and consequential damages.
The proposed count X alleges that
the Defendants placed the Plaintiff under such duress that she was
forced to enter into the contract alleged in COUNT IX by making
threats over a period of one and one-half years; that the threats
were made to the Plaintiff’s husband, to his lawyer, and to others;
that the Defendants intended that the threats reach the Plaintiff
and force her into entering into the contract; that the Defendants
knew that the threats did in fact cause her to enter into the
contract; that the threats were that her husband’s conduct would
be reported, as above alleged, to the New Hampshire Supreme
12
Court’s Attorney Discipline Office and criminal prosecutors, if she
did not enter into the contract; that the duress that her husband
would be disbarred and criminally prosecuted unless she entered
into the contract was legally sufficient to render the contract void
and the Defendants obligated to return the Plaintiff’s assets to her.
The proposed counts thus assert claims against the defendants sounding in
contract and duress as a defense to a breach of contract claim.
Pursuant to RSA 514:9 (2007), a trial court may permit a substantive
amendment to pleadings “in any stage of the proceedings, upon such terms as
the court shall deem just and reasonable, when it shall appear to the court
that it is necessary for the prevention of injustice. . . .” Accordingly, liberal
amendment of pleadings is permitted unless the changes would surprise the
opposing party, introduce an entirely new cause of action, or call for
substantially different evidence. Bel Air Assocs. v. N.H. Dep’t of Health &
Human Servs., 154 N.H. 228, 236 (2006). An amendment may also be denied
if it “would not cure the defect in the writ.” Gould v. George Brox, Inc., 137
N.H. 85, 90 (1993). Whether to allow a party to amend his or her pleadings
rests in the sound discretion of the trial court. Coan v. N.H. Dep’t of Env’t
Servs., 161 N.H. 1, 11 (2010). We will not disturb the trial court’s decision
absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Id.
The trial court’s order states that “[a]s previously determined, where the
plaintiff does not allege that she personally met with Attorney Rockefeller, she
cannot sustain a cause of action arising out of an oral contract. Additionally,
as previously determined, where the defendants were not listed as parties to
the written settlement agreement, the plaintiff cannot sustain a cause of action
against the defendants arising out of that written contract.” Thus the trial
court concluded that the proposed count IX fails because, as a matter of law,
there is no contract between the plaintiff and the defendants. Because there is
no written or oral contract between the plaintiff and the defendants, the trial
court concluded that the proposed count X likewise fails. We agree and cannot
conclude that the trial court’s denial of the motion to amend was an
unsustainable exercise of discretion.
VI. Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress
Count V of the writ alleges that the defendants’ threats, promises, and
actions were for “the sole purpose of extracting all of [the] plaintiff’s property
from her even though she had done nothing wrong and owed nothing to the
defendants,” that the defendants “acted deceitfully under the guise of keeping
their promises,” that the defendants “knew that their actions would cause [the]
plaintiff severe emotional distress but intentionally and/or recklessly
proceeded nonetheless,” and that the defendants did intentionally and/or
13
recklessly cause her “severe and unbearable emotional distress and extreme
mental suffering.”
On appeal, the plaintiff argues that the defendants “intentionally caused
emotional distress to the plaintiff by subjecting her to constant and continuous
threats for a period of more than one and one-half years, depriving her of her
property, and causing her hospitalization.” The defendants argue that the
plaintiff has failed to state a claim because any alleged threats were made to
Attorney Tessier or his attorney and not directly to her.
In order to make out a claim for intentional infliction of emotional
distress, a plaintiff must allege that a defendant “by extreme and outrageous
conduct, intentionally or recklessly cause[d] severe emotional distress to
another.” Morancy v. Morancy, 134 N.H. 493, 496 (1991) (quotation omitted).
“In determining whether conduct is extreme and outrageous, it is not enough
that a person has acted with an intent which is tortious or even criminal, or
that he has intended to inflict emotional distress, or even that his conduct has
been characterized by malice.” Mikell v. Sch. Admin. Unit # 33, 158 N.H. 723,
729 (2009) (citation and quotations omitted). Rather, “[l]iability has been found
only where the conduct has been so outrageous in character, and so extreme in
degree, as to go beyond all possible bounds of decency, and to be regarded as
atrocious, and utterly intolerable in a civilized community.” Id.
The only conduct the plaintiff alleges in her writ involved threats made to
her husband. Liability for intentional infliction of emotional distress “clearly
does not extend to mere . . . threats.” Restatement (Second) of Torts § 46 cmt.
d. Thus, the plaintiff has failed, as a matter of law, to allege facts sufficient to
establish the requisite extreme and outrageous conduct toward her. In the
absence of such allegations, we affirm the trial court’s dismissal of count V.
VII. Negligent Infliction of Emotional Distress
Count VI of the writ alleges that the defendants knew or should have
known that their actions would cause the plaintiff to suffer severe emotional
distress and that the defendants’ actions caused her to suffer severe emotional
distress, manifested by physical symptoms requiring medical care, medication
and hospitalization. The plaintiff argues that she “has alleged ample facts,
including the defendants’ scheme to coerce plaintiff into doing an action that
she could not be legally bound to do” and that she has also “alleged severe
emotional distress with accompanying physical symptoms resulting in her
hospitalization.” The defendants argue that the plaintiff’s failure to allege an
underlying tort is fatal to her claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress.
The elements of a claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress
include: “(1) causal negligence of the defendant; (2) foreseeability; and (3)
14
serious mental and emotional harm accompanied by objective physical
symptoms.” O’Donnell v. HCA Health Servs. of N.H., 152 N.H. 608, 611 (2005)
(citation omitted). The allegations set forth in the plaintiff’s writ satisfy each of
these elements. The alleged conduct of the defendants that supports a claim
for fraudulent misrepresentation also supports a claim for negligent infliction of
emotional distress. It could reasonably be found that it was foreseeable that by
making fraudulent misrepresentations to Attorney Tessier and through him, to
the plaintiff, with the intention of causing the plaintiff to relinquish her
property, the plaintiff would suffer emotional harm as a result. See id. at 612.
In addition, the plaintiff has alleged that as a result of the defendants’ actions,
she “suffered a deterioration of her physical and mental well being, requiring
her to seek medical care and hospitalization for potentially life threatening
conditions.” See Orono Karate v. F. Vallari Studio of Self Defense, 776 F. Supp.
47, 50-51 (D.N.H. 1991). Taken as true, we conclude that the plaintiff has
alleged facts sufficient to support a claim for negligent infliction of emotional
distress. Accordingly, we reverse the trial court’s ruling and remand count VI
to the trial court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
VIII. Respondeat Superior Liability
Count VII of the writ alleges vicarious liability on the part of Nixon
Peabody for actions undertaken by Attorney Rockefeller and other employees in
the performance of their duties. Under the doctrine of respondeat superior, “an
employer may be held vicariously responsible for the tortious acts of its
employee if the employee was acting within the scope of his or her employment
when his or her tortious act injured the plaintiff.” Pierson v. Hubbard, 147
N.H. 760, 766 (2002). Conduct falls within the scope of employment if: “(1) it
is of the kind [the employee] is employed to perform; (2) it occurs substantially
within the authorized time and space limits; and (3) it is actuated, at least in
part, by a purpose to serve the employer.” Porter v. City of Manchester, 151
N.H. 30, 40 (2004).
The trial court ruled that because the plaintiff had not alleged that
Attorney Rockefeller committed any tortious acts, there was no theory of
liability on which Nixon Peabody could be held vicariously liable. Because we
conclude that the plaintiff has stated claims in tort for fraudulent
misrepresentation and negligent infliction of emotional distress, we reverse the
trial court’s ruling and remand count VII for further proceedings consistent
with this opinion.
IX. Negligent Failure to Train and Supervise
Count VIII of the writ alleges negligence on the part of Nixon Peabody in
failing to properly train and supervise Attorney Rockefeller and other
employees, resulting in the plaintiff’s loss of property and severe emotional
15
distress. The defendants assert that the plaintiff failed to allege any facts to
indicate that Nixon Peabody knew or should have known that Attorney
Rockefeller presented a risk to the plaintiff. Without any facts to support an
underlying duty of care or knowledge of a risk, the defendants argue that the
trial court properly dismissed these claims.
The basis for a claim of negligent employment or supervision
brought against an employer where the employee harms a third
party is not the vicarious liability of the doctrine of respondeat
superior, but a separate theory of employer liability. Thus, claims
for negligent hiring, training and supervision encompass direct
liability as a result of the misconduct of the employee.
Exeter Hosp. v. N.H. Ins. Guaranty Assoc., 158 N.H. 400, 405 (2009) (citations
omitted). “Liability exists only if all the requirements of an action of tort for
negligence exist.” Restatement (Second) of Agency § 213 cmt. a (1958). Other
than stating conclusions of law, the plaintiff has failed to allege any facts in the
writ that would support a cause of action for Nixon Peabody’s negligent failure
to train and supervise. See Hungerford v. Jones, 988 F. Supp. 22, 23-24
(D.N.H. 1997) (complaint must contain factual allegations, either direct or
inferential, respecting each material element necessary to sustain recovery
under some actionable legal theory). Absent such facts, we affirm the trial
court’s dismissal of this claim.
Affirmed in part; reversed in
part; and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
16