THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2010-201
1808 CORPORATION
v.
TOWN OF NEW IPSWICH
Argued: February 16, 2011
Opinion Issued: April 26, 2011
Bernstein Shur, P.A., of Manchester (Gregory E. Michael and Edward J.
Sackman on the brief, and Mr. Michael orally), for the petitioner.
Bradley & Faulkner, P.C., of Keene (Beth R. Fernald on the brief and
orally), for the respondent.
HICKS, J. The petitioner, 1808 Corporation, appeals the order of the
Superior Court (Lynn, C.J.) upholding the decision of the zoning board of
adjustment (ZBA) of the respondent, Town of New Ipswich (Town), which, in
turn, upheld the decision of the respondent’s planning board. At issue is
whether the planning board erred when it deferred reviewing the petitioner’s
plans to expand its office space for “no more than 180 days while the
[petitioner] pursues Zoning Board approvals.” We affirm.
The record reveals the following facts. The petitioner owns an
approximately 1.4-acre lot in New Ipswich on which there are two structures: a
one-story building of 540 square feet currently used as the Short Stop
Restaurant, and a two-story building of 3,760 square feet of office space and
3,515 square feet of storage space. The two-story building (1808 building) is
the subject of this appeal.
In 1998, the petitioner requested a special exception to article V.D.1 of
the Town’s zoning ordinance to allow an office building in an area zoned as
“Village District II.” Under Article V.D.1., office buildings are allowed in such
areas only by special exception and only “if . . . the total area of the foundation
of the building does not exceed 1,500 square feet.” Because the foundation of
the 1808 building was 7,275 square feet, the petitioner also sought a variance
from the requirement that the building’s foundation not exceed 1,500 square
feet.
At the May 21, 1998 ZBA meeting at which the petitioner’s applications
were discussed, the petitioner’s agent “explained that the 1808 building will be
approximately 3700 square feet. The back part of the building will be used for
storage by [the building’s] tenants and owner.” The ZBA approved the
petitioner’s applications and discussed the ordinance limitations regarding “the
1,500 square foot area of the foundation for an office building.” The ZBA
“agreed to contact the Planning Board to determine the basis of the 1,500
figure,” and, then, voted unanimously to grant the petitioner the requested
special exception and variance.
In January 2008, the petitioner applied to the planning board for site
plan review. It submitted plans showing that it intended to use the back part
of the building for additional office space and no longer for storage. At a May 6,
2009 hearing on the application, the petitioner argued that expanding the office
space into the building’s back area did not require further ZBA approval, but
was, instead, “a reasonable expansion of an existing [nonconforming] use.” The
planning board voted to defer its consideration of whether to accept the
petitioner’s plan for no more than 180 days while the petitioner pursued ZBA
approvals.
The petitioner appealed this determination to the ZBA. See RSA 676:5,
III (2008). After a public hearing, the ZBA denied the petitioner’s appeal. In its
written decision, the ZBA explained: (1) “[t]he previous [ZBA] . . . decision was
specific concerning the use of the back portion of the building as storage by
owner and tenants”; and (2) “[g]iven the significant change of use, the abutters
and other interested parties are due the opportunity to participate in the due
process offered through the variance and special exception application
process.” The petitioner filed a motion for rehearing, which the ZBA denied,
and then appealed the ZBA’s decisions to the superior court. The trial court
upheld them, and this appeal followed.
2
The issue in this appeal is whether the planning board erred when it
decided that the petitioner needed to obtain additional ZBA approvals before
proceeding with its plan to use an additional 3,515 of the building’s square
footage for office space. The petitioner asserts that additional ZBA approvals
were not required because either: (1) the expansion of office space was within
the scope of the 1998 variance; or (2) the expansion represents a permissible
expansion of a nonconforming use.
Our review of zoning board decisions is limited. Harrington v. Town of
Warner, 152 N.H. 74, 77 (2005). We will uphold the trial court’s decision
unless the evidence does not support it or it is legally erroneous. Malachy Glen
Assocs. v. Town of Chichester, 155 N.H. 102, 105 (2007). For its part, the trial
court must treat all factual findings of the ZBA as prima facie lawful and
reasonable, and may not set them aside, absent errors of law, unless it is
persuaded by a balance of probabilities on the evidence before it that the ZBA
decision is unreasonable. Kalil v. Town of Dummer Zoning Bd. of Adjustment,
155 N.H. 307, 309 (2007).
We first address whether the ZBA erred when it ruled that using an
additional 3,515 of the building’s square footage for office space was not within
the scope of the petitioner’s 1998 variance. Under New Hampshire law, “[t]he
scope of a variance is dependent upon the representations of the applicant and
the intent of the language in the variance at the time it is issued.” N. Country
Envtl. Servs. v. Town of Bethlehem, 146 N.H. 348, 353 (2001) (quotation
omitted). It is a question of fact for the ZBA. See Rye v. Ciborowski, 111 N.H.
77, 81 (1971).
The record submitted on appeal, while meager, supports the ZBA’s
determination. Although the language of the variance itself does not contain
an express limitation on the square footage to be used for office space, see N.
Country Envtl. Servs., 146 N.H. at 353, the representations made by the
petitioner’s agent at the ZBA meeting at which the petitioner’s application was
discussed show that the petitioner intended to use only a portion of the
building for office space. At that meeting, the petitioner’s agent explained that
the petitioner intended to use “approximately 3700 square feet” of the building
for office space and to use the remainder of the building’s square footage “for
storage by tenants and owner.” Given this record, we conclude that there is
evidence to support the ZBA’s determination that the 1998 variance “was
specific concerning the use of the back portion of the building as storage by
owner and tenants.”
In this way, this case is distinguishable from Bio Energy v. Town of
Hopkinton, 153 N.H. 145 (2005), upon which the petitioner relies. In that case,
Bio Energy obtained a variance in 1983 so that it could use woodchips as a
source of fuel in its cogeneration facility. Bio Energy, 153 N.H. at 147. At the
1983 hearings about the variance, Bio Energy did not specify that it would use
3
only “pure woodchips,” and, indeed, raised the possibility of using rubber
chips. Id. at 155. For twenty years, Bio Energy used a fuel mix of woodchips
from a variety of waste wood sources, including waste wood from shavings,
sawdust, and construction and demolition woodchips. Id. In 2001, Bio Energy
applied for a building permit to mechanize the delivery of construction and
demolition woodchips from the wood fuel storage area to the power plant. Id.
at 148. Although Bio Energy obtained the building permit, town residents
sought and obtained a cease and desist order from the selectmen to prevent it
from using construction and demolition woodchips as a fuel source on the
ground that such use was beyond the scope of Bio Energy’s 1983 variance. Id.
at 149. The validity of the cease and desist order was litigated first in the
superior court and then here. Id. at 150.
Ultimately, we ruled that, contrary to the town’s assertions, Bio Energy’s
1983 variance was not limited to the use of “pure woodchips.” Id. at 155. In so
ruling, we observed that Bio Energy never represented that it would use only
“pure woodchips,” and that the meetings at which the 1983 variance was
discussed did not mention “pure woodchips.” Id. Moreover, the variance itself
did not refer to “pure woodchips.” Id. By contrast, in the instant case, the
minutes of the meeting at which the petitioner’s variance was discussed
explicitly mention the petitioner’s intent to use only 3,700 square feet of the
building for office space and to use the remainder of the building for storage.
Accordingly, while in Bio Energy there was no basis for implying a limitation on
the scope of the 1983 variance, there is a basis for implying a limitation on the
petitioner’s variance. See id.
We next address whether the ZBA erred when it failed to apply the
doctrine of expansion of nonconforming uses to the petitioner’s plan to use an
additional 3,515 square feet as office space. Although the petitioner argued
that using additional square footage was a mere expansion of a nonconforming
use, the ZBA disagreed. In so doing, however, the ZBA did not make any of the
requisite findings relative to the permissible expansion of a nonconforming use.
See Guy v. Town of Temple, 157 N.H. 642, 656 (2008) (remand required
because ZBA did not make findings regarding whether petitioner had
unlawfully expanded his junkyard operations, let alone the character, nature,
scope or effect on the surrounding neighborhood of the purported expansion).
We interpret the ZBA’s order as a determination that the doctrine of expansion
of nonconforming uses did not apply to the petitioner’s proposed expansion of
its office space. Moreover, we conclude that the ZBA’s determination is correct
as a matter of law.
The use in this case was allowed by special exception. It is not a use
that lawfully existed before the zoning ordinance was enacted and, thus, a
“nonconforming use.” Dovaro 12 Atlantic v. Town of Hampton, 158 N.H. 222,
228 (2009) (“A nonconforming use is a lawful use existing on the land when the
ordinance prohibiting that use was adopted.”). Nor is it a use allowed by a
4
variance. The 1998 variance was an area variance, not a use variance. See
Boccia v. City of Portsmouth, 151 N.H. 85, 90 (2004), superseded by Laws
2009, 309:1. A use variance allows the applicant to undertake a use that the
zoning ordinance prohibits. Id. An area variance “authorizes deviations from
restrictions which relate to a permitted use,” such as limitations on the size or
height of the building in which such a use may exist. Id. (quotation omitted).
The petitioner was allowed to use its building for office space because it had a
special exception from the zoning ordinance’s prohibition of such uses in the
Village District II. The petitioner was allowed to devote 3,700 of its building’s
square footage for such a use because it obtained a variance from the
restriction that the building’s foundation not exceed 1,500 square feet.
The petitioner does not explain why cases involving the expansion of
nonconforming uses should apply to this case. We have previously
distinguished between nonconforming uses and special exceptions, and have
explained that “the review standard appropriate to the scope of variances or
nonconforming uses” does not apply to special exceptions. Geiss v. Bourassa,
140 N.H. 629, 632 (1996). In contrast to a variance or nonconforming use, a
special exception “is a use permitted upon certain conditions as set forth in a
town’s zoning ordinance.” Id. at 631 (quotation omitted); see 3 E. Ziegler, Jr.,
Rathkopf’s The Law of Zoning and Planning § 61:11, at 61-22 (2010). “If the
conditions for granting [a] special exception are met, the zoning board must
grant it,” and by so doing, “[n]o exception to the application of the ordinance is
truly made.” Geiss, 140 N.H. at 632 (quotation and brackets omitted). “[A]
special exception is not the equivalent of a nonconforming use. Uses that are
permitted as special exceptions are deemed to be permitted as long as they
satisfy the special exception provisions in the ordinance.” Kleinman v. Lower
Merion Tp. ZHB, 916 A.2d 726, 729 (Pa. Commw. Ct. 2006).
Nor does the petitioner address the fact that the variance in this case
was an area variance, not a use variance. The petitioner relies upon Bio
Energy, 153 N.H. 145, and Town of Hampton v. Brust, 122 N.H. 463 (1982);
however, neither case supports the petitioner’s assertion that the doctrine of
expansion of nonconforming uses should apply to this case. Bio Energy
involved a use allowed by variance, not by special exception. Bio Energy, 153
N.H. at 148, 154. Brust involved the expansion of a preexisting nonconforming
use. Brust, 122 N.H. at 468-70. Neither Bio Energy nor Brust concerned a
use allowed by special exception. Under these circumstances, we decline the
petitioner’s invitation to apply the law regarding expansion of nonconforming
uses to this case.
For all of the above reasons, therefore, we affirm the trial court’s decision
and uphold the determinations of the ZBA and planning board that the
5
petitioner must obtain further ZBA approvals before proceeding with its plan to
expand its office space.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
6