THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2011-023
NEW HAMPSHIRE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
v.
PASQUALE FRANCHI
Argued: April 5, 2012
Opinion Issued: July 18, 2012
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Mark P. Hodgdon, senior assistant
attorney general, and Lynmarie C. Cusack, assistant attorney general, on the
brief, and Ms. Cusack orally), for the appellee, New Hampshire Department of
Transportation.
Cooper Cargill Chant, P.A., of North Conway (Randall F. Cooper on the
brief and orally), for the appellant, Pasquale Franchi.
HICKS, J. The appellant in this eminent domain case, Pasquale Franchi
(the landowner), appeals an order of the Superior Court (Brown, J.) denying his
motion in limine to preclude expert testimony, as well as several other Superior
Court (Wageling, J.) rulings at trial. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. In the 1980s, the landowner
purchased a 77.2 acre parcel of land in Conway, abutting the Cranmore
Mountain ski area. On June 6, 2007, the State filed a declaration of taking
with the New Hampshire Board of Tax and Land Appeals (BTLA) acquiring from
the landowner’s property approximately 6.38 acres, consisting of a strip of
land, approximately 200 feet wide, running north and south through the center
of the property.
Following a hearing, the BTLA awarded the landowner $1,000,000 as
just compensation. See RSA 498-A:25 (2010). The State and the landowner
both filed petitions in superior court for a reassessment of damages. See RSA
498-A:27 (2010). On December 13, 2010, a jury returned a verdict awarding
$560,000 as just compensation. The landowner now appeals.
In an eminent domain proceeding, the preferred method for determining
condemnation damages for a partial taking is the “before and after method,
whereby the value of the remainder of the tract after the taking is deducted
from the value of the whole tract before the taking.” Daly v. State, 150 N.H.
277, 280 (2003) (quotation omitted). The owner is entitled to have the land
appraised at the most profitable or advantageous use to which it could be put
on the day of the taking. Id. at 279. The landowner is compensated “not only
[for] the fair market value of the property actually taken, but also . . . for the
effect of the taking, if any, on the entire property, which is referred to as
severance damages.” Id. at 280 (quotation omitted). Use of the “before and
after” method automatically accounts for severance damages. Id.
There is no dispute in this case that there was a taking of the
landowner’s property, and that he is entitled to compensation. Rather, the
landowner contends that certain errors made both before trial and at trial
require that we reverse and remand for a new trial to determine just
compensation. Specifically, he argues that the trial court’s rulings on a motion
in limine and his request for jury instructions, as well as several evidentiary
rulings, were erroneous.
Several of the challenged rulings arose out of the testimony of the State’s
expert, Duane Cowall, a certified commercial property appraiser. Cowall
produced two separate appraisals assessing the value of the property as of the
date of the taking, June 6, 2007. Both used the “comparative sales approach,”
which determines the fair market value of property “by comparing similar
properties that have recently been sold with the property being appraised,
identifying appropriate units of comparison, and making adjustments to the
sale prices (or unit prices, as appropriate) of the comparable properties, based
on relevant, market-derived elements of comparison.” Appeal of Pennichuck
Water Works, 160 N.H. 18, 38 (2010) (quotation omitted). Because this was a
partial taking, Cowall determined the amount of damages by determining the
2
difference between the fair market value of the property before the taking and
the fair market value after the taking. See Daly, 150 N.H. at 280.
In his first appraisal, completed on June 5, 2008, Cowall determined that
the landowner’s property was worth $635,000 before the taking and $475,000
after the taking, resulting in $160,000 in damages. The State provided the
landowner with a copy of the appraisal, and the landowner provided the State
with his own appraisal, based upon “a very dense development,” valuing
damages at $3,070,000.
In light of the substantial disparity between the parties’ appraisals, the
State asked Cowall to prepare a second appraisal and assess the physical,
legal, and economic viability of a higher density development. Cowall’s second
appraisal, prepared on July 17, 2009, concluded that the value of the
landowner’s property was $1,690,000 before the taking and $1,130,000 after
the taking, resulting in $560,000 in damages. On July 9, 2010, Cowall
included a feasibility report with the second appraisal. At trial, Cowall testified
about the second appraisal and explained his conclusions from it. He also
testified that prior to completing the analysis for the second appraisal, he had
completed an earlier appraisal and explained his reasons for changing it. He
also explained to the jury his feasibility report regarding the second appraisal.
Prior to trial, the landowner moved in limine to exclude Cowall’s
testimony, arguing that pursuant to New Hampshire Rules of Evidence 401
and 702, the second appraisal was irrelevant and did not meet the required
threshold level of reliability. The trial court denied the motion.
On appeal, the landowner argues that the trial court erred in denying his
motion in limine to exclude Cowall’s expert testimony related to the second
appraisal because it did not rise to the threshold level of reliability required by
New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 702 and Daubert v. Merrell Dow
Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 509 U.S. 579 (1993). See State v. Pelletier, 149 N.H.
243, 252 (2003).
Expert testimony is admissible if “scientific, technical, or other
specialized knowledge will assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or
to determine a fact in issue,” N.H. R. Ev. 702, so long as the testimony “rise[s]
to a threshold level of reliability,” State v. Cressey, 137 N.H. 402, 405 (1993).
We review a trial court’s determination of reliability for an unsustainable
exercise of discretion. Pelletier, 149 N.H. at 251.
The landowner essentially disagrees with the substance and conclusions
of Cowall’s analysis. However, “[t]he trial court functions only as a gatekeeper,
ensuring a methodology’s reliability before permitting the fact-finder to
determine the weight and credibility to be afforded an expert’s testimony.”
3
Goudreault v. Kleeman, 158 N.H. 236, 247 (2009). The landowner also
contends that the method employed was unreliable because Cowall did not
appraise the property at its highest and best use, but rather gave the property
“the benefit of the doubt.” This, however, mischaracterizes Cowall’s second
appraisal and his resulting testimony. Cowall admitted that in his opinion, the
highest and best use of the property, which was vacant, was to hold it for
future development of single family detached condominiums. His first
appraisal was based upon such a conclusion, and this was explained to the
jury. However, he also explained that there was support for the higher density
analysis contained within his second appraisal. Although the two appraisals
were based upon different assumptions, there is nothing to suggest that the
second appraisal, which the State used as its expert report, or Cowall’s expert
testimony was unreliable. The trial court, therefore, properly admitted this
evidence.
The landowner similarly argues that Cowall’s testimony regarding his
second appraisal was inadmissible because it “was not being offered as the fair
market value based upon a highest and best use, but instead for the irrelevant
purpose of giving the [landowner] the ‘benefit of the doubt.’” However, merely
because Cowall had some reservations about the assumptions underlying his
analysis within that appraisal does not render his testimony irrelevant.
The landowner next argues that the trial court erred in admitting
Cowall’s feasibility analysis because it was neither reliable nor relevant. The
landowner claims that the feasibility analysis “was a badly mis-prepared
version of [a highly complex method of valuation] which skewed completely the
actual feasibility of [a high density development] project.” To support this
argument, the landowner advances the same arguments he set forth regarding
Cowall’s second appraisal and expert testimony. For the same reasons
explained above, we conclude that the trial court did not err in admitting the
feasibility report. Moreover, even assuming, arguendo, it was error to admit
the feasibility report, we find it to be harmless. The feasibility report analyzed
the feasibility of a high density development and supported the lower density
development used in Cowall’s first appraisal. However, the jury accepted the
second appraisal using the higher density analysis and, therefore, apparently
did not rely upon the feasibility report. Kessler v. Gleich, 156 N.H. 488, 494
(2007) (“Where it appears that an error did not affect the outcome below . . . the
judgment will not be disturbed.” (quotation omitted)).
In his pre-trial motion in limine, the landowner requested the following
pre-trial instruction:
At the conclusion of the evidence in this case, it will be your
duty to determine what damages the landowner suffered at
the time of the taking on June 6, 2007. You will be hearing
4
evidence with respect to the fair market value of the real
estate on June 6, 2007, just before the taking occurred and
just after the taking occurred. It is common knowledge,
however, that [the] real estate market [has] sharply declined
since 2007. You are cautioned that you must ignore what
occurred after June 6, 2007. Whether property values went
up or went down after a taking occurs cannot be considered
in determining the award of just compensation.
(Emphasis added). The jury was selected on December 6, 2010, at which time
the trial court gave the following preliminary instruction, which modified the
instruction contained in the landowner’s written request:
[A]t the conclusion of the evidence in this case, it will be
your duty to determine what damages the landowner
suffered at the time of the taking on June 6, 2007. You’ll
be hearing evidence with respect to the fair market value of
the real estate on June 6, 2007 just before the taking
occurred and just after the taking occurred. It is common
knowledge, however, that the real estate market has
sharply declined. Whether property values went up or
down after the taking occurs can be considered in
determining the award of just compensation only to the
extent you find it of assistance in determining the property’s
fair market value on June 6, 2007.
(Emphasis added).
The landowner now argues that the trial court erred in modifying his
requested pre-trial instruction. Although the property is to be valued as of the
date of the taking, market data does not necessarily need to be excluded merely
because it is data from sales occurring subsequent to the taking. Cf. Manning
v. Redevelopment Agency of Newport, 238 A.2d 378, 380-82 (R.I. 1968)
(rejecting “a hard and fast exclusionary rule” which would prohibit post-taking
data for a more flexible approach giving the trial judge discretion to allow post-
taking data). The landowner argues that the trial court’s instruction “was in
essence a carte blanche instruction to the jury to consider the abnormal
collapse of the real estate market . . . without any limitation whether the same
would have been reasonably given substantial weight in [the fictional]
bargaining that [would] have taken place prior to [the date of the taking].”
However, both appraisers properly valued the property as of the date of the
taking and the trial court repeatedly instructed the jury to value the property
as of the date of acquisition. Moreover, the pre-trial instruction did not give
the jury any indication that it should base its fair market value determination
on the post-taking data. Rather, to the contrary, it accurately instructed the
5
jury to consider post-taking data only to the extent that it assisted the jury in
valuing the property on the date of the taking, and we presume the jury
followed these instructions. State v. Smith, 149 N.H. 693, 697 (2003). This
was not an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
The landowner next argues that the trial court erred in declining to give
his requested jury instruction addressing the burden of proof in its charge to
the jury following the close of evidence. The purpose of jury instructions is to
identify issues of material fact, and to inform the jury, in clear and intelligible
language, of the appropriate standards of law by which to resolve such issues.
Rallis v. Demoulas Super Markets, 159 N.H. 95, 98 (2009). The exact scope
and wording of jury instructions are within the sound discretion of the trial
judge. Id. Here, the trial court gave jury instructions on the burden of proof as
well as the determination of fair market value. These instructions accurately
described the law. Moreover, the trial court is not required to use the specific
language requested by either party, see State v. McDonald, 163 N.H. 115, 126
(2011), and the court’s decision not to give the instruction requested by the
landowner was not error.
Finally, the landowner argues that the trial court erred in excluding
evidence of a historic development plan for his property. The plan, which was
created in 1981, was prepared by a previous owner of the land, and “reflected
. . . how the [landowner] was planning to develop [it.]” At trial, the landowner
offered the 1981 plan in order to show that he had plans to develop the land in
2003-2007 that were “a continuation of [the] plan that dated back to 1981.”
The State requested a limiting instruction, and the court inquired about the
relevance of the plan. The court concluded that without further information
relating to the 1981 plan, its relevance was tenuous. The court excluded the
evidence “under a Rule 403 analysis,” but stated that the court would
reconsider the ruling if the landowner laid “some sort of a different foundation.”
New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 403 permits the trial court to exclude
relevant evidence “if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the
danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or
by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of
cumulative evidence.” The trial court has broad discretion to determine the
admissibility of evidence, and we will not disturb its ruling absent an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. State v. Stowe, 162 N.H. 464, 470 (2011).
Here, the trial court performed a Rule 403 analysis, noting that the
relevance was tenuous, and thus, the probative value minimal, and determined
that under Rule 403, the evidence would not be admitted. The landowner
argues the court unsustainably exercised its discretion, asserting that the
evidence was relevant and that it was not prejudicial. However, because
evidence is relevant does not necessarily mean that it is admissible. See N.H.
6
R. Ev. 403. Indeed, the very subject of Rule 403 is the exclusion of relevant
evidence. Moreover, the prejudicial effect of evidence is not the only factor to
be considered in a Rule 403 analysis. Id. The trial court may also consider
confusion of the issues, misleading the jury, delay, waste of time, or needless
presentation of cumulative evidence. Id. The court’s exclusion of the evidence
in this case was not an unsustainable exercise of discretion because it was not
clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of the landowner’s case.
Stowe, 162 N.H. at 470.
The trial court made no error, and we, accordingly, affirm.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
7