THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2011-258
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
CHRISTOPHER GRIBBLE
Argued: November 8, 2012
Opinion Issued: May 7, 2013
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Jeffery A. Strelzin, senior assistant
attorney general, and Peter Hinckley, assistant attorney general, on the brief,
and Mr. Hinckley orally), for the State.
Stephanie Hausman, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
BASSETT, J. The defendant, Christopher Gribble, appeals his
convictions, following a jury trial, for first-degree murder, attempted murder,
conspiracy to commit first-degree murder, witness tampering, and conspiracy
to commit burglary. See RSA 626:8 (2007); RSA 630:1-a (2007); RSA 629:1
(2007); RSA 629:3 (2007); RSA 641:5 (2007); RSA 635:1 (2007). On appeal, he
argues that the Superior Court (Abramson, J.) erred when it: (1) denied his
motion to suppress; (2) denied his motions for a change of venue; and (3)
instructed the jury concerning insanity. We affirm.
The defendant’s convictions arise out of a home invasion in Mont Vernon
that he and three other individuals carried out in the early morning hours of
October 4, 2009, which resulted in the death of Kimberly Cates. The defendant
was charged with alternate counts of first-degree murder, alleging that, acting
in concert with, and aided by, Steven Spader, he purposely or knowingly
caused the death of Cates by attacking her with a knife. He was also charged
with attempted murder of Cates’ daughter, witness tampering, and conspiracy
to commit murder and burglary. The defendant pleaded not guilty by reason of
insanity. The jury found him sane and guilty of all of the charges. This appeal
followed.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in denying his
motion to suppress statements he made to the New Hampshire State Police
that he claimed were obtained in violation of his right to remain silent. He
further contends that the court erred in denying his motions for a change of
venue. He argues that a venue change was necessary due to the extensive
amount of pretrial publicity regarding the crimes and the earlier trial of Steven
Spader. Finally, he asserts that the court erroneously instructed the jury
regarding insanity. We address each argument in turn.
I. Suppression
The following facts are drawn from the trial court’s order on the
defendant’s motion to suppress and the record, or are otherwise undisputed.
On October 5, 2009, Troopers John Encarnacao and Jeffrey Ardini of the New
Hampshire State Police interviewed the defendant at the New Hampshire State
Police Troop B barracks in Milford regarding Cates’ murder and the related
crimes. At the outset of the interview, Trooper Encarnacao confirmed with the
defendant that his presence at the barracks was voluntary and that the
interview would be recorded. He further advised the defendant of his Miranda
rights. See Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966). The defendant stated
that he understood his rights and agreed to answer questions. The troopers
then questioned the defendant about his recent activities.
After approximately an hour, the recording device malfunctioned. When
the interview resumed using a replacement audio recorder, Trooper Ardini
asked the defendant if he remembered his Miranda rights. The defendant
responded that he did. At that point, the troopers resumed questioning the
defendant. They accused him of participating in the home invasion and the
attack on Cates and her daughter. The defendant maintained that he could
not recall everything that he had done during the preceding forty-eight hours,
but he denied participating in the crimes.
As the interview progressed, the troopers employed various tactics to
elicit an admission from the defendant concerning his involvement in the
2
crimes. They expressed skepticism at his memory loss and told the defendant
that they did not believe him because his friends had inculpated him in the
crimes. They repeatedly told the defendant that what he had told them did not
match what his friends were saying and that this was his opportunity to tell
the truth and explain “why this happened.” For instance, at one point Trooper
Ardini said to the defendant:
[Trooper Encarnacao] and I just want to know the why, the how.
It’s not just crime, suspect, done. Come on. You think the lawyers
that we deal with are going to take that? No. They want to know
the why because it totally changes the story. . . . We try to answer
the whys and the whos but when there’s more than one person you
need to start looking out for yourself. And that’s where the why
comes in. That’s why [we] are still in this room with you. We’re
here for you we want to give you the time. We understand it is not,
it goes against everything in our inner instinctual mannerisms to
admit any connection to this whole thing. Any. Even if you just
drove to the general area and the people got out and they did
whatever it is they did, you don’t know whatever, it just goes
against every instinct that we have in our bodies to say that
because there’s consequences to it. We’re not bull****ting you,
there’s consequences. But the consequences are vastly different
depending on the why. And that’s why we’re here. . . . We want to
help you paint that picture that helps explain your why before they
paint it for you.
(Emphases added.) He later told the defendant:
You know those guys are giving stuff up and you know what
they’re giving up is matching what we already know. I don’t know
how else to tell you. This is your chance to give your version of
why. Because the why is what’s going to explain it and change the
perception of this whole thing specifically of you. We can only
throw you the rope man. We can only throw you the rope. You got
to grab it.
(Emphasis added.) Trooper Encarnacao subsequently told him that “[t]he door
is closing on your opportunity to explain why this happened.” (Emphasis
added.)
Despite the troopers’ persistent exhortations to tell the truth and explain
what happened, the defendant continued to profess his innocence. He
challenged the evidence that the troopers claimed connected him to the crime,
and further questioned why, if the troopers had such evidence, they had not
3
already arrested him. After two and a half hours, Trooper Encarnacao stopped
the interview to give everyone a break.
Approximately twenty minutes later, the troopers resumed the interview.
Trooper Ardini again asked the defendant if he remembered and understood
his Miranda rights. The defendant said that he did and that he wanted to help
with the investigation. The troopers then continued to confront him with
information they had about the crimes. Shortly thereafter, the following
conversation took place:
[The defendant]: (inaudible) I don’t have to say
anything.
[Trooper Encarnacao]: You don’t.
[The defendant]: So I don’t want to.
[Trooper Encarnacao]: What?
[The defendant]: So I won’t.
[Trooper Ardini]: What does that mean Chris?
[The defendant]: I have a right not to say anything.
[Trooper Ardini]: That’s true.
[The defendant]: So I won’t say anything.
[Trooper Encarnacao]: So what you’re saying is you don’t
want to talk to us any longer? You
have to speak.
[The defendant]: Yes.
[Trooper Encarnacao]: This interview is over then?
[Trooper Ardini]: At Chris’s request we are ending the
interview and the recording. The
time by my watch is 17:26.
At that time, the troopers turned off the recording equipment and ceased all
questioning. Before Trooper Encarnacao left the interview room, the defendant
said “something to the effect that he was just tired, that he’s sorry, he doesn’t
4
feel like talking anymore.” Trooper Encarnacao told him, “[H]ey, that’s your
prerogative, you don’t want to talk, that’s fine, you don’t have to.”
The defendant was then left alone in the interview room while Trooper
Encarnacao alternated between sitting at a desk directly outside the interview
room and speaking with other investigators about the case in another room at
the barracks. At no point did the defendant request to leave. After about an
hour, the defendant leaned forward and beckoned to Trooper Encarnacao,
indicating that he wanted to speak with him. Trooper Encarnacao moved to
the doorway of the interview room.
Trooper Encarnacao then had what he described as “several separate
conversations” with the defendant in the span of fifteen to twenty minutes. The
defendant first asked him “if everybody was still there,” and he told the
defendant that he was not sure because he had spent the afternoon with the
defendant. Trooper Encarnacao further told the defendant that it had been a
long day and that he was tired. The defendant agreed and began talking about
his family. The defendant then asked Trooper Encarnacao if his job was hard.
Trooper Encarnacao responded that it was. The defendant continued to
question the trooper about his job and whether it was “hard to deal with.”
Trooper Encarnacao responded, “[Y]ou know, at times it is, but it’s like any
other job, you take the good with the bad.” The defendant “said something to
the effect that [Trooper Encarnacao] must see a lot, that must be hard to deal
with,” to which Trooper Encarnacao responded, “it can be, but, you know, the
real thing that’s hard to deal with is when you, you know, can’t find the
answers why something happens.” (Emphasis added.)
The defendant then brought up the subject of the death penalty, asking
Trooper Encarnacao whether the crimes under investigation were eligible for
the death penalty. Trooper Encarnacao told him that he did not think so and
then explained what crimes were eligible for the death penalty. The defendant
also asked about the difference between first and second-degree murder, and
Trooper Encarnacao explained the difference.
Following this conversation, Trooper Encarnacao testified that the
defendant said, “you know what, why don’t you go get your recorder . . . I’ll tell
you everything.” Trooper Encarnacao testified that he was surprised by the
defendant’s statement because, in his mind, the interview was over, and the
defendant had already decided not to tell the troopers anything else. Trooper
Encarnacao reminded the defendant that he did not have to talk, but the
defendant said, “[N]o, you know, I’m going to tell you everything.” Trooper
Encarnacao told the defendant that he had to retrieve his audio recorder and
locate Trooper Ardini. The defendant stated that he did not want to speak with
Trooper Ardini, but that he trusted Trooper Encarnacao. Trooper Encarnacao
then retrieved an audio recorder and returned to the interview room. He
5
testified that he asked the defendant “if he wanted to do this,” and the
defendant “said he did.”
Trooper Encarnacao then began recording. The following conversation
ensued:
[Trooper Encarnacao]: And this is a continuation of [an]
interview that we ended maybe forty
five minutes or so ago. Ah it might
have been a little longer. At your
request we had been speaking with
ah, well it was Chris and I and
Trooper Jeff Ardini from the Major
Crime Unit at that time. Ah and
again we were, we were interviewing
Chris and at some point Chris said
that he didn’t feel like talking
anymore. Ah is it true you’ve come
to me and you’ve told me you’d like
to talk again?
[The defendant]: Yes I would.
Thereafter, Trooper Encarnacao again read the defendant his Miranda rights.
The defendant said that he understood his rights and he further agreed to
speak with Trooper Encarnacao and answer questions. The defendant then
confessed to his involvement in the crimes.
Before trial, the defendant moved to suppress his confession, arguing, in
part, that his right to remain silent was violated because, after he had asserted
this right, Trooper Encarnacao conducted “the functional equivalent of
interrogation which [led] back to a recorded formal interrogation.” Following a
hearing, the trial court denied the defendant’s motion. The court found that,
once the defendant invoked his right to remain silent, Trooper Encarnacao
neither expressly interrogated the defendant nor conducted the functional
equivalent of interrogation. Rather, the court found that the “defendant’s
statements were initiated solely by him, without any prompting by the police.”
(Quotation omitted.) Accordingly, the court ruled that the defendant’s
confession was not obtained in violation of his right to remain silent.
On appeal, the defendant argues that his rights under Part I, Article 15
of the New Hampshire Constitution and the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments
to the United States Constitution were violated. Specifically, he contends that
Trooper Encarnacao engaged in the functional equivalent of interrogation and,
as a result, failed to “scrupulously honor” his invocation of his right to remain
6
silent. We first address the defendant’s claim under the State Constitution and
rely upon federal law only to aid in our analysis. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226,
231-33 (1983).
Whether the defendant was subjected to interrogation is a mixed
question of law and fact. State v. Spencer, 149 N.H. 622, 625 (2003). Thus,
we defer to the trial court’s factual findings with respect to interrogation unless
they are contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. Id. However, we
conduct a de novo review of the trial court’s ultimate determination of whether
interrogation occurred. Id.
Before the defendant’s responses made during custodial interrogation
may be used as evidence against him, the State must prove, beyond a
reasonable doubt, that it did not violate his constitutional rights under
Miranda. See, e.g., id. at 624; State v. Jeleniewski, 147 N.H. 462, 465 (2002).
In Miranda, the Supreme Court held that if an accused is in police custody,
has been informed of his Miranda rights, and “indicates in any manner, at any
time prior to or during questioning, that he wishes to remain silent, the
interrogation must cease.” Miranda, 384 U.S. at 473-74.
Subsequently, in Michigan v. Mosley, 423 U.S. 96, 101-04 (1975), the
Supreme Court addressed the circumstances under which interrogation may
be lawfully resumed after a defendant has invoked his Miranda rights. The
Court found that nothing in Miranda could “sensibly be read to create a per se
proscription of indefinite duration upon any further questioning by any police
officer on any subject, once the person in custody has indicated a desire to
remain silent.” Mosley, 423 U.S. at 102-03. Relying upon the “right to cut off
questioning” as enunciated in Miranda, the Court concluded “that the
admissibility of statements obtained after the person in custody has decided to
remain silent depends under Miranda on whether his ‘right to cut off
questioning’ was ‘scrupulously honored.’” Id. at 103-04. We have similarly
concluded that whenever a suspect in custody exercises his option to cut off
questioning, the police must scrupulously honor the suspect’s desire to remain
silent. State v. Laurie, 135 N.H. 438, 442 (1992).
Nevertheless, the defendant himself may initiate further conversation
and thereby waive the right he had previously invoked. See State v. Plch, 149
N.H. 608, 616 (2003); State v. Elbert, 125 N.H. 1, 9 (1984). In those instances,
the State must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant, without
improper prompting, initiated conversation with the police about the subject of
the charges. See Plch, 149 N.H. at 616. Thus, the defendant – even after he
has asserted his right to remain silent – may choose to initiate further
conversation with the police, and his subsequent statements may be
admissible so long as his decision is not the result of improper prompting by
the police. See Plch, 149 N.H. at 616; cf. United States v. Alexander, 447 F.3d
7
1290, 1294 (10th Cir. 2006) (stating that “a defendant – even if he has asserted
the right to counsel – may choose to reinitiate contact with the police so long as
the government does not coerce him into doing so”).
Here, the defendant does not dispute that, after he invoked his right to
remain silent, he initiated the conversation with Trooper Encarnacao “in the
ordinary dictionary sense of that word.” State v. Gravel, 135 N.H. 172, 177
(1991) (quotation omitted). Nor does he assert that any of his statements were
involuntary. Rather, he argues that Trooper Encarnacao’s responses to his
questions constituted the functional equivalent of interrogation because they
were not confined to answering the defendant’s questions but “directly alluded
to the prior interrogation” regarding the crimes, and, therefore, that these
responses improperly prompted him to confess. We disagree.
Interrogation for Miranda purposes occurs when “a person in custody is
subjected to either express questioning or its functional equivalent.” Spencer,
149 N.H. at 625 (quotation omitted). The functional equivalent of interrogation
includes “any words or actions on the part of the police (other than those
normally attendant to arrest and custody) that the police should know are
reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from the suspect.” Rhode
Island v. Innis, 446 U.S. 291, 301 (1980). The “functional equivalent” aspect of
the term “focuses primarily upon the perceptions of the suspect, rather than
the intent of the police.” Plch, 149 N.H. at 614 (quotation omitted). “This focus
reflects the fact that the Miranda safeguards were designed to vest a suspect in
custody with an added measure of protection against coercive police practices,
without regard to objective proof of the underlying intent of the police.” Innis,
446 U.S. at 301.
Trooper Encarnacao’s responses to the defendant’s questions did not
constitute the functional equivalent of interrogation. Courts have held that a
police officer’s responses to certain inquiries by the defendant do not constitute
interrogation. Spencer, 149 N.H. at 625 (citing and discussing cases). In
Spencer, for instance, we held that the officer’s conduct of showing the
defendant bank surveillance photographs of a person who appeared to be the
defendant was done in response to the defendant’s apparent confusion about
being arrested and did not constitute interrogation. Id. at 626. Similarly, in
United States v. Conley, 156 F.3d 78, 83 (1st Cir. 1998), the court found that
the officer’s “comments regarding the facts of the case and the strength of the
evidence” were made “in direct response to the [defendant’s] importuning,” and
could “hardly be classified as interrogatory.” Here, as in those cases, Trooper
Encarnacao’s statements to the defendant were made in direct response to the
defendant and cannot be characterized as interrogatory.
We are not persuaded by the defendant’s argument that Trooper
Encarnacao “invited [the defendant] to re-engage in a conversation about the
8
crimes” by his response that the hardest part of his job was when he was
unable to find answers as to why a crime occurred. It is true that during their
previous conversation with the defendant the troopers had referenced the need
to know why the crime occurred; however, this fact alone does not support a
conclusion that Trooper Encarnacao’s response effectively “turned the
conversation back to the investigation of the Mont Vernon crimes.” To the
contrary, Trooper Encarnacao’s response materially differs from statements
that we have found to be the functional equivalent of interrogation in other
cases. See Plch, 149 N.H. at 614-15; Gravel, 135 N.H. at 177 (officer’s
questions pertaining to the location where defendant had said he used drug
were asked only to elicit incriminating evidence and, thus, constituted
interrogation). For example, in Plch, the defendant was suspected of the
murder and dismemberment of a woman. Plch, 149 N.H. at 610. During an
interview with the police, he invoked his right to counsel. Id. at 611-12.
Subsequently, the interviewing officer told the defendant that if he had “a
change of heart and . . . want[ed] to stand up and be the man [he] want[ed] to
be” and let the police know where the victim’s body parts were, then he would
have to tell somebody that he wanted to speak with the detectives because they
could no longer speak with him. Id. at 612 (quotation omitted). We found that
the police should have known that these “statements were reasonably likely to
evoke an incriminating response from the suspect,” id. at 614 (quotation and
brackets omitted), and that they were intended to persuade the defendant to
“have a change of heart” and tell the detectives where the body parts were, id.
at 615 (quotation omitted). See also State v. Dellorfano, 128 N.H. 628, 634
(1986) (finding that officer called out defendant’s nickname in the jail cell area
in order to elicit an incriminating answer); State v. Beaupre, 123 N.H. 155, 158
(1983) (finding detective’s invitation to the defendant to make a statement
constituted custodial interrogation in violation of defendant’s right to counsel
under Miranda). Here, we cannot say that Trooper Encarnacao should have
known that his response was reasonably likely to elicit a confession from the
defendant regarding his involvement in the crimes.
The defendant further suggests that Trooper Encarnacao’s response was
meant to appeal to the defendant’s “interest in police work that had been
apparent from the beginning of their interaction.” We disagree. The defendant
asked Trooper Encarnacao a series of questions regarding the difficulty of his
job, and the trooper directly responded by explaining what he found to be the
hardest part of his job. See Spencer, 149 N.H. at 626.
The defendant contends that he made earlier attempts to discontinue
questioning but that the troopers nonetheless continued to question him before
the interview ended. He maintains that his “perceptions of the troopers’
willingness to continue questioning him in the face of his initial, equivocal
attempts to discontinue questioning are relevant to how he would perceive the
later interaction with [Trooper] Encarnacao.” We agree that, in determining
9
whether Trooper Encarnacao conducted the functional equivalent of
interrogation, we focus primarily on the defendant’s perceptions. See Plch, 149
N.H. at 614 (quotation omitted). Here, however, although the troopers
continued to question the defendant despite his “equivocal attempts to
discontinue questioning,” once the defendant unequivocally asserted his right
to remain silent, the troopers immediately ended the interview and left the
defendant alone in the interview room. After the defendant was left alone in
the interview room, there is no evidence that he had any other conversations
with the troopers until he later initiated contact with Trooper Encarnacao. In
light of these facts, we fail to see how the defendant would perceive Trooper
Encarnacao’s later responses to the defendant’s questions as the functional
equivalent of interrogation.
Moreover, there was no reason for Trooper Encarnacao to believe that the
defendant would suddenly decide to admit his involvement in the crimes. The
troopers had interviewed the defendant for nearly four hours, during which
time they repeatedly accused him of committing the crimes, and the defendant
repeatedly professed his innocence. As a result, Trooper Encarnacao could
have reasonably concluded that the defendant would continue to profess his
innocence. See Spencer, 149 N.H. at 626. This is evidenced by Trooper
Encarnacao’s testimony that he was surprised by the defendant’s willingness to
tell him everything as he thought the interview had ended and that the
defendant was not going to tell them anything else. Although Trooper
Encarnacao’s intent is not conclusive, it is relevant to determining whether his
response constituted the functional equivalent of interrogation. See id.
Accordingly, we hold that Trooper Encarnacao did not engage in the
functional equivalent of interrogation. It follows, therefore, that he did not
improperly prompt the defendant to initiate the further conversation. See Plch,
149 N.H. at 615-16. Rather, the ensuing conversation was “initiated solely by
[the defendant], without any prompting by the police.” Id. (quotation omitted).
Thus, the defendant’s Miranda rights were not violated, and we find no error in
the trial court’s denial of his motion to suppress. See Innis, 446 U.S. at 300
(explaining that “[v]olunteered statements of any kind are not barred by the
Fifth Amendment” (quotation omitted)); see also State v. Reynolds, 124 N.H.
428, 433 (1984) (“By voluntarily initiating the discussion . . . the defendant
exercised the control over the questioning that the constitution guarantees
him.”).
Finally, the defendant contends that we should find the State
Constitution more protective than the Federal Constitution with respect to
“suspects who give statements after invoking their right to silence.” He
maintains that in deciding certain cases, such as those addressing whether
there has been a valid waiver of Miranda rights, we have viewed the State
Constitution as more protective than the Federal Constitution. We have
10
historically mandated, under our State Constitution, more protection of a
suspect’s Miranda rights than has the United States Supreme Court under the
Federal Constitution. See Gravel, 135 N.H. at 184. However, to the extent that
the defendant is inviting us to provide greater protection under the State
Constitution than is already given, he has failed to adequately develop an
argument as to why we should now expand that protection. We, therefore,
decline his invitation. See State v. Euliano, 161 N.H. 601, 608 (2011)
(declining to address defendant’s argument that trial judge was not impartial
under Part I, Article 35 of State Constitution and Sixth Amendment to United
States Constitution because defendant had failed to adequately develop it).
As the Federal Constitution offers the defendant no greater protection
than the State Constitution does under these circumstances, see Plch, 149
N.H. at 620; Spencer, 149 N.H. at 629; Innis, 446 U.S. at 300-02, we reach the
same result under the Federal Constitution as we do under the State
Constitution.
II. Venue
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred by denying his
motions to change venue. The crimes in this case generated an extensive
amount of media coverage. While much of the coverage occurred immediately
after the crimes, co-conspirator Spader’s trial and sentencing in November
2010, approximately four months before the defendant’s trial, engendered
numerous newspaper articles and editorials as well as daily television coverage.
Many of those articles identified Spader and the defendant as being accused of
Cates’ murder and the attempted murder of her daughter. One article
described the start of Spader’s trial under the headline, “Jurors slated to visit
site of grisly murder.” Several articles quoted the prosecutor’s opening
argument, which included a graphic description of the attack and the
defendant’s involvement. Media accounts of Spader’s trial also related the
testimony of Quinn Glover, one of the co-conspirators who participated in the
home invasion, in which he said that he saw “Gribble [take] his knife and . . .
put it on the right side of [Cates’] throat. I turned my head away . . . when I
looked back the knife was on the other side of her throat.” (Parenthesis
omitted.) Other articles set forth testimony describing how the defendant
stabbed Cates’ daughter. Another article explained that the defendant was
accused of slashing Cates’ throat and throwing her daughter into a sliding
glass door. Several articles discussed citizens’ reactions to the crimes under
headlines such as “Trial creates uneasy note for many” and “Spader murder
trial testimony stokes public anxiety.”
Following Spader’s conviction in November 2010, the news media shifted
its focus to the defendant’s case. At least one article reported that the
defendant sought to suppress his confession. Several articles and a local
11
television station later reported that the defendant admitted that he committed
the crimes charged but had pleaded not guilty by reason of insanity. In
addition, a few articles included comments by legal and mental health
professionals on the viability of the insanity defense.
Before trial, the defendant filed two motions requesting a change of
venue. In the first motion, he argued that “[t]he volume of adverse and hostile
publicity generated during the trial and sentencing of” Spader required the
court to presume prejudice in advance of jury voir dire. He further maintained
that, if the court denied his change of venue request, it should consider the use
of “supplemental questionnaires to ascertain the true scope of the potential
juror’s exposure to pretrial publicity and that publicity’s impact on that
potential juror.” The trial court denied his motion, finding that “the pretrial
publicity surrounding the Spader trial was not so inherently prejudicial to
justify a change of venue,” and, given that “the issues raised in Spader [were]
remarkably different from those [the] defendant raise[d],” the defendant had
failed “to illustrate how the alleged inflammatory news coverage from the
Spader trial prejudices the jury pool in his trial.” The court also denied his
request for a supplemental juror questionnaire.
After the jury was selected, the defendant renewed his motion to change
venue. He argued that “the jury selection process [had] revealed that the
adverse pretrial publicity in this case created fear, bias and widespread
discussion of the case in the community such that the jurors’ claims that they
[could] be impartial cannot be believed.” The court again denied his request,
finding that he had “not met his heavy burden of establishing inherent or
presumptive prejudice from the pretrial publicity this case garnered” and had
“failed to establish any bias or actual prejudice in the jury panel seated, such
that he [could not] obtain a fair trial.”
On appeal, the defendant argues that the court erred by denying his
motions because “the overwhelming media coverage and intensely antagonistic
community sentiment” denied him “a fair determination of his sanity and
criminal responsibility . . . in Hillsborough County.” Although he bases his
claim on both the State and Federal Constitutions, he relies primarily upon
federal law, and does not argue for a higher standard under the New
Hampshire Constitution. We first address the defendant’s arguments under
the State Constitution and rely upon federal law only to aid in our analysis.
See Ball, 124 N.H. at 231-33.
Part I, Article 17 of the New Hampshire Constitution provides:
In criminal prosecutions, the trial of facts, in the vicinity
where they happened, is so essential to the security of the life,
liberty and estate of the citizen, that no crime or offense ought to
12
be tried in any other county or judicial district than that in which
it is committed; except in any case in any particular county or
judicial district, upon motion by the defendant, and after a finding
by the court that a fair and impartial trial cannot be had where the
offense may be committed, the court shall direct the trial to a
county or judicial district in which a fair and impartial trial can be
obtained.
We have explained that Part I, Article 17 grants a criminal defendant the right
to be tried where the crime was committed and the right to obtain a change of
venue upon proof that he cannot obtain a fair trial there. Petition of State of
N.H. (State v. Johanson), 156 N.H. 148, 154 (2007). Similarly, the United
States Supreme Court has ruled that under the Federal Constitution, “a
defendant must be given an opportunity to show that a change of venue is
required in his case” because of community prejudice. Id. (quotation omitted).
In addition, the due process requirements of Part I, Article 15 of the New
Hampshire Constitution and the Sixth Amendment to the United States
Constitution guarantee a defendant the right to a trial by a fair and impartial
jury. State v. Smart, 136 N.H. 639, 646 (1993); Groppi v. Wisconsin, 400 U.S.
505, 509 (1971); see also N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 35 (“It is the right of every
citizen to be tried by judges as impartial as the lot of humanity will admit.”).
Thus, if there is proof of community prejudice such that the defendant cannot
receive a trial by a fair and impartial jury in the county where the crime was
committed, the defendant has an absolute right to a change of venue. See
Petition of State of N.H. (State v. Johanson), 156 N.H. at 154; see also Skilling
v. United States, 130 S. Ct. 2896, 2913 (2010) (“The Constitution’s place-of-
trial prescriptions . . . do not impede transfer of the proceeding to a different
district at the defendant’s request if extraordinary local prejudice will prevent a
fair trial – a basic requirement of due process.” (quotation omitted)).
Publicity about a case can result in two types of prejudice with regard to
the defendant’s right to a fair trial. State v. Laaman, 114 N.H. 794, 798 (1974).
The first is inherent or presumptive prejudice, which exists when the publicity
by its nature has so tainted the trial atmosphere that it will necessarily result
in a lack of due process. Id.; see Smart, 136 N.H. at 647. A claim of inherent
prejudice does not require the defendant to show “actual identifiable
prejudice.” Smart, 136 N.H. at 647 (quotation omitted). The second type of
prejudice is actual prejudice which exists when the publicity has infected the
jurors to such an extent that the defendant cannot receive, or has not received,
a fair and impartial jury trial. Laaman, 114 N.H. at 798. In this situation, the
defendant must show that the nature of the opinions formed by the jurors as a
result of the publicity are such that they cannot be set aside to enable them to
render a verdict based upon the evidence presented in court. Id.; see also Irvin
v. Dowd, 366 U.S. 717, 723 (1961). Here, the defendant maintains that
presumed or inherent prejudice resulted from the pretrial publicity and that
13
“the community interest” was such that “the jurors’ assurances of impartiality
must be doubted.”
The trial court’s determination of the impartiality of the jurors selected,
essentially a question of demeanor and credibility, “is entitled to special
deference.” Smart, 136 N.H. at 653 (quotation and ellipsis omitted). This is so
in particular “with respect to pretrial publicity” as “[t]he judge of that court sits
in the locale where the publicity is said to have had its effect, and brings to his
evaluation of any such claim of prejudice his own perception of the depth and
extent of news stories that might influence a juror.” Id. (quotation and
brackets omitted); Skilling, 130 S. Ct. at 2918 (“When pretrial publicity is at
issue, primary reliance on the judgment of the trial court makes especially
good sense.” (quotation and brackets omitted)). As a result, we have said “that
the trial court’s finding that a jury was impartial should only be overturned for
manifest error.” Smart, 136 N.H. at 647. Because neither party argues that a
different standard of review should apply, we will review the trial court’s
decisions in this case for manifest error.
A. Pretrial Publicity
The defendant first contends that the pretrial publicity surrounding the
Spader trial and leading up to his trial resulted in presumptive prejudice
requiring a change of venue even before the trial court conducted voir dire. We
disagree.
The seminal case for examining whether presumptive prejudice resulted
from pretrial publicity is Rideau v. Louisiana, 373 U.S. 723 (1963). See
Skilling, 130 S. Ct. at 2913. In Rideau, the defendant was charged with armed
robbery, kidnapping, and murder in a small parish in Louisiana. Rideau, 373
U.S. at 724. On the morning after the crimes, in the absence of defense
counsel, the police interrogated the defendant in jail and obtained his
confession. Id. at 724, 727. The interrogation was filmed and later broadcast
on three separate occasions prior to trial by a television station in the parish
where the crimes were committed, to an audience of between 20,000 and
53,000, in a community which had a population of approximately 150,000. Id.
at 724.
The United States Supreme Court reversed the denial of the defendant’s
motion for a change of venue, stating that “[w]hat the people of [the] . . . Parish
saw on their television sets was [the defendant], in jail, flanked by the sheriff
and two state troopers, admitting in detail the commission of the [crimes], in
response to leading questions by the sheriff.” Id. at 725. The Court explained
that “to the tens of thousands of people who saw and heard it, [this was] in a
very real sense . . . [the defendant’s] trial – at which he pleaded guilty to
murder.” Id. at 726. Based upon these facts, the Court found that “[a]ny
14
subsequent court proceedings in a community so pervasively exposed to such a
spectacle could be but a hollow formality,” id., and, as a result, “without
pausing to examine a particularized transcript of the voir dire examination of
the members of the jury,” the Court held that the denial of the defendant’s
motion to change venue violated his right to due process of law. Id. at 727.
More recently, in Skilling, the Supreme Court addressed a claim of
presumed juror prejudice resulting from “pretrial publicity and community
prejudice” against the defendant. Skilling, 130 S. Ct. at 2907. The defendant,
a longtime Enron executive, had been prosecuted “for crimes committed before
the corporation’s collapse.” Id. He claimed that the trial court erred in failing
to move his trial to a different venue because “the community passion aroused
by Enron’s collapse and the vitriolic media treatment aimed at him” created a
presumption of prejudice. Id. at 2912 (quotation omitted).
The Supreme Court began its analysis by reviewing Rideau and other
cases in which it “overturned a conviction obtained in a trial atmosphere that
was utterly corrupted by press coverage.” Id. at 2914 (quotation and brackets
omitted). The Court explained that those “decisions . . . cannot be made to
stand for the proposition that juror exposure to news accounts of the crime
alone presumptively deprives the defendant of due process.” Id. (quotation and
ellipses omitted). “Prominence does not necessarily produce prejudice, and
juror impartiality,” the Court reiterated, “does not require ignorance.” Id. at
2914-15. The Court then considered certain factors, id. at 2915-17, in making
its determination that the defendant’s trial shared “little in common with those
in which [it] approved a presumption of juror prejudice,” id. at 2916.
The defendant argues that we should consider several of the factors
enumerated in Skilling in addressing his claim, specifically: (1) the size of the
community and the pervasiveness of the media coverage; (2) the nature of the
reporting; (3) the timing of the trial in relation to the crime; and (4) the effect of
the media coverage surrounding Spader’s trial. See id. at 2915-17. Upon
consideration of these factors, we conclude that the trial court did not commit
manifest error when it determined that the pretrial publicity did not create a
presumption of prejudice sufficient to require a change of venue.
1. Size of the Community and Pervasiveness of the Media Coverage
In this case, the jury was drawn from Hillsborough County, the most
populous county in New Hampshire, with a population of over 400,000. See
Hillsborough County, N.H. Employment Sec. (2012), available at
http://www.nhes.nh.gov/elmi/products/cp/documents/hillsborough-cp.pdf.
Although Hillsborough County is not as large as the community in Skilling,
where the jury was drawn from a population with over 4.5 million eligible
jurors, id. at 2915, it is significantly more populous than communities in which
15
prejudice has been presumed, see Rideau, 373 U.S at 724 (presumed prejudice
found where prospective jurors drawn from parish with population of 150,000
residents); Irvin, 366 U.S. at 719 (presumed prejudice found where prospective
jurors drawn from rural county of approximately 30,000 residents); Com. v.
Toolan, 951 N.E.2d 903, 915 (Mass. 2011) (finding that “[t]he small size of the
Nantucket community [with a population of just over 10,000 permanent
residents] weighs in favor of finding local prejudice”).
The defendant raises concerns about the impact that the crimes had on
the community, citing articles quoting a few residents who expressed anger,
bewilderment and heartbreak over the crimes. The defendant fails to
demonstrate, however, how the sentiment expressed by a small number of
residents in a county with over 400,000 residents is indicative of presumed
prejudice in the potential jury pool. Cf. United States v. Mitchell, 752 F. Supp.
2d 1216, 1221 (D. Utah 2010) (finding the fact that nine to ten thousand
community volunteers were involved in the search for kidnapping victim in a
county with a population of 2.8 million did not support presumption of
prejudice); United States v. McVeigh, 918 F. Supp. 1467, 1472 (W.D. Okla.
1996) (change of venue necessitated, in part, by community sentiment, which
included public sympathy for the victims as demonstrated by memorials
displayed in the state capitol building and t-shirts honoring the victims sold in
the courthouse on hearing days). Thus, given the size of the community from
which the jury pool was drawn in this case, it is unreasonable to conclude that
twelve impartial jurors could not be found. See Skilling, 130 S. Ct. at 2915;
see also United States v. Diehl-Armstrong, 739 F. Supp. 2d 786, 793-94, 807
(W.D. Pa. 2010) (finding no presumed prejudice, in part because jury drawn
from community with total population of 545,615); Com. v. Entwistle, 973
N.E.2d 115, 128 (Mass. 2012) (finding no presumed prejudice, in part because
the jury was drawn from the most populous county in New England).
With respect to the pervasiveness of the media coverage, the defendant
cites “information about the circulation of the three leading sources of news
about the crimes: the Union Leader, WMUR, and the Nashua Telegraph.”
Unlike in Rideau, however, where the defendant provided evidence that an
estimated 106,000 people in a population of 150,000 had been exposed to his
confession, Rideau, 373 U.S. at 724, the defendant here concedes that “no
definitive number of potential jurors exposed to . . . media [about the crime]
can be created.” Although the defendant maintains that “[d]uring the Spader
trial, WMUR estimated that an average of almost” 41,000 adults in
Hillsborough County watched the evening news, these numbers represent only
approximately ten percent of Hillsborough County’s population. Moreover,
although “the record reflects how many homes in Hillsborough County received
the Union Leader,” as the defendant acknowledges, “it cannot be calculated
how many jury-eligible adults within the home read [reports] on the Mont
Vernon crimes.” Similarly, as recognized by the defendant, “website viewers
16
may be anywhere in the county, state, or country.” Given these circumstances,
we cannot conclude that the publicity so saturated the community as to
require a presumption of prejudice. See Coleman v. Kemp, 778 F.2d 1487,
1491-1540 (11th Cir. 1985) (concluding that prejudice could be presumed
where pretrial publicity consisting of over 150 newspaper articles and various
news broadcasts saturated a community of approximately 7,000).
2. Nature of the Reporting
The defendant also claims that the nature of the reporting was
prejudicial because “[r]eports of the Spader trial graphically described the
crimes and the victims’ injuries, often using inflammatory language.”
“[I]nherent, or presumptive, prejudice will only be found in cases where the
publicity is of a certain nature,” Smart, 136 N.H. at 647, and “attends only the
extreme case,” Skilling, 130 S. Ct. at 2915. “[I]t is the adverse nature of the
publicity, not merely its quantity, that is critical in finding presumptive
prejudice.” Smart, 136 N.H. at 649. However, even pervasive, adverse pretrial
publicity “does not inevitably lead to an unfair trial.” Skilling, 130 S. Ct. at
2916 (quotation omitted).
The defendant describes as inflammatory certain words in some of the
news reports, including “vicious,” “savage,” “gruesome,” horrific,” “torture,” and
“depravity.” We have reviewed the material submitted by the defendant, and,
although some of the news reports were accusatory in content and included
graphic descriptions of the crimes, we agree with the trial court that an
overwhelming amount of the material submitted consists of straightforward,
factual accounts of the crimes as recounted at Spader’s trial and the
proceedings leading up to the defendant’s trial. See Skilling, 130 S. Ct. at
2916-17 n.17 (noting that “[w]hen publicity is about the event, rather than
directed at individual defendants, this may lessen any prejudicial impact”
(quotation omitted)); Smart, 136 N.H. at 649 (finding no presumed prejudice
despite some hostile and accusatory pretrial publicity). “Distinguishing
between straightforward factual publicity about a celebrated case and
inflammatory, adverse press is crucial.” Smart, 136 N.H. at 649. “To ignore
these real differences in the potential for prejudice would not advance the
cause of fundamental fairness, but only make impossible the timely
prosecution of persons who are well known in the community, whether they be
notorious or merely prominent.” Id. (quotation omitted). Here, the media
coverage cited by the defendant “was not directed at arousing or inciting the
passion of the community.” Mitchell, 752 F. Supp. 2d at 1222 (quotation
omitted).
The defendant also points to reports of the Spader trial describing his
involvement in the crimes as evidence of presumed prejudice. Here, however,
unlike in Rideau, in which the defendant disputed his guilt and the media
17
repeatedly broadcast his “dramatically staged admission,” Skilling, 130 S. Ct.
at 2913, 2916, the defendant admitted to killing Cates and attempting to kill
her daughter.
The defendant further suggests that presumptive prejudice resulted from
reports on the Spader trial containing “information about [the defendant] that
was not introduced at his trial, such as Spader’s statements about [the
defendant’s] involvement” and that the defendant “received ‘fan mail.’” The
defendant does not claim that the reports contained evidence that was
inadmissible but simply that they contained evidence not admitted at his trial.
Although there may be instances in which news reports containing
inadmissible evidence are sufficient to presume jury prejudice, the mere fact
that certain reports contained information that was not admitted in the
defendant’s trial is not sufficient to presume jury prejudice. See Patton v.
Yount, 467 U.S. 1025, 1029, 1040 (1984) (pretrial publicity did not render a
fair trial unlikely even when publicity revealed, among other things,
“information not admitted into evidence at trial”); Smart, 136 N.H. at 650.
Moreover, as stated above, the defendant in this case admitted his involvement
in the charged crimes. Thus, we conclude that news reports containing
Spader’s statements about the defendant’s involvement in the crimes were
insufficient to create a presumption of prejudice.
3. Timing of the Trial in Relation to the Crime
“[C]ourts generally find no presumption of inherent unfairness where
there has been a substantial delay between the criminal act and the trial.”
Mitchell, 752 F. Supp. 2d at 1224 (quotation omitted). For instance, in
Skilling, the Supreme Court found significant that four years had elapsed
between the time of Enron’s collapse and the defendant’s trial, stating that “the
decibel level of media attention diminished somewhat in the years following
Enron’s collapse.” Skilling 130 S. Ct. at 2916. Here, the crimes occurred in
October 2009 and the defendant’s trial occurred nearly a year and a half later
in March 2011. The defendant acknowledges that the media coverage of the
crimes “abated in the fall of 2009.” Thus, the passage of time between the
crimes and the defendant’s trial diminished any presumptive impact of the
publicity at the time the crime was committed. See Goss v. Nelson, 439 F.3d
621, 633 (10th Cir. 2006) (“The passage of time before trial – in this case over a
year – also diminishes the presumptive impact of publicity occurring at the
time the crime was committed.”).
4. Media Coverage of Spader’s Trial
The defendant further argues that a change of venue was required
because his trial occurred shortly after Spader’s trial, during which extensive
media coverage revived interest in the crimes. Thus, we turn to the question of
18
whether the timing of the media coverage of Spader’s trial warranted “an
automatic presumption of prejudice.” Skilling, 130 S. Ct. at 2917.
The defendant’s trial took place approximately four months after the
verdict in the Spader trial. Spader’s trial received substantial publicity. The
bulk of the media accounts submitted by the defendant were generated during
and immediately following Spader’s trial. The defendant submitted thirty-three
articles related to Spader’s trial, twenty-four of which mention the defendant,
as well as seven additional articles related to the defendant’s trial. As noted
above, almost all of the material submitted consists of straightforward, factual
accounts of the crimes as recounted at Spader’s trial and the proceedings
leading up to the defendant’s trial.
More importantly, however, given that the defendant admitted his
participation in the crimes and pleaded not guilty by reason of insanity,
Spader’s trial “ha[d] little relevance to [the defendant’s] state of mind at the
time of the alleged crime.” Mitchell, 752 F. Supp. 2d at 1227 (finding co-
defendant’s guilty plea not relevant to defendant’s case because he pleaded
insanity). As the trial court correctly observed, the issues raised in Spader’s
trial were “remarkably different” from those raised in the defendant’s trial.
Spader pleaded not guilty, and, thus, at trial, the State bore the burden of
proving his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Here, on the other hand, the
defendant admitted that he committed the acts charged but claimed that he
was not guilty because he was insane at the time he committed them.
Therefore, at his trial, the defendant had the burden of proving his insanity
defense. See RSA 628:2 (2007). Consequently, to the extent that media
reporting on the Spader trial described the defendant’s involvement in the
crime, the defendant admitted as much when he pleaded not guilty by reason
of insanity. Although the publicity about Spader’s trial “calls for inquiry to
guard against actual prejudice, it does not ordinarily – and, we are satisfied, it
did not here – warrant an automatic presumption of prejudice.” Skilling, 130
S. Ct. at 2917 (finding that co-defendant’s guilty plea a little over a month
before jury selection began in defendant’s trial did not warrant a presumption
of prejudice so as to require a change of venue).
B. Voir Dire
The defendant next asserts that the trial court erred in failing to grant a
change of venue because the “[s]tatements of potential jurors in both the
Spader and [the defendant’s] case[ ] confirm that the venue was overwhelmingly
exposed to media coverage and hostile public opinion.”
“The manner in which voir dire is conducted is wholly within the sound
discretion of the trial court,” State v. Addison, 161 N.H. 300, 303 (2010)
(quotation and brackets omitted), and “[n]o hard-and-fast formula dictates the
19
necessary depth or breadth of voir dire,” Skilling, 130 S. Ct. at 2917. Whether
a prospective juror is free from prejudice is a determination to be made in the
first instance by the trial court on voir dire. Addison, 161 N.H. at 303; see also
Skilling, 130 S. Ct. at 2917 (“Jury selection . . . is particularly within the
province of the trial judge.” (quotation omitted)); Mu’Min v. Virginia, 500 U.S.
415, 427 (1991) (noting that the trial judge is granted “wide discretion . . . in
conducting voir dire in the area of pretrial publicity and in other areas of
inquiry that might tend to show juror bias”). Accordingly, as recognized by the
Supreme Court:
Reviewing courts are properly resistant to second-guessing
the trial judge’s estimation of a juror’s impartiality, for that judge’s
appraisal is ordinarily influenced by a host of factors impossible to
capture fully in the record – among them, the prospective juror’s
inflection, sincerity, demeanor, candor, body language, and
apprehension of duty. In contrast to the cold transcript received
by the appellate court, the in-the-moment voir dire affords the trial
court a more intimate and immediate basis for assessing a venire
member’s fitness for jury service.
Skilling, 130 S. Ct. at 2918 (citation omitted).
We will not presume unfairness of a constitutional magnitude simply
because the community was aware of the crimes and the charges against the
defendant. See Dobbert v. Florida, 432 U.S. 282, 303 (1977). “It is not
required . . . that the jurors be totally ignorant of the facts and issues
involved.” Irvin, 366 U.S. at 722.
In these days of swift, widespread and diverse methods of
communication, an important case can be expected to arouse the
interest of the public in the vicinity and scarcely any of those best
qualified to serve as jurors will not have formed some impression
or opinion as to the merits of the case. This is particularly true in
criminal cases. To hold that the mere existence of any
preconceived notion as to the guilt or innocence of an accused,
without more, is sufficient to rebut the presumption of a
prospective juror’s impartiality would be to establish an impossible
standard. It is sufficient if the juror can lay aside his impression
or opinion and render a verdict based on the evidence presented in
court.
Id. at 722-23; see also Laaman, 114 N.H. at 800. Indeed, “in today’s
‘information age,’ where news of community events are disseminated virtually
instantaneously by an ever multiplying array of delivery methods, it would be
difficult to find 12 jurors who do not at least have some knowledge of the facts
20
of an important and tragic incident like this one.” Com. v. Briggs, 12 A.3d 291,
313 (Pa. 2011). Thus, the crucial question “is not whether the community
remembered the case, but whether the jurors at [the defendant’s] trial had
such fixed opinions that they could not judge impartially the guilt of the
defendant.” Patton, 467 U.S. at 1035; see also Briggs, 12 A.3d at 314 (“the
pivotal question in determining whether an impartial jury may be selected is
. . . whether it is possible for [the] jurors to set aside their impressions or
preliminary opinions and render a verdict solely based on the evidence
presented to them at trial”).
We have reviewed the 2,347-page transcript of jury selection and have
found no evidence to support the defendant’s argument that a change of venue
was required. Rather, the record establishes that the trial court conducted a
thorough jury selection process over a period of eight days and went to great
lengths to ensure that the empanelled jury was fair and impartial. See State v.
Nelson, 103 N.H. 478, 484 (1961) (requiring three weeks to pick jury in widely
publicized case not evidence of prejudice but rather shows court’s “extreme
care” in obtaining an impartial jury); see also Patton, 467 U.S. at 1027 (jury
selection took ten days and generated 1,186 pages of testimony). For example,
on the first day of jury selection, the court provided the prospective jurors with
a letter, which explained to them that they had been summoned for the
defendant’s case and provided a detailed explanation of the procedures to be
used in jury selection. The letter further informed the prospective jurors that,
until their service was completed, they were not allowed “to read any
newspaper articles, listen to any radio or television reports, or review any
materials on the internet that may concern this case.”
After the jury selection began, the court again instructed the prospective
jurors that, until they were excused from the panel, they were “not to read,
watch, or listen to anything about this case.” In its preliminary instructions,
the court stressed the importance of deciding the case based solely upon the
evidence presented and the obligation to be fair and impartial. The court also
explained the nature of the charges and the insanity defense. The court then
read to the venire a series of questions as to which affirmative answers could
potentially warrant disqualification. Thereafter, the court met individually with
those prospective jurors who answered affirmatively and determined whether
disqualification was in fact warranted.
After two days of preliminary jury selection, the court and the attorneys
conducted individual voir dire of 107 prospective jurors. Although the
defendant argues that the supplemental questionnaire that he submitted to the
court “would have ensured that each potential juror was questioned about the
extent and effect of pretrial publicity and community sentiment,” the record
demonstrates that, in fact, the court and the parties questioned the prospective
jurors regarding the extent and effect of their exposure to pretrial publicity and
21
community sentiment. See Mu’Min, 500 U.S. at 431-32 (holding that United
States Constitution does not require inquiry about pretrial prejudice to include
specific questions regarding content of what each juror has read). The court
began its questioning by telling the prospective jurors that there were no right
or wrong answers to the questions. See Skilling, 130 S. Ct. at 2919 (to ensure
candor the court admonished each juror “that there were no right and wrong
answers to the questions” (quotation and brackets omitted)). The court then
asked each prospective juror a series of questions designed to elicit: the juror’s
prior knowledge of the case through publicity or otherwise; the extent of the
juror’s exposure to the media coverage of the case; whether the juror held or
had expressed an opinion on the case, the defendant, or anyone else involved
in the case; whether the juror would be able to set aside any information or
opinions the juror had heard outside of the courtroom and render a fair and
impartial verdict based solely upon the evidence presented; and whether, if the
juror remembered something the juror may have read or heard during trial, the
juror would be able to set it aside and not share it with other jurors. The
attorneys for each side were then allowed up to ten minutes to question each
prospective juror.
Our review of the individual voir dire demonstrates that almost all of the
prospective jurors were aware of the crimes before jury selection, and nearly
seventy-one percent were aware of the crimes because of exposure to pretrial
media coverage. Sixty-five were excused for cause, and less than one third of
that group was excused because of bias or preconceptions regarding the issue
of the defendant’s sanity. The remainder of those excused for cause were
excused for other reasons such as inability to follow the court’s instructions to
refrain from media exposure and discussing the case, inability to understand
the burden of proof, or because they had personal connections to the crimes or
those involved in the case.
All sixteen seated jurors reported knowing about the crimes prior to jury
selection, and most acknowledged that they had seen or heard media accounts
of the case. Some reported learning about the case only at the time the crimes
occurred, while others reported learning about it through media accounts of
Spader’s trial, and slightly more than half of those seated had discussed the
crimes prior to jury selection or heard others talking about the case. The court
denied the defendant’s motions to excuse seven of the seated jurors for cause,
but only five of those motions were based upon prior knowledge about the case
or exposure to pretrial media or the opinions of others. In each instance, the
court concluded that the juror’s responses demonstrated that he or she would
be able to render a decision based only upon the evidence presented.
This was not a “trial atmosphere utterly corrupted by press coverage.”
Dobbert, 432 U.S. at 303 (quotation and ellipsis omitted). “There is no
suggestion of a circus atmosphere or lynch mob mentality . . . or of any other
22
community-wide rush to judgment that infected other trials that have been set
aside for lack of an impartial jury.” Stafford v. Saffle, 34 F.3d 1557, 1566 (10th
Cir. 1994). “Simply showing that [most of] the potential jurors knew about the
case and that there was extensive pretrial publicity will not suffice to
demonstrate that an irrepressibly hostile attitude pervaded the community.”
Id. at 1567. Indeed, given the nature of the crimes in this case, the defendant
could not reasonably have expected to remain anonymous. See Dobbert, 432
U.S. at 303; Nelson, 103 N.H. at 484.
Nor is it enough to show that some of the prospective jurors discussed
the crimes or heard discussions of the case prior to being called for jury
selection. This is particularly so since all of the jurors eventually seated stated
that they would decide the case based only upon the evidence and not let
media accounts or previous discussions affect their ability to decide the case.
Cf. Moore v. State, 481 S.E.2d 892, 895 (Ga. Ct. App. 1997) (noting that
“[s]ome prospective jurors apparently discussed the crime while waiting in the
hallway prior to jury selection,” but “each member of the venire who overheard
that discussion denied hearing any opinion regarding the guilt of the
defendants and stated the discussion would not affect his or her ability to
decide the case based only on the evidence presented”).
Moreover, the record in this case does not reveal a “pattern of deep and
bitter prejudice . . . throughout the community” that would require a change
in venue. Irvin, 366 U.S. at 727 (quotation omitted). Unlike in Irvin, where the
court excused over half of the prospective jurors “on challenges for cause as
having fixed opinions as to the guilt” of the defendant and “almost 90% of those
examined on the point . . . entertained some opinion as to guilt – ranging in
intensity from mere suspicion to absolute certainty,” id., here, less than twenty
percent of those individually questioned were excused based upon bias or
preconceptions regarding the defendant’s sanity. Likewise, whereas in Irvin,
“[e]ight out of the 12 [seated jurors] thought [the defendant] was guilty,” id., in
this case, voir dire established that none of the seated jurors had in fact formed
an opinion as to the defendant’s sanity.
Rather, this case is more akin to Murphy v. Florida, 421 U.S. 794, 803
(1975), in which the Supreme Court found that the jury selection process did
not permit an inference of actual prejudice where “20 of the 78 persons
questioned were excused because they indicated an opinion as to [the
defendant’s] guilt.” The Court stated that while “[t]his may indeed be 20 more
than would occur in the trial of a totally obscure person, . . . it by no means
suggests a community with sentiment so poisoned against [the defendant] as to
impeach the indifference of jurors who displayed no animus of their own.” Id.;
see also Briggs, 12 A.3d at 316-18 (finding no error in denying defendant’s
motions to change venue when twelve percent of the prospective jurors “stated
that they had a fixed, unalterable opinion of [defendant’s] guilt”). Taking all of
23
the circumstances into account, we conclude that there is ample support for
the trial court’s conclusion that the defendant was unable to demonstrate any
actual bias or prejudice in the seated jury panel.
Thus, we hold that the defendant has failed to establish that a
presumption of prejudice arose from the pretrial publicity or that the publicity
infected the jurors to such an extent that he was unable to receive a fair and
impartial jury trial. Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court did not err in
denying the defendant’s motions to change venue.
As the Federal Constitution offers the defendant no greater protection
than the State Constitution under these circumstances, see Skilling, 130 S. Ct.
at 2912-15; Smart, 136 N.H. at 646, we reach the same result under the
Federal Constitution as we do under the State Constitution.
III. Jury Instructions
Before trial, both the defendant and the State submitted proposed jury
instructions on the issue of insanity. The State’s proposed instructions
enumerated specific factors that the jury could consider in determining
whether the defendant was insane at the time he committed the crimes. These
instructions were drawn from the 2005 drafting committee’s version of
recommended New Hampshire Criminal Jury Instructions on insanity. The
defendant objected to the State’s proposed instructions but requested that, if
the court were to use them, it also include certain other enumerated factors for
the jury to consider in determining whether the defendant was insane. The
trial court denied the defendant’s proposed insanity instructions and ruled that
it would “instruct the jury on the insanity defense consistent with the 2005
draft model jury instructions.”
At trial, the defendant renewed his request that the insanity instruction
not specify factors for the jury’s consideration. He claimed that “the facts of
the case have made clear” that the “instruction unfairly comments on the
evidence and suggests that the State’s theory of their case as to the definition
of ‘mental disease’ is favored by the Court, when it is not supported by the
law.” The State objected, and the court denied the defendant’s request.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in instructing
the jury that it could consider certain specified factors in its determination of
insanity. The defendant contends that the specified factors overwhelmingly
favored the State’s theory of the case. The State disagrees, arguing that “[t]he
challenged instructions neither advocated [for] nor repudiated the State’s trial
position” but “merely set forth possibly helpful factors that jurors could
consider in weighing the merits of those positions.”
24
The purpose of a trial court’s jury instructions is to state and explain to
the jury, in clear and intelligible language, the rules of law applicable to the
case. State v. Cegelis, 138 N.H. 249, 252 (1994). When reviewing jury
instructions, we determine whether the instructions adequately and accurately
explain each element of the offense and reverse only if the instructions did not
fairly cover the issues of law arising in the case. See State v. Hernandez, 159
N.H. 394, 400 (2009).
The scope and wording of jury instructions is generally within the
sound discretion of the trial court, and any allegations of error will
be evaluated by interpreting the disputed instructions in their
entirety, as a reasonable juror would have understood them, and
in light of all the evidence in the case.
Cegelis, 138 N.H. at 251-52 (quotation omitted). We review the trial court’s
decisions on these matters for an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
Hernandez, 159 N.H. at 400. “To show that the trial court’s decision is not
sustainable, the defendant must demonstrate that the court’s ruling was
clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.” State v.
Davidson, 163 N.H. 462, 472 (2012) (quotation omitted).
In this case, the disputed insanity instruction provided, in pertinent part:
In deciding whether the defendant was insane, you may
consider any evidence of insanity. You may consider, for example,
the nature of the defendant’s acts, whether he was suffering from
delusions or hallucinations, whether he knew the difference
between right and wrong, and whether he knew the nature of his
acts. You may also consider whether the defendant acted
impulsively or acted with cunning and planning in executing his
crimes and escaping or avoiding detection. You may also consider
whether he had the power to choose between right and wrong and
whether he could recognize acquaintances and transact business
or manage his affairs.
Now, none of these things, however, is a test for insanity.
You may consider all of these things, some of them, or none of
them, or whatever else you think is pertinent to the issue of
whether the defendant was sane or insane at the time he
committed his various illegal acts.
The defendant does not challenge the substance of the instruction itself.
Indeed, he acknowledges that “[t]he specific factors the trial court used here
are similar to those listed in the standard jury instructions on insanity and
mentioned in” our previous decisions on the insanity defense. Nevertheless, he
25
argues that “[b]y specifying factors, the trial court gave an instruction that
supported the State’s theory of the case and influenced how the jury
considered the evidence.” We disagree.
“A trial judge’s primary duty in charging the jury is to clarify the issues
of the case, and to assist the jury in understanding the questions to be
resolved.” State v. King, 136 N.H. 674, 677 (1993) (quotation omitted). In New
Hampshire, “it is the practice of Superior Court judges not to comment upon
the evidence or upon the credibility of witnesses in the charge to the jury.” Id.
(quotation and brackets omitted). Such practice is prudent given that “the
influence of the trial judge on the jury is necessarily and properly of great
weight and his slightest word or intimation is received with deference, and may
prove controlling.” Id. (quotation and brackets omitted).
Upon review of the instructions in their entirety, and although we do not
adopt these instructions as the only way to instruct the jury on the insanity
defense, we find no error. The trial court instructed the jury that “[i]t is up [to]
you . . . to determine as a question of fact whether the defendant suffered from
a mental disease or defect that caused him to act as charged.” See State v.
Fichera, 153 N.H. 588, 593 (2006) (explaining that sanity and whether a
mental disease or defect caused the charged conduct are questions of fact to be
determined by jury). It explained that the jury may consider “any evidence of
insanity” and provided the challenged factors as examples of what the jurors
could consider as evidence of insanity. However, it made clear that the jury did
not have to consider the factors and, in fact, that none of the factors is a test
for insanity. See State v. Plante, 134 N.H. 456, 461 (1991) (“[A]ny test which
measures the capacity of the defendant is a matter of evidence, which falls
within the province of the jury to be considered like any other factual issue.”).
The defendant suggests that the court’s instruction erroneously stressed
two factors, i.e., “the nature of the charged acts and whether [the defendant]
knew and could choose between right and wrong.” We disagree. We do not
read the instructions as emphasizing any one factor. Moreover, the court
instructed the jury that it could consider whatever else it found relevant to the
issue of insanity. Thus, the instructions left the jurors free to consider any
factor they deemed relevant to the issue of insanity, whether or not the factor
was mentioned in the instruction. See id. at 462. In accordance with the
applicable law on the insanity defense, the trial court also correctly stated that
there is no legal definition or test for insanity. See Fichera, 153 N.H. at 593
(explaining that “there is no test for determining whether a defendant is
insane” (quotation omitted)); Plante, 134 N.H. at 461 (“There is no specific test
or criterion which determines the issue of mental illness.”).
Citing statements made by the prosecutor in the State’s closing
argument, the defendant asserts that the State’s theory of the case was that he
26
“was not insane because he exhibited none of the factors contained in the
court’s instructions,” and that, since the court provided examples of factors
that supported only the State’s theory, “the court shaped the course of the
jury’s deliberation of the evidence.” Simply because the State tailored its
closing argument to the enumerated factors that the court instructed the jury
that it could consider, does not mean that the instruction improperly
supported the State’s theory of the case. Cf. United States v. Prawl, 168 F.3d
622, 629 (2d Cir. 1999) (stating that the purpose of the jury instruction notice
requirement in the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure “is to allow counsel to
conform their arguments to the law as it will thereafter be presented by the
judge to the jury” (quotation omitted)); 88 C.J.S. Trial § 298, at 297-98 (2012)
(“Counsel may base his or her argument on the instructions of the court.”).
This is not a case where the court improperly focused the jury’s attention
on specific portions of the State’s evidence and away from the defendant’s
theory of the case. See King, 136 N.H. at 678 (finding improper the trial court’s
references in its jury instructions to specific evidence presented at trial by
State and its failure to mention exculpatory testimony of defendant). Nor is
this a case in which the trial court’s instructions invaded the exclusive
province of the jury in deciding which facts are proved by the evidence. See
State v. Ross, 141 N.H. 397, 399-400 (1996) (finding that trial court’s
instruction invaded the fact-finding function of the jury and eclipsed the
permissible preceding statement of law). Further, the court explicitly
instructed the jury that the arguments made by counsel “are not evidence” and
that the jury “may not consider [the arguments] as evidence.”
In view of the entire charge, we find that a reasonable juror would not
have understood the instruction as supporting the State’s theory of the case;
rather, it empowered the jury to consider any evidence that it deemed relevant
to the issue of the defendant’s insanity. Accordingly, we hold that the trial
court did not err in instructing the jury as it did.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
27