THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2012-039
TOWN OF NEWBURY
v.
STEVEN P. LANDRIGAN & a.
Argued: April 11, 2013
Opinion Issued: August 21, 2013
Upton & Hatfield, LLP, of Concord (Barton L. Mayer on the brief and
orally), for the petitioner.
D'Amante, Couser, Pellerin, & Associates, P.A., of Concord (Bruce J.
Marshall on the brief and orally), for the respondents.
BASSETT, J. The respondents, Steven and Philomena Landrigan, appeal
an order of the Superior Court (McNamara, J.) finding that they unlawfully
subdivided their property and granting the request of the petitioner, the Town
of Newbury (Town), for injunctive relief and the imposition of a $2,000 fine.
See RSA 674:35 (2008) (amended 2012); RSA 676:15 (2008); RSA 676:16
(2008). The respondents argue that the trial court erred in finding that their
conduct and that of their predecessors had merged two non-conforming parcels
into a single lot. We affirm.
The trial court found, or the record supports, the following facts. In
1935, the Town deeded two contiguous lots, known as lot 3 and lot 4, to a
private party (the original owner). Thereafter, the Town also deeded to the
original owner four small “cottage lots” adjacent to lots 3 and 4.
In 1961, the original owner recorded a plan depicting lots 3, 4 and the
cottage lots. The plan identifies boundary lines separating the “cottage lots”;
however, it does not show an internal boundary line between lots 3 and 4. In
1972, the original owner deeded the southern portion of lot 4 to an abutter. In
1973, the Town deeded to the original owner an adjacent triangular parcel of
land. Around this time, the Town began assessing lot 3, the remaining portion
of lot 4, the “cottage lots,” and the triangular parcel of land as a single lot (the
property).
Subsequently, the property was transferred by deed three times. Each
deed contained an identical metes and bounds description that encompassed
the remaining portion of lot 4, lot 3, the four “cottage lots,” and the triangular
parcel. The property description did not refer to any internal boundary lines.
Each deed in the chain of title contained a “meaning and intending” clause that
referred to the previous deed.
In 2004, the property was transferred by deed to the respondents. That
deed contained the same metes and bounds description as the three prior
deeds and a “meaning and intending” clause referring to the immediately
preceding deed. At the time the respondents purchased the land, they
understood that they were buying a single lot. Later that year, they applied for
a building permit. In that application, they described setbacks measured from
the property’s exterior boundaries and not from the 1935 lot line between lots 3
and 4.
In 2006, the respondents recorded a survey plat of the property, which
shows lots 3 and 4 separated by a dotted line labeled “Old Line.” In 2008, they
recorded two more survey plats, each of which showed a solid line separating
lots 3 and 4, which was not labeled. In 2010, the respondents executed two
deeds purporting to transfer the property to themselves as separate lots. At no
time did the respondents seek or obtain subdivision approval, nor were the
survey plats recorded by the respondents approved by the planning board.
In response to the deeding of the property as separate lots, the Town filed
an action in superior court claiming that the respondents had subdivided their
property without prior planning board approval in violation of RSA 676:16.
The Town argued that the conduct of the prior owners caused lots 3 and 4 to
merge, and that consequently, when the respondents separately conveyed lots
3 and 4 to themselves without planning board approval, they unlawfully
subdivided the property. The respondents countered that they did not need
2
planning board approval to subdivide the property because the lots had never
merged.
Following an evidentiary hearing, the court ruled that the respondents
had unlawfully subdivided their property in violation of RSA 674:35 and RSA
676:16, finding that “[g]iven the manner in which the current and former
owners have treated the property, it has been merged and treated as a single
lot for 50 years or more.” The trial court reasoned that “[t]he deeds involving
the property do not support the [respondents’] position that they currently own
2 lots” and noted that “[a]t the time the [respondents] purchased the property,
they believed they were securing a single parcel of land.” Alternatively, the trial
court relied upon the doctrine of estoppel to find that treating the property as
separate lots would be inequitable because “[s]ince the early [1970s] the
[respondents] and their predecessors have [allowed] the Town of Newbury to tax
their property as a single building lot.”
On appeal, the respondents argue that the trial court erred by: (1)
applying the doctrine of merger by conduct; (2) concluding that they had
improperly subdivided their property; (3) determining that their chain of title
did not support their contention that the property consisted of separate lots of
record; (4) relying upon the testimony of the Town’s expert to construe a survey
prepared by the respondents’ expert; (5) finding that the historical lots
comprising their property had been merged for fifty years or more; and (6)
ruling that they were estopped from treating, and that it would be inequitable
to treat, the property as separate lots.
We construe the respondents’ first five arguments as challenging the trial
court’s application of the merger by conduct doctrine and the weight and
sufficiency of the evidence to support its decision. “In a land use case, we will
uphold the decision of the superior court unless it is not supported by the
evidence or is legally erroneous.” Town of Windham v. Lawrence Sav. Bank,
146 N.H. 517, 519 (2001) (quotation and brackets omitted). For the reasons
that follow, we conclude that the trial court’s determination was neither
unsupported by the evidence nor legally erroneous.
Pursuant to RSA 674:35, the Town has granted its planning board power
to regulate the subdivision of property. See RSA 674:35, I, II. Therefore, under
RSA 676:16, any person who transfers land in the Town without first obtaining
any required subdivision approval from the planning board is subject to a
penalty of $1000 for each lot transferred. The respondents did not obtain such
approval. They contend that subdivision approval was not necessary because
the property always has been and continues to be two lots. They assert that
the trial court erred in ruling that their conduct and that of their predecessors
merged the lots because the common law of merger by conduct has been
abolished. We disagree.
3
The doctrine that landowners’ conduct can result in the merger of
adjacent lots is well established in New Hampshire. In Town of Seabrook v.
Tra-Sea Corp., 119 N.H. 937 (1979), we stated that an owner of adjacent non-
conforming grandfathered lots may lose that grandfathered status and cause
the merger of the non-conforming lots “by abandoning the property or
abolishing individual lot lines,” although we concluded that the owner in that
case had not done so. Tra-Sea Corp., 119 N.H. at 942-43. In Robillard v. Town
of Hudson, 120 N.H. 477 (1980), we held that an owner’s conduct had resulted
in the merger of two non-conforming lots. Robillard, 120 N.H. at 479. That
owner had obtained a building permit for a duplex relying on the combined
frontage and area of the two contiguous, non-conforming lots. Id. at 478. We
held that such conduct “effectively erased the individual lot lines” and resulted
in the merger of the two prior non-conforming lots. Id. at 480.
The respondents read Sutton v. Town of Gilford, 160 N.H. 43 (2010), to
overrule our prior cases and to establish that the only way lots can be merged
is when “either the present or former owners [apply] to the local planning board
for a voluntary merger or the lots [are] merged pursuant to a local ordinance
specifying the conditions of merger.” In Sutton, however, we addressed a
related but distinct issue – whether RSA 674:39-a, which gives property owners
the right to merge contiguous lots, precludes a town from automatically
merging lots pursuant to its zoning ordinance. Sutton, 160 N.H. at 54-55. We
did not address, nor did the facts implicate, the doctrine of merger by conduct.
See id. at 46-50, 53-58. Therefore, Sutton does not abrogate the longstanding
rule that owners can effectuate a merger of contiguous, non-conforming lots,
independent of any town ordinance, “by behavior which results in an
abandonment or abolition of the individual lot lines.” Robillard, 120 N.H. at
479 (quotation omitted).
The respondents also argue that the evidence before the trial court was
insufficient to find that their conduct and that of their predecessors in title had
resulted in the merger of lots 3 and 4. We disagree. “We will affirm the trial
court’s factual findings unless they are unsupported by the evidence and will
affirm the trial court’s legal rulings unless they are erroneous as a matter of
law.” Sutton, 160 N.H. at 55 (quotation omitted). “[W]e defer to the trial
court’s judgment on such issues as resolving conflicts in the testimony,
measuring the credibility of witnesses, and determining the weight to be given
evidence,” id., mindful that in evaluating evidentiary weight and credibility, the
trial court is “not required to believe even uncontroverted evidence,” Town of
Atkinson v. Malborn Realty Trust, 164 N.H. 62, 67 (2012). “It is within the
province of the trial court to accept or reject, in whole or in part, whatever
evidence was presented, including that of the expert witnesses.” Cook v.
Sullivan, 149 N.H. 774, 780 (2003). Here, the record contains ample support
4
for the trial court’s conclusion that the respondents and their predecessors
abandoned the lot line described in the 1935 deed.
Beginning in 1975, the deeds in the respondents’ chain of title uniformly
describe the property by metes and bounds as a single “tract or parcel of land.”
The respondents argue that these property descriptions should be read in light
of “meaning and intending clauses” contained in the deeds, which, they
contend, refer back to the 1935 deed and show that the property is comprised
of two lots. We agree with the Town, however, that an unambiguous metes and
bounds description will prevail over a general reference to a prior deed in a
“meaning and intending clause.” See Finlay v. Stevens, 93 N.H. 124, 129
(1944). Moreover, as the trial court observed, “lot 4 as it existed in the 1935
conveyance from the Town to [the original owner], no longer exist[s].” Part of
lot 4 was sold in 1972, and, as the respondents’ expert admitted at trial, the
“cottage lots” and the triangular parcel have since been incorporated into the
subject property.
Furthermore, at least three plans were filed at the registry of deeds
depicting the property as a single lot. The first plan, recorded in 1961, does
not show a boundary line between lots 3 and 4. A second plan, filed in 1972,
identifies the internal boundary between lots 3 and 4 with a dashed line while
designating the perimeter with a solid line. In 2006, the respondents recorded
a survey plat that again depicts the original internal boundary with a dashed
line, labeled “Old Line,” bisecting a larger single lot. The Town’s expert testified
that “[w]hen you have a plan that shows solid lines around the perimeter of the
property with internal dash lines, the internal lines indicate that they’ve been
abandoned as to the property being separate parcels.” In addition, the 2006
plat refers to the entire property as a single parcel and states its acreage as a
whole.
The respondents correctly note that the 1961 plan contains inaccuracies
and, argue that, therefore, the trial court should not have relied upon it.
However, the inaccuracies are not material, and the 1961 plan is probative of
the original owner’s intention to abandon the internal boundary lines. Further,
it was the province of the trial court to determine the weight to give this
evidence. Cook, 149 N.H. at 780. Similarly, we reject the respondents’
argument that the trial court erred in not adopting the opinion of their expert,
who drafted the 2006 survey plat, as to the meaning of the dashed line. The
trial court is free to accept or reject expert testimony and to determine the
weight accorded to it. Id. It is “not required to believe even uncontroverted
testimony.” Malborn Realty Trust, 164 N.H. at 67. Upon this record, we
cannot say that the trial court erred when it chose not to credit the testimony
of the respondents’ surveyor.
5
Additional evidence in the record demonstrates that for many decades
the respondents and their predecessors treated the property as a single lot.
The record shows that a driveway accessing a house on the property crosses
both of the lots described in the 1935 deed. See Roberts v. Town of Windham,
165 N.H. 186 (2013). Moreover, not only did the respondents admit that when
they purchased the property they believed that they were purchasing one lot,
they treated the property as a single lot when they applied to the Town for
building permits. The respondents argue that, because the Town drafted the
building permit application form, it would be “unreasonable and
unconscionable” for the court to rely on the representations made in
applications. We are not persuaded; the fact remains that, regardless of the
origin of the form itself, the respondents described the setbacks measured from
the external boundary of their property, and not from the 1935 line between
lots 3 and 4.
Thus, we conclude that the evidence supports the trial court’s finding
that, as early as 1961, when the plot plan showing no boundary line between
lots 3 and 4 was recorded, the respondents and their predecessors, through
their conduct, abolished the line between the two lots described in the 1935
deed. While the respondents are correct that the trial court’s order is
inconsistent regarding the precise date of the merger, there is ample support in
the record for the court’s finding that the lots had been merged for at least
several decades. Accordingly, we uphold the trial court’s ruling that the
respondents owned a single parcel in 2008 when they conveyed lots 3 and 4
separately, thereby subdividing their property in violation of RSA 674:35 and
RSA 676:16.
Having found that the trial court properly ruled that the former and
present owners’ conduct resulted in the merger of the subject parcels, we need
not address the respondents’ arguments that the trial court erred in its ruling
on estoppel.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
6