THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2012-176
STEPHEN BARTLETT & a.
v.
CITY OF MANCHESTER
Argued: January 10, 2013
Opinion Issued: February 25, 2013
Cronin & Bisson, P.C., of Manchester (John G. Cronin and Daniel D.
Muller, Jr. on the brief, and Mr. Cronin orally), for the petitioners.
Peter R. Chiesa, of Manchester, for the respondent, joined in part B of
the intervenor’s brief.
Sheehan, Phinney, Bass & Green, P.A, of Manchester (Anna Barbara
Hantz and Susan A. Manchester on the brief, and Ms. Hantz orally), for the
intervenor.
LYNN, J. The petitioners, Stephen Bartlett and others, appeal an order
of the Superior Court (Abramson, J.) vacating a decision of the City of
Manchester Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA), which granted the intervenor,
Brookside Congregational Church (Brookside), a variance. Although the
petitioners asked the trial court to reverse the ZBA’s decision, they appeal the
court’s order because it rules that Brookside’s proposed use and similar uses of
its property are permitted as accessory uses under the Manchester Zoning
Ordinance (ordinance) as a matter of right. Brookside cross-appeals, asking us
to reinstate the ZBA’s grant of the variance. We vacate the order of the
superior court and remand with instructions to remand to the ZBA for further
proceedings consistent with this opinion.
I
The following facts are drawn from the trial court’s order and the record
before the ZBA and the superior court. Brookside’s property is a 10.04-acre
parcel of land in a residential zoning district in the north end of Manchester.
The property contains a sanctuary, chapel, cottage, residence building, carriage
house, office space, parking lot, and green space. Formerly known as Franklin
Street Congregational Church, Brookside has operated church facilities on its
property since 1958 and operates such facilities as a non-conforming use. The
petitioners are abutters to Brookside’s property.
In April 2010, Brookside applied to the City of Manchester for a permit to
allow a “work-based, self-help organization” to occupy a portion of its carriage
house. The next day an administrative official of the City of Manchester
Planning and Community Development Department denied the application,
stating that Brookside’s proposed use was prohibited by “Section(s) 5.10 (J) 8
Social service organization, District R-1B, of the Zoning Ordinance of the City
of Manchester.” (Emphasis omitted.) The denial letter informed Brookside that
“[f]urther proceedings contemplated pertaining to this application must be
pursuant to NH Revised Statutes Annotated 674:33 or other statutory
provisions relative to Zoning Boards of Adjustment, as may be appropriate.”
In response, Brookside applied to the ZBA for a variance to allow Granite
Pathways, a non-profit corporation, to operate a work-based, self-help
organization for adults with mental illness inside Brookside’s carriage house.1
According to the variance application, the organization would be the first of its
kind in New Hampshire and would help members “find support in achieving
their goals for employment, education, wellness, housing, and personal
fulfillment.” Membership in the organization would not be part of any clinical
or mandated treatment program, but rather would be voluntary. Brookside’s
application stated that the organization “would be similar to other church
activities that have benefitted many people and the neighborhood for 50 years,”
1 Although the parties have not supplied a copy of Brookside’s permit application, because both
its variance application and the letter denying its permit application refer to a “work-based, self-
help organization,” we assume that the organization referenced in the two applications is the same
and that Brookside requested a variance because of the denial of its permit application.
2
and would represent “the essence of what the church is.” Like the trial court,
we refer to the organization as the Granite Pathways Clubhouse.
Two weeks later the ZBA held a public hearing on Brookside’s
application. Representatives of Brookside and Granite Pathways attended the
hearing, and Dawn Brockett, co-chair of Brookside’s board of trustees, told the
ZBA that the variance “application and supporting documents contain[ed] all of
the necessary information.” After a single parishioner spoke in favor of
granting Brookside the variance, several members of the community expressed
reservations and opposition. Counsel for petitioner Bartlett voiced concern
that granting the variance would raise safety, security, and transportation
issues, and further argued that Brookside had neither demonstrated
unnecessary hardship nor that granting the variance would not diminish
surrounding property values. The ZBA then tabled Brookside’s application and
scheduled a second public hearing to be held the following month.
At the second public hearing, Brookside, now represented by counsel,
informed the ZBA that, in response to concerns expressed at a recent
neighborhood meeting, it would be willing to stipulate to the following variance
conditions:
1. No more than 35 occupants, which includes staff, on site at any one
time.
2. Occupants to utilize church parking lot for their cars. No on-street
parking. (Some will have motor vehicles; some will use public
transportation.)
3. Hours of operation: Monday-Friday-9:00 AM to 4:30 PM; Holidays;
Occasional evenings and weekends; No later than 9:00 PM on any
evening which is a church policy.
4. Variance terminates if Granite Pathways assigns or subleases its
occupancy rights or changes its mission. (There were concerns that it
would meld into a halfway house.)
5. Granite Pathways will undertake certain screening of potential club
members with the intent that club members cannot include convicted
pedophiles.
6. Granite Pathways will cause members under influence of alcohol or
illegal drugs to be removed from the property.
7. Variance terminates when no longer used by Granite Pathways for its
present purposes as described in the zoning application or December 31,
2015, whichever occurs first.
At the conclusion of the hearing, the ZBA granted Brookside its
requested variance subject to the above conditions. The written notice of
decision states that Brookside met its burden of proof in showing that: (1) the
variance would not be contrary to the public interest; (2) the variance would
3
not be contrary to the spirit of the zoning ordinance; (3) by granting the
variance substantial justice would be done; (4) by granting the variance
surrounding property values would not be diminished; and (5) literal
enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance would result in an unnecessary
hardship.
After the ZBA granted timely motions for rehearing and held a third
public hearing on the matter, it again granted Brookside the variance with the
same conditions. The petitioners again moved for rehearing, arguing, among
other things, that Brookside had not satisfied the criteria set forth in RSA
674:33, I(b) (Supp. 2012), and
[t]hroughout the hearing, a supporting member of the ZBA spoke in favor
of the variance based on the belief that the proposed use was an
accessory church use. The belief is not supported by the facts or the
law. If the use were an accessory use, no variance would be required.
Since [Brookside] did not dispute that a variance was required, the ZBA
acted outside of its jurisdiction to the extent it considered the accessory
use issue rather than [Brookside’s] satisfaction of variance criteria.
Under RSA 674:33, I(b), a zoning board of adjustment has the power to
grant a variance if: (1) “[t]he variance will not be contrary to the public
interest”; (2) “[t]he spirit of the ordinance is observed”; (3) “[s]ubstantial justice
is done”; (4) “[t]he values of surrounding properties are not diminished”; and (5)
“[l]iteral enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance would result in
unnecessary hardship.” The statute contains two definitions of unnecessary
hardship. See RSA 674:33, I(b)(5)(A), (B); Harborside Assocs. v. Parade
Residence Hotel, 162 N.H. 508, 512-13 (2011). Under the first definition:
“[U]nnecessary hardship” means that, owing to special conditions of the
property that distinguish it from other properties in the area:
(i) No fair and substantial relationship exists between the general
public purposes of the ordinance provision and the specific
application of that provision to the property; and
(ii) The proposed use is a reasonable one.
RSA 674:33, I(b)(5)(A). If the variance applicant fails to satisfy this first
definition, the second definition may apply. Under the second definition:
[A]n unnecessary hardship will be deemed to exist if, and only if, owing
to special conditions of the property that distinguish it from other
properties in the area, the property cannot be reasonably used in strict
4
conformance with the ordinance, and a variance is therefore necessary to
enable a reasonable use of it.
RSA 674:33, I(b)(5)(B).
After the ZBA denied the petitioners’ motion for rehearing, they appealed
to the superior court, which vacated the ZBA’s decision. Focusing on
unnecessary hardship, the court ruled that the ZBA had unlawfully found that
literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance would cause Brookside
unnecessary hardship. Notwithstanding this ruling, however, the court found
that the Granite Pathways Clubhouse and similar uses of Brookside’s property
are lawful accessory uses under the ordinance and the accessory use doctrine.
Thus, the court vacated the ZBA’s decision granting Brookside a variance
because it found that Brookside did not need a variance. This appeal and
cross-appeal followed.
On appeal, the petitioners contend that the superior court lacked subject
matter jurisdiction to consider whether the Granite Pathways Clubhouse and
other similar uses of Brookside’s property are permitted as accessory uses
under the ordinance. The petitioners assert that Brookside failed to appeal the
denial of its permit application, elected to apply for a variance, and did not rely
on the accessory use doctrine before the ZBA. More broadly, the petitioners
argue that the statutory scheme governing judicial review of ZBA decisions
contemplates that the superior court address only issues first considered and
decided by the ZBA.
In its cross-appeal, Brookside, joined by the respondent, the City of
Manchester, argues that, even if we accept the petitioners’ argument regarding
accessory use, we should affirm the ZBA’s decision granting a variance because
there is sufficient evidence in the record to support it.
II
Judicial review in zoning cases is limited. Brandt Dev. Co. of N.H. v. City
of Somersworth, 162 N.H. 553, 555 (2011). We will uphold the trial court’s
decision unless it is unsupported by the evidence or legally erroneous. Id. For
its part, the trial court must treat all factual findings of the ZBA as prima facie
lawful and reasonable, and may not set aside or vacate the ZBA’s decision,
except for errors of law, unless it is persuaded by the balance of probabilities,
on the evidence before it, that the decision is unreasonable. RSA 677:6 (2008).
We first address the petitioners’ argument that the superior court lacked
jurisdiction to consider the accessory use issue. Subject matter jurisdiction
5
refers to the court’s statutory or constitutional power to adjudicate the case.
State v. Ortiz, 162 N.H. 585, 589 (2011) (quotation omitted).2
RSA chapter 677 vests the superior court with jurisdiction to hear
appeals of ZBA decisions. To establish jurisdiction in the superior court, a
party must both: (1) file a motion for rehearing with the ZBA within thirty days
of its decision, see RSA 677:2 (Supp. 2012), :3 (2008); and (2) appeal the ZBA’s
decision to the court within thirty days of its denial of the motion for rehearing,
see RSA 677:4 (Supp. 2012). Failure to comply with either requirement divests
the superior court of subject matter jurisdiction over the appeal. See Cardinal
Dev. Corp. v. Town of Winchester Zoning Bd. of Adjustment, 157 N.H. 710, 712
(2008) (construing RSA 677:3); Radziewicz v. Town of Hudson, 159 N.H. 313,
316 (2009) (construing RSA 677:4). Moreover, “no ground not set forth in [the
motion for rehearing] shall be urged, relied on, or given any consideration by a
court unless the court for good cause shown shall allow the appellant to specify
additional grounds.” RSA 677:3, I (emphasis added). The statutory scheme “is
based upon the principle that the local board should have the first opportunity
to pass upon any alleged errors in its decisions so that the court may have the
benefit of the board’s judgment in hearing the appeal.” Atwater v. Town of
Plainfield, 160 N.H. 503, 511-12 (2010) (quotation omitted).
Against this statutory backdrop, we hold that the trial court had subject
matter jurisdiction to consider whether the Granite Pathways Clubhouse and
other similar uses of Brookside’s property are permitted as a matter of right
under the accessory use provision of the ordinance. In deciding whether
Brookside’s variance application satisfied the variance criterion of unnecessary
hardship, the trial court correctly determined that it had to consider the
permissible uses of Brookside’s property under the ordinance, including the
accessory use provision. See Manchester Zoning Ordinance, art. 3 (defining
accessory use of property as “[a] use which exists on the same lot as the
principal use of the property to which it is related, and which is customarily
incidental and subordinate to the principal use”). We agree with the trial court
that, without engaging in this analysis, it could not determine whether literal
2 As we explained in Gordon v. Town of Rye, 162 N.H. 144, 149 (2011):
Subject matter jurisdiction is jurisdiction over the nature of the case and the
type of relief sought; the extent to which a court can rule on the conduct of
persons or the status of things. In other words, it is a tribunal’s authority to
adjudicate the type of controversy involved in the action. A court lacks power to
hear or determine a case concerning subject matters over which it has no
jurisdiction. A party may challenge subject matter jurisdiction at any time
during the proceeding, including on appeal, and may not waive subject matter
jurisdiction.
(Quotation omitted.)
6
enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance would result in an unnecessary
hardship for Brookside. See RSA 674:33, I(b)(5). Thus, the trial court had
subject matter jurisdiction to consider the issue of accessory use in reviewing
the ZBA’s decision to grant Brookside a variance.
We disagree with the premise of the petitioners’ argument that the trial
court lacked jurisdiction to consider the accessory use issue because Brookside
failed to appeal the denial of its permit application. The last sentence of the
letter denying Brookside’s application states merely that any “[f]urther
proceedings contemplated pertaining to this application must be pursuant to
NH Revised Statutes Annotated 674:33,” without specifying a subsection of the
statute. Thereafter, Brookside sought a variance under RSA 674:33, I(b). In
this circumstance, and given the interconnectedness between the issues of
permitted use and hardship, we are not persuaded that Brookside needed to
file a separate appeal pursuant to RSA 674:33, I(a) (2008).3
Next, we reject the petitioners’ argument that, by applying for a variance,
“Brookside effectively waived any claim that its proposed use was permitted
under the accessory use doctrine from the outset of the ZBA proceedings.” We
have found nothing in RSA 674:33, I(b) or our common law that compels this
conclusion. In the absence of contrary legislative intent, we conclude that
contained in every variance application is the threshold question whether the
applicant’s proposed use of property requires a variance because, for the
reasons discussed above, the ZBA will invariably consider this issue in deciding
whether unnecessary hardship exists. Given the complexity of zoning
regulation, the obligation of municipalities “to provide assistance to all their
citizens seeking approval under zoning ordinances,” Richmond Co. v. City of
Concord, 149 N.H. 312, 314 (2003) (quotation omitted), and the importance of
the constitutional right to enjoy property, see Simplex Technologies v. Town of
Newington, 145 N.H. 727, 731 (2001), we cannot accept that the mere filing of
a variance application limits the ZBA or superior court’s consideration of
whether the applicant’s proposed use of property requires a variance in the
first place. Cf. In re Keeper of Records (XYZ Corp.), 348 F.3d 16, 23 (1st Cir.
2003) (“Claims of implied waiver must be evaluated in light of principles of logic
and fairness.”).
Similarly misplaced is the petitioners’ reliance on Town of Windham v.
Alfond, 129 N.H. 24 (1986), for the proposition that Brookside waived its right
to benefit from the accessory use doctrine because it failed to plead the
doctrine before the ZBA. Alfond is inapposite. In Alfond we held that a
defendant in a private nuisance suit has the burden to plead the doctrine and
produce evidence sufficient to permit a prima facie inference that the disputed
3 RSA 674:33, I(a) authorizes zoning boards of adjustment to hear and decide appeals of decisions
of administrative officials enforcing zoning ordinances.
7
use is an accessory one. Alfond, 129 N.H. at 29; see also Treisman v. Kamen,
126 N.H. 372, 377 (1985) (“We therefore hold that when the legality of a
defendant’s conduct is to be judged under a zoning ordinance, the defendant
who claims the benefit of the accessory use doctrine has the burden to raise it
by his pleading.” (emphasis added)). We did not hold that a variance applicant
must alternatively plead the accessory use doctrine. To the extent the
petitioners argue that the pleading requirement of Alfond must apply in the
present case, we disagree. In Treisman, which we relied upon in Alfond, we
explained that considerations of fairness, convenience, and policy require a
defendant in a private nuisance suit to plead reliance on the accessory use
doctrine. See Treisman, 126 N.H. at 377. We conclude, however, that these
considerations do not warrant the imposition of an affirmative pleading
requirement in the variance context where the ZBA must consider what uses of
a property are allowed before it can decide whether unnecessary hardship
exists.4
III
Our rejection of the petitioners’ jurisdictional argument does not end our
analysis. We must still determine whether the trial court correctly ruled that
the Granite Pathways Clubhouse and other similar uses of Brookside’s
property are lawful accessory uses.
We conclude that the trial court lacked a sufficient factual record to
decide the accessory use issue, and that it should have remanded the case to
the ZBA to consider the issue in the first instance. See RSA 677:11 (2008)
(when vacating ZBA decision trial court may remand to the ZBA or local
legislative body for further proceedings); Kalil v. Town of Dummer Zoning Bd. of
Adjustment, 155 N.H. 307, 311 (2007) (trial court may remand to the ZBA for
clarification). While there were isolated references before the ZBA regarding the
uses of Brookside’s property that are reasonably allowed, the evidence and
arguments submitted to the ZBA focused almost exclusively on whether
Brookside had satisfied the variance criteria of RSA 674:33, I(b), not whether
the Granite Pathways Clubhouse and other similar uses of the property are
lawful accessory uses under the ordinance.
Although we have held that whether a particular use is an accessory use
is a question of law, see KSC Realty Trust v. Town of Freedom, 146 N.H. 271,
273 (2001), resolution of the inquiry still requires a sufficiently developed
factual record. See Alfond, 129 N.H. at 30 (prevailing on claim of accessory use
“requires evidence of substantial customary association of the principal and
4 We note that the record refutes the petitioners’ other objection – that they lacked notice that the
trial court might apply the accessory use doctrine. The petitioners’ motion for rehearing of the
ZBA’s decision, petition of appeal to the superior court, and subsequent requests for findings of
fact and rulings of law all reference the issue of accessory use.
8
subordinate uses, whereas evidence of the peculiar character of the property in
question does not address this issue”); 15 P. Loughlin, New Hampshire
Practice, Land Use Planning and Zoning § 9.03, at 174 (4th ed. 2010)
(“Whether a particular use is an accessory use is generally a question of both
law and fact.”). Accordingly, remand is appropriate because the ZBA is the
proper forum for the development of such a record. See Chester Rod and Gun
Club v. Town of Chester, 152 N.H. 577, 583 (2005) (“When reviewing a decision
of a zoning board of adjustment, the superior court acts as an appellate body,
not as a fact finder.”). Of course, in cases where the record demonstrates, as a
matter of law, that the variance applicant’s proposed use is a lawful accessory
use, remand is unnecessary and the trial court may decide the issue in the first
instance. Cf. Lawrence v. Philip Morris USA, 164 N.H. 93, 101 (2012) (no need
to remand if reasonable fact finder would necessarily reach certain conclusion).
But that is not the situation here.
On remand, the ZBA should thoroughly explore the accessory use issue,
giving all interested parties, including the City’s Planning and Community
Development Department, an opportunity to present evidence and arguments
as to whether the Granite Pathways Clubhouse is a lawful accessory use of
Brookside’s property and, if not, whether Brookside should receive a variance.
IV
The foregoing discussion also disposes of Brookside’s cross-appeal.
Given that, on remand, the ZBA must determine whether the Granite Pathways
Clubhouse is a lawful accessory use of Brookside’s property under the
ordinance, we reject Brookside’s claim that sufficient evidence in the record
establishes its entitlement to a variance.
Vacated and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
9