THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2012-705
TOWN OF NEWBURY & a.
v.
NEW HAMPSHIRE FISH AND GAME DEPARTMENT & a.
Argued: April 11, 2013
Opinion Issued: June 28, 2013
Upton & Hatfield, LLP, of Portsmouth (Justin C. Richardson on the joint
brief and orally), for petitioner Town of Newbury.
McLane, Graf, Raulerson & Middleton, PA, of Concord (Gregory H. Smith
on the joint brief), for petitioner Lake Sunapee Protective Association.
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (K. Allen Brooks, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the respondents.
CONBOY, J. The respondents, New Hampshire Fish and Game
Department (F&G) and New Hampshire Council on Resources and
Development (CORD), appeal a decision of the Superior Court (Smukler, J.)
granting summary judgment to the petitioners, Town of Newbury and Lake
Sunapee Protective Association, on their writ of certiorari challenging CORD’s
decision to approve F&G’s design of a boat launch. See RSA 162-C:6 (2002).
The trial court ruled that CORD lacked authority to approve the boat launch
because it is a class III-a public highway and, according to the court, pursuant
to RSA 162-C:6, IV, CORD has no authority to approve “new highway projects.”
We reverse and remand.
The following facts are supported by the record or are otherwise
undisputed. In 1987, the legislature established the Land Conservation
Investment Program (LCIP) to “preserve the natural beauty, landscape, rural
character, natural resources, and high quality of life in New Hampshire by
acquiring lands and interests in lands of statewide, regional, and local
conservation and recreation importance.” RSA 221-A:2 (Supp. 1987) (repealed
1995). The LCIP was authorized to acquire land through negotiations with
landowners. Id. In 1989, the LCIP received an application for it to purchase
approximately 135 acres of land in Newbury known as the “Wild Goose
Property.” A 3.3 acre parcel of the Wild Goose Property abuts Lake Sunapee
(lake frontage parcel). The application provided that the “lake frontage parcel
would be used for public boat launching on Lake Sunapee and as a picnic
area.” With authorization from the Governor and Executive Council, the LCIP
purchased the Wild Goose Property in November 1990.
In 1995, the legislature repealed RSA chapter 221-A, see Laws 1995,
10:16, VII, and transferred management of all land acquired under the LCIP to
CORD, see RSA 162-C:6. CORD assigned management of the lake frontage
parcel to F&G, see RSA 162-C:9 (Supp. 2012), which thereafter functioned as
the lead agency with respect to the design, construction, and maintenance of
the boat launch. In 2009, F&G proposed a design for the boat launch, which
included paving a portion of the lake frontage parcel, creating more than forty
parking spaces, servicing a dual poured-concrete boat ramp, and installing
permanent lighting fixtures.
On April 2, 2012, CORD held a meeting to consider whether F&G’s
design satisfied the goals under RSA 162-C:6. The petitioners objected,
arguing, among other things, that CORD lacked authority to approve the boat
launch. CORD disagreed and found that the design properly balanced the
needs of conservation and public access under RSA 162-C:6.
The petitioners then brought the instant proceeding, seeking, among
other things, a writ of certiorari on the ground that CORD’s decision violated
RSA 162-C:6. The respondents moved for summary judgment. The trial court
denied CORD’s motion and instead entered summary judgment for the
petitioners. Referring to RSA 162-C:6, IV, the court ruled that “CORD is not
authorized by its governing statute to approve the [boat launch] project,” and
2
that if the respondents wished to continue with the proposed boat launch, they
were required to obtain legislative approval. The respondents appealed.
The respondents argue that the trial court erred in ruling that CORD’s
approval of F&G’s design of the boat launch exceeded its authority under RSA
162-C:6. This presents an issue of statutory interpretation. “We are the final
arbiter of the intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of the statute
considered as a whole.” Frost v. Comm’r, N.H. Banking Dep’t, 163 N.H. 365,
374 (2012). “When examining the language of the statute, we ascribe the plain
and ordinary meaning to the words used.” Id. “We interpret legislative intent
from the statute as written and will not consider what the legislature might
have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit to include.” Id.
“We also interpret a statute in the context of the overall statutory scheme and
not in isolation.” Id. We review issues of statutory interpretation de novo. Id.
CORD is charged with managing lands “according to the provisions of
[RSA chapter 162-C] and consistent with agreements entered into with persons
with ownership interests in such lands.” RSA 162-C:6, II. Under RSA 162-C:6,
III, CORD must manage lands “so as to preserve the natural beauty, landscape,
rural character, natural resources, and high quality of life in New Hampshire,”
as well as “maintain and protect benefits derived from such lands and maintain
public access to such lands, where appropriate.” Because CORD holds LCIP
land in trust for the public’s benefit, “no deviation in the uses of any land or
interest in land so acquired [under the LCIP] to uses or purposes not consistent
with the purposes of [RSA chapter 162-C] [is] permitted.” RSA 162-C:10
(2002). “The sale, transfer, conveyance, or release of any such land or interest
in land from public trust is prohibited.” Id. CORD may, however, assign its
responsibilities to other state agencies or municipalities, review such
assignments, and reassign its responsibilities as it deems advisable. See RSA
162-C:9.
RSA 162-C:6, IV provides:
Notwithstanding paragraphs I-III, [CORD] shall recognize that
the interest of public safety and welfare may, from time to time,
require minor expansion, minor modification, or minor alteration of
existing roads within the state highway system. After review and
approval by [CORD], and notwithstanding RSA 162-C:10, the
department of transportation may obtain interests in lands
acquired under the former RSA 221-A [LCIP] adjacent to state
highways. Permissible expansion, modification, or alterations
under this section shall include drainage easements, slope
easements, lane widening, the addition of a passing, climbing, or
turning lane, or similar adjustments, but shall not include
construction of a new highway or portion thereof, construction of a
3
bypass for an existing highway, or similar major alterations.
Approval shall not be granted if reasonable and prudent
alternatives exist nor if individual or cumulative approvals are
likely to materially impair the conservation purposes for which the
parcel was originally protected. Projects determined by the council
to be outside the scope permitted by this subdivision shall require
approval from the general court.
The trial court relied upon RSA 162-C:6, IV in ruling that CORD lacked
statutory authority to approve the boat launch. It found that RSA 162-C:6, IV
“clearly provides that new highway projects are outside the scope of CORD’s
limited authority – they must be approved by the legislature.” The court then
found that boat launches are class III-a highways under RSA 229:5, III-a
(2009), which provides that “[c]lass III-a highways shall consist of new boating
highways from any existing highway to any public water in this state.” The
trial court concluded that “[b]ecause this launch would be new construction,
and because a boat launch is statutorily defined as a highway, CORD is not
authorized by its governing statute to approve the project.” We disagree with
this interpretation.
Section IV is an exception to the statutory mandate that CORD manage
lands pursuant to RSA 162-C:6, I-III and an exception to RSA 162-C:10’s
prohibition against transfers of land from the public trust. It applies, however,
only when the department of transportation (DOT) seeks to “obtain interests in
[LCIP] lands,” thereby removing such interests from the public trust. It is
undisputed that DOT is not an actor here. Even assuming that F&G stands in
DOT’s place for purposes of applying section IV, the exception still does not
apply. There is no evidence in the record that F&G seeks to obtain a legal
interest in LCIP land, and the petitioners do not so contend. Instead, CORD
has delegated its management authority to F&G. Although the trial court
implicitly found that CORD’s delegation of its management authority qualified
as an “interest” under section IV, the petitioners do not press this point, and,
in any event, we disagree with such a reading. The lake frontage parcel
remains in the public trust, and CORD may reassign management of the parcel
at any time. See RSA 162-C:9.
Further, CORD must seek approval from the general court under section
IV only when it concludes that a project is outside the scope of RSA 162-C:6.
Here, CORD has concluded that F&G’s design is consistent with the purposes
set forth under RSA 162-C:6, I-III. In fact, the original purchase application,
which the Governor and Executive Council approved, specifically provided that
the lake frontage parcel would be used for public boat launching. Thus, we do
not construe section IV to limit CORD’s authority to approve F&G’s design of
the boat launch.
4
The petitioners do not endorse the trial court’s interpretation of section
IV. Instead, they contend that the trial court ruled that CORD lacked the
authority to approve the boat launch design because the trial court found that
the design violated sections I-III. There is nothing in the trial court’s order to
support this contention. The trial court’s logic is clear: (1) section IV states
that CORD has no authority to approve the construction of a new highway; (2)
a boat launch is a highway; and (3) therefore, CORD has no authority to
approve the boat launch’s design.
Because we conclude that the trial court erred when it ruled that CORD
lacked the authority to approve the boat launch design merely because the
boat launch is a class III-a highway, we reverse its ruling and remand for the
court to decide the petitioners’ remaining claims, including whether approval of
the boat launch design violated sections II and III.
Reversed and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and LYNN and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
5