THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2012-0387, Bilden Properties, LLC & a. v. S.
Gerald Birin & a., the court on September 30, 2013, issued the
following order:
After review of the defendant’s motion for reconsideration, the court
modifies the slip opinion as set forth below. In all other respects, the defendant’s
motion for reconsideration is denied.
The slip opinion dated August 21, 2013, is modified by deleting the first
two full paragraphs on page 5 of the slip opinion and by replacing them with the
following:
That inference may be rebutted in this case only if searching the
grantor index under the name “Austin James Development, LLC” does
not constitute a “reasonable inquiry.” The petitioners argue that such a
search would not have constituted a “reasonable inquiry” because
information from the Secretary of State established that no entity named
“Austin James Development, LLC” existed. However, New Hampshire
has rejected the theory that an unregistered foreign limited liability
company does not exist for legal purposes. See RSA 304-C:63, I, :69,
II(a) (2005) (repealed and reenacted as RSA 304-C:174, I, :180, II(a)
(Supp. 2012)); cf. Zenane, Inc. v. Tofer, 127 N.H. 366, 367 (1985)
(discussing similar statutory scheme related to unregistered
corporations).
Under New Hampshire law, creating a mortgage, securing debts, and
owning real property do not constitute “doing business” for the purposes
of the statute requiring foreign limited liability companies to register with
the Secretary of State. RSA 304-C:63, I(g), (h), (i). Similarly, by statute,
“[t]he failure of a foreign limited liability company to register in New
Hampshire does not impair . . . [t]he validity of any contract or act of the
foreign limited liability company.” RSA 304-C:69, II(a). Although we
need not decide whether the title abstractor or her supervising attorney
was negligent, we conclude that it was not reasonable, as a matter of
law, to cease investigating upon learning that Austin James
Development, LLC was not registered with the Secretary of State.
Reconsideration denied:
slip opinion modified.
Dalianis, C.J., and Hicks, Conboy, Lynn and Bassett, JJ., concurred.
Eileen Fox,
Clerk