THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2012-214
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
MATTHEW TABALDI
Argued: May 9, 2013
Opinion Issued: October 1, 2013
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Susan P. McGinnis, senior
assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
James B. Reis, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief and
orally, for the defendant.
CONBOY, J. The defendant, Matthew Tabaldi, appeals his convictions,
following a jury trial, for the sale of a narcotic drug (cocaine), see RSA 318-B:2,
I (2011); possession of narcotic drugs (crack cocaine and cocaine), see id.; felon
in possession of an electronic defense weapon, see RSA 159:21 (2002); and
receiving stolen property (a firearm), see RSA 637:7 (2007). He argues that the
Superior Court (Lewis, J.) erred by: (1) denying his motion to strike a
prospective juror; (2) denying his motions to dismiss the possession of an
electronic defense weapon and possession of crack cocaine charges; and (3)
admitting certain evidence over his objection. We affirm all of the defendant’s
convictions except his conviction for being a felon in possession of an electronic
defense weapon. We reverse that conviction with prejudice because we
conclude that the evidence was insufficient to convict him of that charge. See
State v. Gordon, 161 N.H. 410, 418 (2011) (“[I]f the evidence was insufficient to
support the conviction, the Double Jeopardy Clauses of both the New
Hampshire and United States Constitutions . . . preclude a new trial.”).
I. Background
The jury could have found the following facts. On March 25, 2009,
Heather Taylor was the target of a drug investigation conducted by the New
Hampshire Police Narcotics Investigation Unit. The police suspected that
Taylor was transporting large quantities of heroin and cocaine from
Massachusetts into New Hampshire. The police planned a “controlled buy.” In
a controlled buy, the police use a confidential informant (CI) to purchase drugs
from a target using paper currency that has been documented by the recording
of the bills’ serial numbers (also known as “buy money”). In a controlled buy,
officers search the CI before and after sending him or her to purchase the
drugs to ensure that the CI does not have unaccounted-for money or
contraband. Officers also conduct surveillance of the CI and the target during
the investigation.
The police planned for a female CI to purchase drugs from Taylor on
March 25. The plan was for the CI to go to Taylor’s residence in Rochester,
accompany her to Massachusetts, and then return with her to New Hampshire.
At approximately 9:00 a.m., State Police Trooper Bryan Trask, Sergeant Ellen
Arcieri, and a detective from the Rochester Police Department met with the CI.
They searched the CI and her belongings and vehicle, and found no money or
contraband. Trask then supplied the CI with $300 in documented bills (the
buy money).
At 11:40 a.m., the CI drove to Taylor’s residence in Rochester, and police
officers followed. Officers observed the CI enter the residence, where she
remained for between sixty and ninety minutes. While the CI was inside the
residence, however, the target of the investigation changed from Taylor to the
defendant. The CI and Taylor left Taylor’s residence and drove together to a
residence in North Hampton that the defendant shared with Kenneth
Vaillancourt. Surveillance units followed.
At approximately 2:00 p.m., the CI and Taylor arrived at the North
Hampton house. Vaillancourt was at work. Approximately forty-five minutes
after entering the house, the CI exited alone, got into her car, and drove
directly to a prearranged meeting place. There, she gave Trask a small plastic
baggie containing cocaine. After receiving the cocaine, officers searched the CI,
2
her vehicle, and her belongings for other contraband, and again found none.
She no longer had the buy money.
Thereafter, the defendant and Taylor emerged from the residence and
drove away in a gray BMW. The defendant was driving and Taylor was sitting
in the front passenger’s seat. Officers then conducted a motor vehicle stop,
took the defendant and Taylor into custody, and transported them to the police
station. Trask applied for warrants to search the defendant, Taylor, and the
BMW.
Before the warrants were issued, Taylor identified certain items in the
BMW belonging to her, including a green and purple backpack on the front
passenger’s side floor, a purse on the front passenger’s seat, and a black
backpack in the trunk. She consented to a search of those items as well as her
person. Officers found nothing of significance in the backpacks, but in the
purse they found crack cocaine pipes, brass knuckles, lighters, scissors, a
syringe, a first aid kit, and a digital scale. There was testimony at trial that the
buy money was found on the defendant’s person.
Upon executing a search warrant for the BMW, officers found a black bag
under the rear passenger’s seat. The bag’s contents – including laptop
computers with content linked to the defendant, mail addressed to the
defendant, and a notebook entitled “Matthew Tabaldi’s usernames and
passcodes” – indicated that the bag belonged to the defendant. Other items in
the bag included: a ledger, plastic baggies, a white powder used as a cutting
agent to dilute the strength of drugs, a weight for calibrating a scale, and a
small torch commonly used for quickly heating drugs. The bag also contained
a device police referred to as a “taser.” Additionally, officers discovered a black
case under the driver’s seat, which contained drug paraphernalia, including
spoons, plastic tubing, copper mesh, and a hypodermic needle. Officers also
discovered a digital scale in the pocket of a canvas guitar bag behind the
driver’s seat, crack cocaine pipes in a black canvas bag on the front
passenger’s seat, and another crack cocaine pipe in the pocket of a jacket on
that seat. Finally, a Newport cigarette box containing crack cocaine was found
between the driver’s seat and the center console.
Officers also executed a search warrant at Vaillancourt’s residence. In
the defendant’s bedroom they found, among other things, an open box of
plastic sandwich bags and a white powdered substance that later tested
positive for cocaine. On August 20, 2009, the defendant met with Trask and
Arcieri at the State Police barracks in Epping, and told them that he dealt
drugs. During a recorded telephone call with Taylor on October 2, 2011, the
defendant discussed the events of March 25 with her saying, “I had to wait for
a girl and make a sale.” Taylor responded, “Don’t be hating. Don’t be hating.”
The defendant responded, “Hating? I’m doing a long time for this.”
3
II. Discussion
A. Motion to Strike Juror
During jury selection, the venire was advised that the defendant was a
convicted felon. A prospective juror, H.S., thereafter explained to the trial
court, “[H]earing that a gentleman in the defendant’s chair is a convicted felon
just makes me a little – somewhat concerned for the charges brought against
him.” When asked if she would be able to put her concern aside, the juror
indicated, “I will do my best.” The trial court then engaged in the following
exchange with H.S.:
Court: And you’re going to hear about this, but you’re going to
need to expressly and affirmatively be able to say to me that’s --
I’m not trying this case on the basis of someone’s reputation or his
past.
H.S.: Yes, sir.
Court: Whether or not the State has proven the case here, beyond
a reasonable doubt.
H.S.: Okay.
Court: So you need to be focused in on the evidence here.
H.S.: Yes, sir. Okay.
Court: You can do that?
H.S.: Yes, sir.
Defense counsel moved to strike H.S. for cause on the basis of her
“reservations.” The trial court denied the motion. H.S. was later stricken
following the parties’ use of their peremptory challenges. See RSA 606:3, III
(2001); see also RSA 606:4, III (2001).
The defendant argues that the trial court erred in denying his motion to
strike H.S. for cause, and that the error violated his rights to an impartial jury
under the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution and Part I,
Articles 15, 17, 21, and 35 of the New Hampshire Constitution. We first
address the defendant’s claim under the State Constitution and rely upon
federal law only to aid our analysis. See State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33
(1983).
4
Part I, Article 35 of the State Constitution provides, “It is the right of
every citizen to be tried by judges as impartial as the lot of humanity will
admit.” “This provision for judicial impartiality is applicable as well to jurors.”
State v. Town, 163 N.H. 790, 793 (2012). “[I]t is a fundamental precept of our
system of justice that a defendant has the right to be tried by a fair and
impartial jury.” Id. at 793-94 (quotation omitted).
“Generally, a juror is presumed to be impartial.” Id. at 794. “A juror is
considered impartial if the juror can lay aside her impression or opinion and
render a verdict based on the evidence presented in court.” Id. (quotation
omitted). “When a juror’s impartiality is questioned, however, the trial court
has a duty to determine whether the juror is indifferent.” Id. “If it appears that
any juror is not indifferent, he shall be set aside on that trial.” RSA 500-A:12,
II (2010); Town, 163 N.H. at 794. “Indifference or impartiality is not a technical
conception. It is a state of mind.” State v. Weir, 138 N.H. 671, 673 (1994)
(quotation omitted). The trial court’s determination of the impartiality of the
jurors selected is essentially a question of demeanor and credibility and, thus,
is entitled to special deference. Id. at 673-74. “We will not disturb the trial
court’s ruling absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion or a finding that
the trial judge’s decision was against the weight of the evidence.” Town, 163
N.H. at 794.
In Town, we considered an argument similar to that presented here. The
defendant in Town was accused of aggravated felonious sexual assault. Id. at
791. A potential juror expressed concerns regarding her ability to be impartial.
Id. at 794. The juror revealed that she had been the victim of sexual assault
and also stated, “I think I need to do this.” Id. (quotation omitted). She then
reiterated that she was “not sure” whether she could be fair and impartial. Id.
(quotation omitted). Although the trial court twice asked her if she could put
aside her personal circumstances and judge the case based solely upon the
evidence presented, each time she merely indicated that she would “try.” Id.
(quotation omitted). We reversed the defendant’s conviction, concluding that
the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion in finding that the juror
was qualified to sit on the jury. Id. at 791, 795. We held that the juror’s
“indication that she would ‘try’ to be fair and impartial, without more, was
insufficient to establish that she could lay aside her impression or opinion and
render a verdict based on the evidence presented in court.” Id. at 794
(quotation omitted).
This case is similar to Town in that H.S. initially stated that she would
“do her best” to put aside her concerns regarding the defendant’s status as a
convicted felon. Here, however, the trial court probed further, asking a number
of questions, including whether H.S. would “affirmatively be able to say” that
she would “not try[ ] this case on the basis of someone’s reputation or his
5
past.” H.S. responded, “Yes, sir.” On this record, we conclude that the trial
court satisfied its duty to determine whether H.S. was impartial and that the
juror’s responses supported the trial court’s denial of the defendant’s motion to
strike H.S. for cause. Having concluded that the trial court did not err when it
determined that H.S. was impartial, we need not address the defendant’s
arguments based upon his assumption that the juror was not impartial.
Because the State Constitution provides at least as much protection as the
Federal Constitution on this issue, we reach the same conclusion under the
Federal Constitution. See Weir, 138 N.H. at 673.
B. Sufficiency of the Evidence
The defendant argues that the trial court erred when it denied his
motions to dismiss for insufficient evidence the felon in possession of an
electronic defense weapon and possession of crack cocaine charges. “To prevail
upon a sufficiency of the evidence challenge, the defendant must prove that no
rational trier of fact, viewing all of the evidence and all reasonable inferences
from it in the light most favorable to the State, could have found guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt.” State v. Trebian, 164 N.H. 629, 632 (2013). “When the
evidence is solely circumstantial, it must exclude all rational conclusions
except guilt.” Id. “Under this standard, however, we still consider the evidence
in the light most favorable to the State and examine each evidentiary item in
context, not in isolation.” Id. “The proper analysis is not whether every
possible conclusion consistent with innocence has been excluded, but, rather,
whether all such rational conclusions based upon the evidence have been
excluded.” Id. We review the entire trial record because the defendant chose to
present evidence after the trial court denied his motions to dismiss. See State
v. Dion, 164 N.H. 544, 548 (2013). Even though a defendant is not required to
present a case, if he chooses to do so, he takes the chance that evidence
presented in his case may assist in proving the State’s case. Id.
1. Felon in Possession
To convict a defendant of being a felon in possession of an electronic
defense weapon, the State must prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, that: (1)
the defendant was a convicted felon; and (2) he possessed “an electronic
defense weapon away from the premises where he resides.” RSA 159:21. RSA
159:20, I (2002) defines an electronic defense weapon as “an electronically
activated non-lethal device which is designed for or capable of producing an
electrical charge of sufficient magnitude to immobilize or incapacitate a person
temporarily.”
The defendant stipulated at trial that he was a convicted felon. He
contends that the evidence was insufficient because the State failed to prove,
beyond a reasonable doubt, that the device found in his possession was
6
“designed for or capable of producing an electrical charge of sufficient
magnitude to immobilize or incapacitate a person temporarily.” We agree.
The only evidence at trial regarding the capability of the device was
Trask’s testimony. Over the defendant’s objection, Trask testified that, while
searching the defendant’s black bag, he found a device that he described as a
taser. He then testified:
Q And that, just so we’re clear, . . . you yourself carry a Taser,
I imagine?
A Yes.
Q As part of your work?
A Yes.
Q Okay. That obvious – what’s in front of us here . . .
obviously differs from the weapon you carry.
A Correct.
Q Okay. But when you characterized it as a Taser, did you
take a look at it [at] all on the day you discovered it – on the day
you found it back on March 25th of 2009.
A I did. I actually activated it.
Q What happened when you activated it?
A When I activated it, there were blue sparks that arched
between the two electrodes . . . . Depending on [how] you use it,
there would be electricity that would flow from one side to the
other side.
Q And you could see that?
A I could see that.
Q Okay.
A And you could hear the crackling of the electricity going
back and forth.
Q Okay. And how does it appear to be powered?
7
A By a nine-volt battery.
Q Okay. And this was obviously some time ago that this was
discovered. As far as you’re aware, is the battery still working or is
it out?
A No, it’s dead at this point.
The State presented no other evidence to prove the charge.
This testimony was insufficient, as a matter of law, to establish that the
taser Trask discovered was designed for, or capable of, producing the requisite
electrical charge. Trask’s testimony that the device was a “taser” from which
he observed “sparks” and could hear “the crackling of electricity,” even when
viewed in the light most favorable to the State, was insufficient to allow a
rational juror to conclude, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the device was
designed for or capable of the requisite electrical charge. Cf. People v. Racy, 56
Cal. Rptr. 3d 455, 460 (Ct. App. 2007) (“[T]he effects of a stun gun, unlike the
effects of more typically used weapons such as knives or handguns, are
matters beyond the experience of average jurors.”).
Because the evidence was insufficient to establish, beyond a reasonable
doubt, one of the elements of the charge of felon in possession of an electrical
defense weapon, we reverse, with prejudice, the defendant’s conviction on that
charge. See Gordon, 161 N.H. at 418.
2. Possession of Crack Cocaine
The possession of crack cocaine charge alleged that the defendant
knowingly “had in his possession, or under his control, . . . a quantity of the
narcotic drug crack cocaine.” To gain a conviction for possession of a
controlled substance, the State must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that a
defendant: (1) had knowledge of the nature of the drug; (2) had knowledge of
its presence in his vicinity; and (3) had custody of the drug and exercised
dominion and control over it. State v. Smalley, 148 N.H. 66, 68 (2002). The
defendant challenges only the State’s proof that he had custody of the crack
cocaine.
When a drug is not found in a defendant’s physical possession, the State
must prove constructive possession. Id. “Constructive possession can be
inferred from incriminating statements or circumstances linking the defendant
to the drugs, such as personal possessions found near the drugs.” Id. at 69
(quotation omitted). “[C]onstructive possession of drugs need not be exclusive.”
Id. (quotation omitted).
8
The defendant argues that the evidence was insufficient to establish that
he constructively possessed the crack cocaine. Specifically, he argues that “the
evidence could have just as likely supported the conclusion that the cigarette
box, and thus the crack cocaine, belonged to Taylor.” Thus, he contends, the
evidence was insufficient because it failed to exclude all rational conclusions
except guilt. See Trebian, 164 N.H. at 632.
Although the defendant also intimates that the evidence could also have
supported a conclusion that the cigarette box belonged to Vaillancourt, he does
not develop this argument. Nor does the record establish that he raised this
argument in the trial court. Accordingly, we do not consider it.
We conclude that a rational juror, viewing the evidence and all
reasonable inferences from it in the light most favorable to the State, could
have found, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the defendant constructively
possessed the crack cocaine. The crack cocaine was found in a location over
which the defendant could exercise dominion and control. He was the driver of
the vehicle; the cigarette box was found between the driver’s seat and the
center console. Additionally, several of his possessions were located near the
crack cocaine, including his black bag containing drug paraphernalia.
“[P]ersonal possessions of the defendant [found] in close proximity to the
controlled substance may provide a sufficiently close nexus between the
defendant and the substance to allow the jury to infer possession.” Smalley,
148 N.H. at 69 (quotation omitted).
Although the defendant argues that the crack cocaine could have
belonged to Taylor, “the jury could have drawn reasonable inferences based
upon the evidence presented and concluded that [it] belonged to the
defendant.” State v. Duran, 162 N.H. 369, 373 (2011); see United States v.
Howard, 687 F.3d 13, 20–21 (1st Cir. 2012) (it was within jury’s prerogative to
choose which inference regarding constructive possession was most worthy of
belief). The State did not have to establish that the defendant had exclusive
constructive possession of the crack cocaine. See Smalley, 148 N.H. at 69.
Here, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, we
conclude that a rational juror could have reasonably found, beyond a
reasonable doubt, that the defendant constructively possessed the crack
cocaine. Accordingly, we hold that the evidence was sufficient to convict the
defendant of the possession of crack cocaine charge.
C. Evidentiary Issues
1. Buy Money
9
The defendant challenges on both evidentiary and State and Federal
Confrontation Clause grounds the admission of Trask’s testimony that the buy
money was found on the defendant’s person. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 15;
U.S. CONST. amends. VI, XIV. He argues that the evidence was inadmissible
hearsay, see N.H. R. Ev. 801, and that its admission violated his rights to
confront witnesses against him guaranteed by the Federal and State
Constitutions.
We first address the defendant’s arguments under the New Hampshire
Rules of Evidence. See State v. Hodgkiss, 132 N.H. 376, 379 (1989) (We follow
strong policy not to address constitutional arguments unless required.). “We
accord the trial court considerable deference in determining the admissibility of
evidence, and we will not disturb its decision absent an unsustainable exercise
of discretion.” State v. Munroe, 161 N.H. 618, 626 (2011). “To demonstrate an
unsustainable exercise of discretion, the defendant must show that the trial
court’s ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his
case.” Id.
The defendant challenges the following testimony by Trask:
Q And in particular, did you come in to contact with money that
you understood to have been taken off the Defendant’s person
following that stop?
A Yes, I did.
Q Okay. And how much currency was that?
A It was $582 at the time on his person.
Q Was any portion of that currency the same money that had
been given to the CI?
A Yes, it was. The 300 that I had serialized were -- was located
[on] him. It was part of that five hundred –
. . . .
Q So of that . . . 582, 300 of it was the money that you had given
to the CI and had recorded the serial numbers?
A Yes.
. . . .
10
Q So you didn’t take any property from [the defendant] yourself?
A I did not.
Q You testified yesterday that you were given money that was
taken from [the defendant]?
A Yes.
Q Okay. So that means somebody told you that they did that?
A Correct.
The defendant contends that this testimony constitutes hearsay. We agree.
Hearsay is “a statement, other than one made by the declarant while testifying
at the trial or hearing, offered in evidence to prove the truth of the matter
asserted.” N.H. R. Ev. 801. A statement that is not offered to prove the truth
of the matter asserted is not hearsay. See id.; see also State v. Pelletier, 149
N.H. 243, 253 (2003). “Hearsay is not admissible except as provided by [the
rules of evidence] or by other rules prescribed by the Supreme Court pursuant
to statutory authority.” N.H. R. Ev. 802.
Trask’s testimony that he “understood” that the buy money had been
taken from the defendant constitutes inadmissible hearsay. His testimony
introduced, indirectly, an out-of-court statement by another declarant that the
buy money was found on the defendant’s person. This out-of-court statement
was introduced for the truth of what it asserted – that, in fact, the buy money
was found on the defendant’s person. “If the purpose of testimony is to use an
out-of-court statement to prove the truth of facts stated, the hearsay objection
cannot be eliminated by eliciting the content of the statement in an indirect
form.” 2 McCormick on Evidence § 249, at 196 (Kenneth S. Broun ed., 7th ed.
2013). “Thus, when offered as proof of the facts asserted, testimony regarding
‘information received’ by the witness and the results of investigations made by
other persons are properly classified as hearsay.” Id. at 196-97; see United
States v. Baker, 432 F.3d 1189, 1209 (11th Cir. 2005) (investigator’s statement
about what he learned upon arriving at shooting scene was inadmissible
hearsay); United States v. Hernandez, 750 F.2d 1256, 1257 (5th Cir. 1985)
(testimony that Federal Drug Enforcement Administration was made aware
that defendant was a drug smuggler constituted inadmissible hearsay); Ikemire
v. State, 852 N.E.2d 640, 644 (Ind. Ct. App. 2006) (asking police officer to
testify about what he “learned” after questioning a witness elicited a hearsay
response). Accordingly, although Trask’s testimony introduced the out-of-court
statement indirectly, it, nonetheless, constitutes inadmissible hearsay.
11
Trask’s testimony that someone told him that the buy money was found
on the defendant is also inadmissible hearsay. The statement was made by
someone other than Trask (the testifying declarant) and was offered to prove
the truth of the matter asserted (that the buy money was found on the
defendant).
The State’s arguments for a contrary conclusion are unpersuasive. The
State first asserts that Trask’s testimony was admitted for “the limited purpose
of explaining why Trask had compared the serial numbers on the bills.” This is
not supported by the record. Trask never testified that he compared the serial
numbers on the bills. He testified only that the money taken from the
defendant included the buy money. He never testified about how he
determined this to be the case.
Moreover, the trial court stated that it allowed the testimony to show “the
procedure that [Trask] worked on,” which included “where the money came
from.” The trial court expressly allowed Trask to testify that someone had
“represented to him” that the buy money came from the defendant. Thus, the
“procedure” about which the trial court allowed Trask to testify included the
hearsay statement, admitted for the truth of what it asserted.
Alternatively, the State contends that because the defendant “refused”
the trial court’s offer to give a limiting instruction, “he cannot claim that he was
prejudiced by the court’s failure to do so.” Because the “procedure” about
which the court allowed Trask to testify included the fact that Trask was told
that the buy money was found on the defendant, this is one of those rare cases
in which a curative instruction, even if it had been given, would not have cured
the prejudice. See State v. LaBranche, 118 N.H. 176, 179-80 (1978).
The State next invokes the invited error doctrine. Under that doctrine, “a
party may not avail himself of error into which he has led the trial court.”
State v. Bain, 145 N.H. 367, 370 (2000) (quotation omitted). The State
contends that on direct examination, Trask merely testified that he
“understood” that the buy money had been found on the defendant. It was not
until cross-examination that Trask testified that someone told him that this
was the case. The State asserts that “because it was the defendant who elicited
the testimony that the money had in fact been taken from him, he cannot now
claim that he was prejudiced by that testimony.” The State’s effort to
distinguish Trask’s testimony on direct examination from his testimony on
cross-examination is unavailing. As discussed previously, Trask’s testimony
on both direct and cross-examination constitutes inadmissible hearsay.
Trask’s testimony on both direct and cross-examination referred to the same
out-of-court statement by another declarant.
12
The State argues that even if Trask’s testimony constituted inadmissible
hearsay, the error was harmless because there was overwhelming alternative
evidence that the defendant sold the cocaine to the CI. We agree.
“An error is harmless if we can say beyond a reasonable doubt that it did
not affect the verdict.” State v. Beede, 156 N.H. 102, 109 (2007). “The State
bears the burden of proving that an error is harmless.” Id. “The evaluation of
whether the State has met its burden involves consideration of the alternative
evidence presented at trial and the character of the contested evidence.” Id.
“An error may be harmless beyond a reasonable doubt if the alternative
evidence of the defendant’s guilt is of an overwhelming nature, quantity or
weight, and if the contested evidence is merely cumulative or inconsequential
in relation to the strength of the State’s evidence of guilt.” Id.
We conclude that the State has established, beyond a reasonable doubt,
that the defendant’s conviction for selling cocaine was not affected by
admission of Trask’s testimony that the buy money was found on the
defendant’s person. The sale of narcotic drug (cocaine) charge alleged that the
defendant knowingly “sold a quantity of the narcotic drug Cocaine . . . to a
cooperating individual working with the New Hampshire State Police.”
Accordingly, for the jury to convict the defendant of this charge, the State had
to prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the defendant knowingly sold
cocaine to the CI.
The alternative evidence of the defendant’s guilt on this charge was
multi-faceted. Substantial evidence linked him to the controlled buy, which
occurred at Vaillancourt’s residence, where the defendant lived. Moreover, the
defendant admitted to Taylor that, on March 25, 2009, the day on which the
controlled buy occurred, he “had to wait for a girl and make a sale.” From this
statement, the jury reasonably could have inferred that the “girl” to whom he
referred was the CI and that the “sale” he made on March 25 was the sale of
cocaine to the CI. He also told Taylor that he would be “doing a long time for
this.” The two statements in context allowed the jury reasonably to infer that
the defendant would be “doing a long time” for selling cocaine to the CI.
Additionally, there was substantial evidence that the defendant regularly
sold drugs. The defendant admitted to the police that he was involved in drug
dealing. Further, when the police searched the defendant’s bedroom, the police
found an open box of plastic sandwich bags that “were indicative of packaging
drugs for distribution.” They also found a white powdered substance on the
defendant’s desk, which tested positive for cocaine. Moreover, a bag found in
the BMW with items indicating that the bag belonged to the defendant also
contained a ledger, plastic sandwich bags, a small bag containing a cutting
agent, and a weight for calibrating a scale.
13
We conclude that, given the extent and nature of the alternative evidence
of the defendant’s guilt on this charge, such evidence was overwhelming and
that the inadmissible testimony was inconsequential to it. Accordingly, we
hold that any error in admitting the challenged testimony was harmless beyond
a reasonable doubt. Although the defendant contends that admitting Trask’s
testimony violated his rights under the State and Federal Confrontation
Clauses, our conclusion that any error was harmless beyond a reasonable
doubt is dispositive of those claims. See State v. Hernandez, 159 N.H. 394,
401-02 (2009) (applying harmless error review to admission of evidence in
violation of State and Federal Confrontation Clauses).
2. Photographs
The defendant next asserts that the trial court erred when it admitted
two photographs that he asserts unfairly prejudiced the jury. One photograph
was of the defendant, leaning back in a car seat and holding fanned-out paper
currency in his hand. The second is a photograph that the police took of the
first photograph tucked into the frame of a mirror, surrounded by photographs
of the defendant’s son. The defendant concedes that the second photograph
was taken to document the location of the first photograph.
The defendant contends that both photographs were irrelevant. See N.H.
R. Ev. 401, 402. He also argues that even if the photographs were marginally
relevant, they were inadmissible under New Hampshire Rules of Evidence 403
and 404(b) because their limited probative value was substantially outweighed
by the danger of unfair prejudice.
“We review challenges to a trial court’s evidentiary rulings under our
unsustainable exercise of discretion standard and reverse only if the rulings
are clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of a party’s case.” State
v. Brooks, 164 N.H. 272, 283 (2012) (quotation omitted). In determining
whether a ruling is a proper exercise of judicial discretion, we consider whether
the record establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the discretionary
decision made. State v. Noucas, 165 N.H. ___, ___ (decided July 16, 2013).
The defendant bears the burden of demonstrating that the trial court’s ruling
was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Id.
Under Rule 401, evidence is relevant if it has “any tendency to make the
existence of any fact that is of consequence to the determination of the action
more probable or less probable than it would be without the evidence.” N.H. R.
Ev. 401. Irrelevant evidence is inadmissible. N.H. R. Ev. 402.
Here, we conclude that the trial court reasonably determined that the
challenged photographs were relevant to demonstrate that the defendant had
dominion and control over the room in which the police found the cocaine and
14
incriminating items. Proof of this fact was necessary to prove the possession of
cocaine charge. See Trebian, 164 N.H. at 632. The charge alleged that the
defendant knowingly “had in his possession, or under his control . . . a
quantity of the narcotic drug cocaine.” The cocaine at issue was found in the
bedroom.
To establish that the defendant constructively possessed the cocaine, the
State had to prove more than that he and Vaillancourt shared occupancy of
Vaillancourt’s home. See State v. Cartier, 133 N.H. 217, 221 (1990); State v.
Comeau, 114 N.H. 431, 435 (1974) (evidence sufficient to establish
constructive possession of drugs when evidence showed, among other things,
that defendant had access to room where marijuana plants were found and
kept personal possessions there). Although the defendant contends that the
fact that he occupied the bedroom “was not . . . genuinely disputed,” because
he did not stipulate that he knew the cocaine was in his room and that he had
custody of and exercised dominion and control over it, the State retained the
burden of proving these facts beyond a reasonable doubt. See Trebian, 164
N.H. at 632.
Under the balancing test common to Rules 403 and 404(b), we examine
whether the probative value of the evidence is substantially outweighed by the
danger of unfair prejudice to the defendant. State v. Marti, 140 N.H. 692, 694
(1996). “Under both rules, evidence is unfairly prejudicial if its primary
purpose or effect is to appeal to a jury’s sympathies, arouse its sense of horror,
provoke its instinct to punish, or trigger other mainsprings of human action
that may cause a jury to base its decision on something other than the
established propositions in the case.” Id. (quotation omitted). “Unfair
prejudice is not, of course, mere detriment to a defendant from the tendency of
the evidence to prove guilt, in which sense all evidence offered by the
prosecution is meant to be prejudicial.” State v. Nightingale, 160 N.H. 569,
574 (2010). “Rather, the prejudice required to predicate reversible error is an
undue tendency to induce a decision against the defendant on some improper
basis, commonly one that is emotionally charged.” Id. Among the factors we
consider in weighing the evidence are: (1) whether the evidence would have a
great emotional impact upon a jury; (2) its potential for appealing to a juror’s
sense of resentment or outrage; and (3) the extent to which the issue upon
which it is offered is established by other evidence, stipulation or inference. Id.
at 574-75.
“The trial court is in the best position to gauge the prejudicial impact of
particular testimony, and what steps, if any, are necessary to remedy that
prejudice.” Id. at 575 (quotation omitted). “Thus, we give the trial court broad
latitude when ruling on the admissibility of potentially unfairly prejudicial
evidence.” Id.
15
The trial court reasonably concluded that the probative value of the
photographs was not substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair
prejudice to the defendant. In the context of this case, we cannot say that a
photograph of the defendant holding fanned-out paper currency in his hand
was likely to have any greater emotional impact on the jury than the other
evidence tending to show that he regularly sold drugs. See id. Although the
photograph “may have been prejudicial, we cannot conclude that [it] was so
inflammatory as to substantially outweigh its probative value.” Id. (quotation
omitted).
The defendant contends that the juxtaposition of the images in the police
photograph, which showed the photograph of the defendant holding the money
and two photographs of his son, “served to elicit a sense of sympathy for the
child . . . , and to provoke the jury’s instinct to punish [the defendant] in an
effort to protect the child.” We find this speculative, conclusory argument
unpersuasive.
For all of the above reasons, we conclude that the trial court did not
unsustainably exercise its discretion when it admitted the photographs into
evidence.
Affirmed in part; and reversed
in part.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, LYNN and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
16