THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Department of Environmental Services
No. 2012-405
APPEAL OF THOMAS MORRISSEY & a.
(New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services)
Argued: April 17, 2013
Opinion Issued: June 5, 2013
Bernstein, Shuer, Sawyer & Nelson, P.A., of Manchester (Gregory E.
Michael and Christopher G. Aslin on the brief, and Mr. Aslin orally), for the
petitioners.
Nelson Kinder + Mosseau PC, of Manchester (Christopher D. Hawkins and
Robert F. Callaghan, Jr. on the brief, and Mr. Hawkins orally), for the
respondent.
DALIANIS, C. J. The petitioners, Thomas Morrissey, Margaret Russell,
Dorothy Sears, Reginald Rogers, Richard and Barbara Sanders, Patricia
Reynolds, John Chamberlain, John Quimby, Michael O'Donnell, and Robert
and Judith Dupuis, appeal a ruling of the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services (DES) Wetlands Council (Council) affirming the
issuance by the Wetlands Bureau (Bureau) of a wetlands permit to the
respondent, Town of Lyme (Town). The petitioners argue that, when issuing
the permit, the Bureau and Council did not consider the total wetlands impact
of the proposed project because they misinterpreted the scope of our ruling in
Morrissey v. Town of Lyme, 162 N.H. 777, 779 (2011) (Morrissey I) and DES’s
authority under RSA chapter 482-A. We vacate and remand.
The following facts are drawn from the record and our opinion in
Morrissey I. The petitioners own properties with frontage on Post Pond and the
west side of the Clay Brook wetlands. Morrissey I, 162 N.H. at 779. The Town
owns property on the east side of the Clay Brook wetlands as well as a
contiguous parcel with frontage on Post Pond, which is used as a recreation
area. Id. In December 2004, DES determined that the natural mean high
water mark for Post Pond corresponds to a level of three feet on the local staff
gauge. Id. Subsequently, the Town modified its water release policy to permit
the breaching of beaver dams, which had historically controlled the water level
of the pond and wetlands, when the water level exceeds the natural mean high
water mark. Id.
In 2006, the Town obtained a standard dredge and fill permit under RSA
chapter 482-A to install a beaver pipe through the controlling beaver dam in
Clay Brook and stabilize the water level at the natural mean high water mark.
Id. Under RSA chapter 482-A, the wetlands statute, a dredge and fill permit is
required before one can “excavate, remove, fill, dredge or construct any
structures in or on any bank, flat, marsh, or swamp in and adjacent to any
waters of the state.” RSA 482-A:3, I(a) (Supp. 2012). In 2007, the Town
installed two additional beaver pipes without first obtaining a permit.
Morrissey I, 162 N.H. at 779. In 2008, the Town again changed its water
release policy to maintain the water level at two feet on the local staff gauge,
thus lowering the water level and increasing the size of the recreation area.
The Town then lowered the two beaver pipes it had installed in 2007, which
resulted in a water level of one foot seven inches on the local staff gauge. Id.
Shortly thereafter, the Town breached the controlling beaver dam, dropping the
water level to one foot three inches. Id.
In July 2008, the Bureau issued a Letter of Deficiency to the Town,
“request[ing] the retention of a certified wetland scientist to delineate the
wetlands on its property and the submission of after-the-fact permit
applications to retain the unauthorized wetland impacts.” In July 2009, the
Town submitted two applications to the Bureau: an after-the-fact permit
application to retain the two unpermitted beaver pipes it had installed in 2007
and an application to add fill to the recreation area bordering the pond. The
petitioners objected to both. On October 21, 2009, the Bureau held a public
hearing on both applications. In December 2009, it denied the after-the-fact
permit application, but granted the permit to add fill (“add-fill permit”).
The petitioners moved for reconsideration, arguing that the Town’s
“overall plan [wa]s to raise the [recreation] field and lower the pond as part of
this single project,” and that the permit was based upon an application that
was “incomplete at best, and mis-leading at worst,” because it did not address
2
all the wetlands impacts of the proposed project. The Bureau denied
reconsideration, stating that DES lacked authority to regulate the Town’s
activity relative to the water level of Post Pond. It explained:
DES wetlands regulations have no authority relative to controlling
the level of the pond . . . . The Town has the authority to set and
lower the water level in the pond by local determination . . . . The
DES wetlands regulations have no authority to control the water
level in Post Pond – the water level is determined by the Town of
Lyme. . . . [T]he effect of the change in water level of the pond, is
beyond the scope of the wetlands authority to regulate pursuant to
RSA 482-A:3, as it does not represent excavation, dredge, fill, or
construction of a structure in wetlands. . . . [T]herefore [e]ffects to
abutters from an activity over which DES has no authority [cannot]
be addressed through the DES wetlands permit process.
In June 2011, the petitioners appealed the grant of the add-fill permit to
the Council. At their request, the appeal was stayed pending the resolution of
Morrissey I. Morrissey I was decided in December 2011 against the petitioners
and, in February 2012, the Town asked the Council to dismiss the petitioners’
appeal of the add-fill permit. The Council dismissed the appeal in March 2012
“[c]onsistent with the Supreme Court opinion and the Council’s lack of
authority over water level disputes.” It ruled that the petitioners’ argument
that the underlying permit application improperly omitted the wetlands impact
of the proposed project was barred in part by our finding in Morrissey I that the
Town’s activity relative to the water level of Post Pond did not substantially and
unreasonably interfere with the petitioners’ use and enjoyment of their
property. The Council also stated that “water level determination . . . is outside
the purview of both the DES Wetlands Bureau and the Council” because,
“absent a specific reference in RSA 482-A:3, I(a) to ‘water level changes[,]’ the
Council does not believe DES … ha[s] authority under RSA 482-A over the
effects of water level changes.” This appeal followed.
Our standard of review of the Council's decision is set forth in RSA
541:13 (2007), which provides:
Upon the hearing the burden of proof shall be upon the
party seeking to set aside any order or decision of the [Council] to
show that the same is clearly unreasonable or unlawful, and all
findings of the [Council] upon all questions of fact properly before
it shall be deemed to be prima facie lawful and reasonable; and the
order or decision appealed from shall not be set aside or vacated
except for errors of law, unless the court is satisfied, by a clear
preponderance of the evidence before it, that such order is unjust
or unreasonable.
3
Although “it is well established in our case law that an
interpretation of a statute by the agency charged with its
administration is entitled to deference,” “[t]he deference afforded . .
. is not absolute.” Appeal of Town of Seabrook, 163 N.H. 635, 644
(2012). “We are still the final arbiter of the legislature’s intent as
expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole, and
we are not bound by an agency’s interpretation of a statute.” Id.
(citations omitted). We review an agency’s interpretation of a
statute de novo and “will not defer to an agency’s interpretation if it
clearly conflicts with the express statutory language . . . or if it is
plainly incorrect.” Id. (citation omitted); cf. Greenland
Conservation Comm’n v. N.H. Wetlands Council, 154 N.H. 529,
544-45 (2006) (alleged error “that the wetlands council applied a
deferential rather than de novo standard of review to the wetlands
bureau’s legal conclusion” regarding DES’s scope of authority
under RSA chapter 482-A “would have been corrected . . . when
the superior court correctly applied the de novo standard of review
to the wetlands council’s legal determinations”).
We first look to the language of the statute itself, and, if
possible, construe that language according to its plain and
ordinary meaning. DaimlerChrysler Corp. v. Victoria, 153 N.H.
664, 666 (2006). When the language of a statute is clear on its
face, its meaning is not subject to modification. Dalton Hydro v.
Town of Dalton, 153 N.H. 75, 78 (2005). We will neither consider
what the legislature might have said nor add words that it did not
see fit to include. Id. Furthermore, we interpret statutes in the
context of the overall statutory scheme and not in isolation.
DaimlerChrysler Corp., 153 N.H. at 666. Our goal is to apply
statutes in light of the legislature’s intent in enacting them, and in
light of the policy sought to be advanced by the entire statutory
scheme. Carlisle v. Frisbie Mem. Hosp., 152 N.H. 762, 773 (2005).
On appeal, the petitioners argue that the Council
erroneously determined that Morrissey I precluded their challenge
to the issuance of the add-fill permit. They argue that their appeal
is not barred by res judicata or collateral estoppel because it
advances a different cause of action from that in their petition in
Morrissey I. The Town responds that there is no meaningful
distinction between the two actions.
“The doctrine of res judicata prevents the parties from
relitigating matters actually litigated and matters that could have
been litigated in the first action.” Morgenroth & Assoc’s v. State,
126 N.H. 266, 269 (1985) (quotation omitted). The doctrine applies
if three elements are met: (1) the parties are the same or in privity
4
with one another; (2) the same cause of action was before the court
in both instances; and (3) the first action ended with a final
judgment on the merits. Gray v. Kelly, 161 N.H. 160, 164 (2010).
We have defined the term “cause of action” as “the right to recover,
regardless of the theory of recovery.” McNair v. McNair, 151 N.H.
343, 353 (2004) (quotations omitted). It “refers to all theories on
which relief could be claimed on the basis of the factual
transaction in question.” Aubert v. Aubert, 129 N.H. 422, 426
(1987) (quotation and brackets omitted).
We find that res judicata does not apply here because our
decision in Morrissey I did not result in a final judgment on the
merits. In Morrissey I, the petitioners sought a writ of mandamus
from the trial court that DES “violated RSA 482-A[,] ‘The Wetlands
Act[,]’ by classifying the Town of Lyme’s plan to reduce the water
level in the Post Pond Ecological Area as a project which does not
require a permit.” Morrissey I, 162 N.H. at 784. The petitioners
asked the trial court “to order [DES] not to issue permits that allow
dredging or filling of Clay Brook Wetlands, [and] to require the
Town to obtain a permit to lower the water level of the Post Pond
Ecological Area.” The trial court denied mandamus relief and, on
appeal, the petitioners asked us to interpret their request for a writ
of mandamus as a request for declaratory judgment. We focused
upon two paragraphs in the petition that alleged that DES must
require the Town to obtain a permit under RSA chapter 482-A and
not rely upon New Hampshire Administrative Rule, Env-Wt
303.05(j), the regulatory provision that allows the removal of a
beaver dam without a permit. Id. We declined to interpret these
paragraphs as advancing a request for declaratory judgment,
noting that they were merely an ill-pleaded request for mandamus
relief. Id. at 784-85. The petitioners also argued that the Town’s
actions relative to the water level of Post Pond constituted a private
nuisance and unlawful taking because they interfered with the
petitioners’ enjoyment of their property. Morrissey I, 162 N.H. at
780. We affirmed the trial court’s dismissal of the petitioners’
claims for private nuisance and unlawful taking because their
allegations “f[e]ll short of demonstrating that the Town’s activity
substantially and unreasonably interfered with the use and
enjoyment of their property.” Id. at 782-83 (quotation and
brackets omitted).
In their current appeal, the petitioners argue that DES
issued the add-fill permit without considering the total wetlands
impact of the project proposed in the add-fill permit application.
According to the petitioners, DES issued the permit based upon an
impermissibly segmented application that separated “the Town’s
5
lowering of the water level of Post Pond and associated wetlands”
from “the Town’s proposed addition of fill to raise the level of the
recreation fields.” They argue that DES should have considered
the two issues together because “the Town's application to improve
the recreation fields by adding fill to raise the fields above the
water table . . . and the Town's revision of its Water Policy to lower
the water level of Post Pond . . . are part and parcel of a single
project.” The petitioners thus argue that DES issued the add-fill
permit after improperly considering “only a portion of the impacts
of [the] proposed project.”
Res judicata does not apply here because the first action
sought a writ of mandamus that did not issue.
A writ of mandamus is used to compel a public official to
perform a ministerial act that the official has refused to perform, or
to vacate the result of a public official’s act that was performed
arbitrarily or in bad faith. This court will, in its discretion, issue a
writ of mandamus only where the petitioner has an apparent right
to the requested relief and no other remedy will fully and
adequately afford relief.
Petition of CIGNA Healthcare, 146 N.H. 683, 687 (2001) (citation omitted).
“When an official is given discretion to decide how to resolve an issue before
him, a mandamus order may require him to address the issue, but it cannot
require a particular result.” Rockhouse Mt. Property Owners Assoc. v. Town of
Conway, 127 N.H. 593, 602 (1986). Although “[i]t is well settled that the
doctrine of res judicata is applicable to judgments in mandamus and
prohibition proceedings,”
[i]t is axiomatic that the doctrine will not operate unless the
judgment was rendered upon the merits, and in several cases the
courts have declined res judicata effect to judgments denying a
writ of mandamus . . . where the judgment was not rendered upon
the merits of the application.
Annotation, Judgment Granting or Denying Writ of Mandamus or Prohibition
as Res Judicata, 21 A.L.R. 3d 206, 213 (1968).
In Morrissey I, we did not address the merits of the petitioners’ request
for mandamus, leaving intact the trial court's ruling that the request was both
too general and too specific to permit mandamus relief. Because the
petitioners did not obtain a ruling on the merits, i.e., a determination as to
DES’s obligation to regulate the Town's activity relative to the water level of
Post Pond, their petition in Morrissey I does not bar their present appeal.
6
The Town next invokes the doctrine of collateral estoppel, which “bars a
party to a prior action . . . from relitigating any issue or fact actually litigated
and determined in the prior action.” Appeal of Town of Seabrook, 163 N.H. at
654 (quotation omitted, emphasis added).
Under certain circumstances, collateral estoppel may preclude the
relitigation of findings made by an administrative board when: (1)
the issue subject to estoppel is identical in each action; (2) the first
action resolved the issue finally on the merits; (3) the party to be
estopped appeared in the first action or was in privity with
someone who did; (4) the party to be estopped had a full and fair
opportunity to litigate the issue; and (5) the finding at issue was
essential to the first judgment.
Petition of Kalar, 162 N.H. 314, 320-21 (2011).
The Town argues that this appeal is precluded by a finding by the trial
court that we mentioned in Morrissey I when addressing the merits of the
petitioners' private nuisance claim. In Morrissey I, we noted that “the trial
court found that the Town is not legally obligated to maintain the pond at a
level above the natural low-water mark; nor do the petitioners have the right to
have the pond maintained above the natural low-water mark.” Morrissey I, 162
N.H. at 781 (quotations and brackets omitted). The Town argues that, because
of the finding that the petitioners have no property rights in the water level of
Post Pond, they cannot make a showing of infringement under RSA 482-A:11,
II (2001). Pursuant to RSA 482-A:11, II, “[n]o permit to dredge or fill shall be
granted if it shall infringe on the property rights or unreasonably affect the
value or enjoyment of property of abutting owners.”
The Town’s collateral estoppel argument fails on the first prong because
the question of whether the Town is legally obligated to maintain the water
level of Post Pond above or below a certain level is not at issue in this appeal.
Rather, the question before us is whether DES properly declined to consider
the Town’s activity relative to the water level in the pond because the activity
did not itself require a wetlands permit. The Town’s argument also fails on the
fifth prong: the finding upon which the Town relies was far from essential to
the judgment in Morrissey I. We mentioned it in passing and rested our
rejection of the petitioners’ private nuisance claim upon altogether different
grounds. See id. at 782.
We therefore proceed to the merits of the appeal. The petitioners argue
that the Council erred in finding that DES lacks regulatory authority over the
Town’s activity of lowering the water level in Post Pond. The petitioners
contend that the Town’s construction of beaver pipes and removal of beaver
dams triggers DES’s authority under RSA 482-A:3, I(a), which prohibits
“remov[al] . . . or construct[ion of] any structures in . . . any waters of the state
7
without a permit from [DES].” According to the petitioners, by concluding that
DES lacks authority over changes in the water level, DES created a “loophole”
in the wetlands statute, whereby “any land owner that wishes to drain
wetlands . . . could do so without obtaining a dredge and fill permit simply by
claiming a change in water level as the purpose of the proposed excavation.”
The purpose of the wetlands statute is to protect and preserve wetlands
for the public good and welfare. RSA 482-A:1 (2001). “[T]he title of chapter
482-A strongly indicates that the legislature intended it to protect wetlands . . .
from the effects caused by dredging and filling within their boundaries.”
Greenland Conservation Comm’n, 154 N.H. at 534. The permitting provision,
RSA 482-A:3, effectuates the wetlands statute's purpose. Id. at 535.
In ruling that it lacked permitting authority over the Town changing the
water level in Post Pond, the Council relied upon the absence of “water level
changes” from the activities listed in RSA 482-A:3, I(a) requiring a permit.
Indeed, DES’s permitting authority is limited to the activities enumerated in
RSA 482-A:3, I(a).
DES is authorized to grant permits for certain enumerated
construction activities in or on banks, flats, marshes and swamps
in and adjacent to state waters. DES is not authorized to grant
dredge and fill permits for construction activities not listed in the
statute or conducted anywhere other than the places listed in the
statute. The permitting process described in RSA 482-A:3, I, is the
way the legislature has determined that DES shall carry out the
purposes described in RSA 482-A:1.
Id. (citations omitted).
DES’s administrative rules set forth a number of criteria that DES must
consider when evaluating a permit application under RSA 482-A:3, I(a). N.H.
Admin. Rules, Env-Wt 302.02. One criterion is that, “for any major or minor
project, the applicant shall demonstrate by plan and example” that the
applicant has considered a number of factors “in the project's design in
assessing the impact of the proposed project to areas and environments under
[DES’s] jurisdiction.” N.H. Admin. Rules, Env-Wt 302.04. These factors
include “[t]he relationship of the proposed wetlands to be impacted relative to
nearby wetlands and surface waters” and “[t]he impact of the proposed project
on the values and functions of the total wetland or wetland complex.” N.H.
Admin. Rules Env-Wt 302.04(a)(4), (17).
Pursuant to DES’s administrative rules, to obtain a permit under RSA
482-A:3, I(a), the applicant must demonstrate – and consequently, DES cannot
decline to address – the total wetlands impact of the proposed project. See
N.H. Admin. Rules, Env-Wt 302.04(a)(4), (17). If, when assessing this impact,
8
DES could consider only activity that itself requires a permit, its regulatory
authority would be severely curtailed and the purpose of the wetlands statute
ill-served. Such a reading would also effectively nullify many, if not most, of
the complex and multifaceted factors listed in Rule 302.04. For example, RSA
482-A:3, I(a) does not authorize DES to issue a permit for a project based upon
its impact “on, public commerce, navigation and recreation.” Nevertheless, an
applicant must show, and DES cannot decline to consider, any such impact
when evaluating a project proposal that falls within its permitting authority
under RSA 482-A:3. See N.H. Admin. Rules, Env-Wt 302.04(a)(8). We will not
interpret an administrative rule in such a way as to render a significant portion
of it meaningless. See Appeal of Murdock, 156 N.H. 732, 736 (2008).
The Council took the overbroad position that, “absent a specific reference
in RSA 482-A:3, I(a) to ‘water level changes,’ ” the Bureau and Council do not
have “authority under RSA 482-A over the effects of water level changes.” An
activity within DES’s permitting authority may result in a change in water
levels, and DES would necessarily have to consider the “effects of water level
changes” as part of the total wetlands impact of the permitted activity. For
example, the installation of beaver pipes, which also results in changes in
water levels, is undisputedly within DES’s permitting authority: in 2006, the
Town obtained a permit under RSA 482-A:3 to install a beaver pipe, and the
Bureau noted that operating the beaver pipe “will impact on the water levels of
the pond.”
The Bureau and Council erred when they declined to consider the Town’s
practice of lowering the water level in the pond. This practice, although
omitted from the Town’s add-fill permit application, constituted part of the
project to add fill and had a bearing on its total wetlands impact. The Town
adopted a new water release policy in 2008 “for purposes of breaching the
dams to lower the water in Post Pond.” The Town admits that the policy of
maintaining the water level in Post Pond at two feet, and the breaching of
beaver dams to maintain that water level, “was done to expand the town beach
and reduce the cost of improvements to the Town’s playing fields.” In order to
“improve existing Town recreation facility athletic fields, the picnic area and to
retain sand placed on the beach,” the Town applied to DES for the add-fill
permit. To obtain such a permit, the Town had to describe, and the Bureau
had to consider, the total wetlands impact of the proposed project. Based upon
the record, however, the Town’s activity relative to the water level in Post Pond
had a wetlands impact that, at best, was not supported by sufficient
information for the Bureau to evaluate and, at worst, was detrimental.
The Bureau considered the add-fill permit application at the same time
as the after-the-fact application to retain two beaver pipes: it held one hearing
on both applications. Moreover, the Bureau noted that the after-the-fact
application “appear[s] to be directly connected to a larger pending application.”
9
It denied the after-the-fact permit application, having found that “the project
will cause unnecessary destruction of wetlands.” At the same time, the Bureau
approved the add-fill permit application, based in part on a finding “that th[e]
proposal [wa]s the alternative with the least adverse impact to areas and
environments under [DES’s] jurisdiction” and that “[n]o changes in water
quality or level shall occur as a result of this project.” When the petitioners
appealed, the Bureau clarified that it merely found “that no changes in water
quality or level ‘shall occur’ (or were authorized) as a result of this project.”
(Emphasis added.) We conclude that, by declining to consider the Town’s
lowering of the water level in Post Pond when issuing the add-fill permit, the
Bureau failed to consider the total wetlands impact of the proposed project.
We disagree with the Town that the Council properly declined to consider
the Town’s activity relative to Post Pond because DES’s authority is limited to
the activities listed in RSA 482-A:3 and because the water level dropped as a
result of beaver dams becoming abandoned and derelict rather than “any
activity within the scope of RSA 482-A:3.” Even if the water level in the pond
dropped as a result of dam abandonment rather than any action taken by the
Town, the Town’s practice of lowering the water level, together with, or
notwithstanding, beaver activity, was part of the wetlands impact of the project
to add fill to the recreation fields: the Bureau could not decline to consider it.
Insofar as the petitioners argue that, when considering the add-fill
permit application, the Bureau and Council should have required the Town to
obtain separate wetlands permits to remove beaver dams and install beaver
pipes, we reject this argument. The Town did apply for a permit to install a
beaver pipe in 2006 and to retain two beaver pipes in 2009. These applications
are not before us. As for beaver dams, any argument that the Town should
have procured a wetlands permit in order to remove these structures has not
been preserved. The petitioners failed to raise it in their appeal to the Council,
see RSA 482-A:10, IV-a (“Only those grounds set forth in the notice of appeal
shall be considered by the council.”), and in their motion for reconsideration,
see Appeal of Coffey, 144 N.H. 531, 533 (1999) (“Issues not raised in the motion
for rehearing cannot be raised on appeal.”).
The petitioners argued before the Council and argue on appeal that the
Bureau improperly relied upon New Hampshire Administrative Rule, Env-Wt
303.05(j), a provision that allows the removal of a beaver dam without a permit
in certain circumstances, when the Bureau concluded that “DES wetlands
regulations have no ability to control the water level in Post Pond.” In
declining to consider the Town’s lowering of the water level, the Bureau relied
predominantly upon what it perceived to be its statutory authority under RSA
482-A:3. It merely noted that “beaver dams may be removed and their
impoundments released without a wetlands permit pursuant to [Rule]
303.05(j),” and on appeal, the Council expressly stated that this regulation was
not the basis for the Bureau’s rulings. The record supports this conclusion.
10
We therefore need not address the petitioners’ arguments that: (1) the Bureau
acted unlawfully and unreasonably when it relied upon Rule 303.05(j); (2) the
Council erred when it found that the petitioners waived this argument; and (3)
Rule 303.05(j) is facially invalid because it conflicts with RSA 210:9 (2011).
We note that this opinion does not address whether the Town is correct
that, as the claimed owner of the beaver dams, it has the authority to set the
water level of Post Pond at or above the natural low water mark. The scope of a
municipality's and DES’s authority, if any, to regulate the water level of a great
pond by means of beaver dams and beaver pipes is not squarely before us.
Rather, the issue before us is whether, when DES evaluates a permit
application involving an activity that falls within the scope of RSA 482-A:3
(adding fill), it may decline to consider a related activity (setting water levels)
that itself may not require a wetlands permit but has a bearing on the total
wetlands impact of the proposed project. We answer in the negative.
Accordingly, we need not address the Town’s argument that “even if RSA 482-
A:3 granted DES the authority to regulate water levels,” the record supports
the conclusion that “permitting the Town to maintain a water level of 2.0 feet
would be reasonable.”
Because the Bureau misinterpreted RSA 482-A:3, I(a) and did not
consider the total wetlands impact of the proposed project, we vacate and
remand to the Council for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Vacated and remanded.
HICKS, CONBOY, LYNN and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
11