THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2012-510
OSAHENRUMWEN OJO
v.
JOSEPH C. LORENZO & a.
Submitted: February 13, 2013
Opinion Issued: April 3, 2013
Osahenrumwen Ojo, self-represented party, on the memorandum of law.
McDonough, O'Shaughnessy, Whaland & Meagher, PLLC, of Manchester
(Robert J. Meagher on the brief), for the defendants.
LYNN, J. The plaintiff, Osahenrumwen Ojo, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Brown, J.) granting a motion to dismiss filed by the
defendants, Officer Joseph C. Lorenzo and the Manchester Police Department
(MPD). We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand.
The following facts are taken from the allegations in the plaintiff’s writ of
summons, which we accept as true for purposes of this appeal, or are
established as a matter of law. See Morrissey v. Town of Lyme, 162 N.H. 777,
778 (2011). On May 9, 2010, at approximately 1:00 a.m., Lorenzo stopped the
plaintiff while he was walking on Hall Street in Manchester. Lorenzo pulled the
plaintiff by the arm, placed him against his unmarked police cruiser, patted
him down, and asked him where he was coming from and where he was going.
The plaintiff replied that he had left his brother’s apartment a couple of hours
earlier. He explained that he and his brother had had “an altercation” earlier
in the day and that he wanted to avoid “unnecessary problems.” After
additional officers arrived on the scene, Lorenzo arrested the plaintiff. When
the plaintiff asked why he was under arrest, an unidentified officer informed
him that a kidnapping victim had identified him from a photographic line-up
and that he matched the victim’s description of the assailant.
The State charged the plaintiff by criminal complaint with kidnapping,
see RSA 633:1 (2007), falsifying physical evidence, see RSA 641:6 (2007), and
simple assault, see RSA 631:2-a (2007). On May 10, the plaintiff was arraigned
in the Manchester District Court on the charges of kidnapping and falsifying
physical evidence. See RSA 594:20-a, I (Supp. 2012); State v. Hughes, 135
N.H. 413, 419 (1992). On May 24, the district court held a preliminary
examination (also known as a probable cause hearing) and subsequently
ordered the plaintiff bound over to the superior court on both charges. See
RSA 596-A:4, :7 (2001); RSA 592-A:4 (2001).1 A Hillsborough County grand
jury later returned indictments against the plaintiff for kidnapping and
falsifying physical evidence, and the State filed an information charging him
with simple assault. In October 2011, after the plaintiff spent approximately
seventeen months in pretrial custody at the Hillsborough County House of
Corrections, the State nol prossed all of the charges because the complaining
witness allegedly moved to Germany.
In April 2012, the plaintiff, unrepresented by counsel, filed a civil lawsuit
against the defendants2 alleging, among other things, that officers of the
Manchester Police Department: (1) ignored their duties to fully, reasonably,
and prudently conduct their investigation before placing him under arrest; and
(2) employed unnecessarily suggestive, unreliable, and untrustworthy
identification procedures. The writ alleged that the plaintiff did not match the
description of the alleged kidnapper. According to the writ, the alleged victim
had described the assailant as a black male, in his early twenties, five feet ten
or eleven inches tall, with short dark hair and a beard. The plaintiff, a black
male, was, however, thirty-three years old with a bald head and a clean-shaven
1 The plaintiff’s writ alleges, and the defendants do not dispute, that the plaintiff’s appearance in
the district court on May 10 was for a probable cause hearing. The record, however, reveals that a
preliminary examination (i.e., “probable cause hearing”) was scheduled for May 24, and the
plaintiff received notice that the district court found probable cause on May 24. Accordingly, we
conclude that the plaintiff’s appearance in the district court on May 10 was his arraignment and
the probable cause hearing was held on May 24.
2 The plaintiff’s writ also named as a defendant “Robert Walsh, hillsborough county attorney for
the state.” The caption of the plaintiff’s writ, however, named as defendants only Officer Lorenzo
and the MPD, and there is no evidence that Attorney Walsh was served as a defendant. On
appeal, neither party refers to Attorney Walsh. Accordingly, we conclude that Attorney Walsh is
not a party to this appeal.
2
face. He also had visible scars on both cheeks that the victim had not
mentioned. The plaintiff claimed that he suffered unnecessary imprisonment,
unlawful punishment, and substantial loss of property.
Construing the plaintiff’s writ to assert claims for false imprisonment and
malicious prosecution, the defendants moved to dismiss for failure to state a
claim. The defendants argued that a lack of probable cause is an element of
both false imprisonment and malicious prosecution and that the plaintiff could
not prevail on either claim because the district court and grand jury found
probable cause in the earlier criminal prosecution. Alternatively, the
defendants argued that they were entitled to immunity under RSA 507:8-d
(2010) and official immunity under Everitt v. General Electric Co., 156 N.H.
202 (2007). Finally, the defendants argued they were not the proper party-
defendants with respect to plaintiff’s malicious prosecution claim.
The superior court granted the defendants’ motion. The court’s order
states, in its entirety: “Motion to Dismiss granted. Probable cause was found
by the Hillsborough County Grand Jury and the Defendant Officer and Police
Department are, under those circumstances, immune from suit.” This appeal
followed.
In reviewing a motion to dismiss, our task is to determine whether the
allegations in the plaintiff’s pleadings are reasonably susceptible of a
construction that would permit recovery. Morrissey, 162 N.H. at 780. We
assume the well-pleaded allegations of fact in the writ to be true, and construe
all reasonable inferences from them in the plaintiff’s favor. Bel Air Assocs. v.
N.H. Dep’t of Health & Human Servs., 154 N.H. 228, 231 (2006). We need not,
however, assume the truth of statements in the pleadings that are merely
conclusions of law. Morrissey, 162 N.H. at 780. “We then engage in a
threshold inquiry that tests the facts in the [writ] against the applicable law.”
Bel Air Assocs., 154 N.H. at 231 (quotation omitted). In conducting this
inquiry, we may also consider “documents attached to the plaintiff’s pleadings,
. . . documents the authenticity of which are not disputed by the parties[,]
official public records[,] or documents sufficiently referred to in the [writ].”
Beane v. Dana S. Beane & Co., 160 N.H. 708, 711 (2010) (citation, quotation,
and ellipses omitted).
We first address the trial court’s ruling that the defendants are immune
from suit because the grand jury found probable cause in the prior criminal
prosecution of the plaintiff. “An indictment represents the conclusion of a
grand jury that probable cause exists to believe that a defendant has
committed a particular crime.” Moody v. Cunningham, 127 N.H. 550, 554
(1986). We consider whether the indictments returned against the plaintiff
entitle the defendants to immunity under RSA 507:8-d or to official immunity.
3
RSA 507:8-d provides: “No person shall incur any civil liability to
another person by taking any action against such person which would
constitute justification pursuant to RSA [chapter] 627.” Under RSA 627:2, I
(2007), “[a]ny conduct, other than the use of physical force under
circumstances specifically dealt with in other sections of this chapter, is
justifiable when it is authorized by law.” By statute, a police officer may make
a warrantless arrest if the officer has probable cause to believe that the
arrestee has committed a felony. RSA 594:10, II(b) (Supp. 2012); State v.
Vachon, 130 N.H. 37, 40 (1987). “Probable cause to arrest exists when the
arresting officer has knowledge and trustworthy information sufficient to
warrant a person of reasonable caution and prudence in believing that the
arrestee has committed an offense.” Hartgers v. Town of Plaistow, 141 N.H.
253, 255 (1996) (quotation omitted). For purposes of this appeal, we assume
that a police officer with probable cause to make a warrantless arrest under
RSA 594:10, II(b) and the officer’s employer may be entitled to immunity from
suit under RSA 507:8-d.
The doctrine of official immunity provides that “municipal police officers
are immune from personal liability for decisions, acts or omissions that are: (1)
made within the scope of their official duties while in the course of their
employment; (2) discretionary, rather than ministerial; and (3) not made in a
wanton or reckless manner.” Everitt, 156 N.H. at 219. “[T]he purpose of
immunity is to operate as a bar to a lawsuit, rather than as a mere defense
against liability, and is effectively lost if a case is erroneously permitted to go to
trial.” Id. at 221 (quotation omitted). The doctrine is a necessary compromise
between competing policies. Id. at 216-18. It recognizes that although
“immunity can be fundamentally unfair to our citizens who are injured by
erroneous police decisions,” the “public simply cannot afford for those
individuals charged with securing and preserving community safety to have
their judgment shaded out of fear of subsequent lawsuits or to have their
energies otherwise deflected by litigation, at times a lengthy and cumbersome
process.” Id. at 218. When available to an individual police officer, official
immunity “generally may be vicariously extended to the government entity
employing the individual, but it is not an automatic grant.” Id. at 221
(quotation omitted).
We conclude that the indictments returned against the plaintiff do not
entitle the defendants to immunity under RSA 507:8-d or official immunity.
Although it is black-letter law that “the finding of an indictment, fair upon its
face, by a properly constituted grand jury, conclusively determines the
existence of probable cause for the purpose of holding the accused to answer,”
Ex Parte United States, 287 U.S. 241, 250 (1932), it is equally true that post-
arrest indictments do not operate retroactively to establish the existence of
probable cause at the moment of arrest. See Radvansky v. City of Olmsted
Falls, 395 F.3d 291, 308 n.13 (6th Cir. 2005) (“after-the-fact grand jury
4
involvement cannot serve to validate a prior arrest”); Garmon v. Lumpkin
County, Ga., 878 F.2d 1406, 1409 (11th Cir. 1989) (“A subsequent indictment
does not retroactively provide probable cause for an arrest that has already
taken place.”); Kent v. Katz, 146 F. Supp. 2d 450, 460 n.8 (D. Vt. 2001)
(“subsequent grand jury indictment does not retroactively provide probable
cause for a false arrest that had already taken place”). The reason for the rule
is sound: a grand jury considers whether, at the time it acts, probable cause
exists to believe that a crime has been committed, see Moody, 127 N.H. at 554;
a grand jury does not consider whether, at the time of arrest, the arresting
officer had “knowledge and trustworthy information sufficient to warrant a
person of reasonable caution and prudence in believing that the arrestee . . .
committed an offense.”3 Hartgers, 141 N.H. at 255 (quotation omitted). Thus,
contrary to the conclusion of the trial court, the probable cause found by the
grand jury does not establish that probable cause supported the plaintiff’s
arrest or that his arrest was not “made in a wanton or reckless manner.”
Everitt, 156 N.H. at 219.
Furthermore, to the extent the trial court gave the indictments preclusive
effect on the issue of whether Lorenzo had probable cause to arrest the
plaintiff, we note that “estoppel as between criminal and later civil actions” is
warranted only when the plaintiff had “a fair opportunity to litigate the issue”
in the prior criminal prosecution. See Hopps v. Utica Mut. Ins. Co., 127 N.H.
508, 511-12 (1982). Here, the plaintiff was not a party to the grand jury
proceeding and had no full and fair opportunity to litigate issues raised in that
proceeding. See State v. Hall, 152 N.H. 374, 376 (2005) (“A grand jury
proceeding is not an adversary hearing . . . . [I]t is an ex parte investigation to
determine whether a crime has been committed and whether criminal
proceedings should be instituted against any person.” (quotation omitted)); see
also 38 Am. Jur. 2d Grand Jury § 44, at 927 (2010) (“One whose conduct is
being investigated by a grand jury has no right, constitutional or otherwise, to
petition, appear before, or testify before a grand jury.”). Thus, even if the grand
jury had considered whether Lorenzo had probable cause to arrest the plaintiff,
the indictments do not conclusively establish that probable cause supported
the arrest.
On appeal, the defendants advance several alternative arguments
seeking affirmance of the trial court’s order. They argue that: (1) they are
entitled to immunity under RSA 507:8-d and official immunity because facts
alleged by the plaintiff establish that Lorenzo had probable cause to arrest the
plaintiff; (2) they are entitled to official immunity because the district court
found probable cause; (3) the plaintiff’s claims for false imprisonment and
3 For example, an investigation conducted between the arrest and indictment may support a
finding of probable cause at the time the indictment is returned that did not exist at the time the
arrest was made. The record before us contains no information as to what, if any, post-arrest,
pre-indictment investigation occurred in this case.
5
malicious prosecution must be dismissed because both claims require a lack of
probable cause and the plaintiff cannot prove a lack of probable cause; and (4)
the malicious prosecution claim fails as a matter of law because the plaintiff
has not alleged that Lorenzo acted with malice. We address each argument in
turn. See Sherryland v. Snuffer, 150 N.H. 262, 267 (2003).
Limiting our review to the well-pleaded allegations of fact in the plaintiff’s
writ, and construing all reasonable inferences from them in his favor, see
Guglielmo v. WorldCom, 148 N.H. 309, 312 (2002), we reject the argument that
the facts alleged by the plaintiff establish that the defendants are entitled to
immunity under RSA 507:8-d or official immunity. Because we must accept as
true that Lorenzo arrested the plaintiff despite substantial inconsistencies
between his physical appearance on the morning of his arrest and the alleged
kidnapping victim’s description of the assailant, including inconsistencies in
age, hairstyle, and facial hair, we conclude that the writ does not establish that
Lorenzo had probable cause to arrest the plaintiff or that the arrest was not
“made in a wanton or reckless manner.” Everitt, 156 N.H. at 219. Although
we must accept as true that an unidentified police officer told the plaintiff that
a kidnapping victim had identified him from a photo line-up, we need not
accept the underlying truth of the statement, i.e., that the alleged kidnapping
victim, in fact, identified the plaintiff from a photo line-up. Furthermore,
although the defendants direct our attention to facts alleged by the plaintiff in
his objection to the defendants’ motion to dismiss and in a separate motion
filed with this court, titled “Plaintiff’s motion for brief statement per order of the
supreme court,” we cannot accept these facts as true for purposes of this
appeal. The plaintiff’s objection to the defendants’ motion to dismiss was not
submitted as part of the record before us, and in his motion filed with this
court the plaintiff specifically noted that “the facts asserted” therein were
simply “derived from the discovery which was supplied by the State in [his]
criminal case.”
Nor are we persuaded that the defendants are entitled to official
immunity because the district court found probable cause in ordering the
plaintiff bound over to the superior court on the charges of kidnapping and
falsifying physical evidence. The defendants argue – without citing any
authority – that the probable cause determination of the district court
establishes that Lorenzo did not arrest the plaintiff “in a wanton or reckless
manner.” Everitt, 156 N.H. at 219. The defendants appear to argue that this
determination should be given collateral estoppel effect on the issue of whether
probable cause supported the plaintiff’s arrest. We disagree.
For collateral estoppel to apply, three basic conditions must be
satisfied: (1) the issue subject to estoppel must be identical in
each action; (2) the first action must have resolved the issue
finally on the merits; and (3) the party to be estopped must have
6
appeared as a party in the first action, or have been in privity
with someone who did so. These conditions must be
understood, in turn, as particular elements of the more general
requirement, that a party against whom estoppel is pleaded
must have had a full and fair prior opportunity to litigate the
issue or fact in question.
Stewart v. Bader, 154 N.H. 75, 80-81 (2006) (quotation and citation omitted).
“The applicability of collateral estoppel is a question of law that we review de
novo.” Tyler v. Hannaford Bros., 161 N.H. 242, 246 (2010).
Here, two of the three basic conditions to apply collateral estoppel cannot
be satisfied. First, the issue of probable cause to bind over a criminal
defendant for trial and the issue of probable cause to arrest are not identical.
To bind over a criminal defendant for trial, a court must “determine whether
probable cause exists to believe that an offense has been committed . . . .”
State v. St. Arnault, 114 N.H. 216, 217-18 (1974) (quotation omitted); see
Smith v. O’Brien, 109 N.H. 317, 318 (1969) (the purpose of a probable cause
hearing “is to determine whether probable cause exists for . . . detention
pending grand jury action”); State v. Chase, 109 N.H. 296, 297 (1969) (same).
By contrast, “[p]robable cause to arrest exists when the arresting officer has
knowledge and trustworthy information sufficient to warrant a person of
reasonable caution and prudence in believing that the arrestee has committed
an offense.” Hartgers, 141 N.H. at 255 (quotation omitted). Thus, based upon
the evidence presented to it at the time of the hearing, the district court found
probable cause to believe that the plaintiff had committed an offense. The
district court did not find that at the time of arrest Lorenzo had probable cause
to believe that the plaintiff had committed an offense. Id. As explained in
Kumar v. Chicago Housing Authority, 862 F. Supp. 213 (N.D. Ill. 1994):
[A]lthough both determinations are referred to as ‘probable cause’
determinations, the question of whether there is probable cause to bind
over the charged party is different from the question of whether the
arresting officers had probable cause to make the arrest. Resolution of
the first issue does not resolve the second.
Kumar, 862 F. Supp. at 217; see also Broughton v. Hazerloth, No. 01-70074,
2006 WL 798959, at *2 (E.D. Mich. March 29, 2006) (“The issue at a
preliminary examination is whether or not there is probable cause that a crime
has been committed, not whether there was probable cause to arrest a
suspect.”); Schmidlin v. City of Palo Alto, 69 Cal. Rptr. 3d 365, 395 (Ct. App.
2007) (“issue of ‘probable cause’ to arrest (or sufficient cause to detain) is
simply not the same as – let alone identical to – that of sufficient cause to hold
the defendant for trial”); Morley v. Walker, 175 F.3d 756, 760-61 (9th Cir.
7
1999) (court refused to equate probable cause to arrest with probable cause to
bind over a defendant for trial).
Second, even if the issues of probable cause to arrest and probable cause
to bind over a defendant for trial were identical, the district court cannot be
said to have resolved the issue finally on the merits. The probable cause
determination of the district court is merely a preliminary step in the criminal
prosecution. As we explained in St. Arnault, the district court “merely passes
the responsibility to the grand jury to decide whether the defendant should
stand trial.” St. Arnault, 114 N.H. at 218. Compare Aubert v. Aubert, 129
N.H. 422, 428 (1987) (“prior criminal conviction has collateral estoppel effect in
a subsequent civil proceeding as to the issues actually litigated and decided in
the criminal case” (emphasis added)).
We turn next to the defendants’ contention that the plaintiff’s claims for
false imprisonment and malicious prosecution must be dismissed because a
lack of probable cause is an element of both claims and the plaintiff cannot
prove a lack of probable cause. The defendants argue that the plaintiff cannot
prove a lack of probable cause because: (1) “[g]iven the findings by the district
court and the grand jury, probable cause was present in this case”; and (2)
“based on the facts alleged in the plaintiff’s writ of summons, probable cause is
established.”
As an initial matter, we note that the defendants are mistaken that a
lack of probable cause is an element of false imprisonment. To prevail on a
claim for false imprisonment, a plaintiff must demonstrate that: (1) the
defendant acted with the intent of confining him within boundaries fixed by the
defendant; (2) the defendant’s act directly or indirectly resulted in the plaintiff’s
confinement; (3) the plaintiff was conscious of or harmed by the confinement;
and (4) the defendant acted without legal authority. See MacKenzie v. Linehan,
158 N.H. 476, 482 (2009); cf. Restatement (Second) of Torts § 35, at 52 (1965).
We have explicitly stated that a lack of probable cause is not an element of
false imprisonment. See Hickox v. J.B. Morin Agency, Inc., 110 N.H. 438, 442
(1970) (“allegations of malice, want of probable cause and dismissal of the
prosecution . . . [are] all elements of malicious prosecution, but not of false
imprisonment or false arrest”). Instead, probable cause is a defense to a claim
for false imprisonment resulting from a warrantless detention. See Larreault v.
Stores, 93 N.H. 375, 375 (1945). For the reasons discussed above, the
probable cause determinations of the district court and grand jury, as well as
the well-pleaded allegations of fact in the plaintiff’s writ, do not establish that
Lorenzo had probable cause to arrest the plaintiff.
We agree with the defendants, however, that the plaintiff’s claim for
malicious prosecution must be dismissed. To prevail on a claim for malicious
prosecution, a plaintiff must demonstrate that: (1) he was subjected to a
8
criminal prosecution or civil proceeding instituted by the defendant; (2) without
probable cause; (3) with malice; and (4) the prior action terminated in his favor.
See Stock v. Byers, 120 N.H. 844, 846 (1980); Paul v. Sherburne, 153 N.H.
747, 749 (2006).
Courts are nearly uniform in holding that the return of an indictment
defeats a claim for malicious prosecution unless the plaintiff alleges that the
defendant engaged in impropriety when procuring the indictment. See
Annotation, Malicious Prosecution: Effect of Grand Jury Indictment on Issue of
Probable Cause, 28 A.L.R.3d 748 (1969) (Supp. 2012); Gonzalez Rucci v.
United States I.N.S., 405 F.3d 45, 49 (1st Cir. 2005) (indictment “definitively
establishes probable cause” unless, at the pleading stage, the plaintiff asserts
that “the defendants wrongfully obtained the indictment by knowingly
presenting false testimony to the grand jury”); Alvarado v. City of New York,
453 Fed. Appx. 56, 58-59 (2d Cir. 2011) (construing New York law to hold that
indictment creates a rebuttable presumption of probable cause, which may be
overcome only if “the indictment was procured by fraud, perjury, the
suppression of evidence or other police conduct undertaken in bad faith”
(quotation omitted)); Beckett v. Ford, 613 F. Supp. 2d 970, 982 (N.D. Ohio
2009) (indictment is prima facie evidence of probable cause for purposes of an
Ohio malicious prosecution claim, which may be overcome only if “the
indictment resulted from perjured testimony or [if] the grand jury proceedings
were otherwise significantly irregular” (quotation omitted)). Here, the plaintiff’s
writ does not allege that Lorenzo or any other member of the Manchester Police
Department engaged in impropriety when procuring the indictments returned
against him. Thus, the allegations in his writ do not permit a finding that
criminal charges were instituted against him without probable cause.
Finally, we note that the plaintiff asserts in his memorandum of law that
he has a cognizable claim for false arrest or false imprisonment under 42
U.S.C. § 1983. The defendants contend that the plaintiff’s writ fails to allege
any such claims. Because we reverse the dismissal of the plaintiff’s claim for
false imprisonment, we leave for the trial court to determine in the first
instance whether the plaintiff’s writ asserts a cognizable claim for false arrest
or false imprisonment under 42 U.S.C. § 1983.
In conclusion, we repeat that the “public simply cannot afford for those
individuals charged with securing and preserving community safety to have
their judgment shaded out of fear of subsequent lawsuits or to have their
energies otherwise deflected by litigation, at times a lengthy and cumbersome
process.” Everitt, 156 N.H. at 218. We understand that “[p]olice officers are
trusted with one of the most basic and necessary functions of civilized society,
securing and preserving public safety.” Id. at 217. Nonetheless, at this stage
of the proceeding, the defendants have not demonstrated that they are entitled
to immunity from suit, or that probable cause supported the plaintiff’s arrest.
9
We note that if further factual development of the record establishes the lack of
any genuine issue of material fact regarding the existence of probable cause for
the plaintiff’s arrest, the summary judgment procedure remains available to the
defendants to resolve this litigation short of a trial. See RSA 491:8-a (2010);
Anilao v. Spota, 774 F. Supp. 2d 457, 491 (E.D.N.Y. 2011) (“a defendant
presenting an immunity defense on a [motion to dismiss] instead of a motion
for summary judgment must accept the more stringent standard applicable to
this procedural route” (quotation omitted)).
Affirmed in part; reversed in
part; and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
10