THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
8th Circuit Court - Keene Probate Division
No. 2012-703
DANIEL A. EATON
v.
MARY LOUISE EATON & a.
Argued: October 10, 2013
Opinion Issued: December 20, 2013
Laboe Associates, PLLC, of Concord (Kerri S. Tasker and John E. Laboe
on the brief, and Mr. Laboe orally), for the petitioner.
Bradley & Faulkner, P.C., of Keene (Gary J. Kinyon on the brief and
orally), for the respondents.
LYNN, J. The petitioner, Daniel A. Eaton, appeals an order of the 8th
Circuit Court - Keene Probate Division (Hampe, J.), which granted the
summary judgment motion filed by the petitioner’s mother, Mary Louise Eaton
(Mrs. Eaton), and her guardian, Michael Eaton (Michael). We affirm.
This is the second appeal arising from the petitioner’s attempts to be
paid for legal fees he incurred in guardianship proceedings involving his
mother. See In re Guardianship of Eaton, 163 N.H. 386 (2012). The following
facts are drawn from Eaton and from the record in this appeal.
In March 2010, Dean Eaton (Dean), the petitioner’s brother, filed a
petition for guardianship over their mother, Mrs. Eaton. Id. at 388. The
petitioner objected to Dean’s petition and filed his own petition. Id. In a June
2010 settlement agreement, the petitioner and Dean agreed that their brother,
Michael, would be appointed guardian. Id. Shortly thereafter, the trial court
found Mrs. Eaton to be incapacitated and appointed Michael guardian over her
person and estate. Id. Thereafter, the petitioner filed a motion under RSA 464-
A:43 (2004), requesting the trial court to order Michael, as guardian of Mrs.
Eaton’s estate, to pay the attorney’s fees the petitioner incurred during the
guardianship proceedings. Id. Michael objected, and the trial court denied the
petitioner’s motion. Id. We upheld the trial court’s decision in Eaton. Id. at
393.
In October 2010, the petitioner filed the instant action, in which he again
sought payment of legal fees incurred during the guardianship proceeding. He
alleged that he was entitled to the fees because he acted as his mother’s
attorney-in-fact pursuant to a durable general power of attorney, which was
executed in October 2004. The respondents moved for summary judgment on
three grounds: (1) that the actions taken by the petitioner were not done
pursuant to the power of attorney but for the petitioner’s own benefit; (2) that
the petitioner had no authority to act under the power of attorney because it
lacked the acknowledgment required by RSA 506:6, VII(a) (2010); and (3) that
the petitioner admitted under oath in a deposition that the only time he acted
under the power of attorney was in connection with obtaining medical records.
The trial court found that there were genuine issues of material fact in dispute
with regard to the respondents’ first and third arguments which precluded the
trial court from granting summary judgment. However, with respect to the
second argument, the trial court ruled that “the acknowledgment requirement
of RSA 506:6, VII(a) is mandatory and therefore Daniel Eaton could not have
been acting as Mary Lou Eaton’s attorney-in-fact when he undertook the acts
[for which the legal fees were claimed], as a matter of law.” The trial court
therefore granted summary judgment for the respondents on that ground.
On appeal, the sole issue is whether the trial court erred in ruling that
the absence of an acknowledgment executed by the petitioner and affixed to the
durable general power of attorney precluded the petitioner from acting under
the power. This presents an issue of statutory interpretation, which is a
question of law that we review de novo. Schiavi v. City of Rochester, 152 N.H.
487, 489 (2005). “We are the final arbiter of the legislature’s intent as
expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole.” Eaton, 163 N.H.
at 389. “Further, we interpret a statute in the context of the overall statutory
scheme and not in isolation.” Id. “When examining the language of a statute,
we ascribe the plain and ordinary meaning to the words used.” Id. “We
interpret legislative intent from the statute as written and will not consider
what the legislature might have said or add language that the legislature did
2
not see fit to include.” Id. “We do not consider legislative history to construe a
statute that is clear on its face.” Id.
In this case there are two pertinent requirements for a durable general
power of attorney: it must have affixed to it both a properly executed
“disclosure statement” by the principal, see RSA 506:6, VI(a), and a properly
executed “acknowledgment” by the attorney-in-fact, see RSA 506:6, VII(a).
RSA 506:6, VII(a) specifically states that an attorney-in-fact “shall have no
authority to act” under the power of attorney unless the attorney-in-fact first
has executed and affixed to it the required acknowledgment.
The disclosure statement serves multiple purposes under the statute.
First, it ensures that the principal made an informed decision to appoint an
attorney-in-fact. RSA 506:6, VI(a). Second, it informs the principal, among
other things, that the durable general power of attorney grants the attorney-in-
fact the power to make decisions concerning the principal’s “money, property,
or both” on the principal’s behalf. Id. Third, it also informs the principal that
the principal has the power to revoke the power of attorney as long as she is “of
sound mind.” Id.
The acknowledgment explains the duties and responsibilities of, and
burdens on, the attorney-in-fact as the principal’s agent. RSA 506:6, VII(a). It
informs the agent that the durable general power of attorney “is valid only if the
Principal is of sound mind when the Principal signs it.” Id. It ensures that the
attorney-in-fact is aware that he owes the principal a fiduciary duty. Id. Under
this fiduciary duty, the attorney-in-fact must “observe the standards observed
by a prudent person, which means the use of those powers that is reasonable
in view of the interests of the Principal and in view of the way in which a
person of ordinary judgment would act in carrying out that person’s own
affairs.” Id. The acknowledgment further informs the attorney-in-fact not to
“use the money or property for [his] own benefit or to make gifts to [him]self or
others unless the Durable Power of Attorney specifically gives [him] the
authority to do so.” Id. It also informs the attorney-in-fact that if his acts are
challenged, he has the burden of proving that he “acted under the standards of
a fiduciary.” Id.
While the petitioner and the respondents purport to agree that the
durable general power of attorney here was “valid,” their divergent views on the
meaning of validity renders their agreement illusory. The respondents contend
that the power of attorney was valid only in the sense that it was not void from
the outset merely because it lacked an executed and affixed acknowledgment.
However, according to the respondents, the petitioner did not have the
authority to act pursuant to the power until the acknowledgment was executed
and affixed to the power of attorney. See RSA 506:6, VII(b) (2010) (“The
acknowledgment . . . need not be signed when the durable power of attorney is
3
executed as long as it is executed prior to the [attorney-in-fact] exercising the
power granted under the durable power of attorney.”). Although we agree that
a power of attorney that does not contain an executed and affixed
acknowledgment is not void from the outset, to define “valid” in this narrow
sense would be inconsistent with the accepted usage of the word. See
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 2529-30 (unabridged ed. 2002)
(“valid” means “able to effect or accomplish what is designed or intended;
effective; efficacious”). Thus, to be “valid,” an attorney-in-fact must be able to
use the durable general power of attorney for its intended purposes.
The petitioner, by contrast, relies upon RSA 506:6, VIII(b) (2010) to argue
that he was entitled to act pursuant to the durable general power of attorney
despite the fact that it lacked an executed and affixed acknowledgment. We
conclude that the petitioner misconstrues the meaning of the statute. RSA
506:6, VIII(b) provides: “Failure to comply with paragraph VI or VII shall not
invalidate an otherwise valid durable power of attorney, subject to the
provisions of RSA 506:7, IV(b)” (emphasis added). By its terms, this statute
creates an exception to the requirements that a power of attorney contain both
an executed and affixed disclosure statement and acknowledgment. However,
this exception applies only to powers of attorney that are “otherwise valid.” To
determine whether the durable power of attorney is “otherwise valid” one must
look to RSA 506:6, VIII(a) (2010), which sets forth the requirements for validity.
RSA 506:6, VIII(a) states:
A power of attorney shall be valid if it:
(1) Is valid under common law or statute existing at the time of
execution; or
(2) Has been determined by the court to be valid upon the filing of
a petition pursuant to RSA 506:7.
With respect to RSA 506:6, VIII(a)(2), the petitioner does not contend that
a court has determined that the power of attorney at issue is valid. And insofar
as the instant proceeding may be considered to provide the occasion for such a
determination, see RSA 506:7, RSA 506:6, VIII(a)(2) cannot plausibly be read to
confer upon the courts an ad hoc authority to declare valid a power of attorney
if doing so would contravene other provisions of RSA 506:6. To the contrary, in
deciding whether a power of attorney has been or can be validly used, courts
must apply the law as specified in RSA 506:6, including the acknowledgement
requirement, unless another provision of the statute specifically excepts the
power of attorney in question from the need to comply with RSA 506:6, VII(a).
As explained below, RSA 506:6, VIII(a)(1) provides the only possible basis for
excepting a power of attorney from the requirements of RSA 506:6, VII(a), and
it does not apply in this case.
4
Based upon its terms, it is apparent that the purpose of RSA 506:6,
VIII(a)(1) is to function as a “grandfather” provision that serves to validate
durable general powers of attorney which, although not complying with the
present requirements of RSA 506:6, were valid under the governing law (either
common law or statutory) in effect when they were executed. New Hampshire
law did not address the use of disclosure statements or acknowledgments in
connection with powers of attorney prior to 2001, when the legislature added
paragraphs V through IX to RSA 506:6. See RSA 506:6, V-IX (Supp. 2001); see
also Laws 2001, 257:1. However, under the 2001 legislation, the inclusion of
disclosure statements and acknowledgements in powers of attorney, as
provided for by paragraphs VI and VII of the statute, was discretionary rather
than mandatory. RSA 506:6, VI, VII (Supp. 2001). The 2001 legislation also
added paragraph VIII, which provided: “Nothing in paragraphs V – VII of this
section shall render ineffective a durable power of attorney validly executed
under New Hampshire law.”1 RSA 506:6, VIII (Supp. 2001).
It was not until 2003 that another statutory amendment revised
paragraphs VI and VII of RSA 506:6 to make disclosure statements and
acknowledgments mandatory components of durable general powers of
attorney. See RSA 506:6, VI, VII (Supp. 2003); see also Laws 2003, 312:4. At
the same time, the legislature amended paragraph VIII of RSA 506:6 to include
subsections (a) and (b). RSA 506:6, VIII (Supp. 2003). However, the 2003
amendment included within the exception for “otherwise valid” powers of
attorney created by paragraph VIII(b) only powers of attorney that lacked
disclosure statements; powers of attorney that lacked an acknowledgment were
not covered by the exception.2 Id. In 2005, the legislature once again amended
RSA 506:6, VIII(b) to its present form, which makes clear that “otherwise valid”
durable powers of attorney may include those that lack either a disclosure
statement, an acknowledgment, or both. See Laws 2005, 71:4.
With the above statutory history in mind, when RSA 506:6, VII(a), VIII(a)
and VIII(b) are read together, it becomes clear that to be “otherwise valid”
without a disclosure statement and/or an acknowledgment, a durable power of
attorney must be one that did not require these components to be valid at the
time it was executed. Construing the “otherwise valid” language of RSA 506:6,
VIII(b) in this fashion is the only way to avoid it contradicting RSA 506:6, VI(a)
and VII(a), a result that would be contrary to our settled rules of statutory
interpretation. See Appeal of Union Tel. Co., 160 N.H. 309, 311 (2010) (“When
1 Under the 2001 legislation, paragraph V was added to RSA 506:6. It stated: “An attorney in fact
is not authorized to make gifts to the attorney in fact or to others unless the durable power of
attorney explicitly authorizes such gifts.” RSA 506:6, V (Supp. 2001); see also Laws 2001, 257:1.
2 Pursuant to Laws 2003, 312:4, RSA 506:6, VIII(b) stated: “Failure to comply with paragraph VI
shall not invalidate an otherwise valid durable power of attorney, subject to the provisions of RSA
506:7, IV(b).”
5
interpreting two statutes which deal with similar subject matter, we will
construe them so that they do not contradict each other, and so that they will
lead to reasonable results and effectuate the legislative purpose of the
statute.”).
Because the durable power of attorney at issue in this case was executed
in October 2004, after the date when an acknowledgment was a mandatory
prerequisite to the use of the power, it does not qualify as “otherwise valid”
within the meaning of RSA 506:6, VIII(b).3 Consequently, the trial court did not
err in granting the respondents’ motion for summary judgment.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
3 The petitioner asserts that our construction of RSA 506:6, VIII(b) renders RSA 506:7, IV(b) (2010)
superfluous. We disagree. While RSA 506:6, VIII(b) permits the use of powers of attorney that
lack disclosure statements and/or acknowledgments if they were executed at a time when these
components were not required, the “subject to the provisions of RSA 506:7, IV(b)” language of the
statute serves to make clear that, although the power may be valid, gifts or transfers made
pursuant to such “grandfathered” powers of attorney do not enjoy the presumption of lawfulness
conferred by the first sentence of RSA 506:7, IV(b). Moreover, pursuant to the second sentence of
RSA 506:7, IV(b), an attorney-in-fact acting under such a power, when challenged, must bear the
burden of proving that a transfer of the principal’s property made for less than adequate
consideration “was authorized and was not a result of undue influence, fraud, or
misrepresentation.”
6