THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2012-081
KEVIN P. SHEEHAN
v.
NEW HAMPSHIRE DEPARTMENT OF
RESOURCES AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Argued: September 20, 2012
Opinion Issued: November 15, 2012
Michael J. DiCola, of Hudson, on the brief and orally, for the petitioner.
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Lauren J. Noether, senior assistant
attorney general, and Anne M. Edwards, associate attorney general, on the
memorandum of law, and Ms. Noether orally), for the respondent.
CONBOY, J. The petitioner, Kevin P. Sheehan, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Lewis, J.) entering judgment in favor of the respondent, the
New Hampshire Department of Resources and Economic Development (DRED),
on his request for declaratory, injunctive, and other relief. We affirm.
The trial court found the following facts. On November 13, 2008, the
petitioner purchased property in Derry (the Property). The Property abuts
Jackman Road, which is a class VI town road and not in good condition. The
Property is connected to Warner Hill Road by a .44 mile tract of land that is
under DRED’s control as part of its statewide trail system. See RSA ch. 216-F
(2011).
In the 1930’s, the Boston & Maine Railroad (B&M) owned this tract as
part of a larger railroad corridor. In the mid-to-late 1930’s, B&M sought to
abandon the corridor to the State. After extended negotiations with B&M and
adjacent abutters, the State acquired the corridor through a mechanism known
as a Commissioners’ Return of Highway Layout. The purpose expressed by the
State in acquiring the corridor was to create a highway over its length.
Thereafter, the New Hampshire Department of Public Works and Highways
(DPWH) controlled the corridor. The DPWH removed the railroad ties from the
corridor, but improved only certain portions; the portion of the corridor
abutting the Property remains an unpaved dirt trail.
In 1975, the Governor and Executive Council transferred the unimproved
portions of the corridor from DPWH to DRED for recreational trail use. See
RSA 216-F:1, III. Before and after the 1975 transfer, the prior owners of the
Property utilized the corridor to access the Property by non-recreational motor
vehicles. In July 2008, however, before the petitioner purchased the Property,
DRED moved a gate nearer to Warner Hill Road, effectively blocking all non-
recreational motor vehicles from using the corridor to access the Property.
Currently, the portion of the corridor abutting the Property is used only for
recreational activities.
Before purchasing the Property, the petitioner understood that the State
claimed ownership of the corridor and that a gate blocked non-recreational
motor vehicle access. After purchasing the Property, the petitioner filed this
equity action seeking to bar DRED from prohibiting or interfering with non-
recreational motor vehicle access over the portion of the corridor separating the
Property from Warner Hill Road. The petitioner alleges that DRED has violated
RSA 216-F:2, II.
The superior court conducted a bench trial on this issue and heard from
several expert witnesses. Ultimately, it determined that the State had acquired
title in fee simple to the corridor through a highway layout and that the portion
of the corridor abutting the Property is not a “public road” because the State
has never “constructed” on it. Thus, the court ruled that DRED did not violate
RSA 216-F:2, II. This appeal followed.
On appeal, the petitioner contends that the trial court erred when it
determined that the State owns the corridor in fee simple and when it found
that the corridor is not a public road. Because the petitioner failed to submit a
transcript, we assume that the evidence was sufficient to support the trial
2
court’s conclusion and review for legal error only. See Buatti v. Prentice, 162
N.H. 228, 229 (2011).
We find consideration of whether the State acquired fee simple ownership
and whether the corridor constitutes a public road unnecessary. Even if we
assume, without deciding, that the trial court erred in both respects, we,
nonetheless, affirm the trial court’s decision because the State has statutory
authority to limit the public’s use of the corridor. See RSA ch. 216-F; see also
Catalano v. Town of Windham, 133 N.H. 504, 508 (1990) (“[W]hen a trial court
reaches the correct result, but on mistaken grounds, [we] will sustain the
decision if there are valid alternative grounds to support it.” (quotation
omitted)).
We are the final arbiter of the intent of the legislature as expressed in the
words of a statute considered as a whole. Estate of Gordon-Couture v. Brown,
152 N.H. 265, 266 (2005). We first examine the language of the statute, and,
where possible, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meaning to the words used.
Id. Our goal is to apply statutes in light of the legislature’s intent in enacting
them, and in light of the policy sought to be advanced by the entire statutory
scheme. Id.
Furthermore, statutes in derogation of the common law are to be
interpreted strictly. Id. While a statute may abolish a common law right, there
is a presumption that the legislature has no such purpose. Id. If a common
law right is to be taken away, it must be expressed clearly by the legislature.
Id.
In relevant part, RSA 216-F:2 provides:
I. The trails within the system shall be held, developed and
administered under this chapter primarily as recreational trails for
hiking, nature walks, bird watching, horseback riding, bicycling,
ski touring, snowshoeing, snowmobiling, mushing, and off highway
recreational vehicles and the natural scenic beauty thereof shall be
preserved insofar as is practical . . . .
II. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the right
of the public to pass over existing public roads which may be or
become part of the trail system . . . .
III. . . . A restriction on the use of any type of a mechanized
means of transportation on portions of the trail shall be imposed
by the commissioner where, in his opinion, it would be most
disruptive for the other stated principal purposes.
3
The petitioner argues that although RSA 216-F:2, I, provides that the trails
within the statewide trail system shall be “held, developed and administered
. . . as recreational trails,” RSA 216-F:2, II provides that the section is not
intended to “limit the right of the public to pass over existing public roads” that
become part of the trail system. The petitioner asserts that, read together,
these provisions preclude the State from restricting non-recreational motor
vehicles over public roads that are part of the trail system. We disagree.
We cannot conclude that by enacting RSA 216-F:2, II, the legislature
intended to prohibit DRED from excluding non-recreational motor vehicles
from using public roads within its trail system that have not been developed for
such use. Such an interpretation is contrary to the overall purpose of the
statute. The legislature enacted RSA chapter 216-F to establish trails for
recreational purposes such as hiking, nature walks, and bicycling. See RSA
216-F:2, I. Additionally, the legislature expressly allows DRED’s commissioner
to restrict the use of any type of a mechanized means of transportation “where,
in his opinion, it would be most disruptive for the other stated principal trail
uses.” RSA 216-F:2, III.
Moreover, the petitioner’s interpretation would abrogate common law
principles when the legislature has not expressed a clear intention to do so.
Under our common law, public highways are subject to State control. State v.
Cox, 91 N.H. 137, 141 (1940), aff’d, 312 U.S. 569 (1941); see also Opinion of
the Justices, 94 N.H. 501, 503 (1947). A highway’s use is “such as the State
permits, and . . . any conditions of permission are proper, provided they are not
forbidden by the Constitution.” Cox, 91 N.H. at 141. Furthermore, the State
“may limit the travel uses to certain forms of use.” Id. In other words, the
State has the authority to regulate the “time, mode, and circumstances under
which parties shall assert, enjoy, or exercise their rights of highway use.” Id.
(quotation and brackets omitted). Because the legislature has not clearly
expressed an intention to abrogate these principles under RSA 216-F:2, II, we
reject the petitioner’s interpretation. See Brown, 152 N.H. at 266.
Here, DRED has not barred the petitioner’s access over the corridor.
Rather, DRED prohibits one form of access – non-recreational motor vehicle
travel. Accordingly, we hold that the trial court did not err in concluding that
DRED has not limited “the public’s right to pass over existing public roads,”
pursuant to RSA 216-F:2, II.
As a final matter, any issue raised in the notice of appeal but not briefed
is deemed waived. See In re Estate of King, 149 N.H. 226, 230 (2003).
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, LYNN and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
4