THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Sullivan
No. 2012-596
ROBIN PLAISTED
v.
JEFFREY A. LABRIE
Submitted: March 14, 2013
Opinion Issued: July 16, 2013
Myers Associates, PLLC, of Lebanon (Howard B. Myers on the brief), for
the plaintiff.
Law Offices of Simpson & Mulligan, PLLC, of Lebanon (James L. Mulligan
on the memorandum of law), for the defendant.
BASSETT, J. The plaintiff, Robin Plaisted, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Tucker, J.) granting the motion of the defendant, Jeffrey A.
LaBrie, to dismiss as time-barred her petition seeking proceeds from the sale of
property that she claims to have once owned. We affirm.
The plaintiff alleges the following facts, which we accept as true for
purposes of this appeal. Elter-Nodvin v. Nodvin, 163 N.H. 678, 679 (2012). In
May 2002, the plaintiff and the defendant entered into a purchase and sale
agreement with Ocwen Federal Bank FSB to purchase property located at 10
Nelson Street in Woodsville. The parties initialed each page of the agreement
and signed as buyers; however, the defendant signed only on behalf of Blue
Star Consulting (Blue Star) – a New Hampshire corporation of which he was the
sole shareholder, officer, and director. On July 19, a quitclaim deed listing
Blue Star as sole grantee was recorded with the Grafton County Registry of
Deeds.
On July 31, the plaintiff wrote, and the defendant cashed, a check made
out to “Jeff LaBrie” in the amount of $19,500. The check noted that it was
“[f]rom R. Plaisted for full payment for 50% of 10 Nelson [Street] Property.” On
August 15, the defendant, as president of Blue Star, signed a “Declaration of
Ownership” stating that Blue Star granted to the plaintiff a fifty percent
interest in the property. Two years later, on October 15, 2004, Blue Star sold
the property for a profit of $98,855.97 and wired the proceeds to a bank
account “[f]or the benefit of Blue Star Consulting (Jeff LaBrie).”
In October 2011, the plaintiff petitioned the trial court, seeking a
declaration that she had been a one-half owner of the property, as well as an
order requiring the defendant to pay her one-half of the sale proceeds. The
defendant moved to dismiss, contending that the plaintiff had “failed to allege
either facts or law upon which the Court could conclude . . . that she had, or
now has, any claim to title of the subject property,” and, thus, her claim was
“personal in nature.” He maintained that, since her claim was personal in
nature, it was time-barred under the three-year statute of limitations. See RSA
508:4 (2010). The plaintiff objected, arguing that, pursuant to Shuris v.
Morgan, 118 N.H. 154 (1978), her claim for the proceeds from the sale of the
property was based upon her ownership interest in the property, and, thus, the
twenty-year statute of limitations for the recovery of real estate applied. See
RSA 508:2 (2010). The trial court granted the defendant’s motion, and this
appeal followed.
In reviewing the trial court’s grant of a motion to dismiss, our standard
of review is whether the allegations in the plaintiff’s pleadings are reasonably
susceptible of a construction that would permit recovery. Kilnwood on
Kanasatka Condo. Unit Assoc. v. Smith, 163 N.H. 751, 752 (2012). We assume
that the plaintiff’s pleadings are true and construe all reasonable inferences in
the light most favorable to her. Id. We then engage in a threshold inquiry that
tests the facts in the petition against the applicable law, and if the allegations
constitute a basis for legal relief, we must hold that it was improper to grant
the motion to dismiss. Id.
The plaintiff argues that her cause of action is an action for the recovery
of real estate, and, thus, the trial court erred in applying the three-year statute
of limitations under RSA 508:4 rather than the twenty-year statute of
limitations under RSA 508:2. We disagree.
2
RSA 508:2, I, provides, in relevant part, that “[n]o action for the recovery
of real estate shall be brought after 20 years from the time the right to recover
first accrued.” RSA 508:4, I, provides, in pertinent part, that “all personal
actions, except actions for slander or libel, may be brought only within 3 years
of the act or omission complained of.”
To determine the nature of a cause of action for statute of limitations
purposes, we look not to “the form of the action but rather its substance.”
Wood v. Greaves, 152 N.H. 228, 231 (2005) (quotation, brackets, and ellipsis
omitted). In this case, the plaintiff does not seek the recovery of real property.
Rather, she seeks her share of the proceeds from the sale of the property. She
acknowledges that she is “attempting to recover damages based on a breach of
contract and fraud.” Nevertheless, relying upon Shuris, she maintains that,
because she seeks to establish that she once had an ownership interest in the
property, and because her claim for the sale proceeds is based upon that
interest, her claims are subject to the twenty-year statute of limitations in RSA
508:2. In support of her argument, she cites the following language from
Shuris: “It is true, as defendant argues, that plaintiff seeks money and not the
property, but his claim for the money as a substitute for the property rests on
his claim of ownership of the property itself.” Shuris, 118 N.H. at 157. Based
upon this language, the plaintiff argues that we held that a claim for sale
proceeds derived from an ownership interest is subject to the twenty-year
statute of limitations provided in RSA 508:2.
However, Shuris does not stand for the proposition that a claim for
proceeds from the sale of real property, if based upon a claim of ownership of
the property itself, is subject to the twenty-year statute of limitations in RSA
508:2. Although in Shuris, as in this case, the plaintiff sought to establish his
right to proceeds from the sale of real estate he claimed to own, id. at 155,
because we found that the plaintiff’s cause of action was timely whether it
arose under RSA 508:2 or RSA 508:4, we did not have occasion to decide which
statute of limitations applied to the plaintiff’s claim. Id. at 157. Shuris,
therefore, is inapposite.
Here, construing all reasonable inferences in the plaintiff’s favor, we
agree with the trial court that the plaintiff’s action was personal in nature and,
therefore, subject to the three-year statute of limitations in RSA 508:4. The
plaintiff’s petition alleges conduct by which the defendant, through Blue Star,
“promote[d] an injustice and fraud upon” her. She alleges that the defendant
obtained one-half of the purchase price from her and represented that he
would grant her a one-half interest in the property, but, in fact, did not do so.
In substance, the plaintiff claims that, were it not for the defendant’s breach of
contract or fraud, she would have had a one-half ownership interest in the
property and been entitled to one-half of the sale proceeds. See Wood, 152
3
N.H. at 231 (nature of cause of action for statute of limitations purposes is
determined by substance of action rather than form). Under her own theory of
recovery, therefore, she would not be entitled to obtain her share of the sale
proceeds without first establishing that she had an ownership interest in the
property and this she could do only by proving that the defendant had
breached their contract or committed fraud.
Because the plaintiff’s action is predicated upon establishing the
defendant’s breach of contract or fraud, she was required to bring it within
three years of the time the breach or fraud was discovered “or in the exercise of
reasonable diligence should have [been] discovered.” RSA 508:4, I; see Sutton
v. Sutton, 118 P.3d 700, 703 (Kan. Ct. App. 2005) (concluding that to maintain
action to recover property, plaintiff first was required to nullify fraudulent
conveyance, and, thus, her action should have been brought under the time
period for fraudulent conveyances and not recovery of real property); Herthel v.
Barth, 81 P.2d 19, 20, 21 (Kan. 1938) (finding plaintiff’s action “to obtain a
decree to impress land with a constructive trust in favor of the plaintiff”
depended entirely upon establishing defendant’s fraud and, therefore, the “gist
of the action was – relief on the ground of fraud” that was barred by the two-
year fraud statute of limitations (quotation omitted)); Potter v. Cottrill, 2012 WL
1964921, at *3-4 (Ohio Ct. App. 2012) (finding that before plaintiff could obtain
recovery of title to real property he would have to prove that defendant
breached her fiduciary duty and, thus, actual nature of plaintiff’s claims was
breach of fiduciary duty subject to breach of fiduciary duty statute of
limitations). Here, the plaintiff’s petition alleges that those fraudulent or
wrongful acts occurred no later than October 15, 2004, the date on which Blue
Star sold the property and failed to share the proceeds with her. This action
was commenced in October 2011, seven years after the sale, and, as the trial
court observed, the plaintiff has not raised the applicability of the discovery
rule exception. See Perez v. Pike Inds., 153 N.H. 158, 160 (2005) (explaining
that, once the defendant establishes that the cause of action was not brought
within three years of the alleged act, the burden shifts to the plaintiff to raise
and prove the applicability of the discovery rule exception). Accordingly, we
conclude that the trial court did not err in applying the three-year statute of
limitations for personal actions under RSA 508:4, and we affirm its dismissal of
the plaintiff’s claims.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
4