THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2012-387
BILDEN PROPERTIES, LLC & a.
v.
S. GERALD BIRIN & a.
Argued: June 4, 2013
Opinion Issued: August 21, 2013
Opinion Modified: September 30, 2013
Coughlin, Rainboth, Murphy & Lown, P.A., of Portsmouth (Kenneth D.
Murphy on the brief and orally), for petitioner Bilden Properties, LLC.
Wacks & McHale PC, of Lynnfield, Massachusetts (Kenneth D. Wacks
and Michelle A. McHale on the brief, and John F. Willis orally), for petitioner
TD Bank, N.A.
Hage Hodes, P.A., of Manchester (Jamie N. Hage on the brief and orally),
for the respondents.
DALIANIS, C.J. The petitioners, Bilden Properties, LLC (Bilden
Properties) and TD Bank, N.A. (TD Bank), appeal, and the respondents, S.
Gerald and Gail Birin (the Birins), cross-appeal, an order of the Superior Court
(Nicolosi, J.) finding, among other things, that the petitioners are bona fide
purchasers for value, who acquired interests in the subject property without
notice of the Birins’ mortgage on it. We affirm in part, reverse in part, vacate in
part, and remand.
The trial court found or the record supports the following facts. The
property at issue is 719 Daniel Webster Highway in Merrimack. On December
18, 2001, Austin James Properties, LLC acquired title to the property and
granted first and second mortgages to Southern New Hampshire Bank. The
managing member of Austin James Properties, LLC was Scott Desantis. In
2006, to secure a number of debts Desantis and entities that he controlled
owed to the Birins, Austin James Properties, LLC granted a $1 million
mortgage on the property to the Birins. The $1 million mortgage far exceeds
the property’s fair market value.
The Birins’ mortgage deed is captioned incorrectly. Although the text of
the deed identifies the grantor as “Austin James Properties, LLC,” the caption
identifies the grantor as “Austin James Development, LLC.” (Emphases added.)
Perhaps because of the caption error, the grantor index in the registry of deeds
lists Austin James Development, LLC as the grantor of the Birins’ mortgage
instead of Austin James Properties, LLC.
In May and July 2007, Austin James Properties, LLC granted mortgages
on the property to Blackfoot Capital, LLC. The May 2007 mortgage lists the
grantor as Austin James Properties, LLC. The May 2007 mortgage encumbers
two properties: the subject property and 31 Temple Street in Nashua.
The July 2007 mortgage to Blackfoot Capital, LLC identifies several
grantors: Alan James Development, LLC; Austin James Properties, LLC a/k/a
Austin James Development, LLC; Desantis Home Development, LLC; Paul
James Development, LLC; Scott J. Desantis a/k/a Scott Desantis; and Steven
James Development, LLC. The July 2007 mortgage encumbers “[a]ll property
owned by Mortgagor in the County of Hillsborough” except for the homestead
property owned by Desantis in Nashua.
In November 2007, Austin James Properties, LLC entered into a
purchase and sale agreement with Bilden Properties regarding the subject
property. Bilden Properties applied to TD Bank for a purchase money loan
secured by a mortgage. TD Bank retained the services of an attorney to certify
that title to the property was marketable and insurable. The attorney delegated
the task of examining title to a title abstractor.
By searching the grantor index under Austin James Properties, LLC, the
title abstractor discovered the July 2007 mortgage to Blackfoot Capital, LLC,
2
which identifies one of the grantors as Austin James Properties, LLC a/k/a
Austin James Development, LLC. However, she did not search the grantor
index for conveyances by Austin James Development, LLC. Instead, she
contacted the Office of the New Hampshire Secretary of State and was informed
that no entity with that name was registered there.
The title abstractor informed the attorney about the July 2007 mortgage
to Blackfoot Capital, LLC noting that the deed “references the current owner
with an aka of Austin James Development, LLC”; she asked the attorney
whether she should “run any other names” in the grantor index. The attorney
did not instruct her to do so. Because the title abstractor did not search the
grantor index under “Austin James Development, LLC,” she did not find the
Birins’ mortgage. Had she done such a search, she would have discovered it.
Ultimately, the attorney certified that title to the property was marketable
and insurable, and, in December 2007, Austin James Properties, LLC conveyed
the subject property to Bilden Properties by warranty deed for $339,000.
Bilden Properties granted a mortgage to TD Bank in the amount of $271,000.
As part of the sale, discharges were obtained of the two Southern New
Hampshire Bank mortgages in the amount of $156,899.70. In addition, the
Blackfoot Capital, LLC mortgages were satisfied in the amount of $75,000.
In 2009, the Birins began foreclosure proceedings on the property. The
petitioners moved to temporarily and permanently enjoin the foreclosure and
for certain declaratory and equitable relief. A temporary injunction was
granted in July 2009. Following a bench trial, the trial court found that the
petitioners were bona fide purchasers for value, who purchased the subject
property without notice of the Birins’ mortgage. Despite this finding, the trial
court also ruled that the petitioners’ interests in the property were equitably
subrogated up to the amount paid to discharge the Southern New Hampshire
Bank mortgages. Moreover, although the trial court granted the petitioners’
request for a permanent injunction “prohibiting the [Birins] from foreclosing on
or exercising any purported right, title or interest against the [subject
property],” the trial court stated that their “right of foreclosure is limited by the
terms of their mortgage and as a mortgagee junior to the TD Bank mortgage as
subrogated.” The trial court denied a subsequent motion for clarification, and
this appeal followed.
We begin by deciding whether, as the Birins contend, the trial court
erred when it found that the petitioners were bona fide purchasers for value,
who purchased the property without notice of the Birins’ mortgage.
New Hampshire is a “race-notice” jurisdiction. C F Invs. v. Option One
Mortgage, Corp., 163 N.H. 313, 315 (2012). In a “race-notice” jurisdiction,
“priority is given to a subsequent purchaser who acquires an interest without
3
notice of the prior interest, but only if the subsequent purchaser also records
that subsequent interest before the owner of the prior interest records that
prior interest.” 14 R. Powell, Powell on Real Property § 82.02[1][a](3) (Michael
Allan Wolf ed., 2013); see RSA 477:3-a (2001). Thus, in this case, the Birins’
mortgage is not enforceable against the petitioners if the petitioners acquired
their interest in the property without notice of the Birins’ mortgage and the
petitioners recorded their interest first. See Powell, supra § 82.02[1][c][iii].
Notice may be of three types: (1) actual; (2) record; and (3) inquiry. Id.
§ 82.02[1][d]; see C F Invs., 163 N.H. at 316. “Actual notice” refers to
“information concerning the fact – as, for example, concerning the prior
interest, claim, or right – directly and personally communicated to the party.”
Powell, supra § 82.02[1][d][i] (quotation omitted).
“Record notice” is “notice arising solely from the record.” Id.
§ 82.02[1][d][ii]. “Record notice” is sometimes referred to as “constructive