THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
9th Circuit Court - Manchester Family Division
No. 2012-135
IN THE MATTER OF S. REBECCA CARMODY AND CRAIG T. CARMODY
Submitted: January 10, 2013
Opinion Issued: March 13, 2013
Law Office of Joshua L. Gordon, of Concord (Joshua L. Gordon on the
brief), for the defendant.
S. Rebecca Carmody, self-represented party, filed no brief.
BASSETT, J. The defendant, Craig T. Carmody, appeals an order of the
9th Circuit Court - Manchester Family Division (Emery, J.) denying his request
for the return of firearms that he had relinquished six years earlier as required
by a domestic violence temporary order. See RSA 173-B:5, X (2002). We
reverse and remand.
The following facts are drawn from the trial court’s order or are otherwise
supported by the record. On January 3, 2005, a domestic violence temporary
order was issued that required the defendant to relinquish all firearms in his
possession. On May 12, 2005, the Superior Court approved an agreement
signed by the defendant and the plaintiff, S. Rebecca Carmody, to withdraw the
order.
On November 9, 2011, the defendant requested the return of the firearms
that he had relinquished pursuant to the order. The plaintiff stated that she
had no objection. The New Hampshire State Police sent a facsimile to the court
stating “there are [no] firearm disqualifiers on [the defendant’s] Criminal
Record.” On December 12, 2011, the court conducted a hearing during which
counsel for the defendant stated that the Chief of the Greenfield Police
Department had contacted him regarding the defendant’s firearms and
inquired whether counsel could “do something to try [to] get them out of [the
Chief’s] care, custody, and control.”
Following the hearing, the court denied the defendant’s motion. The
court ruled that the language of RSA 173-B:5, X “limited the defendant to
applying within 15 days prior to the expiration of the court’s order of
protection.” The court concluded that it had “no choice but to deny the
motion” as the defendant filed his request more than six years after the
expiration of the protective order. The defendant’s motion for reconsideration
was denied, and this appeal followed.
The defendant argues that the trial court erred in construing RSA 173-
B:5, X. We review the trial court’s interpretation of a statute de novo. In the
Matter of McArdle & McArdle, 162 N.H. 482, 484 (2011). We are the final
arbiter of the intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of the statute
considered as a whole. Id. We first examine the language of the statute, and,
where possible, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used.
Id. When the language of a statute is clear on its face, its meaning is not
subject to modification. Id. We will neither consider what the legislature might
have said nor add words that it did not see fit to include. Id. at 485.
RSA 173-B:5, X(a) states, in pertinent part:
Within 15 days prior to the expiration of the protective orders,
the defendant may request, by motion to the court, the return of
any and all firearms and ammunition and specified deadly
weapons held by the law enforcement agency while the protective
order was in effect. Upon receipt of such a motion, the court shall
schedule a hearing no later than 15 days after the expiration of the
order.
(Emphasis added.) We agree with the defendant that RSA 173-B:5, X(a) does
not limit the defendant to applying within fifteen days of the expiration of the
court’s order of protection for the return of his firearms. Rather, the express
language in RSA 173-B:5, X(a) provides that a defendant may request the
return of firearms within fifteen days prior to the expiration of a protective
order. See Appeal of Rowan, 142 N.H. 67, 71 (1997) (“It is the general rule that
in statutes the word ‘may’ is permissive only, and the word ‘shall’ is
mandatory.” (quotation omitted)). Nothing in the language of the statute
requires a defendant to apply within fifteen days of the order’s expiration or
2
forgo the return of his firearms. Accordingly, because the trial court
misconstrued RSA 173-B:5, we reverse and remand.
Reversed and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY, and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
3