THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Public Protection Fund Committee
No. 2012-300
APPEAL OF DAVID STACY
(New Hampshire Bar Association Public Protection Fund Committee)
Argued: January 16, 2013
Opinion Issued: March 29, 2013
Law Office of Steven M. Latici, P.A., of Gilmanton (Steven M. Latici on the
brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Thomas Quarles, Jr. and
Anna B. Peterson on the brief, and Mr. Quarles orally), for the respondent.
LYNN, J. The petitioner, David Stacy, appeals the decision of the New
Hampshire Bar Association Public Protection Fund Committee (PPFC) denying
his claim for reimbursement for the fees and costs that he and his
conservatorship estate paid to attorney Donald Wyatt. The PPFC found that
the petitioner failed to demonstrate that the funds at issue were lost as a result
of Wyatt’s embezzlement, conversion, or theft. We affirm.
In In re Proposed Public Protection Fund Rule, 142 N.H. 588 (1998), we
adopted Supreme Court Rule 55(2), which directs the New Hampshire Bar
Association to establish the Public Protection Fund (PPF). The PPF is “a
reimbursement mechanism for proven losses resulting from embezzlement,
conversion, or theft of client funds by lawyers.” Sup. Ct. R. 55(2). “[V]ictims
who have lost money or property as the result of the defalcation of the lawyer”
may petition the PPF for reimbursement, “explain[ing] specifically the
defalcations which led to the losses in question.” Sup. Ct. R. 55(3), (4). The
PPFC may hold a hearing on the petition, at which “[t]he claimant shall bear
the burden of proving each element of the claim, including the amount of the
claimant’s loss, by a preponderance of the evidence.” Public Protection Fund
Reg. 500.13.1 The PPFC then issues a written decision explaining its reasons
for approving or denying the claim. Id. 500.18.
A claim may be brought only against a lawyer who “has been suspended
or disbarred from practice; or . . . has died or been judged mentally
incompetent before the suspension or disbarment proceedings have been
commenced or concluded.” Sup. Ct. R. 55(3). Additionally, a claim “must be
submitted within three years of the time when the victim discovered or first
reasonably should have discovered the defalcations and the resulting losses.”
Id. Recovery on a claim is now capped at $250,000, Sup. Ct. R. 55(4), although
when Stacy filed his claim with the PPFC, the cap was $150,000.
I
The underlying facts are set forth in large part in Wyatt’s Case, 159 N.H.
285 (2009). Beginning in the spring of 1998, Wyatt served as personal counsel
to the petitioner. Wyatt’s Case, 159 N.H. at 289. In 2001, the petitioner
sought a voluntary conservatorship for himself and the appointment of Michel
Brault as his conservator. Id. at 290. Wyatt counseled the petitioner
throughout this process. Id. The Carroll County Probate Court approved the
petition and appointed Brault as conservator. Id. Brault, acting on the
petitioner’s behalf, entered into four agreements for legal services with Wyatt’s
firm, Wyatt & Theroux, PC. Brault signed one of the agreements pursuant to a
power of attorney granted by the petitioner; this agreement pre-dated Brault’s
appointment as conservator. Brault signed the remaining three agreements as
conservator.
On March 18, 2003, Brault resigned as conservator, id. at 305, and,
eventually, the probate court appointed the petitioner’s sister, Deborah Stacy,
in his place. Id. at 296. In May 2003, Ms. Stacy filed a professional conduct
complaint against Wyatt for having a conflict of interest when simultaneously
representing the conservatorship estate and the petitioner. Id. at 296-97. As a
result, the attorney discipline office charged Wyatt with violating New
Hampshire Rules of Professional Conduct 1.7 (amended 2007), 1.9 (amended
2007), and 8.4(a). Id. at 297.
1 See Regulations of the New Hampshire Bar Association Public Protection Fund Committee,
available at http://www.nhbar.org/for-the-public/public-protection-fund-committee-
regulations.asp (02/07/2013).
2
Ms. Stacy also objected to the inventory and accounts that Brault filed
with the probate court on behalf of the conservatorship in June 2002 and May
2003. On July 13, 2005, the probate court found that “Brault breached his
fiduciary obligations in numerous ways, to varying degrees, during his
management of [the petitioner’s conservatorship] estate.” The probate court
found that, among other breaches, Brault wasted estate assets on Wyatt’s legal
fees “when it was clear that Wyatt was in a clear conflict of interest position”
and the petitioner had objected to Wyatt’s continued representation of the
conservatorship estate. The probate court stated:
Consequently, payments for administrative support by Wyatt and
attorney fees and costs paid to Wyatt were not proper expenses of
the conservatorship estate and must be reimbursed to the estate
by Brault. Payment of attorney fees to Wyatt out of the
conservatorship estate . . . were a waste and misapplication of
conservatorship assets. . . . As conservator, Brault had a fiduciary
duty to see to the proper application of [the petitioner’s] resources
. . . . Brault failed miserably in this regard and should reimburse
the conservatorship estate for those failures, except to the extent, if
any, Wyatt reimburses the conservatorship estate for fees and
costs disallowed to him, as hereinafter stated.
Because of Wyatt’s inherent conflict of interest . . . , the [In
re Estate of McCool, 131 N.H. 340 (1988)] decision . . . essentially
instructs this Court to disallow all fees and costs incurred and
paid to Wyatt . . . . [The petitioner] identifies the total amount for
all fees paid to Donald Wyatt . . . as being $175,012.82. . . . [The
petitioner] identifies the total amount of administrative support
fees and costs paid to Wyatt . . . at $16,071.00. While the Court
has not tried to add up all the various separate amounts of fees,
legal and administrative, as well as all costs shown in various
amounts in the multiple exhibits presented in relation to [the]
question of Wyatt’s fees, the Court will accept the representation
being made by the requests and supporting exhibits as being
reasonably accurate and supported by the evidence presented
overall, as well as reasonable inferences to be derived therefrom.
Therefore, Donald Wyatt is ordered to reimburse the
conservatorship estate for all fees and costs paid to him, in the
amount of $175,012.82, and administrative support fees and costs
in the amount of $16,071.00.
(Quotation omitted; emphasis added.) The probate court ordered Wyatt to
repay $191,083.82 to the estate and, in case of Wyatt’s nonpayment, directed
Brault to make the payment.
3
Significantly, although he was ordered to reimburse the conservatorship
estate for all fees and costs paid to him, Wyatt was not a party to the
proceedings before the probate court. See In re Wyatt, 368 B.R. 99, 101
(Bankr. D.N.H. 2007). Additionally, Wyatt was involved in bankruptcy
proceedings at the time. Id. The petitioner filed a claim against Wyatt in those
proceedings, but the bankruptcy court disallowed it because the petitioner
failed to appear at a hearing. Id.
On November 2, 2005, the petitioner submitted a claim to the PPFC,
setting forth $191,083.82 as “the total amount of the actual theft” and
describing the manner of the loss by referring to the probate court order. The
petitioner stated that he first discovered “losses from Wyatt’s actions by order
of the Carroll County Probate Court dated July 13, 2005.” Because Supreme
Court Rule 55(4) provides that a claim may be brought only against a lawyer
who has been suspended or disbarred, the PPFC held the petitioner’s claim in
abeyance pending the resolution of Wyatt’s disciplinary action.
In September 2005, shortly before he filed his claim with the PPFC, the
petitioner brought suit against Brault’s probate bond insurance company,
eventually settling for $275,000 of the $400,000 bond. The release that the
petitioner signed on May 19, 2006 provided: “this release includes all claims
for attorneys fees and other legal expense or cost, interest, . . . and all claims
described in the order of the Carroll County Probate Court (Patten, J.) of July
13, 2005.”
In September 2009, disciplinary proceedings against Wyatt concluded.
See Wyatt’s Case, 159 N.H. at 309. We found that Wyatt operated under a
conflict of interest when he simultaneously represented the conservatorship
estate and the petitioner, and that the petitioner’s interests were materially
adverse to Brault’s interests as conservator. Id. at 305. Wyatt was suspended
from the practice of law for a period of two years for the “continuous and
knowing violations of his duties of loyalty.” Id. at 309. “In violating Conduct
Rules 1.7(a) and 1.9, [Wyatt] undertook and persisted in representations which
he knew or should have known were improper. Other attorneys twice pointed
out the conflicts of interest.” Id. at 308.
We did not disbar Wyatt because he did not “act pursuant to some
selfish or improper motive.” Id. at 309. “While [Wyatt] improperly favored
Brault’s and [the petitioner’s wife’s] interests, the reasonableness of [his] fear
for [the petitioner’s] welfare was never questioned in these proceedings and
mitigates much, though not all, of his misconduct.” Id. Unlike the probate
court, we did not direct Wyatt to forfeit the fees he had collected from the
petitioner and the conservatorship estate. The Professional Conduct
4
Committee (PCC), which prosecuted the disciplinary action, had waived the
argument that Wyatt violated Conduct Rule 1.5(a) by charging illegal fees while
operating under a conflict of interest. Id. at 305-06.
After Wyatt’s suspension, the PPFC brought forward the petitioner’s
claim and scheduled a hearing on the merits for August 26, 2010. Prior to the
hearing, the PPFC requested additional information, including whether a claim
had been made against the $400,000 surety bond. The petitioner responded
that he settled with the bond carrier for $275,000. The PPFC then cancelled
the August 2010 hearing; it directed the petitioner “to show cause why his
claim should not be dismissed on the grounds that he has made a full recovery
of his claimed damages from a third party.”
The petitioner responded that the release operated on all claims against
Brault rather than Wyatt. In a further response dated September 7, 2010, the
petitioner also raised new claims, in addition to the loss of $191,083.82 named
in his original claim. These new claims related to: legal fees paid to attorneys
in Texas, a car loan secured by the petitioner’s automobile, proceeds from a
loan issued to Wyatt, proceeds from the foreclosure sale of the petitioner’s
home, and a loan issued to the conservatorship estate but deposited into
Wyatt’s account.
The PPFC scheduled a hearing to address: (1) why the petitioner settled
the bond for less than $400,000; (2) why the petitioner’s claim should not be
reduced proportionately by his settlement; and (3) whether the funds subject to
the claim were paid to Wyatt as a result of Wyatt’s defalcation, embezzlement,
conversion, or theft. The PPFC ruled that the petitioner’s new claims were
untimely because he did not raise them until September 2010. See Sup. Ct. R.
55(3).
After a hearing on May 24, 2011, the PPFC ruled that it would reduce the
petitioner’s claim by the portion of his recovery on the bond that the probate
court found to be attributable to attorney’s fees. The PPFC rejected the
petitioner’s arguments that the probate court found that Wyatt committed
conversion and/or theft when he collected fees for his representation of the
petitioner, the conservatorship, and Brault, and that the PPFC was bound by
these findings.
Following a further hearing, the PPFC undertook an independent
calculation of the petitioner’s claim, noting that the probate court accepted the
parties’ representations without reviewing them. The PPFC concluded that the
petitioner had proved only $173,849.73 in attorney’s fees and expenses paid to
Wyatt during the period at issue in his claim. The PPFC offset that amount by
5
$36,481.00 representing the proportion of the petitioner’s recovery on the
probate bond attributable to Wyatt’s fees and expenses,2 resulting in a net
claim of $137,368.73.
The PPFC then addressed whether the petitioner’s claim arose from
Wyatt’s theft or conversion of client funds.3 It found that the petitioner failed
to carry his burden on this issue. As to theft, the PPFC found that the
evidence did not establish that Wyatt acted with the intent to steal when he
received funds from the conservatorship estate in payment of his legal fees and
expenses. With respect to conversion, the PPFC concluded that, because the
funds were paid to Wyatt with the permission of the conservator, Wyatt did not
act with the intent required for conversion since he did not know to a
substantial certainty that his actions “would wrongfully deprive the one
entitled to possession of the funds of possession.” In addition, it found no
conversion in Wyatt’s failure to return the funds after we upheld the PCC’s
“determination that he had a conflict of interest because that determination
came more than seven years after the last legal fees at issue were paid to [him]
and six years after he filed for bankruptcy, after presumably spending the legal
fees he received.” This appeal followed.
II
The standard of review applicable to a decision of the PPFC is an issue of
first impression. Supreme Court Rule 55(5) provides: “Decisions of the [PPFC]
as to whether or not to pay claims and the amount of payments shall be within
the [PPFC’s] discretion . . . and will be reviewable only for unsustainable
exercise of discretion.” (Emphasis added.) In the context of awarding
attorney’s fees, we have described the unsustainable exercise of discretion
standard as follows: “To be reversible on appeal, the discretion must have been
exercised for reasons clearly untenable or to an extent clearly unreasonable to
2 The PPFC explained its calculation of the offset as follows:
The probate court surcharged a total of $999,099.00 against Mr. Brault. Included
in this amount was the $191,083.82 in attorneys’ fees and costs that the probate
court found Attorney Wyatt should repay, but also surcharged against Mr. Brault
. . . . [T]he Fund determined that the percentage of the total surcharge due to
Attorney Wyatt’s attorneys’ fees, 19.1%, should be the percentage by which Mr.
Stacy’s bond recovery would reduce his claim to the Fund. Accordingly, the Fund
determined that Mr. Stacy’s claim should be reduced by $36,481.00, which is the
percentage of Mr. Stacy’s $275,000.00 bond recovery attributable to Wyatt’s
conduct.
(Citations omitted).
3 The petitioner makes no claim that Wyatt’s conduct constituted embezzlement within the
meaning of Supreme Court Rule 55.
6
the prejudice of the objecting party. If there is some support in the record for
the trial court’s determination, we will uphold it.” LaMontagne Builders v.
Brooks, 154 N.H. 252, 259 (2006) (quotation omitted).
On appeal, the petitioner argues that the PPFC erred in finding that
Wyatt had not committed theft or conversion when he collected and retained
fees while knowing about the conflict of interest involved in his joint
representation of the conservator and beneficiary of the conservatorship estate.
We disagree.
The PPF “provid[es] some measure of reimbursement to victims who have
lost money or property caused by the defalcation of lawyers.” Sup. Ct. R. 55(1).
Reimbursement for defalcation requires “proven losses resulting from
embezzlement, conversion, or theft of client funds by lawyers.” Sup. Ct. R.
55(2). The rule does not define the terms “embezzlement,” “conversion,” or
“theft.” Supreme Court Rule 55 is consistent with the ABA Model Rules for
Lawyer’s Funds for Client Protection (ABA Model Rules), pursuant to which
public protection funds generally “reimburs[e] losses caused by the dishonest
conduct of lawyers.” ABA Model Rule 1. “‘[D]ishonest conduct’
means wrongful acts committed by a lawyer in the nature of theft or
embezzlement of money or the wrongful taking or conversion of money,
property, or other things of value . . . .” ABA Model Rule 10 (emphasis added).
Thus, the focus of our rule is upon dishonest takings by lawyers.
Next, we consider the type of dishonesty contemplated by Supreme Court
Rule 55. Given that the defalcating attorney must be suspended or disbarred
before the client can obtain reimbursement, Sup. Ct. R. 55(4), we consider the
type of dishonest conduct that may warrant suspension or disbarment.
An attorney may be disbarred or suspended under the disciplinary
rule prohibiting an attorney from engaging in illegal conduct
involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation where the
attorney converts or wrongfully retains, misappropriates, or
misapplies money or property received in his or her professional
capacity. Continuing public confidence in the judicial system and
the bar requires that the strictest attorney discipline be imposed in
misappropriation cases and no circumstances ever justify the
deliberate misappropriation of client's funds for a lawyer’s personal
benefit.
7 Am. Jur. 2d Attorneys at Law § 63, at 131-32 (2007) (emphasis added). The
ABA Standards for Imposing Lawyer Sanctions, § 4.11, at 28 (1992)
7
(Standards)4, pursuant to which we sanctioned Wyatt, Wyatt’s Case, 159 N.H.
at 307, recommend disbarment “when a lawyer knowingly converts client
property and causes injury or potential injury to a client.” The Standards
distinguish between knowingly dealing improperly with client property and
knowingly converting client property.
[S]uspension is generally fitting when a lawyer knows or should
know that he is dealing improperly with client property and causes
injury or potential injury to a client. Standards, supra § 4.12.
Disbarment is reserved for when a lawyer “knowingly converts
client property,” in addition to causing injury or potential injury to
the client. Standards, supra § 4.11
Coddington’s Case, 155 N.H. 66, 68 (2007); see also In the Matter of Yalkut,
176 P.3d 1119, 1126 (N.M. 2008) (finding no conversion or misappropriation of
client funds where lawyer withdrew fees from trust account before he had
earned them under mistaken belief that his “flat fee” agreement with client
entitled him to do so). The Standards also distinguish between conversion and
failure to avoid a conflict of interest. See Standards, supra § 4.31, at 31. We
found that Wyatt had engaged in the latter, not the former.
Our case law is consistent with the policy of sanctioning most harshly
“illegal conduct involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation where
the attorney converts or wrongfully retains, misappropriates, or misapplies”
client funds. 7 Am. Jur. 2d Attorneys at Law § 63, at 131; see, e.g.,
Richmond’s Case, 153 N.H. 729, 745 (2006) (disbarring an attorney, as
recommended by the Standards, supra § 4.11, for knowingly converting client
property and causing or potentially causing injury to the client when the
attorney knowingly made transactions out of the client’s brokerage accounts,
against the client’s express instructions, for the attorney’s own benefit, and to
the client’s detriment); Doherty’s Case, 142 N.H. 446, 451-52 (1997)
(suspending an attorney for commingling and converting client funds by
expending the funds before having earned them, disobeying four court orders
to disgorge the funds, and placing his own financial difficulties above the needs
of his clients, thus “seriously calling into question the absence of a selfish
motive”); cf. Coddington’s Case, 155 N.H. at 70-71 (suspending an attorney for
commingling rather than knowingly converting client funds where, among
other mitigating factors, “there was no evidence that the [attorney had a
dishonest motive”]); Douglas’ Case, 147 N.H. 538, 545 (2002) (suspending an
attorney for improperly withdrawing client funds and applying them to her fees
where the attorney “did not make any intentional misrepresentations and . . .
4 Although we have not adopted the Standards, we look to them for guidance. Coddington's Case,
155 N.H. 66, 68 (2007).
8
her violations of the rules stemmed from her erroneous belief that she was
authorized to withdraw the escrowed funds”).
The petitioner relies upon Douglas’ Case, 156 N.H. 613 (2007), arguing
that it stands for the proposition that “applying client funds to the payment of
legal bills without permission is an act of conversion.” In Douglas’ Case, we
disbarred an attorney for violating several rules of professional conduct,
including Rule 1.15(c), which requires an attorney to segregate client property
during a dispute with a client over that property,5 and Rule 8.4(c), which
prohibits an attorney from engaging in conduct involving dishonesty, fraud,
deceit or misrepresentation. Douglas’ Case, 156 N.H. at 619-20. Petitioner
cites the following passage from that case as supporting his position:
The duty to safeguard property means that a lawyer may not use a
client’s or third party’s funds for his own or his law firm’s
purposes. Such misuse is conversion. Conversion in the extreme
sense occurs when a lawyer intentionally takes or uses client
funds for his own or the law firm’s use. Applying client funds to
the client's bill without permission is an example of conversion.
Id. at 619 (quotations, citations, and brackets omitted). But the attorney
conduct at issue in Douglas’ Case is qualitatively different from Wyatt’s
conduct here.
First, the attorney in Douglas’ Case failed to segregate client funds;
despite a disagreement with the client as to whether the funds should be
applied to the bill, the attorney withdrew them from her trust account,
converted them into cash and then into Traveler’s Checks, and put them into a
safe. Id. at 617-18. Second, she misrepresented to the client the whereabouts
of the funds. Id. at 620. Third, the attorney had a selfish motive. Id. at 623.
We adopted the judicial referee’s finding that the attorney engaged in knowing
conversion and disbarred her, as recommended by the Standards, supra
§ 4.11, at 28.
The referee concluded that the [attorney] knowingly violated the
duty to preserve her client’s property, the duty to be candid and
the duty to maintain personal integrity, and that her conduct
caused injury or potential injury to [the client]. As the referee
found, “the [attorney] knowingly converted [the client’s] property
when she withdrew the $49,000 from her trust account, without
[the client’s] knowledge or permission, and applied it to her fees.”
5 The requirement that an attorney segregate property that is subject to a dispute with the client
now appears in Rule 1.15(g) rather than Rule 1.15(c), as it did when the events at issue in
Douglas’ Case transpired.
9
Accordingly, disbarment is the proper sanction.
Id. at 621.
Although we have sometimes suspended attorneys for conduct falling
short of knowing dishonesty, based upon the above authorities, as well as the
underlying purpose of the PPF, we conclude that, to obtain reimbursement
from the PPF, a claimant must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that
the losses resulted from an attorney’s knowingly dishonest conduct. Public
Protection Fund Reg. 500.13; cf. O’Meyer v. Idaho State Bar, 67 P.3d 82, 84
(Idaho 2003) (“[R]ecovery from [Client Security Fund] was not intended to be a
substitute for a malpractice action. Reimbursement from the fund is limited to
loss caused by a lawyer’s dishonest conduct.” (quotation omitted)). The
findings contained in Wyatt’s Case and in the probate court’s order fall short of
such a showing.
Here, although Wyatt’s submission of his legal bills evidences his intent
to obtain payment from the petitioner and the conservatorship estate, Wyatt’s
conduct does not amount to a defalcation. The record supports the PPFC’s
finding that Wyatt sought and collected the fees and expenses under the
honest, albeit erroneous, belief that he had a valid claim to them as
compensation for the services he rendered. In fact, the petitioner did not
contend before the PPFC, nor does he argue on appeal, that Wyatt’s fees were
unearned or unreasonable. Even granting that Wyatt acted with knowledge of
his conflicted representation of both petitioner and Brault, as we found in
Wyatt’s Case, 159 N.H. at 307, knowledge of a conflict of interest is not the
equivalent of knowingly dishonest conduct.
The probate court’s order that Wyatt reimburse the conservatorship
estate for the fees he collected does not persuade us to the contrary. First,
Wyatt was not a party to the probate proceedings against Brault. Second, the
court’s conclusion that Wyatt was obligated to return his fees to the petitioner
was predicated upon our holding in In re Estate of McCool, 131 N.H. at 351. In
McCool, we held that “an attorney who violates our rules of professional
conduct by engaging in clear conflicts of interest, of whose existence he either
knew or should have known, may receive neither executor’s nor legal fees for
services he renders an estate.” However, an attorney’s obligation to return the
fees based upon a conflict of interest did not compel the PPFC here to find that
Wyatt’s conduct involved dishonesty within the meaning of Rule 55.
For the foregoing reasons, we find that the PPFC sustainably exercised
its discretion when it denied the petitioner’s claim for failing to prove by a
preponderance of the evidence that his losses resulted from the conversion or
theft of client funds by Wyatt within the meaning of Rule 55. See Sup. Ct. R.
10
55(5); Public Protection Fund Reg. 500.13. We therefore need not address the
petitioner’s other arguments on appeal.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
11