THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
6th Circuit Court – Franklin Family Division
No. 2012-402
IN RE CODY C.
Submitted: April 11, 2013
Opinion Issued: July 16, 2013
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief), for the State.
Christopher M. Johnson, chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief, for the juvenile.
BASSETT, J. The juvenile, Cody C., appeals a decision of the 6th Circuit
Court – Franklin Family Division (Gordon, J.) retaining jurisdiction over him
until his eighteenth birthday. See RSA 169-B:4, V (Supp. 2012). We affirm.
The record supports, or the parties agree to, the following facts. The
juvenile had been adjudicated delinquent on several occasions. Shortly before
the juvenile’s seventeenth birthday, the State moved, pursuant to RSA 169-B:4,
V, to extend the court’s jurisdiction until the juvenile’s eighteenth birthday.
At a hearing on the motion, the juvenile argued that RSA 169-B:4, V
cannot support the court’s retention of jurisdiction. The court disagreed,
ruling that paragraph V applied, and extended jurisdiction until the juvenile’s
eighteenth birthday. This appeal followed.
On appeal, the juvenile argues that the trial court erred in relying upon
RSA 169-B:4, V to retain jurisdiction until his eighteenth birthday. He
contends that the plain language of paragraph V “renders it applicable only in
cases otherwise covered by RSA 169-B:4, III.” We disagree.
We review the trial court’s statutory interpretation de novo. In re Kirsten
P., 158 N.H. 158, 160 (2008). In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the
final arbiters of the legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute
considered as a whole. Id. When examining the language of the statute, we
ascribe the plain and ordinary meaning to the words used. Id. We interpret
legislative intent from the statute as written and will not consider what the
legislature might have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit
to include. Id.
RSA 169-B:4, V provides, in pertinent part:
Notwithstanding paragraph III, when the court finds by clear
and convincing evidence that closing the case would endanger the
safety of the minor, any other person, or the community, or the
court finds that there is a high probability that continued provision
of treatment services is necessary to rehabilitate the minor, the
court may retain jurisdiction over any minor:
(a) Who has been found to have committed a violent crime as
defined under RSA 169-B:35-a, I(c);
(b) Who has been petitioned to the court on 4 or more
occasions and adjudicated delinquent in 4 separate
adjudicatory hearings which alleged misdemeanor or felony
offenses; or
(c) Who is subject to the jurisdiction of the court prior to the
minor’s seventeenth birthday and for whom the department
has filed a motion with the court requesting that the court
retain jurisdiction under this subparagraph . . . .
RSA 169-B:4, III provides, in pertinent part, that, at the request of the
State, “the court may retain jurisdiction over the minor for a period of up
to 2 years following the completion of any appeal if the petition was filed
after the minor had attained the age of 16 years.”
The juvenile argues that the legislature’s use of “[n]otwithstanding
paragraph III” in paragraph V limits paragraph V’s application to cases
otherwise covered by RSA 169-B:4, III. Because his case does not involve an
2
appeal and is not covered by RSA 169-B:4, III, the juvenile concludes that
paragraph V does not apply. The State counters that the “notwithstanding”
clause ensures the applicability of paragraph V, even when extended
jurisdiction under paragraph III is unavailable.
“Notwithstanding” means, in relevant part, “in spite of.” Webster’s Third
New International Dictionary 1545 (unabridged ed. 2002). Thus, by utilizing
the word “notwithstanding” in RSA 169-B:4, V, the legislature intended that
paragraph V apply regardless of whether paragraph III is also applicable. This
interpretation is consistent with how we have interpreted “notwithstanding” in
other statutes. See King v. Sununu, 126 N.H. 302, 306-07 (1985) (holding that
“notwithstanding” in statute dealing with distribution of sweepstakes revenue
expressed legislature’s intent that statute “take precedence” over a conflicting
statute); State v. Payne, 115 N.H. 595, 596, 598 (1975) (holding that penalty
provision of reckless operation statute stating “notwithstanding the provisions
of Title LXII” prevented the fines provided for therein from being limited by Title
LXII (quotation omitted)).
The juvenile argues that in In re Juvenile 2003-248, 150 N.H. 751
(2004), we adopted his interpretation of paragraph V. He is mistaken. The
issue in that case was whether the trial court properly retained jurisdiction
over a juvenile under paragraph V after the juvenile had exercised her rights
under paragraph IV to revoke her consent to the court’s continued jurisdiction
over her. In re Juvenile 2003-248, 150 N.H. at 751. We held that “if a court
retains jurisdiction over a case pursuant to a juvenile’s consent under
paragraph II, closure of the case is controlled exclusively by paragraph IV” and
not by paragraph V. Id. at 752. In dicta, we stated that the “application” of
paragraph V is limited to circumstances involving paragraph III. Id. at 753.
We were not construing paragraph V for all purposes, but rather were
reviewing it only in the narrow context of a case that was governed by
paragraph IV. See id. at 752-53.
Were we to interpret RSA 169-B:4, V as suggested by the juvenile, we
would severely limit the ability of trial courts to retain jurisdiction over the
most at-risk minors, i.e., those minors who have been found to have committed
violent crimes or who have been repeatedly adjudicated delinquent, RSA 169-
B:4, V (a), (b). Such an interpretation would contravene the purpose of RSA
chapter 169-B, which is, “[c]onsistent with the protection of the public
interest,” to “promote the minor’s acceptance of personal responsibility for
delinquent acts committed by the minor, encourage the minor to understand
and appreciate the personal consequences of such acts, and provide a minor
who has committed delinquent acts with counseling, supervision, treatment
and rehabilitation.” RSA 169-B:1, II (2002). Moreover, such an interpretation
would not serve “[t]o encourage the wholesome moral, mental, emotional, and
physical development of each minor coming within the provisions of this
3
chapter, by providing the protection, care, treatment, counselling, supervision,
and rehabilitative resources which such minor needs . . . .” RSA 169-B:1, I
(2002). We, therefore, reject the juvenile’s argument.
The juvenile argues that the rule of lenity requires us to construe the
statute in his favor. We have previously noted that “[t]he rule of lenity serves
as a guide for interpreting criminal statutes where the legislature failed to
articulate its intent unambiguously.” In re Alex C., 161 N.H. 231, 239 (2010)
(quotation and brackets omitted) (emphasis added). Even if we were to assume
that RSA 169-B:4, V is a criminal statute, the rule of lenity would not apply
here because the “notwithstanding” clause in RSA 169-B:4, V is not
ambiguous. See id. at 239-40.
Therefore, for all the above reasons, we uphold the trial court’s retention
of jurisdiction over the juvenile until his eighteenth birthday.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
4