THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2012-088
GREAT AMERICAN DINING, INC.
v.
PHILADELPHIA INDEMNITY INSURANCE COMPANY
Argued: January 10, 2013
Opinion Issued: February 25, 2013
Primmer, Piper, Eggleston & Cramer, PC, of Manchester (Doreen F.
Connor on the brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Morrison Mahoney, LLP, of Manchester (Edwin F. Landers, Jr. and
Caroline K. Delaney on the brief, and Ms. Delaney orally), for the respondent.
LYNN, J. The respondent, Philadelphia Indemnity Insurance Company
(Philadelphia), appeals an order of the Superior Court (Smukler, J.) finding that
the petitioner, Great American Dining, Inc. (GAD), is an additional insured
under a policy issued by Philadelphia. We affirm.
The trial court found the following facts. DW Ray Commons, LLC (DW
Ray) owned and leased a building to Webster Place Center, Inc. (Webster Place).
Prior to renting the building, DW Ray required Webster Place to obtain an
insurance policy listing DW Ray as an additional insured. In March 2008,
Webster Place obtained from Philadelphia a commercial general liability policy
that contained a provision listing as an additional insured “[a]ny person or
organization with respect to their liability arising out of the ownership,
maintenance or use of that part of the premises leased or rented to [Webster
Place] . . . .”
In October 2008, Dr. James Kenneth Wyly fell through the building’s
porch railing and suffered serious injuries. Dr. Wyly sued DW Ray and
Webster Place for damages. After the Superior Court issued a declaration that
DW Ray was an additional insured under Webster Place’s policy with
Philadelphia, Webster Place and DW Ray settled with Dr. Wyly and sued GAD
for contribution on the theory that GAD negligently constructed, installed, and
maintained the porch railing. A jury found that GAD was 45% at fault for Dr.
Wyly’s injuries.
GAD then filed the present declaratory judgment action, asking the trial
court to find that it is an additional insured under Webster Place’s policy with
Philadelphia, and, as such, entitled to reimbursement for defense costs
incurred in the action for contribution, the judgment rendered against it, and
costs and attorney’s fees pursuant to RSA 491:22-b (2010) for bringing the
action against Philadelphia to determine coverage.
The trial court determined that GAD is an additional insured under a
provision of the policy titled “Managers, Landlords or Lessors of Premises”
because the provision applies to “any person or organization” whose liability
“aris[es] out of ownership, maintenance or use” of the leased premises. The
court found that Philadelphia owed GAD a duty of defending the contribution
case because Dr. Wyly’s pleadings sufficiently alleged that GAD engaged in
maintenance. As to Philadelphia’s duty to indemnify GAD, the court concluded
that “the trial evidence and the theory upon which the judgment was actually
entered establish that GAD’s liability arose from its ‘maintenance’ of the
lease[d] premises.” Having determined that GAD is an additional insured and
that Philadelphia owed it a duty both to defend and to indemnify, the court
awarded GAD reimbursement for defense costs and the judgment rendered in
the contribution action as well as attorney’s fees and costs. This appeal
followed.
In an action for declaratory judgment under RSA 491:22-a (2010), the
insurer bears the burden of establishing lack of coverage. M. Mooney Corp. v.
U.S. Fidelity & Guaranty Co., 136 N.H. 463, 466 (1992). “The fundamental
goal of interpreting an insurance policy . . . is to carry out the intent of the
contracting parties.” Bates v. Phenix Mut. Fire Ins. Co., 156 N.H. 719, 722
(2008) (quotation omitted). Our analysis begins with an examination of the
insurance policy language. Pro Con Constr. v. Acadia Ins. Co., 147 N.H. 470,
2
472 (2002). We look to the plain and ordinary meaning of the policy’s words in
context, Concord Gen. Mut. Ins. Co. v. Mitchell, 138 N.H. 229, 231 (1994),
“and we construe the terms of the policy as would a reasonable person in the
position of the insured based on more than a casual reading of the policy as a
whole.” Deyette v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 142 N.H. 560, 561 (1997) (quotation
omitted). This is an objective standard. Concord Hosp. v. N.H. Medical
Malpractice Joint Underwriting Assoc., 137 N.H. 680, 683 (1993). “If more
than one reasonable interpretation is possible, and an interpretation provides
coverage, the policy contains an ambiguity and will be construed against the
insurer.” Brickley v. Progressive N. Ins. Co., 160 N.H. 625, 627 (2010)
(quotation omitted).
The interpretation of an insurance policy, like any contract, is an issue of
law for the court to decide. Allstate Ins. Co. v. Armstrong, 144 N.H. 170, 172
(1999). We review questions of law de novo. In the Matter of Taber-McCarthy
& McCarthy, 160 N.H. 112, 115 (2010).
On appeal, Philadelphia argues that: (1) GAD was not an additional
insured because it was not a manager, landlord, or lessor of the premises; (2)
GAD’s liability did not arise out of “the ownership, maintenance or use” of the
premises leased to Webster Place; and (3) GAD was a stranger to the policy and
ambiguities, therefore, need not be construed in its favor.
The policy language at issue here, Provision 2f, is the portion of the
additional insured endorsement that provides:
2. Each of the following is also an insured:
f. Managers, Landlords, or Lessors of Premises – Any
person or organization with respect to their liability arising
out of the ownership, maintenance or use of that part of the
premises leased or rented to you subject to the following
additional exclusions:
This insurance does not apply to
(1) Any “occurrence” which takes place after you cease
to be a tenant in that premises.
(2) Structural alterations, new construction or
demolition operations performed by or on behalf of
that person or organization.
The trial court found that Provision 2f covers more than just managers,
landlords and lessors because, notwithstanding its heading, the provision
3
broadly encompasses any person or organization with respect to its liability
arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of the premises. The court
contrasted Provision 2f with Provision 2b, which defines as additional insureds
“managers and supervisors . . . , but only with respect to their duties as your
managers and supervisors.” (Emphasis added.) The court reasoned:
Importantly, the terms “managers and supervisors” are both
included in the heading and in the language [of Provision 2b],
indicating a clear intent to limit coverage only to managers and
supervisors. Because Philadelphia did not similarly draft the
“managers, landlords, and lessors” provision, the broader language
of the provision controls.
In ruling that Provision 2f applies more broadly than its caption suggests, the
court relied on Concord Hospital, 137 N.H. at 683, which states that “we
disregard the labels attached to . . . policies and examine the various
provisions themselves.”
As an initial matter, we disagree with Philadelphia that the court
misapplied Concord Hospital: consistent with that case, the court read the
policy as a whole. In Concord Hospital, we addressed whether several medical
malpractice insurance policies covered certain occurrences that the insured
hospital reported to the insurer two days before the policies lapsed, but for
which the hospital did not file claims until after the policies lapsed. Concord
Hosp., 137 N.H. at 682. The policies were labeled “claims made,” which we
described as “afford[ing] coverage for tort claims that [we]re . . . reported to the
insurance company during the policy period.” Id. at 683. We looked past the
“claims made” label to the policies’ various provisions to determine whether
they were, in fact, “claims made,” in that claims had to have been reported
before the policies lapsed.
[The policies] are not “claims made” simply because they say
they are. “Claims made” is a category of policies that contain
certain provisions; without those provisions, no amount of labelling
can make these policies “claims made” or induce us to treat them
as such. The layperson of average intelligence does not know what
“claims made” refers to and cannot be expected to read crucial
provisions into the term. The insurance company must spell out
the provisions of a “claims made” policy.
Accordingly, we disregard the labels attached to the . . . policies
and examine the various provisions themselves.
Id. (citation omitted).
4
Even though three provisions in the policies stated that covered claims
had to have been first made while the policies were still in force, a fourth
provision stated that “[a] claim shall be considered to be first made when the
company first receives written notice of the claim or occurrence.” Id. at 684
(quotation omitted). Reading the policies as a whole, we concluded that,
although titled “claims made,” the policies in fact offered coverage for claims
made after the policy had expired, as long as the underlying occurrences were
reported while the policy was still in effect. Id. at 687.
Similarly, we read insurance policies as a whole in Hanover Insurance
Co. v. Grondin, 119 N.H. 394, 397 (1979), and Atwood v. Hartford Accident &
Indemnity Co., 116 N.H. 636 (1976), two cases on which Philadelphia relies in
arguing that we should read the caption of Provision 2f as controlling. In
Atwood, we considered whether the policy provided coverage by looking at the
size and inconspicuous location of the provision extending coverage,
confusingly redundant headings in the policy, obscure phrasing of the
exclusion, and the fact that one part of the policy contained four indications of
coverage, whereas the relevant exclusion was buried among thirteen others.
Atwood, 116 N.H. at 637-39. We also noted that the language obligating the
insurer to indemnify the insured appeared in a sentence numbering one
hundred twenty-nine words. Id. at 638. Based on all these factors, we
concluded that the policy did not afford the insured fair notice of the exclusion.
Id. at 639. In Hanover Insurance Co., 119 N.H. at 397, we also considered the
policy as a whole, emphasizing its clear and unambiguous language and simple
and informative captions. We concluded that a reasonable person reading the
policy as a whole would not expect coverage for the type of accident at issue.
Id.
Concord Hospital, Atwood, and Hanover Insurance Co. stand for the
proposition that, when construing an insurance policy, we must read it as a
whole and from the vantage point of an ordinary person. Hanover Ins. Co., 119
N.H. at 397; Concord Hosp., 137 N.H. at 682-83; Atwood, 116 N.H. at 637; see
also Maville v. Peerless Ins. Co., 141 N.H. 317, 319 (1996); Raudonis v. Ins. Co.
of North America, 137 N.H. 57, 59 (1993). We disagree with Philadelphia “that
the scope of the holding in Concord Hospital extends to only allowing analyzing
courts to disregard insurance policy captions, terms or words if they are in
direct conflict with other portions of the policy.”
Mindful of these principles, and reading the policy at issue as a whole,
we address whether Provision 2f applies, as its caption suggests, to “Managers,
Landlords, or Lessors of Premises” or, more broadly, to “[a]ny person or
organization,” as stated in its text.
Initially, we observe that the policy itself attempts to prevent over-
reliance on captions. The general liability endorsement, which lists the various
5
provisions’ captions, also states: “The following is a summary of the Limits on
Insurance and additional coverages provided by the endorsement. For
complete details on specific coverages, consult the policy contract wording.”
Captions must be construed together with the provisions following them.
In addition the captions of a policy are a part of it, and should be
construed with the detailed provisions. The captions will not, of
themselves, be taken to override the intention of the parties as
shown by the provisions and clauses inserted therein, but may be
read in connection with such clauses in determining the intention
of the parties. Nor should the parties be deemed to have chosen
wrong words in heading a clause in the policy if another
construction can reasonably be found which gives an harmonious
effect to the heading and clause together. But an ambiguous
provision of a policy may be explained by its caption. And the
better rule is that a caption, at least where misleading, or
confusing, may control over less liberal provisions in the policy
itself. While captions in a policy are not insuring provisions and
are not required to be drawn so as to touch on every element of the
policy, they should not be repugnant or misleading as to the
requirements of the coverage in the policy.
13 Appleman, Insurance Law and Practice § 7387, at 168-71 (revised ed. 1976)
(emphasis added).
Construing the language of the policy as a whole, we find Provision 2f
ambiguous because “more than one reasonable interpretation is possible.”
MacLearn v. Commerce Ins. Co., 163 N.H. 241, 244 (2012). One such
interpretation is that Provision 2f covers not only “managers, landlords, or
lessors,” but “any person or organization with respect to their liability arising
out of the ownership, maintenance or use” of the premises, because in no other
provision of the additional insured endorsement does the caption act as a
limitation.
The policy is replete with limiting language. For example, Philadelphia
drafted Section II of the policy to limit coverage for various types of insureds.
An insured individual is covered “only with respect to the conduct of a business
of which [he or she is] the sole owner”; the members and partners of an insured
partnership or joint venture are covered “only with respect to the conduct of
[the] business”; the members of an insured LLC “only with respect to the
conduct of [the LLC’s] business”; the LLC’s managers “only with respect to their
duties as . . . managers”; the stockholders of an insured organization “only with
respect to their liability as stockholders”; and the insured’s trustees “only with
respect to their duties as trustees.” The insured’s volunteer workers and
employees are also insured, “but only for acts within the scope of their
6
employment . . . or while performing duties related to the conduct of . . .
business.” The insured’s employees, volunteer workers, partners, and
members are covered only for bodily injury incurred in the course of
employment or performing duties related to the conduct of the insured’s
business.
The additional insured endorsement also contains numerous limitations.
Each of the eight provisions describing the types of entities and individuals
deemed additional insureds consists of a caption and text.
2. Each of the following is also an insured:
a. Medical Directors and Administrators – Your medical
directors and administrators, but only while acting within the
scope of and during the course of their duties as such. Such
duties do not include the furnishing or failure to furnish
professional services of any physician or psychiatrist in the
treatment of a patient.
b. Managers and Supervisors – If you are an organization other
than a partnership or joint venture, your managers and
supervisors are also insureds, but only with respect to their duties
as your managers and supervisors.
c. Broadened Named Insured – Any organization and subsidiary
thereof which you control and actively manage . . . . However,
coverage does not apply to any organization or subsidiary not
named in the Declarations as Named Insured, if they are also
insured under another similar policy, but for its termination or the
exhaustion of its limits of insurance.
d. Funding Source – Any person or organization with respect to
their liability arising out of:
(1) Their financial control of you; or
(2) Premises they own, maintain or control while you lease or
occupy these premises.
This insurance does not apply to structural alterations, new
construction and demolition operations performed by or for that
person or organization.
e. Home Care Providers – At the first Named Insured’s option, any
person or organization under your direct supervision and control
7
while providing for you private home respite or foster home care for
the developmentally disabled.
f. Managers, Landlords, or Lessors of Premises – Any person or
organization with respect to their liability arising out of the
ownership, maintenance or use of that part of the premises leased
or rented to you subject to the following additional exclusions:
This insurance does not apply to
(1) Any “occurrence” which takes place after you cease to be
a tenant in that premises.
(2) Structural alterations, new construction or demolition
operations performed by or on behalf of that person or
organization.
g. Lessor of Leased Equipment – Automatic Status When
Required in Lease Agreement With You – Any person or
organization from whom you lease equipment when you and such
person or organization have agreed in writing in a contract or
agreement that such person or organization is to be added as an
additional insured on your policy. Such person or organization is
an insured only with respect to liability for “bodily injury”,
“property damage” or “personal and advertising injury” caused, in
whole or in part, by your maintenance, operation or use of
equipment leased to you by such person or organization. . . .
h. Grantors of Permits – Any state or political subdivision
granting you a permit in connection with your premises subject to
the following additional provision . . . .
Unlike Provision 2f, the captions of Provisions 2a, 2b, 2e, 2g, and 2h are
either repeated or echoed in the provisions’ text. With the exception of
Provision 2f, each provision’s limitations are set forth in the text rather than
the caption. For example, despite its expansive caption “Funding Source,”
Provision 2d limits coverage to liability arising out of the financial control of the
insured or of the ownership, maintenance, or control of the leased premises.
Similarly, Provision 2a extends coverage to medical directors and
administrators, but, as the text specifies, “only while acting within the scope of
and during the course of their duties as such” and subject to further
restrictions on the types of duties covered. Provision 2b specifies that
managers and supervisors are covered only with respect to their duties as
such. The text of Provision 2c, titled “Broadened Named Insured,” limits its
reach by setting forth the types of organizations covered by the provision.
8
Similarly, the text of Provisions 2e, 2g, and 2h, which apply to home care
providers, lessors of leased equipment, and grantors of permits, significantly
narrow the provisions’ captions.
Consistent with Concord Hospital, Atwood, and Hanover Insurance Co.,
we must interpret Provision 2f “consider[ing] how the policy provisions interact
in order to better understand a provision’s meaning.” New Appleman on Ins. L.
Libr. Ed. §5.03[1], at 5-31 (Dec. 2010); cf. Phaneuf Funeral Home v. Little Giant
Pump Co., 163 N.H. 727, 734 (2012) (applying “the basic principle that words
are known by the company they keep”). Throughout the policy and the
additional insured endorsement, the parties inserted numerous limitations on
coverage. Provision 2f itself contains several limitations in its text: it limits
coverage to liability arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or use of the
leased premises and further excludes some types of occurrences and
operations. None of these limitations references managers, landlords, or
lessors. The parties to the policy were clearly able, but opted not to, include in
the text of Provision 2f reference to the caption as they did, for example, in
Provisions 2a, 2b, and 2e. Nor did they limit Provision 2f to the duties
undertaken as managers, landlords, or lessors as they did in Provision 2b.
We reject Philadelphia’s argument that reading Provision 2f as extending
coverage to “any person or organization,” rather than only “managers,
landlords, or lessors,” “would lead to the absurd result of improperly extending
additional insured status to any independent construction or maintenance
contractor with no involvement in the ownership or management of the
property.” “An insurance company remains free to limit its liability through
clear and unambiguous policy language.” Weeks v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins.
Co., 140 N.H. 641, 643 (1996) (quotation omitted). But having extended
coverage to “liability arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use” of the
leased premises, Philadelphia cannot now argue that it intended to limit
coverage to only those with “involvement in the ownership or management of
the property.”
Nor are we persuaded that the trial court’s reading of Provision 2f would
lead to an absurd result by extending coverage to individuals who are strangers
to the policy, such as contractors, electricians, plumbers, carpenters, snow
plowers, exterminators, and “‘any’ person or organization that worked in any
capacity on the property.” First, a broad reading of Provision 2f as covering
any person or organization whose liability arises out of the ownership,
maintenance, or use of the leased premises leads no more to an absurd result
than do provisions in a motor vehicle insurance policy extending coverage to
any individual operating the vehicle with the owner’s consent, see RSA 264:18,
9
VI (2004),1 when such individual would also be a “stranger to the policy.”
Second, Provision 2f covers only those persons and organizations whose
liability arises out of the ownership, maintenance, or use of the leased
premises. See Merrimack School Dist. v. Nat’l School Bus Serv., 140 N.H. 9, 13
(1995) (“The phrase ‘arising out of’ has been interpreted as . . . meaning
‘originating from or growing out of or flowing from.’”). Thus, “any person or
organization” is specifically limited by the terms of the provision. For all the
foregoing reasons, we find that a reasonable insured could conclude that the
caption of Provision 2f does not act as a limitation on the coverage set forth in
the text.
We acknowledge that Philadelphia offers a plausible construction of the
policy, i.e., that the caption of Provision 2f, “Managers, Landlords, or Lessors of
Premises,” serves to narrow the provision’s broad language referencing “[a]ny
person or organization.” When an insurance policy’s language is ambiguous
and one reasonable interpretation favors coverage, however, we construe the
policy in the insured’s favor and against the insurer. Barking Dog v. Citizens
Ins. Co. of America, 164 N.H. 80, 84 (2012). We reject Philadelphia’s argument
that the trial court improperly construed ambiguities in favor of GAD.
Although it does not challenge the rule that ambiguities must be
construed against the insurer and in favor of the insured, Philadelphia
contends that ambiguous terms must not be construed in favor of GAD, a
stranger to the policy. This is a circular argument because the very question
before us is who is an insured under the terms of the policy and, where terms
are ambiguous, how to construe them. We decline to adopt a new rule of
construction, which would not construe ambiguities against the insurer when
addressing who is an insured under the policy. The rationale for our firmly-
established rule is equally as strong in such a situation as in any other: the
insurer controls the language of the policy and the insurance contract aims “to
provide protection for the insured.” Trombly v. Blue Cross/Blue Shield, 120
N.H. 764, 771 (1980) (adopting the majority rule of construction because “[t]his
rule reflects the fundamental principle of contract law that doubtful language
1 RSA 264:18, VI states:
A motor vehicle liability policy . . . shall be subject . . . to the following provisions which need
not be contained therein:
. . .
VI. The insurance applies to any person who has obtained possession or control of the vehicle of the
insured with his express or implied consent even though the use in the course of which liability to pay
damages arises has been expressly or impliedly forbidden by the insured or is otherwise
unauthorized. This provision, however, shall not apply to the use of a vehicle converted with the
intent to wrongfully deprive the owner of his property therein.
10
is to be construed most strongly against the party who used it in drafting the
contract” (quotation omitted)); cf. Northern Sec. Ins. Co., Inc. v. Doherty, 987
A.2d 253, 256-57 (Vt. 2009) (“[T]he naming of the Trust as an additional
insured . . . clearly falls within the realm of ambiguity as we have defined that
term. Because the policy language is ambiguous, we construe it in favor of
providing coverage for the beneficiaries of the Trust . . . .” (citation and
quotation omitted)).
Next, Philadelphia contends that Provision 2f does not cover GAD
because GAD’s work on the porch railing constituted renovation rather than
maintenance and the two terms are not synonymous. Philadelphia argues that
renovation “connotes an action of restoring property to a good condition or
making it like new again – which is an entirely different concept from
maintenance, which only involves taking steps to keep or preserve the existing
condition (or status quo).”
The policy does not define “maintenance” or “renovation.” “Where
disputed terms are not defined in the policy, we construe them in context, and
in the light of what a more than casual reading of the policy would reveal to an
ordinarily intelligent insured.” Weeks, 140 N.H. at 644 (quotation and ellipses
omitted). Our review of the policy does not reveal, and Philadelphia has not
explained, how we should construe the term “maintenance” when reading the
policy as a whole.2 Philadelphia argues that maintenance differs from
renovation based upon definitions set forth in certain dictionaries, but other
dictionaries define maintenance as potentially coextensive, or at least
overlapping, with renovation in that both activities include the concept of
repair. “Maintenance” is defined, in part, as “[t]he care and work put into
property to keep it operating and productive; general repair and upkeep.”
Black’s Law Dictionary 1039 (9th ed. 2009). “Renovation” means “restor[ation]
to a former better state (as by cleaning, repairing, or rebuilding).” Merriam-
Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary 1054 (11th ed. 2003). “Repair” is defined, in
part, as “restor[ing] by replacing a part or putting together what is torn or
broken.” Id. at 1055; cf. 8A L. Russ & T. Segalla, Couch on Insurance 3d
§ 119:36, at 119-54 (1997) (in the context of automobile insurance, “[t]he
‘maintenance’ aspect of the ‘ownership, maintenance, or use’ clause covers the
act of repairing the covered automobile”). Given the variety of these
overlapping definitions, “maintenance” may reasonably be understood to
include “renovation.” Furthermore, the only case which Philadelphia cites
when distinguishing between maintenance and renovation, Utility Service v.
Dep’t of Labor, 331 S.W.3d 654, 657 (Mo. 2011), is entirely inapposite as it did
2 Cf. Weeks, 140 N.H. at 644 (although “professional services” were not defined in the policy, when read as a
whole, the policy covers more than medical malpractice where it states that it was designed "to protect
against a variety of liability claims" and specifically excludes coverage for certain administrators when acting
"as physicians in the direct treatment of patients" and does not cover employees who are "interns, externs,
residents, dentists, osteopathic or medical doctors.").
11
not concern an insurance contract, but rather a statute which defined both
“maintenance work” and “construction.”
Because Provision 2f applies to “[a]ny person or organization with respect
to their liability arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use” of the
premises, and because, read broadly, GAD’s renovation of the porch railing
constituted maintenance of the railing, we agree with the trial court that GAD
is an additional insured under Philadelphia’s policy.
We also agree that Philadelphia owed GAD a duty to defend it against the
contribution actions brought by DW Ray and Webster Place.
An insurer’s obligation to defend its insured is determined by
whether the cause of action against the insured alleges sufficient
facts in the pleadings to bring it within the express terms of the
policy. In considering whether a duty to defend exists based on
the sufficiency of the pleadings, we consider the reasonable
expectations of the insured as to its rights under the policy. An
insurer’s obligation is not merely to defend in cases of perfect
declarations, but also in cases where, by any reasonable
intendment of the pleadings, liability of the insured can be
inferred, and neither ambiguity nor inconsistency in the
underlying writ can justify escape of the insurer from its obligation
to defend. In cases of doubt as to whether the writ against the
insured alleges a liability of the insurer under the policy, the doubt
must be resolved in the insured’s favor.
N. Sec. Ins. Co. v. Connors, 161 N.H. 645, 650 (2011) (quotation and citations
omitted; emphasis added).
In their writs against GAD, DW Ray and Webster Place alleged that Dr.
Wyly’s claims for negligence flow directly from the actions of GAD and its
employees and that, having settled Dr. Wyly’s personal injury claims, DW Ray
and Webster Place are entitled to contribution from GAD. Dr. Wyly’s claims, in
turn, can be reasonably read as alleging that GAD maintained the leased
premises. See 14 L. Russ & T. Segalla, Couch on Insurance 3d § 200:1, at
200-5 (2007) (“An insurer will have a duty to defend the insured in a suit if the
complaint against the insured contains allegations that, if proved, would be
covered under the policy.”).
Dr. Wyly alleged that DW Ray, either directly or through an independent
contractor, breached its duty to install or renovate the railing in a workmanlike
fashion and in compliance with the building code. As Dr. Wyly alleged in the
writ, “[t]he railing that failed to protect [him] was installed, modified and/or
inspected by DW [Ray], or at its direction.” In his claim against Webster Place,
12
Dr. Wyly alleged that it owed him “a duty to ensure that the workm[e]n who
renovated . . . this railing . . . were competent to complete their work.” The writ
also described DW Ray’s and Webster Place’s duty as one “to correct obvious
hazards, such as the railing.” “[B]y any reasonable intendment of the
pleadings, [GAD’s] liability . . . can be inferred” from Dr. Wyly’s allegations that
an independent contractor, an entity working at DW Ray’s direction, and/or
Webster Place’s workmen negligently installed, modified, inspected, and/or
renovated the railing and failed to correct obvious hazards such as the railing.
N. Sec. Ins. Co., 161 N.H. at 650; State Farm Ins. Co. v. Bruns, 156 N.H. 708,
710 (2008).
To the extent that the term “renovation” is used ambiguously or
inconsistently throughout the writ, “neither ambiguity nor inconsistency in the
underlying complaint can justify escape of the insurer from its obligation to
defend.” N. Sec. Ins. Co., 161 N.H. at 650. We resolve any doubt against the
insurer and in favor of coverage. Id. The trial court properly ruled that
Philadelphia owed GAD a duty to defend.
The record also supports the trial court’s conclusion that Philadelphia
owed GAD a duty to indemnify. “[T]he majority of jurisdictions hold that the
duty to defend is distinct from, and broader than, the duty to indemnify.” 14
Couch on Insurance 3d, supra § 200:1, at 200-6.
The distinction between the duty to defend and the duty to
indemnify is based upon the time when the duties are determined.
The duty to defend arises prior to the completion of litigation, and
therefore insurers are required to meet their defense obligation
before the scope of the insured’s liability has been determined. In
contrast, the duty to indemnify arises only once liability has been
conclusively determined. In other words, because the duty to
defend arises whenever an insurer ascertains facts that give rise to
the possibility or the potential of liability to indemnify, the duty to
defend must be assessed at the very outset of a case, unlike the
duty to indemnify, which arises only when the insured's underlying
liability is established.
14 Couch on Insurance 3d, supra § 200:3, at 200-9 to 200-10. “[T]he duty to
indemnify adher[es] only if the third party suit proves meritorious.” Julio &
Sons Co. v. Travelers Cas. and Sur. Co., 591 F. Supp. 2d 651, 657 (S.D.N.Y.
2008).
“[T]he duty to indemnify depends on the facts established at trial and the
theory under which the judgment is actually entered in the case.” 43 Am. Jur.
2d Insurance § 684, at 746 (2003). “A plaintiff’s factual allegations that
potentially support a covered claim is all that is needed to invoke the insurer’s
13
duty to defend, whereas, the facts actually established in the underlying suit
control the duty to indemnify.” Julio & Sons Co., 591 F. Supp. 2d at 657
(quotation omitted); see also VRV Development L.P. v. Mid-Continent Cas. Co.,
630 F.3d 451, 459 (5th Cir. 2011); Travelers Ins. v. Waltham Indus.
Laboratories, 883 F.2d 1092, 1099 (1st Cir. 1989); State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co. v. Koshy, 995 A.2d 651, 670 (Me. 2010).
Philadelphia argues that “[t]he evidence presented at the contribution
trial clearly established that GAD’s work at Webster Place, including work on
the railing, involved new construction and renovation, not ‘maintenance.’”
Philadelphia relies on the testimony of Alex Ray, the owner of both DW Ray and
GAD. Ray’s testimony, however, does not support the conclusion that GAD did
not maintain the property. Ray testified that, from the time DW Ray acquired
the property and until the accident, GAD performed maintenance and repair on
the property.
[GAD] also ha[s] a maintenance division which maintains all the
buildings and one of the extended components is[,] when we build
or renovate a building[,] we generally have a pattern which we hire
someone to do the major construction, which is an outside
contractor if it’s a major renovation. And then we finish some of
that, painting, fitting out, finish work, mill work, as part of the
maintenance job . . . .
In Webster Place’s and DW Ray’s contribution action against GAD, the
court instructed the jury to find whether GAD’s legal fault contributed to the
cause of Dr. Wyly’s injury and, in determining whether the parties, including
GAD, were negligent, “to decide whether or not a party exercised reasonable
care under all the circumstances in the construction, operation and
maintenance of the property.” (Emphasis added.) The court also instructed
the jury to determine whether any of the parties, including GAD, had breached
the duty of reasonable care: “in other words, whether any of the parties did or
did not construct, operate or maintain the premises in accordance with the
duty of due care . . . .” (Emphasis added.) The jury found that GAD was 45%
at fault for Dr. Wyly’s injuries.
“We assume that the jury follows properly crafted instructions . . . .” Cyr
v. J.I. Case Co., 139 N.H. 193, 210 (1994). We note that it is unclear as to
whether the jury’s general verdict amounted to a finding that GAD’s negligence
lay in its construction, operation, maintenance, or any combination of these
functions relating to the premises. Thus, it cannot be said with certainty
whether the jury actually found GAD liable for negligent maintenance. See
Julio & Sons Co., 591 F. Supp. 2d at 657. Such certainty, however, is not
necessary because it is not the insured’s burden to establish coverage. “Under
New Hampshire law, the burden of proving that no insurance coverage exists is
14
on the insurer.” Laconia Rod & Gun Club v. Hartford Acc. & Indem. Co., 123
N.H. 179, 182 (1983); Rivera v. Liberty Mut. Fire Ins. Co., 163 N.H. 603, 606
(2012) (“In a declaratory judgment action to determine the coverage of an
insurance policy, the burden of proof is always on the insurer, regardless of
which party brings the petition.”). Because, under its general verdict, the jury
could have found GAD liable for negligent maintenance, Philadelphia has not
met its burden of establishing lack of coverage.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and CONBOY and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
15