THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Board of Tax and Land Appeals
No. 2012-252
APPEAL OF CITY OF NASHUA
(New Hampshire Board of Tax and Land Appeals)
Submitted: January 16, 2013
Opinion Issued: April 12, 2013
Law Offices of Sylvia F. Brewster, PLLC, of Portsmouth (Sylvia F.
Brewster on the brief), for the taxpayer.
Office of Corporation Counsel, of Nashua (Stephen M. Bennett on the
brief), for the City of Nashua.
Carynne Christine Fillmore, of Concord, by brief, for the New Hampshire
Local Government Center, as amicus curiae.
HICKS, J. The City of Nashua (City) appeals a decision of the New
Hampshire Board of Tax and Land Appeals (BTLA) ruling that the taxpayer,
Marijane Kennedy (taxpayer), is entitled to an “elderly exemption” under RSA
72:39-a (2012) for the tax year 2011. We reverse.
The following facts were found by the BTLA or are supported in the
record. On April 11, 2011, the taxpayer filed an application with the City for
an elderly exemption for tax year 2011. The application listed total assets, not
including the value of her residence, of $145,724.19. It also noted the
existence of an equity loan secured by the taxpayer’s residence in the amount
of $42,000. To qualify for the elderly exemption under the City’s ordinance, the
taxpayer’s net assets must not exceed $125,000, excluding the value of the
taxpayer’s residence. The City denied the exemption on the ground that the
taxpayer’s net assets exceeded $125,000.
The taxpayer appealed to the BTLA. She contended that because the
statutory definition of “net assets” deducts the value of “good faith
encumbrances,” RSA 72:39-a, I(c), the amount of her equity loan should be
subtracted from her total assets (excluding the value of her residence) to arrive
at “net assets,” thereby bringing her “net assets” below the prescribed limit.
The BTLA agreed, and the City appealed.
“Our standard for review of BTLA decisions is statutory.” Appeal of
Wilson, 161 N.H. 659, 661 (2011); see RSA 541:13 (2007). We will not set
aside or vacate “the order or decision appealed from . . . except for errors of
law, unless [we are] satisfied, by a clear preponderance of the evidence before
[us], that such order is unjust or unreasonable.” RSA 541:13. “The
interpretation of a statute is to be decided ultimately by this court. Therefore,
if we find that the BTLA misapprehended or misapplied the law, its order will
be set aside.” Appeal of Wilson, 161 N.H. at 661 (quotation and brackets
omitted). “We review the BTLA’s statutory interpretation de novo.” Id. at 662.
The starting point in any statutory interpretation case is the
language of the statute itself. We first look to the plain and
ordinary meaning of the words used. As we examine the language,
we do not merely look at isolated words or phrases, but instead we
consider the statute as a whole. In so doing, we are better able to
discern the legislature’s intent, and therefore better able to
understand the statutory language in light of the policy sought to
be advanced by the entire statutory scheme.
Pennelli v. Town of Pelham, 148 N.H. 365, 366 (2002) (quotations and citations
omitted). Moreover, our construction of tax statutes is “guided by the well-
settled principle that a tax exemption is construed to give full effect to the
legislative intent of the statute.” Id. (ellipsis omitted).
The statute at issue, entitled “Conditions for Elderly Exemption,”
provides in pertinent part:
I. No exemption shall be allowed under RSA 72:39-b unless the
person applying therefor:
. . .
2
(c) Owns net assets not in excess of the amount determined
by the city or town for purposes of RSA 72:39-b, excluding the
value of the person’s actual residence and the land upon which it
is located up to the greater of 2 acres or the minimum single family
residential lot size specified in the local zoning ordinance. . . . “Net
assets” means the value of all assets, tangible and intangible,
minus the value of any good faith encumbrances. “Residence”
means the housing unit, and related structures such as an
unattached garage or woodshed, which is the person’s principal
home, and which the person in good faith regards as home to the
exclusion of any other places where the person may temporarily
live. “Residence” shall exclude attached dwelling units and
unattached structures used or intended for commercial or other
nonresidential purposes.
RSA 72:39-a.
Both parties contend that the statute’s meaning can be discerned from
its plain language and that, in any event, there is “no formal legislative history”
that “clarifies” the calculation of net assets. The City argues that the term
“value” in the first sentence of RSA 72:39-a, I(c) “includes both the market
value of the residence and any encumbrances on that residence.” Therefore,
both the market value of the residence and the amount of any encumbrance on
it are excluded from the calculation of net assets. The taxpayer counters that
the first sentence of RSA 72:39-a, I(c) “contains no reference to any
encumbrance; it refers only to the value of the residence.” She argues that the
legislature could have added language to modify the term “value,” but did not.
Thus, the taxpayer implicitly invokes the standard of statutory construction
that “[w]e interpret legislative intent from the statute as written and will not
consider what the legislature might have said or add language the legislature
did not see fit to include.” Appeal of Wilson, 161 N.H. at 662.
The taxpayer also relies upon the legislature’s use of the term “all,”
arguing that under the second quoted sentence of RSA 72:39-a, I(c),
the “adjusted pool” of assets created by the first sentence[, i.e. all
assets except for the taxpayer’s residence,] is further reduced by all
good faith encumbrances, without regard to the type of asset or the
type of encumbrance. If the legislature had wanted to limit the
type of encumbrance which could be deducted from the “adjusted”
pool of assets, it would have done so. It did not.
The final term relied upon by the taxpayer is “net,” which she contends
was properly interpreted by the BTLA: “As observed by the BTLA, the meaning
3
which it assigned to the term ‘net assets’ is supported by the dictionary
definition of the adjective ‘net’ which signifies something free from all charges
and deductions, distinguishable from a ‘gross’ amount.”
We are not persuaded that any of the terms emphasized above resolves
the question before us. Rather, we agree with the amicus curiae that the term
“encumbrance” is the linchpin to the analysis. Black’s Law Dictionary defines
“encumbrance” to mean “[a] claim or liability that is attached to property or
some other right and that may lessen its value, such as a lien or mortgage.”
Black’s Law Dictionary 607 (9th ed. 2009). We conclude that the plain
meaning of RSA 72:39-a, I(c) is that net assets means the value of all
includable assets net of any encumbrances on those assets. We therefore
agree with the City that because the taxpayer’s residence is not counted as an
asset in the net asset calculation pursuant to the first sentence of RSA 72:39-
a, I(c), no encumbrance on that residence is deducted in that calculation.
The taxpayer argues that this interpretation “rests upon the false
assumption that the legislature was primarily concerned with the availability of
taxpayer assets to pay property taxes. Nothing in the statute supports such an
argument . . . [or] suggests that a taxpayer should have to sell or mortgage or
liquidate assets in order to pay property obligations.” We need not determine,
however, whether the posited assumption is true or false. We accept the
taxpayer’s argument that “[t]he statute is silent on the subject of the
availability of taxpayer assets and the uses to which they should be put.” Our
interpretation of RSA 72:39-a, I(c), however, rests upon the plain meaning of
the language the legislature did use. The legislature chose to value taxpayers’
assets net of all encumbrances that may lessen their value. See Black’s Law
Dictionary, supra. Because, as the taxpayer argues, the “adjusted pool” of
assets created by the first sentence of RSA 72:39-a, I(c) consists of all assets
except for the taxpayer’s residence, the encumbrances that lessen the value of
that “adjusted pool” of assets do not include encumbrances on the excluded
residence.
Finally, the taxpayer argues that “[t]he City’s approach to calculating net
assets is unfair and unequal as applied” and that the legislature could not have
intended such a result. In support of this assertion, the taxpayer quotes a
hypothetical posited by the BTLA:
For example, a taxpayer who has reported assets of $120,000 with
no mortgage on her residence is certainly better off financially (in
terms of having resources to pay property taxes) than a taxpayer
who has reported assets of $145,000 and a $40,000 mortgage
encumbrance on her residence. Yet, under the City’s approach,
the first taxpayer would qualify for the elderly exemption and the
4
second would not, even though the net assets of the first taxpayer
are higher by $15,000, even if the residences have the same value.
We are not persuaded by the BTLA’s hypothetical, given that other
hypothetical applications of the statute plainly within its terms produce results
that are also arguably “unfair and unequal.” For instance, we can assume that
as between two taxpayers with equal assets and equal income, and all other
things being equal, the taxpayer with no unsecured debt is better able to pay
property taxes than the one with minimum monthly credit card payments
consuming much of her monthly income, and “is certainly better off financially
(in terms of having resources to pay property taxes).” As the City and the
amicus curiae point out, RSA 72:39-a does not account for unsecured debt at
all in determining whether a taxpayer is entitled to the elderly exemption.
For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that the BTLA erred in its
interpretation of RSA 72:39-a, and, accordingly, reverse its decision.
Reversed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and CONBOY, LYNN and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
5