THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
6th Circuit Court – Concord Probate Division
No. 2012-555
PETITION OF STEPHEN STOMPOR
Argued: September 19, 2013
Opinion Issued: December 6, 2013
Roy S. McCandless, Esq., P.L.L.C., of Concord, (Roy S. McCandless on
the brief and orally), for Stephen Stompor.
Seufert, Davis & Hunt, PLLC, of Franklin (Christopher J. Seufert on the
brief and orally), for Stan Stompor.
CONBOY, J. The petitioner, Stephen Stompor, seeks a writ of certiorari,
see Sup. Ct. R. 11, challenging an order of the 6th Circuit Court – Concord
Probate Division (Hampe, J.) granting the petitioner and his brother, the
respondent, Stan Stompor, access to the file of an attorney who drafted estate
plan documents for their parents, Broneslaw and Amelia Stompor (the
parents). We affirm.
The following facts are drawn from the record. In 2001 and 2002, the
parents met with an attorney (the Attorney) regarding their estate plans. The
Attorney drafted estate plan documents for them; however, due to a conflict,
the Attorney subsequently withdrew from representing them, and the estate
plan documents were not executed.
In 2004, the petitioner wrote to the Attorney to inquire whether the
Attorney would again represent the parents with regard to their estate plans.
The Attorney declined to do so. The petitioner then helped the parents prepare
certain estate plan documents, and the parents executed those documents in
October 2004. Although these estate plan documents are not included in the
record on appeal, the petitioner represents, and the respondent does not
dispute, that they include wills that bequeath the parents’ assets to the
petitioner and his family to the exclusion of the parents’ other children. The
documents include the Broneslaw J. Stompor Living Trust, of which the
petitioner is a co-trustee. That same year, the parents also gave the petitioner
powers of attorney to act as their agent.
In October 2007, the respondent filed a petition in the probate division,
on the parents’ behalf, pursuant to RSA 506:7 (2010), seeking to determine the
legality of certain acts of the petitioner and requesting, among other things, an
accounting of the petitioner’s handling of all of the parents’ funds either
personally or as a trustee of his father’s living trust. In June 2009, the
respondent successfully moved to amend his petition to allege that, in 2004,
the petitioner, as the parents’ fiduciary, exercised undue influence over the
parents when they lacked the capacity to understand the estate plan
documents that gave the petitioner and his family exclusive inheritance rights
to the parents’ assets to the exclusion of the parents’ other children. The
respondent sought to have the petitioner removed as the parents’ fiduciary and
to void all actions taken in his fiduciary capacity. The parents passed away
during the late summer of 2009.
In February 2010, while his petition was still pending, the respondent
sought disclosure from the Attorney of any information he had regarding his
contact with the parents in connection with the challenged 2004 estate plan.
The petitioner objected, arguing that the attorney-client privilege prohibits
disclosure of any documents the Attorney has relating to his consultations with
the parents. Thereafter, the court granted the parties’ assented-to discovery
motion allowing the Attorney to submit, for in camera review, any files he had
“concerning [the parents’] estate plan[] documents signed in 2004.” The court
reviewed the file and held a hearing. At the December 1, 2011 hearing, the
Attorney appeared and objected to disclosure of his file on the ground that,
with the possible exception of the 2004 letter from the petitioner, its contents
are subject to the attorney-client privilege.
Subsequently, the court issued an order allowing disclosure of the
Attorney’s file to the parties. The court ruled that, pursuant to Stevens v.
Thurston, 112 N.H. 118 (1972), the Attorney’s entire file was discoverable
because it was relevant to a dispute among the decedents’ children and to
whether the petitioner unduly influenced the parents’ decisions regarding their
estate plan. After being denied an interlocutory appeal, the petitioner filed this
2
petition for writ of certiorari challenging the trial court’s ruling. We accepted
the petition and stayed the court’s disclosure order pending resolution of this
proceeding.
The petitioner argues that the attorney-client evidentiary privilege
prohibits disclosure of the Attorney’s file and that no exceptions to the privilege
apply. He further contends that this case does not involve an at-issue waiver
or a compelling need that would allow for disclosure of the Attorney’s file. The
petitioner also argues that his 2004 correspondence with the Attorney is
protected by the attorney-client privilege because he wrote to the Attorney on
the parents’ behalf. Finally, the petitioner maintains that the trial court erred
because the Attorney’s file is not responsive to the discovery order.
We review a trial court’s decisions on the management of discovery and
the admissibility of evidence under an unsustainable exercise of discretion
standard. Desclos v. S. N.H. Med. Ctr., 153 N.H. 607, 610 (2006). We will not
disturb the trial court’s order absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
Id. To meet this standard, the petitioner must demonstrate that the trial
court’s ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his
case. See id.
“The common law rule that confidential communications between a client
and an attorney are privileged and protected from inquiry is recognized and
enforced in this jurisdiction.” Hampton Police Assoc. v. Town of Hampton, 162
N.H. 7, 15 (2011) (quotation omitted). New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 502
essentially codifies the common law attorney-client privilege. Id. Under Rule
502(b), “A client has a privilege to refuse to disclose and to prevent any other
person from disclosing confidential communications made for the purpose of
facilitating the rendition of professional legal services to the client,” including
communications between the client and his lawyer. This privilege continues
after the death of the client, see Stevens, 112 N.H. at 119, and may be claimed
by the personal representative of a deceased client as well as the person who
was the lawyer or the lawyer’s representative at the time of the communication,
“but only on behalf of the client,” N.H. R. Ev. 502(c).
Rule 502(d), however, sets forth five categories of communications that
are not privileged. Applicable here is Rule 502(d)(2), which excepts from the
privilege “a communication relevant to an issue between parties who claim
through the same deceased client, regardless of whether the claims are by
testate or intestate succession or by inter vivos transaction.” Although the
purpose of the attorney-client privilege is to encourage full disclosure of
information between an attorney and his client by guaranteeing the inviolability
of their confidential communications, Riddle Spring Realty Co. v. State, 107
N.H. 271, 274 (1966), the basis for the exception in Rule 502(d)(2) is that “all
reason for assertion of the privilege disappears” when the privilege is being
3
asserted not for the protection of the testator or his estate but for the
protection of a claimant to his estate, Stevens, 112 N.H. at 119. This is so
because the best way to protect the client’s intent lies in the admission of all
relevant evidence that will aid in the determination of his true will. Id. As the
United States Supreme Court has noted, “[t]he general rule with respect to
confidential communications is that such communications are privileged
during the testator’s lifetime and, also, after the testator’s death unless sought
to be disclosed in litigation between the testator’s heirs”; “[t]he rationale for
such disclosure is that it furthers the client’s intent.” Swidler & Berlin v.
United States, 524 U.S. 399, 405 (1998) (quotation and ellipsis omitted).
Here, the parties claim through the same deceased clients. If the
respondent is successful in proving that the petitioner unduly influenced the
parents, the 2004 estate plan documents that bequeathed to the petitioner and
his family all of the parents’ assets will be voided. Cf. Stevens, 112 N.H. at 119
(noting in will contest that, if defendants were successful, they, rather than
plaintiff, would be representatives of testator). The question, therefore, is
whether the Attorney’s file is relevant to an issue between the parties. N.H. R.
Ev. 502(d)(2). In order to be relevant, the Attorney’s file must have “any
tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the
determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be
without the evidence.” N.H. R. Ev. 401.
The respondent alleges that, in 2004, the petitioner unduly influenced
the parents to leave all of their assets to the petitioner and his family at a time
when the parents lacked the capacity to understand what they were signing.
To invalidate a will on the ground of undue influence, there must be evidence
sufficient to permit the inference that the testator was misled or coerced into
making the will as it was made. Bartlett v. McKay, 80 N.H. 574, 574 (1923). It
must appear that the alleged influence amounts “to force and coercion,
destroying free agency, and not merely the influence of affection, or merely the
desire of gratifying another; but it must appear that the will was obtained by
this coercion.” Id. at 574-75 (quotation omitted). “Undue influence to avoid a
will must be of a kind that subjugates the mind of the testator to that of the
person seeking to control it, so as to destroy the free agency of the testator at
the time the will is made.” Id. at 575 (quotation omitted).
We have reviewed the Attorney’s file and agree with the trial court that
the file is relevant to the issues between the parties. The Attorney’s file relates
to the parents’ intentions regarding their estate plan prior to the time the
respondent alleges that they were unduly influenced by the petitioner and were
incompetent to understand what they were signing. Thus, the file is relevant to
determining whether the petitioner unduly influenced the parents at the time
they executed their estate plan in 2004 and to ascertaining whether the 2004
estate plan documents reflect the parents’ true intent. See Remien v. Remien,
4
1996 WL 411387, at *3 (N.D. Ill. 1996) (ordering production, under similar
exception, of deceased father’s letters to his attorney, which related to father’s
intention regarding disposition of his stock in corporation, because they were
relevant to assessment of whether son’s actions at time of stock redemption
frustrated or fulfilled father’s wishes); In re Texas A & M–Corpus Christi
Foundation, 84 S.W.3d 358, 360-61 (Tex. App. 2002) (allowing discovery of
information, under similar exception, from attorneys who assisted decedent
with estate and trust matters prior to the gift at issue because it was relevant
to decedent’s longstanding intentions to make gift and to her mental acumen
shortly before gift was made).
Relying upon Gould, Larson, Bennet, Wells v. Panico, 869 A.2d 653
(Conn. 2005), the petitioner argues that the exception in Rule 502(d)(2) is
limited to cases in which the attorney’s work includes executed estate plan
documents, regardless of whether the attorney’s work is relevant to the issues
in the case. In Gould, the Connecticut Supreme Court held that “when the
communications between a decedent and his attorney do not result in an
executed will, the communications do not fall within the exception to the
attorney-client privilege and thus are confidential.” Gould, 869 A.2d at 655.
Connecticut’s exception to the attorney-client privilege, however, applies to
“communications, by a client to the attorney who drafted his will, in respect to
that document and transactions between them leading up to its execution,” id.
at 657 (emphasis omitted), and thus, is more limited than our exception, which
allows for disclosure of “communication[s] relevant to an issue between parties
who claim through the same deceased client.” N.H. R. Ev. 502(d)(2). Given
that Connecticut’s exception is narrower than ours, we find Gould inapplicable.
Our conclusion that the Rule 502(d)(2) exception is not limited to
attorney-client communications that culminate in executed estate plan
documents is supported by the decisions of other courts in states that have
adopted an exception similar to ours. See Ervesun v. Bank of New York, 239
A.2d 10, 14 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 1968) (finding that, by adopting
exception, legislature intended to depart from earlier rule that disallowed
attorney from testifying to circumstances surrounding execution of earlier wills
superseded by probated will); Tanner v. Farmer, 414 P.2d 340, 342-43 (Or.
1966) (concluding that, by applying exception in more recent case, court
overruled earlier case disallowing testimony of attorney who had prepared two
unexecuted wills). Accordingly, because the Attorney’s file is relevant to an
issue between parties who claim through the same deceased client, we hold
that the trial court did not unsustainably exercise its discretion in allowing the
file to be disclosed to the parties under Rule 502(d)(2).
In light of our holding that the Attorney’s file is subject to disclosure
pursuant to the exception in Rule 502(d)(2), we need not address the
5
petitioner’s arguments regarding whether there was an at-issue waiver of the
attorney-client privilege or a compelling need for disclosure.
The petitioner next argues that the 2004 correspondence between him
and the Attorney is protected by the attorney-client privilege. He contends that
he contacted the Attorney on the parents’ behalf as prospective clients and
“[a]n expectation of privacy was . . . evident.” Assuming, without deciding, that
the attorney-client privilege protects communications between a prospective
client, or a representative of a prospective client, and an attorney, and that the
petitioner is entitled to claim the privilege on the parents’ behalf, we find that
these communications are also discoverable under Rule 502(d)(2).
As discussed above, the respondent alleges that the petitioner unduly
influenced the parents to execute the 2004 estate plan documents when they
were not competent to understand them. As with the Attorney’s file, the
correspondence between the petitioner and the Attorney in 2004 is relevant to
the evaluation of the undue influence allegation and the determination of
whether the 2004 estate plan documents reflect the parents’ true intent. Cf.
Stevens, 112 N.H. at 119; In re Texas A & M–Corpus Christi Foundation, 84
S.W.3d at 360 (finding discovery sought relevant to evaluating mental acumen
of deceased at time gift was made). Accordingly, we conclude that the trial
court did not unsustainably exercise its discretion in allowing disclosure of the
2004 correspondence between the petitioner and the Attorney.
The petitioner further contends that the trial court erred by expanding
upon the assented-to discovery order. He maintains that the discovery order
related only to estate plan documents signed in 2004 and that the Attorney’s
file, which includes communications the Attorney had with the parents in 2001
and 2002 does not “pertain to” the executed 2004 documents.
Trial courts enjoy broad discretion in determining the limits of pretrial
discovery. See N.H. Ball Bearings v. Jackson, 158 N.H. 421, 429 (2009). Here,
the court reviewed the Attorney’s file and found it relevant to the issues in this
case, and, based upon our review of the file, we agree. Accordingly, to the
extent that the trial court may have expanded the scope of its initial assented-
to discovery order, we find no error by the trial court.
Finally, the petitioner filed a motion seeking to correct certain
misstatements made by his counsel at oral argument. The respondent objects.
Because our ruling today does not rely upon any of the alleged misstatements,
we decline to rule on the petitioner’s motion as it is moot.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, LYNN and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
6