THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Public Utilities Commission
No. 2012-398
APPEAL OF NORTHERN NEW ENGLAND TELEPHONE OPERATIONS, LLC
D/B/A FAIRPOINT COMMUNICATIONS – NNE
(New Hampshire Public Utilities Commission)
Argued: April 11, 2013
Opinion Issued: August 21, 2013
Orr & Reno, P.A., of Concord (Susan S. Geiger on the joint brief and
orally), for the petitioner Freedom Ring Communications, LLC d/b/a BayRing
Communications.
Rich May, P.C., of Boston, Massachusetts (Shaela McNulty Collins and
Eric J. Krathwohl on the joint brief), for petitioner Global Crossing
Telecommunications, Inc., A Level 3 Company.
BCM Environmental & Land Law PLLC, of Concord (Amy Manzelli on the
joint brief), and Fagelbaum & Heller, LLP, of Sherborn, Massachusetts (Gregory
M. Kennan on the joint brief), for petitioner Choice One of New Hampshire,
Inc., Conversent Communications of New Hampshire, LLC, CTC
Communications Corp., and Lightship Telecom, LLC, all of which do business
as Earthlink Business.
Hinckley, Allen & Snyder, LLP, of Concord (Daniel M. Deschenes on the
joint brief), and James A. Huttenhower, of Chicago, Illinois, on the joint brief,
for petitioner AT&T Corp.
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Harry N. Malone on the
brief and orally), for the respondent, Northern New England Telephone
Operations, LLC d/b/a FairPoint Communications – NNE.
DALIANIS, C.J. The respondent, Northern New England Telephone
Operations, LLC d/b/a FairPoint Communications – NNE (FairPoint), appeals
two orders of the New Hampshire Public Utilities Commission (PUC). The
petitioners are all “competitive local exchange carriers.” We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. On March 21, 2008, the PUC
ordered Verizon New England, Inc. d/b/a Verizon New Hampshire (Verizon) to
stop imposing “carrier common line charges” upon certain telephone calls that
did not require the use of Verizon’s common line. The PUC found that Verizon
did not provide switched access service in connection with these calls. On
appeal, we reversed the PUC’s decision. See Appeal of Verizon New England,
158 N.H. 693 (2009). Under the plain language of Verizon’s access tariff (the
Tariff), we concluded that Verizon was allowed to impose a “carrier common
line access charge” (CCL charge) upon “each aspect of switched access service,”
and that “common line access” is only one component of switched access
service. Id. at 696-97. It was undisputed that Verizon provided other aspects
of switched access service with respect to the calls at issue. Id. at 697.
Following our decision, the PUC reopened the proceeding and ordered
FairPoint, which had purchased Verizon’s New Hampshire assets, to modify the
Tariff to clarify that it could “charge CCL only when a FairPoint common line is
used in the provision of switched access services.” The PUC gave FairPoint
thirty days to submit tariff revisions. Ultimately, on January 20, 2012, the
PUC approved in part, and rejected in part, tariff revisions that FairPoint
submitted within the single filing (the “tariff filing”) on December 22, 2011. The
PUC approved FairPoint’s revision of the CCL charge, but rejected FairPoint’s
proposal to increase the rate of an interconnection charge under the Tariff.
The PUC found that this portion of the tariff filing was submitted voluntarily
and would be treated as “illustrative in the pending adjudication.” Shortly
thereafter, on February 3, 2012, the PUC granted the petitioners’ motion to
2
dismiss the portion of the docket related to the interconnection charge. The
PUC determined that an order of the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) and sections of the Code of Federal Regulations capped the rate of the
interconnection charge at the rate in effect on December 29, 2011. FairPoint
unsuccessfully moved for reconsideration of both orders, and this appeal
followed.
We begin with the standard of review. A party seeking to set aside an
order of the PUC has the burden of demonstrating that the order is contrary to
law or, by a clear preponderance of the evidence, is unjust or unreasonable.
RSA 541:13 (2007); see Appeal of Bretton Woods Tel. Co., 164 N.H. 379, 386
(2012). Findings of fact by the PUC are presumed prima facie lawful and
reasonable. RSA 541:13; see Appeal of Bretton Woods Tel. Co., 164 N.H. at
386. “When we are reviewing agency orders which seek to balance competing
economic interests, or which anticipate such an administrative resolution, our
responsibility is not to supplant the PUC’s balance of interests with one more
nearly to our liking.” Appeal of Pennichuck Water Works, 160 N.H. 18, 26
(2010) (quotation omitted). “The statutory presumption, and the corresponding
obligation of judicial deference are the more acute when we recognize that
discretionary choices of policy necessarily affect such decisions, and that the
legislature has entrusted such policy to the informed judgment of the PUC and
not to the preference of reviewing courts.” Id. (quotation and brackets omitted).
However, “[w]hile we give the PUC’s policy choices considerable deference, we
do not defer to its statutory interpretation; we review the PUC’s statutory
interpretation de novo.” Id.
Before addressing the merits of FairPoint’s appeal, we first consider the
petitioners’ contention that several of FairPoint’s arguments are untimely and
should be dismissed because FairPoint did not move for rehearing within thirty
days of each of the PUC orders giving rise to these arguments. In support of
their position, the petitioners cite RSA 541:3, :4, :6 (2007), and the Note to New
Hampshire Supreme Court Rule 10(1), which provides that to appeal an
administrative agency order under RSA chapter 541, “the appealing party must
have timely filed for a rehearing with the administrative agency.” We note that
motions for rehearing and appeals of PUC orders are governed by RSA chapter
541 except as otherwise provided. See RSA 365:21 (2009); Appeal of Office of
Consumer Advocate, 148 N.H. 134, 135-36 (2002).
Resolution of this issue requires statutory interpretation. We are the
final arbiters of the legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute
considered as a whole. Appeal of Pennichuck Water Works, 160 N.H. at 27.
We interpret statutes not in isolation, but in the context of the overall statutory
scheme. Id. Our analysis must start with consideration of the plain meaning
of the relevant statutes, construing them, when reasonably possible, to
3
effectuate their underlying policies. Id. Insofar as reasonably possible, we will
construe the various statutory provisions harmoniously. Id.
Based upon our review of RSA chapter 541, we reject the petitioners’
argument. RSA 541:3 provides that an application for rehearing may be made
within thirty days of “any order or decision” and may include arguments
related to “any matter determined in the action or proceeding, or covered or
included in the order.” (Emphasis added.) RSA 541:4, in turn, provides that
“[n]o appeal from any order or decision of the commission shall be taken unless
the appellant shall have made application for rehearing as herein provided,”
and that “no ground not set forth therein shall be urged, relied on, or given any
consideration by the court, unless the court for good cause shown shall allow
the appellant to specify additional grounds.” RSA 541:6 provides that “[w]ithin
thirty days after the application for a rehearing is denied, or, if the application
is granted, then within thirty days after the decision on such rehearing, the
applicant may appeal by petition to the supreme court.” When read together,
these sections establish that arguments may be raised on appeal if they relate
to “any matter determined in the action or proceeding,” were included in an
application for rehearing within thirty days of “any order or decision,” and the
agency’s ruling on the application was timely appealed to this court. When
statutory language is clear, its meaning is not subject to modification. See
Rainville v. Lakes Region Water Co., 163 N.H. 271, 274 (2012). We find
nothing in the statutory scheme that supports the petitioners’ contention that
FairPoint was required to move for rehearing of every PUC order that gave rise
to the arguments it has raised on appeal. The record demonstrates that
FairPoint timely moved for reconsideration of the orders at issue. Accordingly,
we address FairPoint’s arguments in turn.
FairPoint first argues that the PUC erred because it ordered FairPoint to
submit tariff revisions that were “outside the scope of this proceeding.”
FairPoint relies upon a procedural order from November 2006 in which the
PUC stated that it would not consider modification of the Tariff in the present
proceeding. We are not persuaded by this argument.
In an order dated May 4, 2011, the PUC determined that,
notwithstanding the November 2006 procedural order, “administrative
convenience” dictated that it would consider modification of the Tariff without
“assign[ing] a separate docket number to the proceeding.” In PUC parlance, a
proceeding is a “docketed case commenced by the [PUC].” N.H. Admin. Rules,
Puc 102.16. FairPoint has not challenged this reasoning. Accordingly, we
conclude that FairPoint has failed to demonstrate that the PUC’s decision to
order tariff revisions in the same proceeding was unjust or unreasonable. See
Appeal of Bretton Woods Tel. Co., 164 N.H. at 386 n.3 (finding party failed to
demonstrate error because it did not challenge the PUC’s reasoning). Although
FairPoint has raised other arguments about why the tariff revisions ordered by
4
the PUC were outside the scope of the proceeding, we do not consider these
arguments because they were not included in FairPoint’s motion for
reconsideration. See RSA 541:4; see, e.g., Appeal of Coffey, 144 N.H. 531, 533
(1999) (“Issues not raised in the motion for rehearing cannot be raised on
appeal.”).
FairPoint next argues that there is insufficient evidence in the record to
support the PUC’s finding that the CCL charge is not a “contribution element.”
In its March 2008 order, the PUC rejected Verizon’s argument that the CCL
charge is “a contribution element not dedicated to the common line or designed
to recover any costs of the common line itself.” Instead, the PUC found that the
charge was intended to recover and did recover a portion of the costs of Verizon’s
common line. We note that FairPoint does not provide a definition of
“contribution element.” From our review of the record and the parties’
arguments, we surmise that a “contribution element” is a charge that may be
assessed to recover costs not associated with a particular service.
In reviewing FairPoint’s argument, we are mindful that the PUC’s findings
of fact are presumed lawful and reasonable. RSA 541:13; see Appeal of Bretton
Woods Tel. Co., 164 N.H. at 386. It is the PUC’s duty to resolve issues of fact
and conflicts of opinion. Appeal of Pennichuck Water Works, 160 N.H. at 41.
The PUC is not compelled to accept opinion evidence of any witness including
expert witnesses, and may even reject uncontroverted evidence. Id.
The record demonstrates that the PUC received conflicting evidence about
whether the CCL charge is a contribution element that could be imposed when a
call did not require the use of Verizon’s common line. Although Verizon
submitted testimony that the CCL charge was designed to be a contribution
element, AT&T, one of the petitioners, submitted testimony arguing that Verizon
was “wrong in its argument that [the] CCL [charge] is a contribution element.”
Relying upon its understanding of past PUC decisions, AT&T argued that the
CCL charge could be assessed only when a call traversed Verizon’s common line.
Accordingly, given AT&T’s supporting testimony, we uphold the PUC’s finding
that the CCL charge is not “a contribution element not dedicated to the common
line or designed to recover any costs of the common line itself.” See id. at 41.
Although FairPoint further argues that the PUC’s explanation for its finding
was insufficient under RSA 363:17-b, III (2009), FairPoint did not include this
argument in its motion for reconsideration and we, therefore, will not address it.
See RSA 541:4; Appeal of Coffey, 144 N.H. at 533.
FairPoint next argues that the PUC violated its due process rights under
the State and Federal Constitutions by “prohibiting further proceedings”
regarding the purpose of the CCL charge. FairPoint contends that it was
denied a “meaningful opportunity to be heard” and that the PUC “prejudg[ed]
the central issue in this case.” FairPoint highlights that the PUC: (1) ruled
5
that it would “not re-litigate the purpose or propriety of the CCL charge”; and
(2) limited the scope of the proceeding to issues other than the purpose of the
charge. We assume, without deciding, that FairPoint did not waive this
argument. We first consider the argument under the State Constitution and
rely on federal law only to aid in our analysis. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-
33 (1983). “Where governmental action would affect a legally protected
interest, the due process clause of the New Hampshire Constitution guarantees
to the holder of the interest the right to be heard at a meaningful time and in a
meaningful manner.” Appeal of Pennichuck Water Works, 160 N.H. at 36
(quotation omitted); Appeal of Town of Nottingham, 153 N.H. 539, 551 (2006)
(“where issues of fact are presented for resolution by an administrative agency
due process requires a meaningful opportunity to be heard” (quotation and
brackets omitted)).
We conclude that the PUC did not deprive FairPoint of a meaningful
opportunity to be heard when it concluded that further proceedings regarding
the purpose of the CCL charge were unnecessary. First, FairPoint agreed to
take the record “as is” when it intervened in the proceeding, thereby
acknowledging that no further proceedings were necessary to decide issues
already addressed. Second, FairPoint makes no argument that Verizon, its
predecessor, lacked a meaningful opportunity to be heard regarding the
purpose of the CCL charge. For example, FairPoint does not argue that the
PUC denied Verizon the opportunity to present evidence regarding the purpose
of the charge. Third, even if FairPoint had not agreed to take the record “as is,”
FairPoint has not identified any evidence that it would have presented had the
PUC allowed further proceedings regarding the purpose of the CCL charge. Cf.
Ruel v. N.H. Real Estate Appraiser Bd., 163 N.H. 34, 44 (2011) (“A court will
not set aside an agency’s decision for a procedural irregularity . . . unless the
complaining party shows material prejudice.”); Appeal of Concord Natural Gas
Corp., 121 N.H. 685, 691 (1981).
FairPoint’s lone citation of Appeal of Concord Steam Corp., 130 N.H. 422
(1988), is not persuasive. In that case, we found that a public utility was
denied a meaningful opportunity to be heard because it received “inadequate
notice” that the PUC would make findings not germane to that proceeding that
would be conclusive in later proceedings. Appeal of Concord Steam Corp., 130
N.H. at 428-29. Here, FairPoint’s due process argument is not predicated upon
a lack of