THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
9th Circuit – Nashua Probate Division
No. 2012-368
IN RE ESTATE OF RICHARD B. WILBER
Argued: April 11, 2013
Opinion Issued: August 21, 2013
Ransmeier & Spellman, P.C., of Concord (Frank E. Kenison and John T.
Alexander on the brief, and Mr. Alexander orally), for the respondent.
Upton & Hatfield, LLP, of Concord (Douglas S. Hatfield and Matthew R.
Serge on the brief, and Mr. Hatfield orally), for the petitioner.
HICKS, J. The petitioner, Estate of Richard Wilber (Richard’s Estate),
appeals a decision of the 9th Circuit – Nashua Probate Division (O’Neill, J.)
allowing the respondent, Estate of Josephine Wilber (Josephine’s Estate), to
claim a statutory share under RSA 560:10 (2007) of certain real property
located in Hillsborough. We reverse and remand.
I
The following facts are undisputed. Richard and Josephine Wilber were
married for approximately fifty years. Richard owned property in both
Maryland and New Hampshire. On March 19, 2007, the Wilbers executed a
contract (the Agreement) in which Richard agreed to transfer his Maryland
property to Josephine and she, in turn, agreed to allow him to live in the house
on the property until his death or until he no longer wished to live there.
Richard also agreed not to make any claims on the Maryland property during
his life or “after [his] death,” and Josephine, in return, agreed not to make any
claims on Richard’s New Hampshire property (the Property) during her life or
“after [her] death.”
Richard died testate on October 18, 2010, omitting Josephine from his
will. The executor of Richard’s estate in Maryland, his state of domicile, filed
ancillary administration in the 9th Circuit – Nashua Probate Division to
distribute property he owned in New Hampshire. In December 2010,
Josephine filed a waiver by surviving spouse in the probate division, seeking a
statutory share of the Property under RSA 560:10, which allows a surviving
spouse to waive the decedent spouse’s will and take a specified portion of the
estate. Josephine died on March 12, 2011, leaving the executor of her estate,
Rosemary Heyne, to pursue her claim. Richard’s Estate opposed the waiver on
several grounds, among them: (1) Josephine had already petitioned the
Orphans’ Court for Prince George’s County, Maryland for a statutory share of
his estate, and had been denied for untimeliness; and (2) Josephine waived her
right to pursue a statutory share by promising in the Agreement to make no
claims on the Property during her life or after death. The probate division
disagreed on both grounds, ruling that it had ancillary jurisdiction over the
Property and that the Agreement did not satisfy “the necessary criteria to be a
valid and enforceable postnuptial agreement.” This appeal followed.
II
Richard’s Estate argues that the trial court erred in failing to enforce the
Property Agreement. Josephine’s Estate, on the other hand, argues that: (1)
New Hampshire has not recognized the validity of postnuptial agreements and
this court should not do so absent legislative enactment; and (2) the trial court
committed no error in finding the agreement fundamentally unfair and, thus,
unenforceable.
A
As the name suggests, a postnuptial agreement “is an agreement that
determines a couple’s rights and obligations upon divorce” or death, but,
unlike an antenuptial agreement, “is entered into after a couple weds but
before they separate.” Williams, Postnuptial Agreements, 2007 Wis. L. Rev.
827, 828 (2007).
Josephine’s Estate contends, at the outset, that although Maryland
recognizes postnuptial agreements, it is “[d]oubtful” that Maryland courts
would have enforced the Agreement. Richard’s Estate does not explicitly
disagree, but rather cites New Hampshire precedents to support its position
2
that the Agreement should be enforced. Because neither party has asked us to
apply Maryland law to determine whether the Agreement bars Josephine’s
Estate’s claim to a statutory share, we will apply the common law of New
Hampshire to decide that question. See Centronics, Corp. v. Genicom Corp.,
132 N.H. 133, 139 (1989) (“Since the New York decisions are not at odds with
our own, . . . and since neither party has suggested that the relevant
substantive law differs between the two jurisdictions, we will assume that to
whatever extent the governing foreign law has not been proven it is identical to
our own.”).
Postnuptial agreements are neither prohibited nor specifically authorized
by our statutes, cf. RSA 460:2-a (2004) (recognizing antenuptial agreements),
and we have had no occasion to address them under our common law. Courts
and legislatures long ago abandoned the common law rule that a husband and
wife could not contract with one another. See Adams v. Adams, 80 N.H. 80, 86
(1921). The modern view is that spouses may freely enter contractual
relationships, and courts will uphold them if they satisfy the criteria of contract
formation and are otherwise fair. See id.; Williams, supra at 838-39. As early
as 1900, in Foote v. Nickerson, 70 N.H. 496 (1900), we signaled our willingness
to give effect to postnuptial agreements when we stated that “[a]n agreement
renouncing marital rights is void,” but that “[a]n agreement touching property
rights may be valid.” Foote, 70 N.H. at 518. Similarly, in Hill v. Hill, 74 N.H.
288 (1907), we suggested that contracts between a husband and wife may be
upheld as long as they did not “contemplate a renunciation of marital . . .
rights.” Hill, 74 N.H. at 290. Although, as in Foote, the court in Hill did not
expressly consider whether spouses “can make a valid agreement between
themselves touching their respective rights in each other’s property,” id., the
analysis in Hill essentially assumed that they could do so. See id. at 290-91.
In recent years, courts have generally recognized and enforced
postnuptial agreements, even in the absence of express legislative approval.
See, e.g., In re Marriage of Traster, 291 P.3d 494, 501, 512 (Kan. Ct. App.
2012); Ansin v. Craven-Ansin, 929 N.E.2d 955, 961, 969 (Mass. 2010); In re
Marriage of Friedman, 122 Cal. Rptr. 2d 412, 418 (Ct. App. 2002). One recent
example is Bedrick v. Bedrick, 17 A.3d 17 (Conn. 2011), a case in which the
Connecticut Supreme Court opined that “[p]ostnuptial agreements are
consistent with public policy” because they “realistically acknowledge the high
incidence of divorce” and “allow two mature adults to handle their own
financial affairs.” Bedrick, 17 A.3d at 24 (quotation omitted); accord, e.g., In re
Bulova’s Will, 220 N.Y.S.2d 541, 548 (App. Div. 1961) (postnuptial agreement
is enforceable, rendering widow’s right of election void).
We find no compelling reason to depart from this trend. Postnuptial
agreements give married persons the flexibility to dispose of their property and
establish their rights and obligations upon death or marital dissolution, given
3
their particular life circumstances. While the default rules applying to divorce
or death are designed to ensure a fair outcome in often delicate situations, see,
e.g., RSA 458:16-a (2004) (presumption that equal distribution of marital
property is equitable), there is no reason why they should, in every case,
override the mutual, agreed-upon will of consenting adults. See Bratton v.
Bratton, 136 S.W.3d 595, 604 n.2 (Tenn. 2004) (noting the “many cases
upholding post-nuptial agreements in which the parties mutually release
claims to each other’s property in the event of death”). We hold, therefore, that
postnuptial agreements may be enforced in New Hampshire.
B
We must now determine whether to enforce the agreement at issue. At
the outset, we note that Josephine’s Estate contends that its attempt to take a
statutory share under RSA 560:10 does not constitute a “claim” on the
Property for the purpose of the Agreement. We disagree. The relevant clause of
the Agreement states: “I . . . agree not to make any claims on [the Property]
while I am living or after my death.” A “claim” is defined broadly: “The
assertion of an existing right; . . . [a] demand for money, property, or a legal
remedy to which one asserts a right.” Black’s Law Dictionary 281-82 (9th ed.
2009). Josephine’s Estate’s attempt to take an interest in the Property
pursuant to RSA 560:10 falls squarely within this definition as the “assertion of
an existing right.”
Turning now to the central issue in this case, Richard’s Estate argues
that the Agreement is enforceable because it “was both procedurally and
substantively fair to both parties.” The trial court disagreed, concluding that
the Agreement lacked “fundamental fairness in that there is no accompanying
financial disclosure document or any indication that one was provided, and
there was no indication that Mrs. Wilber was provided with or offered legal
counsel.” Josephine’s Estate contends that the trial court “was justified in
finding that [Richard’s] conduct fell short of the scrupulously transparent and
fair behavior required of spouses when they contract with one another.”
Our standard in review of a probate court decision is determined by
statute: “The findings of fact of the judge of probate are final unless they are so
plainly erroneous that such findings could not be reasonably made.” RSA 567-
A:4 (2007). “Consequently, we will not disturb the probate court’s decree
unless it is unsupported by the evidence or plainly erroneous as a matter of
law.” In re Angel N., 141 N.H. 158, 161 (1996) (quotation and brackets
omitted).
Other state courts take different approaches to reviewing postnuptial
contracts. Some require greater indicia of fairness than that which applies to
antenuptial contracts, while others analyze both antenuptial and postnuptial
4
contracts under the same standard. Compare, e.g., Ansin, 929 N.E.2d at 962
n.8, 969 n.19 (concluding that principles applicable to antenuptial and
postnuptial agreements “are not the same in all respects” and noting, as an
example, that parties to the former are “free not to marry” (quotation omitted)),
and Minn. Stat. Ann. § 519.11 (West 2006) (imposing more stringent
requirements for postnuptial contracts than for antenuptial contracts), with
Stoner v. Stoner, 819 A.2d 529, 533 n.5 (Pa. 2003) (“[T]he principles applicable
to antenuptial agreements are equally applicable to postnuptial agreements,
although the circumstances may slightly differ.”).
We look to principles governing antenuptial agreements for guidance.
Ordinary principles of contract law govern antenuptial agreements. See
Norberg v. Norberg, 135 N.H. 620, 623 (1992). Unlike parties to a commercial
contract, however, spouses are traditionally regarded as fiduciaries of one
another, and, therefore, often do not enter into agreements from arm’s length.
See 41 C.J.S. Husband and Wife § 121, at 492 (2006) (“A confidential or
fiduciary relationship is generally deemed to exist between a prospective
husband and wife executing an antenuptial agreement . . . .”). Because the
State has a special interest in the subject matter of antenuptial agreements,
courts scrutinize them more closely than ordinary commercial contracts. In re
Estate of Hollett, 150 N.H. 39, 42 (2003). That said, an antenuptial contract
“carries with it a presumption of validity.” In the Matter of Yannalfo and
Yannalfo, 147 N.H. 597, 599 (2002); see MacFarlane v. Rich (MacFarlane), 132
N.H. 608, 614 (1989). As a result, the party seeking invalidation of the
agreement must prove that: “(1) the agreement was obtained through fraud,
duress or mistake, or through misrepresentation or nondisclosure of a material
fact; (2) the agreement is unconscionable; or (3) the facts and circumstances
have so changed since the agreement was executed as to make the agreement
unenforceable.” Yannalfo, 147 N.H. at 599; see MacFarlane, 132 N.H. at 614.
Because of the fiduciary nature of the marital relationship, “the parties must
exercise the highest degree of good faith, candor and sincerity in all matters
bearing on the terms and execution of the proposed agreement, with fairness
being the ultimate measure.” In re Estate of Hollett, 150 N.H. at 42-43
(quotation omitted).
Here, we need not decide whether postnuptial contracts must be subject
to scrutiny beyond that which applies to antenuptial contracts. That is
because Josephine’s Estate, as the party challenging the Agreement, failed to
meet its burden to demonstrate that the Agreement was unfair to Josephine
under either standard. No evidence was introduced suggesting fraud, mistake,
or duress. See Yannalfo, 147 N.H. at 599. The only evidence touching upon
the circumstances surrounding the Agreement’s formation was the testimony of
Robert Wilber, Richard’s son, that Josephine – not Richard – both requested
the Agreement be drawn up and dictated its terms. Moreover, the fact that
there is no financial disclosure document accompanying the Agreement does
5
not suffice to show either that a “material” fact was withheld from Josephine or
that the agreement was “obtained through” such nondisclosure. Id. Nor does
the fact that Josephine was not provided with or offered legal counsel
invalidate the Agreement. Although hiring independent counsel would have
“go[ne] a long way toward ensuring the enforceability of [the] agreement,”
Ansin, 929 N.E.2d at 963 n.9, Josephine and Richard were free to form a
contract without doing so. See Stoner, 819 A.2d at 532 (noting that per se
requirement of consultation with independent legal counsel “would be a
paternalistic and unwarranted interference with the parties’ freedom to
contract”).
Furthermore, nothing in the record indicates that Josephine did not
understand the financial implications of giving up her rights in the New
Hampshire property in exchange for obtaining title to the Maryland property.
Indeed, as noted above, she was married to Richard for approximately fifty
years and, at least for some time in the later years of the marriage, paid their
bills. See Button v. Button, 388 N.W.2d 546, 550 (Wis. 1986) (noting that
“independent knowledge of the opposing spouse’s financial status” may be a
“substitute for disclosure”). Nor is there any evidence that the exchange was
unconscionable because of some gross inequality in the value of their
respective rights under the Agreement. Thus, Josephine’s Estate failed to meet
its burden to show the agreement is unenforceable. We conclude, therefore,
that the trial court’s decision to the contrary is unsupported by the evidence.
Josephine’s Estate also contends that Richard breached the Agreement
“[b]y refusing to perform his obligations under the Property Agreement without
additional consideration,” thus releasing her from her obligation to make no
claims against the Property. This argument appears to rest on the fact that,
upon transferring the deed to the Maryland property to Josephine, Richard
demanded that she promise not to require him to make repairs on it and not to
divorce him. Josephine’s Estate concedes, however, both that Richard kept his
promise to convey title to the Maryland property to Josephine and that she
accepted title. Cf. Keshishian v. CMC Radiologists, 142 N.H. 168, 173 (1997)
(“[A] party cannot treat a contract as binding and as rescinded at the same
time.” (quotation and brackets omitted)). Having accepted his performance,
Josephine remained obligated to perform her end of the bargain.
In light of the foregoing, we reverse the ruling of the trial court and
remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and CONBOY, LYNN and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
6