THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2012-091
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
NICHOLAS TREBIAN
Argued: January 10, 2013
Opinion Issued: February 25, 2013
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
David M. Rothstein, deputy chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
DALIANIS, C.J. The defendant, Nicholas Trebian, was convicted of
possession of marijuana with intent to sell and possession of a controlled drug
commonly known as “ecstasy,” following a jury trial in Superior Court
(Smukler, J.). See RSA 318-B:2, I (2011). On appeal, he argues that the trial
court erred in denying his motion to dismiss the ecstasy possession charge.
We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. On the evening of May 5,
2010, while walking his dog near his home in Allenstown, Jeffrey Gardner
heard the squeal of rubber on pavement followed by a loud crash. Gardner,
who is a part-time firefighter and emergency medical technician (EMT), got into
his truck and drove to the accident scene on nearby Granite Street. When he
arrived, he saw the headlights on the car involved “flash,” as though someone
nearby had locked the car remotely. He approached the car, saw no one, and
called the Allenstown police to report the accident. While on his cellular
telephone, he heard sounds of movement in the bushes nearby. Gardner
identified himself as an EMT and, holding up his flashlight, ordered the person
to come out of the bushes. At that point, a man emerged, telling Gardner that
he was “all set” and adamantly asserting that Gardner should get off the cell
phone and not call the police. The man, who was tense and angry, approached
to nearly within arm’s reach of Gardner. When the man saw the blue lights of
a police cruiser approaching, he ran off through an adjacent cemetery.
When Lieutenant Paul Paquette of the Allenstown Police Department
arrived, he determined that the vehicle was registered to Amanda Guay, whom
he later learned was the defendant’s girlfriend. Unable to contact Guay to
inquire about the driver of the vehicle, he called for a tow truck. When the tow
truck arrived, Paquette unlocked the vehicle and began an inventory search.
As he leaned into the vehicle, he detected a very strong odor of marijuana.
When he looked into the back seat, he discovered a partially opened duffel bag
containing what appeared to be a large bag of marijuana. At that point, he
stopped his search, had the vehicle towed to the police station, and, the
following day, obtained a search warrant.
During the search pursuant to the warrant, Detective George Baker
discovered, inside the pocket on the driver’s door, a registration in the name of
Nicholas Trebian, a bill of sale, and a temporary registration in the name of
Amanda Guay. From the duffel bag in the back seat, Baker seized two small
plastic bags of vegetative matter that appeared to him to be marijuana, as well
as a larger, gallon-sized bag containing a “brick” of what appeared to be
compressed marijuana. The bags were sent to the State laboratory for
analysis. In addition, Baker retrieved some papers, a pipe, a grinder used to
break up marijuana, a scale, some items of men’s clothing, and receipts for
purchases made at Wal-Mart and Cumberland Farms. At trial, the defendant
and the State stipulated that the receipts belonged to the defendant and that
no other person was with him when he made the purchases.
On the day after the accident, Gardner went to the Allenstown police
station to view a photographic array. Gardner immediately selected the
defendant’s photo, concluding that he was “a hundred percent” certain that the
defendant was the man whom he had encountered at the accident scene.
The State laboratory analysis of the vegetative matter confirmed that it
was marijuana. The chemist conducting the analysis discovered two ecstasy
2
pills that had not been found during the search of the vehicle. The defendant
was subsequently charged with possession of marijuana with intent to
distribute and possession of ecstasy.
After the State presented its case, the defendant moved to dismiss the
possession of ecstasy charge, arguing that the police officer who sent the
marijuana to the laboratory did not know of the presence of the pills and that
the chemist was surprised to discover them inside one of the bags of
marijuana. Consequently, the defendant asserted, the State failed to prove his
knowledge of the presence of the ecstasy pills. The trial court denied the
motion. The jury found the defendant guilty on both counts. This appeal
followed.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in denying his
motion to dismiss the possession of ecstasy charge because the State produced
no evidence tying him specifically to the ecstasy pills found in the bag of
marijuana. The State counters that the evidence was sufficient to prove both
that the defendant possessed the ecstasy and that he knew of its presence.
Although at oral argument, the defendant asserted that the ecstasy pills were
found within the brick of marijuana, which was “very tightly compressed,” he
has not briefed this contention, and the record does not support it.
Accordingly, we decline to address this contention specifically. See State v.
Tallard, 149 N.H. 183, 188 (2003).
To prevail upon a sufficiency of the evidence challenge, the defendant
must prove that no rational trier of fact, viewing all of the evidence and all
reasonable inferences from it in the light most favorable to the State, could
have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Gibbs, 164 N.H. ___, ___
(decided December 21, 2012). When the evidence is solely circumstantial, it
must exclude all rational conclusions except guilt. Id. Under this standard,
however, we still consider the evidence in the light most favorable to the State
and examine each evidentiary item in context, not in isolation. Id. The proper
analysis is not whether every possible conclusion consistent with innocence
has been excluded, but, rather, whether all such rational conclusions based
upon the evidence have been excluded. State v. Duran, 162 N.H. 369, 372
(2011).
To obtain a conviction for possession of a controlled drug, the State must
prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant: (1) had knowledge of the
nature of the drug; (2) had knowledge of its presence in his vicinity; and (3) had
custody of the drug and exercised dominion and control over it. State v.
Smalley, 148 N.H. 66, 68 (2002). Where, as here, the drug was not in the
defendant’s physical possession, the State must prove constructive possession.
Duran, 162 N.H. at 372. Constructive possession can be inferred from
circumstances linking the defendant to the drugs, such as personal
3
possessions found near the drugs. Smalley, 148 N.H. at 69. Additionally,
“constructive possession may be shown when other facts buttress an inference
of [the] defendant’s knowledge of the presence of the controlled substance.”
State v. Purlee, 839 S.W.2d 584, 588 (Mo. 1992) (en banc); see Duran, 162
N.H. at 372.
For the purpose of this appeal, the defendant concedes that the evidence
was legally sufficient to prove his constructive possession of the marijuana. He
asserts, however, that “[t]he connection specifically to the ecstasy pills within
the marijuana bags . . . is too tenuous.” We disagree.
The defendant contends that this case is similar to State v. Allen, 723
N.E.2d 674 (Ohio Ct. Com. Pl. 1999). In Allen, the defendant was charged with
possession of crack cocaine after a crack pipe was found in his sock. Id. at
675. The court concluded that, “[b]ased upon all the facts and circumstances
in evidence, [it could not] find beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant
‘knowingly possessed’ crack cocaine as alleged in the indictment.” Id. at 676.
The trial court noted that the officer saw no indication that the defendant was
using drugs or any movements suggesting that he put anything in his sock. Id.
To be sure, Allen contains language that appears to support the defendant’s
position: “It is just as possible that he had [the crack pipe] for some time, that
it was given to him by his companion before the officer spotted them, or that he
found it lying on the grounds of the public housing project.” Id.
Allen, however, is distinguishable. Although analysis of the residue in
the crack pipe field-tested positive for cocaine, the chemist testified that “crack
and powder [cocaine] would look identical.” Id. at 675. Because the defendant
was charged with possession of crack cocaine, and because the court could not
find beyond a reasonable doubt that the residue in the pipe was crack cocaine,
as opposed to powder cocaine, it found the defendant not guilty. Id. at 677.
Hence, it was the prosecution’s inability to prove the nature of the drug, rather
than its inability to prove “possession” of the drug, that resulted in the not
guilty finding. Here, however, the controlled drug found in the marijuana bag –
ecstasy – was the drug that the indictment charged the defendant with
possessing.
Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, as we must,
we conclude that a rational juror could have found beyond a reasonable doubt
that the defendant possessed the ecstasy pills. See United States v. Howard,
687 F.3d 13, 20-21 (1st Cir. 2012) (noting that it was within jury’s prerogative
to choose which inference regarding constructive possession seemed most
worthy of belief). “Since it is impossible to look into the mind of the defendant,
whether or not he had knowledge that he was possessing [the ecstasy pills]
must be determined from all the facts and circumstances in evidence.” Allen,
723 N.E.2d at 675. The ecstasy pills were discovered inside one of the bags of
4
marijuana, which was itself inside a duffel bag containing men’s clothing and
receipts for purchases made by the defendant. As we have previously stated,
“[e]vidence of ‘personal possessions of the defendant standing in close
proximity to the controlled substance may provide a sufficiently close nexus
between the defendant and the substance to allow the jury to infer
possession.’” Smalley, 148 N.H. at 69. Here, not only were the ecstasy pills “in
close proximity” to the marijuana, which the defendant concedes he
constructively possessed, they were actually contained in one of the bags of
marijuana. See State v. Stiles, 128 N.H. 81, 86 (1986). Considering the
evidence, and all reasonable inferences drawn from it, in the light most
favorable to the State, a rational trier of fact could have found beyond a
reasonable doubt that the defendant possessed the ecstasy pills. See Duran,
162 N.H. at 373 (rejecting defendant’s argument that another inmate could
have placed shank in defendant’s bag); cf. Com. v. McCollum, 945 N.E.2d 937,
947 (Mass. App. Ct.) (finding insufficient evidence of cocaine possession where
prosecution introduced no evidence that defendant stored any of his personal
effects in bedroom or ever accessed bedroom closet or underside of mattress
where cocaine was found), review denied, 953 N.E.2d 720 (Mass. 2011).
Accordingly, we affirm.
Affirmed.
HICKS, CONBOY, LYNN and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
5