THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2012-038
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
HECTOR RODRIGUEZ
Argued: February 7, 2013
Opinion Issued: April 30, 2013
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Susan P. McGinnis, senior
assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Christopher M. Johnson, chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
LYNN, J. Consistent with the law of most jurisdictions, New Hampshire
Rule of Evidence 801(d)(2)(E) permits the introduction of co-conspirators’
statements when made during the course of and in furtherance of a
conspiracy. However, post-arrest statements of co-conspirators are not
admissible under this rule.1 In this case, a substantial number of post-arrest
co-conspirator statements were improperly admitted during the trial of the
defendant, Hector Rodriguez, before the Superior Court (Colburn, J.) on
charges of burglary, conspiracy to commit burglary, first degree assault,
accomplice to first degree assault, and conspiracy to commit first degree
assault. See RSA 626:8 (2007) (accomplice liability); RSA 629:3 (2007)
(conspiracy); RSA 631:1 (2007) (first degree assault); RSA 635:1 (2007)
(burglary). Following his conviction on all charges, the trial court
acknowledged its error and attempted to remedy it by vacating the burglary
conviction and one of the first degree assault convictions (the one based on the
theory that the defendant acted as a principal in the commission of the
assault), while allowing the remaining three convictions to stand. Because we
conclude that the improperly admitted evidence constitutes harmless error
with respect only to the defendant’s conviction for conspiracy to commit
burglary, we affirm that conviction, but reverse his convictions on the
accomplice and conspiracy first degree assault charges and remand for a new
trial on those charges.
I
The following facts were adduced at trial. In the interests of clarity and
to underscore the integral role that the improperly admitted statements played
in the State’s case, we recite those statements in italics, while detailing the
properly admitted evidence in standard font. In 2010, the defendant and Jesus
“Stretch” Cortes were incarcerated together at the Youth Detention Center
(YDC) in Manchester. A YDC employee testified that Cortes and the defendant
“did not get along very well” and that an incident occurred when Cortes
assaulted the defendant and gave him a black eye. The employee heard the
defendant say that he and Cortes “were going to have some type of retaliation”
and that “some people that he was friends with, possibly his brother, was going
to help him.” The YDC employee characterized the defendant’s statements as
“just talking” and “embellish[ing].” Nashua Police Detective Daniel Mederos,
who interviewed the defendant, testified that the defendant told him that “he’s
had past issues with Jesus Stretch Corte[s].”
On January 2, 2011, the defendant was at his home in Nashua with his
brother, Anthony Serrano, as well as Junior Vincente and Adam “Bori”
Santiago. That same evening Nicholas Voight and Nicole Iannelli were at
1 See 29A Am. Jur. 2d Evidence § 858, at 149-50 (2008) (“[W]here coconspirators were in custody
when they made their confessions, the objects of the conspiracy were complete, and the
coconspirators were not attempting to conceal the crime or their cohorts, the statements were not
made in furtherance of the conspiracy.”); United States v. Meises, 645 F.3d 5, 18 n. 21 (1st Cir.
2011) (“There is no question that the hearsay exception for co-conspirator statements made
during the course and in furtherance of the conspiracy, does not apply to . . . post-arrest
statements.” (quotation and citation omitted)).
2
Iannelli’s house. Iannelli testified that Voight called the defendant and then
asked Iannelli to drive him to the defendant’s house. She agreed and they left
at around 7 p.m.
According to Iannelli, at the defendant’s house, she and Voight
encountered the defendant, Serrano, Vincente, and Santiago, none of whom
Iannelli had met before. The men were standing outside, wearing oversized
sweatshirts and baggy pants. They were speaking Spanish, which Iannelli
could not understand, and she heard the name “Stretch” mentioned in passing.
Iannelli generally described the men as “talking, and making weird gestures,
like moving, getting kind of hyperactive and moving around, and like lifting
their shirts . . . [and] going about themselves.” She did not see any weapons.
Iannelli heard the defendant and Voight engage in small talk in English. The
defendant appeared to her to be “the leader,” “the big man on campus . . .
leading everybody.”
Detective Alex Gorman interviewed Voight. He testified that Voight told
him that he knew where Cortes lived and told the defendant. Voight told
Gorman that he “had a double beef with Stretch” for a prior assault and for
“shorting his bags of marijuana.” Detective Mederos interviewed Vincente. He
testified that, according to Vincente, “the plan was to go to [Cortes’] house
because [Voight] knew him from buying weed” and “gave the information about
where Stretch lived.” Mederos also testified that the defendant admitted to him
that “he was with a group,” that “they planned to go and assault Stretch,” and
that “they basically came up and intended to go over to Jesus Corte[s’]
residence to assault him.”
Detective Gorman testified that Santiago told him that the plan was to beat
up Cortes and not to “stab him or kill him.” Nevertheless, Santiago told Gorman
that he brought a knife, a “mini-Samurai sword, eight inches total in length, with
probably a . . . four-inch blade,” and showed it to everyone. On cross-
examination, Gorman clarified Santiago’s account of showing the knife to the
others:
[H]e does say that he shows it. Obviously the transcript doesn’t
show the motions that he was making. When he says, “I got it right
here,” he was, in the interview, lifting up his shirt and pointing to his
waistband saying that he didn’t take -- and when I said, “Did you
take it out, you know, and [wave] it around,” he said, “No, I had it
right here.”
Iannelli testified that at the defendant’s house, the defendant asked her if
she had her driver’s license, whether she was driving her own car, and how
long she had been driving. He then asked her to drive him “somewhere,” but
he did not say where. According to Iannelli, the defendant’s tone was such that
3
she did not feel she had the choice of refusing him. The defendant got into
Iannelli’s car, while Serrano, Vincente, Santiago, and Voight got into a silver
Lincoln that belonged to the defendant’s mother. Iannelli said that she did not
have any weapons in her car and did not look inside the Lincoln to see if it
contained weapons. The defendant instructed Iannelli to follow the Lincoln but
did not tell her where they were going.
Detective Gorman testified that, according to Voight, once he was in the car
with Serrano, Santiago, and Vincente, he explained “where specifically in the
building that Voight was bringing them to . . . [that] Stretch lived.” “He said that
you go in the main door, go up the stairs, take a left and it’s the first door on your
right. And he also gave them an apartment number . . . 206.” Voight told
Gorman that he did not see any weapons and “knew that they were going to
beat up Stretch and possibly take his . . . drugs.” Santiago told Gorman that
Serrano brought “a miniature baseball bat, almost like a souvenir baseball bat”
made of wood. Gorman, who also interviewed Serrano, testified that Serrano
confirmed the men brought weapons with them in the Lincoln.
Iannelli testified that she followed the Lincoln to the parking lot of an
apartment building on Ledge Street in Nashua. Voight pulled into the parking
lot and parked facing away from the building; Iannelli parked next to him,
facing the building. The defendant got out of Iannelli’s car and Santiago,
Serrano, and Vincente got out of the Lincoln. The defendant instructed Iannelli
to stay in the car, and she and Voight remained in their respective cars while
the defendant, Santiago, Serrano, and Vincente went into the building. Iannelli
did not see them wearing masks or carrying weapons. She observed that the
men were talking, but did not hear what they were saying because the windows
of her car were rolled up.
Detective Mederos testified that the defendant described to him what
happened next. The defendant, Serrano, Santiago, and Vincente entered the
building, which “was identified as Corte[s’] residence,” through its front
entrance. The men “put black things over their faces, and they all went up to
the second floor of the apartment building, where [the defendant] remained
near the fire door outside the apartment.” The defendant told Mederos “that he
went there as extra muscle and that he stayed by the fire door as Anthony
Serrano, Junior Vincente and Bori [Santiago] went to the front door of
apartment 206,” where the defendant believed Stretch lived. Based upon
photographs introduced at trial, Mederos testified that the fire door was
approximately twenty feet from the door to apartment 206 and, standing beside
the fire door, “[y]ou can see the entire . . . hallway outside . . . [and] the entire
front door” of apartment 206.
According to Detective Mederos, the defendant told him that “someone
knocked on the door, and an individual opened the door, and [the defendant]
4
observed [Serrano] strike . . . the individual who answered the door with a bat.”
The defendant described Serrano’s bat as “a small, wooden . . . T-ball bat.” The
defendant saw Santiago “with his right hand stretched out in . . . front of him
enter the apartment”; Serrano and Vincente followed Santiago into the
apartment. The defendant “couldn’t see anything from the hallway of what was
going on inside” other than “that it was a male that came to the door.”
According to Mederos, the man who opened the door turned out to have been
Maxene Rousseau, who “[was] clearly not the same build or [had] the same
physical characteristics as Jesus Corte[s],” such that the two men “are
dissimilar enough that there wouldn’t be [a mistake].”
Detective Mederos further testified that Vincente told him that it was he,
Vincente, who “was in the hallway looking out” and that it was the defendant
who entered the apartment with Santiago and Serrano. Serrano first hit with a
bat the man who opened the door, then Santiago rushed in with a knife, followed
by Serrano and the defendant. A short while later, Vincente opened the door to
apartment 206, said “Let’s go,” and the men fled the building.
Mederos testified that Serrano told him that both the defendant and
Vincente went into apartment 206 together with himself and Santiago; Serrano
did not specify where inside the apartment the defendant went. On cross-
examination, however, Mederos testified that, during his interview, Serrano also
told him that neither he nor the defendant went inside the apartment.
Detective Gorman testified about Santiago’s differing versions of what
transpired inside the apartment building. Santiago told Gorman that Serrano
first hit with the bat the man who opened the door, then Santiago stabbed the
man, and then Vincente followed them into the apartment. Santiago also told
Gorman that Vincente did not go into the apartment and stood outside as the
lookout. At some point, Santiago said that he served as the lookout and did not
go inside the apartment. Finally, Santiago told Gorman that Vincente and
Serrano went in first, and “then they came back and brought [Santiago] over
later.” Santiago said that all of them “were wearing masks . . . or had some sort
of face covering.”
Rousseau testified about what happened when he opened the door. He
was first hit on the forehead with a baseball bat and then stumbled back as he
was hit, kicked, and punched repeatedly. Someone attempted to stab him, but
he kept blocking the attempts. Rousseau’s vision was blurry and “bloody” and
he could not describe how many assailants he saw:
When I was on the ground there was a gentleman in front of
me with a mask, and I could look there’s a tall gentleman and
now the gentleman kept pacing. But I cannot give any
description because . . . it was so blurry. There’s not much I
5
could see . . . the only way I know, there was a chubby guy in
front of me, because he pretty much, right on my face, ask
me for somebody that they know. They said, “Are you so and
so?”
Rousseau responded that he was not “so and so” and asked, “What did I do to
you guys? I do not know you guys.” The “chubby guy” bent down and pulled
off a black-and-white mask. The men asked Rousseau whether he lived in the
apartment. Rousseau said yes, at which point “the chubby guy turn[ed]
around, talk[ed] to his friend,” swore, and then the men ran out of the
apartment. The assault lasted approximately five minutes.
Although Rousseau testified on direct examination about a “tall guy,” a
“chubby guy,” a masked man, and “another gentleman pacing,” he appeared
unclear as to how many assailants he saw or what they looked like.
Q: . . . Was the person who was wearing the mask, did he enter
your apartment?
A: Yes.
Q: Okay. What about the tall guy?
A: Yes.
Q: And what about the chubby guy?
A: No, the chubby guy looked like it was in front of me, and the tall
guy – it was another gentleman pacing. I can tell how big it was
because I cannot give no description with everything that was
going on and blurriness. I can tell no description. All I could see
was, there was a gentleman with the mask, that’s why it’s chubby,
in front of me. . . . I asked him the question.
Q: Okay. . . . [W]hat about the guy who was pacing, where was he?
A: He was in . . . the kitchen, but it was like behind the tall guy.
On cross-examination, Rousseau clarified that he described one of the
assailants as tall because he was taller than the “chubby guy,” and that he
described the “chubby guy” as chubby because he was so close to Rousseau’s
face when he bent down to ask Rousseau a question; he could not describe
“this chubby guy” any further. Also on cross-examination, Rousseau indicated
that there were three assailants, although he could not describe them.
6
After the men left the apartment, Rousseau stood up, walked down the
hallway, pulled the fire alarm, walked downstairs and out the front door where
a “car reversed and hit [him].” He heard a male voice say “Go, go, go” from
inside the car and, as his “body lay on the trunk and the back window,” he “hit
the car real hard . . . kind of smash[ing] the back window.” He saw that a
white girl with black hair was driving the car.
Iannelli testified that five minutes after they walked in, the four men ran
out of the building. The defendant got into her car while the other three got
into the Lincoln where Voight was waiting. The defendant instructed Iannelli to
drive, yelling “Go, go, go.” Voight backed out of the parking lot, hitting a car on
his way out. Then Iannelli “backed up and felt something, and [her rear]
windshield smashed, and then somebody was on top of [her] car.” She turned
around and saw a tall black male who “jumped on [her] car and was trying to
get in, like come after them.” The defendant kept “saying to go and to leave”
and Iannelli pulled out and left the parking lot. The defendant appeared
nervous and instructed Iannelli “to just go straight because it was quicker.”
She “asked him what happened and where [they] were going. He told [her] not
to ask questions and to keep going, and just kept repeating himself.”
Back at the defendant’s house, Iannelli initially stayed in the car, but the
defendant got out and told her to get out of the car. The others were already
there, engaged in conversation. Iannelli did not see any weapons. She heard
the defendant “describe[] which apartment building they went to, and then
[Voight] said that, ‘It was the wrong guy. It was the wrong one. I said to go to
the left. You went to the right,’ or something like that.” On cross-examination,
Iannelli clarified that she did not remember who said, “We got the wrong guy.”
The men were acting “[v]ery nervous and scared.” Approximately five minutes
later, she and Voight went back to Iannelli’s house, and Voight was “freaking
out and screaming and yelling.”
The next day, Iannelli learned what had happened through news
accounts. Her father took her to the Nashua Police Department, where she
spoke with Gorman, identified the defendant from a photographic array, and
helped locate Voight. In the course of the ensuing investigation, police
interviewed the defendant, Voight, Serrano, Vincente, and Santiago. They also
spoke with Rousseau. A search of the silver Lincoln produced “a pair of black
leggings that were consistent with some of the descriptions . . . of one of the
face coverings [used during the attack], as well as a wooden stick or shovel
handle, ax handle in the trunk.” The police did not test the stick for
fingerprints because, according to Gorman, “it generally didn’t match the
description of the weapon that was described . . . by everybody.” Nor did they
test the leggings for DNA. The police did not collect any fingerprints or other
forensic evidence, such as DNA, from the apartment.
7
During the trial, the defendant repeatedly and unsuccessfully objected to
the admission of Detective Gorman’s and Detective Mederos’ testimony
concerning what they were told by Voight, Serrano, Vincente, and Santiago.
When the State proposed to “elicit statements in furtherance of th[e] conspiracy
from the co-conspirator [Vincente] through Detective Mederos,” the defendant
objected, arguing that the State had failed to establish by a preponderance of
the evidence the existence of a conspiracy and that admission of these
statements would violate his rights under the Confrontation Clause. The court
overruled the objection. When Mederos testified about what Vincente said he
heard from Voight, the defense objected on the grounds that such statements
constituted double hearsay. The court agreed, but allowed the State to proceed
“consistent with [its] ruling.” The State proceeded to question Mederos about
what Vincente told him Voight had told Vincente. When Mederos began to
testify about his interview with Serrano, the defense renewed its objection and
the court adhered to its previous ruling.
Before defense counsel began cross-examining Mederos, the court
reaffirmed its ruling on the defendant’s objections. The trial judge stated that
in so ruling, she “was focused on the rules of evidence,” specifically New
Hampshire Rule of Evidence 801(d)(2)(E), and, having further researched the
defendant’s arguments under the Confrontation Clause, affirmed the ruling.
The defendant argued that he needed to cross-examine the co-conspirators
because they gave vastly inconsistent accounts of what had transpired. The
State responded that the defendant would be able to cross-examine the
detectives and “inquire of other statements that may be inconsistent with those
statements that are elicited as being in furtherance of the conspiracy.” The
State asked that the court rule on the admissibility of the co-conspirators’
statements on a question-by-question basis, and the court agreed. Before
Gorman began to testify about Voight’s and Santiago’s post-arrest statements,
the defendant renewed his objection and the court again reaffirmed its ruling.
Prior to submitting the case to the jury, the court gave the following
instruction:
You’ve heard testimony relative to statements made by
Anthony Serrano, Junior Vincente, Adam Santiago and Nicholas
Voight, all of whom are alleged co-conspirators and unavailable
witnesses at trial. There can be many reasons why a person is
unavailable, and you are not to speculate as to why they did not
testify at this trial. . . .
You should note that because these alleged co-conspirators
did not testify, [the defendant] did not have an opportunity to
question them or challenge their statements directly. You can
reject their statements, you can accept the statements as true, or
8
you can accept some and reject some of these statements as true.
In short, you should give them as much weight as you think they
deserve.
During deliberations, the jury asked to “hear/see detective Mederos or detective
Gorman testimony regarding his interview with Anthony Serrano and Junior
Vincente.” The court responded that no transcript was available and
instructed the jurors to rely upon their collective memories. The jury convicted
the defendant of all five charges.
The defendant moved to set aside the verdicts, arguing that the co-
conspirators’ post-arrest statements were improperly admitted because they
were made neither during the pendency of nor in furtherance of the conspiracy.
At a hearing on the motion, the court ruled that “the co-conspirators’
statements . . . should not have been allowed . . . in the way they came in,” and
given this error, “the question becomes, is it harmless error because is there
enough . . . evidence on the balance to sustain the convictions.” The court
found that the remaining admissible evidence was not sufficient to support the
convictions for burglary and for the first degree assault charge predicated on
the defendant’s participation as a principal in that offense. As to the
convictions for the three remaining charges, the court ruled:
[U]ltimately, particularly . . . in the context of a motion to vacate
. . . and after the fact, negating of a charge, . . . the Defense in this
case certainly met their burden of establishing that there might
have been error. And then the analysis just becomes how
harmless it is. And I think there was plenty of other testimony to
support the conviction, which is why I’m not going to grant it on all
the other charges.
The court subsequently issued a written order setting aside the
convictions for burglary and first degree assault based upon the principal
liability theory, and upholding the convictions for conspiracy to commit
burglary, conspiracy to commit first degree assault, and first degree assault
based upon accomplice liability. The court determined that the admission of
the co-conspirators’ statements was contrary to New Hampshire Rule of
Evidence 801 because they were not made during the pendency of and in
furtherance of the conspiracy, and contrary to the Confrontation Clause
because the statements were testimonial. See Crawford v. Washington, 541
U.S. 36 (2004); U.S. CONST. amend. VI. The court proceeded to apply the
standard of review applicable to motions to set aside a verdict, whereby “the
defendant has the burden of establishing that the evidence, viewed in its
entirety and with all reasonable inferences drawn in favor of the State, was
insufficient to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that he was guilty of the crime
charged.” State v. Fandozzi, 159 N.H. 773, 782 (2010) (quotation omitted).
9
Applying this standard, the court concluded that: (1) “the balance of the
evidence, absent the co-conspirator statements, is sufficient to find the
defendant guilty of conspiracy to commit burglary”; (2) “with all reasonable
inferences drawn in favor of the State, [the evidence] is sufficient to sustain a
guilty verdict as to the charge of conspiracy to commit first degree assault”;
and (3) “there is sufficient evidence that the defendant acted in concert with the
others to commit first degree assault.” This appeal followed.
II
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court applied the wrong
standard of review when ruling on his motion to set aside the verdicts. The
trial court reviewed the convictions under the standard applicable to motions
to set aside a verdict; it placed the burden on the defendant to establish that
the entirety of the properly admitted evidence, with all reasonable inferences
drawn in favor of the State, was insufficient to prove beyond a reasonable
doubt that the defendant was guilty. See id. The defendant argues that the
court should have applied the harmless error test, which puts the burden on
the State to demonstrate, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the erroneously
admitted evidence did not affect the verdict. See State v. Beede, 156 N.H. 102,
109 (2007). The State responds that the defendant failed to preserve this
argument because he did not file a motion to reconsider asking the court to
apply the correct legal standard, see New Hampshire Department of
Corrections v. Butland, 147 N.H. 676 (2002), or make a specific
contemporaneous objection during the hearing on the motion to set aside the
verdicts, see State v. Ericson, 159 N.H. 379, 386 (2009); Super. Ct. R. 59-A.
The defendant also appeals the trial court’s improper admission of the
post-arrest co-conspirator statements and argues that this error requires the
reversal of all of his convictions. The State has not cross-appealed the trial
court’s ruling that it erred in the admission of these statements, nor the action
taken by the court – dismissal of the burglary and first degree assault-principal
liability charges – to remedy its error.2 Furthermore, the State does not argue
that the defendant failed to preserve his argument that the improper admission
of the statements requires reversal of his convictions.
Accordingly, we do not need to address whether the defendant preserved
his challenge to the standard of review that the trial court applied to his post-
trial motion. Instead, we proceed directly to the question of whether the
admission of Detective Gorman’s and Detective Mederos’ testimony concerning
2 But see Lockhart v. Nelson, 488 U.S. 33, 34 (1988) (holding that “where the evidence offered by
the State and admitted by the trial court – whether erroneously or not – would have been
sufficient to sustain a guilty verdict, the Double Jeopardy Clause does not preclude retrial”); State
v. Horak, 159 N.H. 576, 582-83 (2010) (adopting Lockhart’s holding for purposes of double
jeopardy analysis under the New Hampshire Constitution).
10
what they were told by Voight, Serrano, Vincente, and Santiago amounted to
harmless error.
An error is harmless if we can say beyond a reasonable doubt that
it did not affect the verdict. The State bears the burden of proving
that an error is harmless. The evaluation of whether the State has
met its burden involves consideration of the alternative evidence
presented at trial and the character of the contested evidence. An
error may be harmless beyond a reasonable doubt if the alternative
evidence of the defendant’s guilt is of an overwhelming nature,
quantity or weight, and if the contested evidence is merely
cumulative or inconsequential in relation to the strength of the
State’s evidence of guilt. In making this determination, we
consider the alternative evidence presented at trial as well as the
character of the inadmissible evidence itself.
Beede, 156 N.H. at 109 (citations omitted).
As to the convictions for accomplice to first degree assault and
conspiracy to commit first degree assault, we cannot conclude that the
erroneous admission of Voight’s, Vincente’s, Serrano’s, and Santiago’s post-
arrest statements through the testimony of Detectives Mederos and Gorman
was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
The indictment for accomplice to first degree assault alleges that the
defendant,
while acting in concert with Anthony Serrano, Junior Vincente and
Adam Santiago, knowingly caused bodily injury to M.R. by striking
M.R. in the head with a bat, stabbing him twice with a knife and
kicking him while he was on the ground; said bat and knife being
deadly weapons as then and there used . . . .
A person acts as an accomplice if, “[w]ith the purpose of promoting or
facilitating the commission of the offense, he solicits such other person in
committing it, or aids or agrees or attempts to aid such other person in
planning or committing it.” RSA 626:8, III(a). Here, the defendant is alleged to
have facilitated the commission of first degree assault by “knowingly caus[ing]
bodily injury to another by means of a deadly weapon.” RSA 631:1, I(b).
As to the defendant’s conviction for conspiracy to commit first degree
assault, a conviction for criminal conspiracy requires the State to prove that
the defendant, “with a purpose that a crime defined by statute be committed,
. . . agree[d] with one or more persons to commit or cause the commission of
such crime, and an overt act [wa]s committed by one of the conspirators in
11
furtherance of the conspiracy.” RSA 629:3, I. The indictment for conspiracy to
commit first degree assault alleges that the defendant,
with the purpose to commit the crime of First Degree Assault, did
agree with Nicholas Voight, Junior Vincente, Anthony Serrano and
Adam Santiago to go to the residence of Jesus Cortes . . . to cause
bodily injury to him through the use of a bat and a knife, said bat
and knife being deadly weapons in the manner they were intended
to be used . . . .
The underlying offense which the defendant allegedly conspired to commit was
first degree assault, an element of which, as charged, is the use of a deadly
weapon. See RSA 631:1, I(b).
To find a defendant guilty of criminal conspiracy, the jury must find that
he agreed – even tacitly, State v. Gilbert, 115 N.H. 665, 667 (1975) – to bring
about each element of the underlying offense. See State v. Douglas, 11 A.3d
699, 707 (Conn. App. Ct. 2011) (“[P]roof of a conspiracy to commit a specific
offense requires proof that the conspirators intended to bring about the
elements of the conspired offense.” (quotation and brackets omitted)). This is
the reason that “[a] jury in a conspiracy prosecution must be instructed on all
of the essential elements of the crime that a defendant is alleged to have
conspired to commit . . . .” 15A C.J.S. Conspiracy § 223, at 511 (2012); United
States v. McCaleb, 552 F.3d 1053, 1058 (9th Cir. 2009) (“[A] district court
plainly errs in a conspiracy case if it fails to instruct the jury on an element of
the crime that is the object of the conspiracy.” (quotation omitted)).
An agreement is insufficient to establish conspiracy with others
that certain activities be done . . . without [the defendant] knowing
that the goal of the conspiracy was to commit the specific crime
charged as the basis of the conspiracy.
A conspiracy is not established by a showing of mere
knowledge of the acts of the other parties, acquiescence in their
purposes, or mere passive cognizance of the crime. Mere presence
or awareness is insufficient. There must be some knowing
participation in the conspiracy with a view to the furtherance of
the common design and purpose.
15A C.J.S. Conspiracy, supra § 122, at 449-50 (emphasis added).
Thus, to affirm the defendant’s convictions for conspiracy to commit first
degree assault and accomplice to first degree assault, we must be able to
conclude that the properly-admitted evidence overwhelmingly established that
he had at least a tacit understanding that deadly weapons would be used in
12
the commission of the assault. See Beede, 156 N.H. at 109. The State asserts
that this standard is met, arguing:
Given the swiftness of the attack with deadly weapons and the
entry into the apartment, common sense dictates that the group
had planned to attack Cortes with deadly weapons, that they had
planned to enter the apartment during the attack, and that the
others had their weapons out and ready before Rousseau answered
the door.
We are not convinced. In his interview with Mederos, the defendant
acknowledged the planned assault on Cortes but did not say that weapons
would be used in the attack. Iannelli testified that she saw the men lift their
shirts, but she did not see any weapons. Santiago’s improperly-admitted
statement that he showed the knife to everyone constituted the only direct
evidence that the defendant knew that one of the co-conspirators was armed.
There is no evidence that the defendant knew Serrano was armed with a bat,
other than the inference that he must have seen Serrano holding it at some
point on his way into and/or once inside the building; yet Iannelli testified that
she did not see any weapons when the men went into the building.
Even though a jury could reasonably have found that the defendant
must have seen Santiago bare the knife before one of the men knocked on the
door, and therefore concluded – based upon the absence of evidence of the
defendant’s objection or attempted withdrawal from the venture at that point –
that he assented to the use of this weapon, the strength of this inferential
chain is not compelling in light of the record as a whole. Mederos testified that
the fire door was approximately twenty feet from the door to apartment 206,
and absent Santiago’s improperly admitted description of the knife as being
eight inches long, there was no other evidence concerning the size of the knife –
and therefore the obviousness of its visibility.3 The defendant told Mederos
merely that he saw Santiago, with his right hand extended, enter the
apartment.
As to the bat, although a jury could reasonably have found that the
defendant saw Serrano with the bat before Rousseau opened the door, the
properly-admitted evidence that he knew a bat would be used in the
commission of the offense is not overwhelming. As with the knife, the size and
appearance of the bat are far from obvious. Although Mederos testified that
3 The trial court found – and the State does not contest – that the evidence placing the defendant
inside the apartment (and therefore rendering him part of the physical attack on Rousseau) came
entirely from post-arrest co-conspirator statements. To determine whether the erroneous
admission of these statements was harmless error, we must therefore consider the only alternative
evidence of the defendant’s location within the building: his statement to Mederos that he
remained by the fire door and acted as a lookout.
13
the defendant described “the bat that his brother Anthony Serrano had . . . as
a small wooden . . . T-ball bat,” the detective did not indicate that the
defendant acknowledged seeing Serrano with the bat before he actually used it
to hit Rousseau. The police ultimately retrieved from the Lincoln what Gorman
described as “a wooden stick or shovel handle, ax handle,” which was so
dissimilar to “the weapon that was described . . . by everybody” that the police
did not test it for fingerprints. Additionally, Iannelli testified that the men were
wearing oversized sweatshirts and baggy pants, clothing under which one
could conceal either a knife or a small bat.
Moreover, the improperly admitted statements of the co-conspirators
placed the defendant inside the apartment participating in the physical attack
on Rousseau – a scenario under which the inference that deadly weapons were
used with the defendant’s knowledge and consent was far stronger than
without such evidence.
In sum, even taking account of the evidence suggesting that the
defendant may have been the leader of the criminal venture, we conclude that
the admissible evidence of the defendant’s guilt of accomplice to first degree
assault and conspiracy to commit first degree assault “is [not] of an
overwhelming nature, quantity or weight, and . . . the contested evidence is
[not] merely cumulative or inconsequential in relation to the strength of the
State’s evidence of guilt.” Id. Having determined that the error was not
harmless, we reverse these convictions and remand. See State v. Reid, 134
N.H. 418, 423 (1991); State v. Leuthner, 124 N.H. 638, 642 (1984).
Finally, addressing the defendant’s conviction for conspiracy to commit
burglary, we find that the admission of the post-arrest co-conspirator
statements was harmless error. Under RSA 635:1, I, “A person is guilty of
burglary if he enters a building or occupied structure, or separately secured or
occupied section thereof, with purpose to commit a crime therein . . . .” See
also RSA 629:3, I.
The defendant argues that the admissible evidence of an agreement to
enter the apartment with the purpose to commit a crime inside is not
overwhelming. We disagree. A YDC employee testified that the defendant said
he would enlist his friends, and perhaps his brother, to help him retaliate
against Cortes. Iannelli testified that, on the night of the assault, the men
mentioned the name “Stretch” and the defendant appeared to be the leader of
the group. She further testified that the defendant persuaded her to drive him
and instructed her to follow Voight and the others. According to Mederos, the
defendant said he entered the apartment building because “[i]t was identified
as Corte[s’] residence.” Most importantly, Mederos testified that the defendant
admitted to him that, on the night of January 2, 2011, “he was with a group
and they basically came up and intended to go over to Jesus Corte[s’] residence
14
to assault him.” In addition, the defendant’s statements as to his actions as
the “lookout,” combined with Rousseau’s testimony that his attackers hit him
and entered the apartment immediately upon his opening the door, plainly
show that the criminal venture that he joined contemplated entry into the
apartment to carry out the attack. Given the defendant’s admission that he
intended to go to Cortes’ residence to assault him as well as evidence that he
enlisted the help of others to do so, we conclude that the alternative evidence of
the defendant’s guilt is overwhelming, Beede, 156 N.H. at 109, and affirm the
defendant’s conviction for conspiracy to commit burglary.
We deem waived the remaining questions that the defendant raised in his
notice of appeal but did not brief. State v. Kelley, 159 N.H. 449, 455 (2009).
Affirmed in part; reversed in
part; and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
15