THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Sullivan
No. 2012-492
KIMBALL UNION ACADEMY
v.
JOHN GENOVESI & a.
Argued: February 13, 2013
Opinion Issued: June 28, 2013
Sheehan, Phinney, Bass + Green, P.A., of Manchester (John-Mark Turner
and Peter S. Cowan on the brief, and Mr. Turner orally), for the plaintiff.
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Andrew D. Dunn & a. on
the brief, and Jonathan M. Eck orally), for defendant John Genovesi.
HICKS, J. Defendant John Genovesi appeals the refusal of the Superior
Court (Tucker, J.) to dismiss, for lack of personal jurisdiction, a claim against
him for professional negligence brought by the plaintiff, Kimball Union
Academy (KUA). Defendants JDE, Inc. (JDE) and James DePaul are not
involved in this appeal. We affirm and remand.
KUA’s writ alleges the following facts. KUA is a college preparatory
school located in Meriden. It hired JDE to design and build a field house
facility on its campus. JDE is a Florida corporation with a place of business in
Pennsylvania. James DePaul is JDE’s president and resides in Pennsylvania.
Under its contract with KUA, JDE was required to supply an architect and an
engineer, both licensed in New Hampshire, for the project’s design.
The writ further alleges that Genovesi is a professional engineer who
resides in New Jersey. He is not licensed in New Hampshire. Nevertheless,
JDE hired him “to perform certain design work for the footings and foundation
system” of the field house. JDE and Genovesi failed to “prepare a complete set
of construction documents, for the footing and foundation system design,”
prior to the commencement of work on the footings and foundation. The
incomplete design “lacked key information essential to the construction and
proper inspection of the footings and foundation system. Among other things,
[Genovesi] failed to provide (or to determine that others were providing) special
inspection instructions for the footings and foundation system as required by
the” applicable building code.
KUA’s writ alleges a number of problems with the footing and foundation
work that prompted it to terminate its contract with JDE and commence this
action. The writ alleges a single count, for professional negligence, against
Genovesi, which reads, in part, as follows:
[Genovesi] breached his duty to KUA by failing to perform
his work on the Project in conformance with both the applicable
laws and codes and with the applicable professional practice
standards governing his work by, among other things, failing to
prepare complete construction documents and failing to supply
special inspection instructions for the footing and foundation
work and/or to determine that such special inspection
instructions were provided.
Genovesi moved to dismiss, asserting that the superior court lacks
personal jurisdiction over him. He submitted an affidavit averring that he has
“never resided in New Hampshire, owned any real property in New Hampshire,
advertised in New Hampshire, had any business interests in New Hampshire,
or even been in New Hampshire since a ski vacation . . . more than thirty years
before the circumstances of this case arose.” He also averred that he “did all of
the work in connection with preparing foundation drawings from [his] office in
New Jersey.” KUA objected, submitting, among other things, copies of the
contract between Genovesi and JDE, Genovesi’s bill for services, which reflects
three conference calls with New Hampshire participants, and certain e-mails.
The trial court denied Genovesi’s request for an evidentiary hearing and denied
his motion to dismiss. This appeal followed.
Our standard of review for rulings on motions to dismiss for lack of
personal jurisdiction varies according to the case’s procedural posture. State v.
2
N. Atlantic Ref. Ltd., 160 N.H. 275, 280 (2010). “When, as in this case, the
trial court rules upon the motion without holding an evidentiary hearing, the
trial court employs a prima facie standard, and we review the trial court’s
decision de novo.” Id. (quotation omitted). The inquiry under the prima facie
standard is whether the plaintiff “has proffered evidence which, if credited, is
sufficient to support findings of all facts essential to personal jurisdiction.” Id.
(quotation omitted). “[T]he plaintiff ordinarily cannot rest upon the pleadings,
but is obliged to adduce evidence of specific facts.” Id. at 281 (quotation
omitted). Both the trial court and we, when undertaking de novo review, “must
accept the plaintiff’s (properly documented) proffers as true for the purpose of
determining the adequacy of the prima facie jurisdictional showing.” Id.
(quotation omitted). The plaintiff’s evidentiary proffers must be construed “in
the light most congenial to the plaintiff’s jurisdictional claim” and “[f]acts put
forward by the defendant may be considered only if they are uncontradicted by
the plaintiff’s submissions.” Id. (quotation omitted).
Genovesi first argues that the trial court erred in failing to conduct an
analysis under New Hampshire’s long-arm statute. See RSA 510:4, I (2010).
“To decide whether it may exercise in personam jurisdiction over a non-
resident defendant, a court typically must engage in a two-part inquiry. First,
the State’s long-arm statute must authorize such jurisdiction. Second, the
requirements of the federal Due Process Clause must be satisfied.” Fellows v.
Colburn, 162 N.H. 685, 690 (2011) (quotation and citation omitted).
Genovesi acknowledges our case law construing the New Hampshire
long-arm statute to permit “the exercise of jurisdiction to the extent permissible
under the Federal Due Process Clause,” id., but asserts that this interpretation
“does not permit a trial court to conflate the analyses in circumstances where
the plain language of the statutory requirements have not been met.” We are
not persuaded. “Because we construe the long-arm statute broadly, personal
jurisdiction over nonresidents may be exercised whenever the requirements of
the Due Process Clause of the United States Constitution are satisfied.”
Alacron v. Swanson, 145 N.H. 625, 628 (2000) (citation omitted). Moreover, we
disagree that Genovesi does not fall within the statute’s plain language.
New Hampshire’s long-arm statute provides, in part:
Any person who is not an inhabitant of this state and who, in
person or through an agent, transacts any business within this
state, [or] commits a tortious act within this state . . . submits
himself, or his personal representative, to the jurisdiction of the
courts of this state as to any cause of action arising from or
growing out of the acts enumerated above.
3
RSA 510:4, I. Genovesi contends that he did not transact any business in this
state, given that it is undisputed that his business transactions were with JDE,
a Florida corporation, and DePaul, a Pennsylvania resident. He also asserts
that he did not commit a tortious act in New Hampshire, “as he completed all
of his work from his office in New Jersey.”
KUA counters that the long-arm statute is satisfied because Genovesi’s
tortious act caused injury in New Hampshire. We agree. “For jurisdictional
purposes, a party commits a tortious act within the State when the injury
occurs in New Hampshire even if the injury is the result of acts outside the
State.” Thomas v. Telegraph Publ’g Co., 151 N.H. 435, 437 (2004); see
Tavoularis v. Womer, 123 N.H. 423, 426 (1983) (holding that “the fact that only
the alleged injury occurred within the State does not preclude New Hampshire
courts from subjecting a nonresident to their jurisdiction under the long-arm
statute”).
Genovesi argues, however, that KUA has “failed to allege an injury which
can be causally related to the alleged negligent actions taken by [him]” because
it “does not allege that [his] designs were actually used by JDE to complete the
KUA field house.” In fact, Genovesi points out, KUA’s writ alleges that “[t]he
footing and foundation work performed by JDE did not conform to the design
prepared by [Genovesi].” Thus, Genovesi argues, his designs could not have
caused injury in New Hampshire even assuming they were negligently
prepared.
Genovesi’s argument is unavailing. First, as KUA notes, its writ alleges
that “[t]he footing and foundation system design prepared by [Genovesi] and
used by JDE was incomplete and lacked key information.” (Emphasis added.)
Moreover, that KUA’s writ alleges JDE negligently executed Genovesi’s design
does not negate its allegation that the design itself was also negligently
prepared by Genovesi. Any issue related to the actual causation of injury is, as
KUA suggests, a merits issue rather than a jurisdictional one. For similar
reasons, we are not persuaded by Genovesi’s argument that “JDE was
supposed to present Mr. Genovesi’s foundation design to a New Hampshire-
licensed professional engineer for review, signature, and seal by that
engineering professional prior to submission to the [town] for a building
permit.” Again, this fact, even if true, does not negate the allegation that
Genovesi was negligent in the first instance. Issues of ultimate responsibility
are not before us. We conclude that because Genovesi is alleged to have
caused injury in New Hampshire by his tortious acts, the requirements of New
Hampshire’s long-arm statute have been met. See Thomas, 151 N.H. at 437.
We now turn to the second prong of the jurisdictional inquiry – whether
the requirements of the Federal Due Process Clause are satisfied. See Fellows,
162 N.H. at 690. Under the Federal Due Process Clause, “a court may exercise
4
personal jurisdiction over a non-resident defendant if the defendant has
minimum contacts with the forum, such that the maintenance of the suit does
not offend traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice.” Id. at 690-
91 (quotation omitted). KUA does not contend that Genovesi has the
“continuous and systematic” contacts with New Hampshire to support general
jurisdiction; rather, the issue is whether KUA has demonstrated specific
jurisdiction, “where the cause of action arises out of or relates to the
defendant’s forum-based contacts.” Id. at 691.
In determining whether the exercise of specific personal
jurisdiction over a defendant comports with due process, we
examine whether: (1) the contacts relate to the cause of action;
(2) the defendant has purposefully availed [himself] of the
protection of New Hampshire’s laws; and (3) it would be fair and
reasonable to require the defendant to defend the suit in New
Hampshire. Each factor must be evaluated on a case-by-case
basis, and all three factors must be satisfied in order for the
exercise of jurisdiction to be constitutional.
Id. (citation omitted).
Genovesi asserts that neither the first nor second factor is met here.
“The first inquiry, relatedness, asks whether the claim underlying the litigation
directly arises out of, or relates to, the defendant’s forum-state activities.”
Astro-Med, Inc. v. Nihon Kohden America, Inc., 591 F.3d 1, 9 (1st Cir. 2009)
(quotations, brackets, and ellipsis omitted). The test for relatedness is a
“flexible, relaxed standard.” Id. (quotations omitted). “To satisfy the
relatedness factor, there must be more than just an attenuated connection
between the contacts and the claim; the defendant’s in-state conduct must
form an important, or at least material, element of proof in the plaintiff’s case.”
N. Atlantic Ref. Ltd., 160 N.H. at 282 (quotation and brackets omitted).
Genovesi argues that the trial court erred in finding sufficient minimum
contacts in the form of three telephone conferences and one e-mail he directed
into New Hampshire where “KUA does not allege that [he] committed any tort
through his e-mail or during [those] telephone communications” and his “e-
mail and telephone contacts with New Hampshire do not form an element of
proof, material or otherwise, necessary to establish KUA’s cause of action
against [him] for professional negligence.” Rather, he contends, KUA alleges
negligence in the preparation of design work that he: (1) “contracted
exclusively with JDE, a non-New Hampshire entity, to prepare”; (2) completed
at his office in New Jersey; and (3) submitted to DePaul in Pennsylvania by e-
mail.
5
Genovesi’s argument, however, like that of the defendant in Astro-Med,
“emphasizes too fine a point.” Astro-Med, 591 F.3d at 10. “[A] defendant need
not be physically present in the forum state to cause injury (and thus “activity”
for jurisdictional purposes) in the forum state.” Id. (quotation omitted).
Genovesi’s allegedly negligent design work in New Jersey led to the injury to
KUA in New Hampshire. “That in-forum injury was clearly related to” KUA’s
professional negligence claim. Id.
Moreover, that the injury would occur in New Hampshire was entirely
foreseeable. See N. Atlantic Ref. Ltd., 160 N.H. at 282 (noting that “[t]he
court’s assessment of relatedness is informed by the concept of foreseeability”)
(quotation omitted)). The proffered evidence shows that Genovesi gave JDE a
“proposal for engineering services to provide a foundation design for the 160’ x
250’ KUA Field House.” The proposal referenced the project’s address in New
Hampshire. Genovesi was therefore aware that his plans would be utilized in
constructing a building in New Hampshire.
Furthermore, the trial court noted that “Genovesi actively engaged in
making his work suitable to its location in New Hampshire, mindful of local
restrictions and in coordination with local specialists.” For instance, in an e-
mail to DePaul, Genovesi stated that he “spoke with Richard Porter of
Engineered Foundation Technologies [in Nashua] at some length regarding the
site conditions” and that he would “proceed with the foundation design along
th[e] line” they discussed. The trial court concluded that “[a]n integral part of
Genovesi’s work was the location of the Project, and Genovesi maintained
extensive contacts with New Hampshire in order to make his design fit the
specifications of that location.” We find no error in the court’s determination
that Genovesi’s New Hampshire contacts related to KUA’s cause of action.
The second factor asks whether “the defendant has purposefully availed
[himself] of the protection of New Hampshire’s laws.” Fellows, 162 N.H. at 691.
Purposeful availment requires both foreseeability and
voluntariness. Voluntariness requires that the defendant’s
contacts with the forum state proximately result from actions
by the defendant himself. The contacts must be deliberate, and
not based on the unilateral actions of another party.
Foreseeability requires that the contacts also must be of a
nature that the defendant could reasonably anticipate being
haled into court there.
N. Atlantic Ref. Ltd., 160 N.H. at 284 (quotations and citations omitted).
Genovesi maintains that he, “by his own acts, sought to contract with
JDE and agreed to design a foundation from New Jersey pursuant to
6
specifications submitted by JDE.” Genovesi knew, however, that his design
would be used to construct a building in New Hampshire. As noted above, his
proposal to JDE referenced the field house facility’s address in New Hampshire.
The scope of the proposed work included “[d]etermin[ing] local environmental
loads in accordance with State, County and Town building codes.” It also
proposed the “[r]eview [of] geotechnical report test data and recommendations”
and promised that “[d]rawings will be complete and ready for review and
signature by a local professional for submission to the [town] for a building
permit.” The use of the allegedly negligent design in New Hampshire cannot be
said to constitute “unilateral action[ ]” by JDE that would render Genovesi’s
contact with New Hampshire involuntary. Id. (quotation omitted). Moreover,
because Genovesi “purposefully entered into a contract [with JDE] which had
substantial connections with New Hampshire, . . . [he] could reasonably
anticipate being haled into court here.” Computac, 124 N.H. at 354. It was
foreseeable that any injury that would result from negligent preparation of the
foundation design would occur in New Hampshire, where the foundation was
constructed, and that suit would be brought here as a result. Cf. id.
Accordingly, we find the purposeful availment factor satisfied.
Genovesi contends, however, that to establish the purposeful availment
factor, we have “required an increased quantum of proof . . . where an out-of-
state defendant’s products end up in New Hampshire despite the fact that
there was no direct sale by the defendant to a New Hampshire resident.” He
asserts that this analysis, dubbed “stream of commerce plus,” should be
applied in this case.
We have adopted the “stream of commerce plus” theory in products
liability cases. See N. Atlantic Ref. Ltd., 160 N.H. at 284. Under that theory,
which was first put forth by Justice O’Connor in her plurality opinion in Asahi
Metal Industry Co. v. Superior Court, 480 U.S. 102, 108-13 (1987), the
defendant’s “placement of a product into the stream of commerce, without
more, is not an act . . . purposefully directed toward the forum State.” Id.
(quotations and brackets omitted). Nor is the “defendant’s awareness that the
stream of commerce may or will sweep the product into the forum state
sufficient to establish purposeful availment.” Id. (quotation omitted). “Rather,
to meet the purposeful availment factor, there must be additional conduct of
the defendant that indicates an intent or purpose to serve the market in the
forum State.” Id. (quotations and brackets omitted).
This is not, however, a products liability case, or even a case in which a
manufacturer places a product into the “stream of commerce” without directing
it to a specific destination. Thus, as KUA points out, the “stream of commerce
plus” analysis is of doubtful application here. Cf. Burman v. Phoenix
Worldwide Industries, Inc., 437 F. Supp. 2d 142, 149 n.4 (D.D.C. 2006) (noting
lack of controlling authority for “the notion that the stream of commerce theory
7
applies to services rendered, as a defendant’s liability for faulty manufactured
products was the sole focus of the Supreme Court’s discussion in Asahi”).
Even so, that analysis recognizes, as “additional conduct” supporting the
exercise of jurisdiction, the defendant’s act of “designing the product for the
market in the forum State.” N. Atlantic Ref. Ltd., 160 N.H. at 284 (quotation
omitted). As previously noted, Genovesi tailored his design to fit specific site
conditions at the project’s New Hampshire location. Thus, even were we to
apply the “stream of commerce plus” analysis, we would find the requisite
“additional conduct of the defendant that indicates an intent or purpose to
serve the market in the forum State” such that the exercise of personal
jurisdiction over him would not offend due process. Id. (quotations and
brackets omitted).
Having concluded that KUA has met its burden on the first two factors,
we ordinarily would now consider the third. See Fellows, 162 N.H. at 691.
Because Genovesi has not addressed this factor in his brief, however, we
conclude that he does not challenge the trial court’s finding that “it would be
fair and reasonable to require him to defend the suit in New Hampshire.”
Accordingly, we affirm and remand.
Affirmed and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and CONBOY, LYNN and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
8