THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Coos
No. 2012-174
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
WILLIAM PLOOF
Argued: April 11, 2013
Opinion Issued: June 28, 2013
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Brian R. Graf, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief, and Stacey P. Coughlin, attorney, orally), for the
State.
James B. Reis, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief and
orally, for the defendant.
DALIANIS, C.J. The defendant, William Ploof, was convicted of
aggravated felonious sexual assault and conspiracy to commit aggravated
felonious sexual assault, following a jury trial in Superior Court (Bornstein, J.).
See RSA 632-A:2 (Supp. 1983) (amended 1986, 1992, 1994, 1995, 1997, 1998,
1999, 2003, 2008, 2012) (now codified at RSA 632-A:2, I(l) (Supp. 2012)); RSA
629:3 (1974) (amended 1999). On appeal, he argues that the evidence was
insufficient to establish his identity and that the trial court erred by not
declaring a mistrial during the victim’s testimony. We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. Between August 1982 and
April 1983, the victim, J.Z., who was eleven or twelve years old, and his friend,
R.W., who was twelve years old, sometimes associated with a group of men who
provided the boys with alcohol and marijuana. One day during that time, the
boys went to the apartment of one of the men, Gerard Duchesne. Also present
were the defendant, Maurice Boucher, and Lyle Whitehouse. The men began
talking about sex and certain sexual acts that the defendant could perform by
himself and with others. At some point, R.W. went into the bathroom with
Boucher for five or ten minutes. R.W. testified that, when he returned, J.Z.
had “a sickening look on his face,” was “just about in tears, and he wanted to
leave.” J.Z. testified that while R.W. was out of the room, the defendant
fondled him and put J.Z.’s penis in the defendant’s mouth.
At some point after this incident, the defendant threatened the boys that
if they told anybody what had happened, he would kill them. Heeding the
threat, they did not speak, even to each other, about what had happened.
More than twenty-seven years later, in 2009, while the Berlin Police were
investigating an unrelated crime, J.Z. was interviewed as a possible witness.
At that time, the police learned of J.Z.’s allegations of sexual assault that
resulted in the charges in this case.
Although the defendant was present at jury selection, he later submitted
a waiver of his right to be present at trial, which the court initially denied. The
defendant then refused to be transported to the trial and renewed his waiver of
his right to be present. The court granted his request, and the trial proceeded
without him. At the close of the State’s case, the defendant moved to dismiss,
asserting that the evidence was insufficient to prove identity, and subsequently
moved to set aside the verdict for the same reason. The trial court denied both
motions. The defendant was convicted of aggravated felonious sexual assault
and conspiracy to commit aggravated felonious sexual assault; this appeal
followed.
The defendant first argues that the evidence was insufficient to establish
his identity as the perpetrator of the charged crimes. The State counters that
the identity evidence was sufficient, because three witnesses, who knew the
defendant personally, identified him by name.
To prevail on his sufficiency of the evidence claim, the defendant must
establish that no rational trier of fact, viewing all of the evidence and all
reasonable inferences from it in the light most favorable to the State, could
have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. See State v. Wilmot, 163 N.H.
148, 154 (2012). The State has the burden of proving beyond a reasonable
doubt that the person charged with a crime is indeed the perpetrator of that
2
crime. Cf. State v. Ward, 118 N.H. 874, 878 (1978) (discussing proof that
defendant is same person who has been convicted of offenses listed in habitual
offender petition). Of course, when a defendant waives his right to appear at
trial and the trial proceeds in absentia, witnesses cannot point to the defendant
in court to identify the defendant as the perpetrator.
As the State maintains, three witnesses, who testified that they knew the
defendant personally, identified him by name. The State contends that the
identification of the defendant was, therefore, supported by sufficient evidence.
We have previously held, however, that “sameness of name is insufficient
evidence of identity, even when the name is unusual.” State v. Lougee, 137
N.H. 635, 637 (1993) (quotation omitted), impliedly overruled on other grounds
as recognized by State v. Thompson, 164 N.H. 447, 451 (2012). Consequently,
more was required than merely asserting that the perpetrator of the crimes and
the defendant, who was not present, shared the same name. See Akridge v.
State, 970 So. 2d 917, 918 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2007).
We agree with the State’s assertion that when there is no contrary
evidence offered by the defendant in a criminal case, “a comparatively small
amount of proof in addition to identity of name constitutes sufficient evidence
to submit to a jury to whose good judgment the decision is entrusted.” State v.
Olson, 244 N.W.2d 718, 721 (N.D. 1976) (quotation omitted); accord Com. v.
Doe, 393 N.E.2d 426, 428 (Mass. App. Ct. 1979) (“Slight confirmatory evidence
is needed to establish identity of persons where there is identity of names.”).
“The minimum required must necessarily depend on the facts of each case and
the general law applicable to criminal causes.” Olson, 244 N.W.2d at 721
(quotation omitted).
Here, each of the three witnesses was questioned about “Defendant, Mr.
William Ploof,” “the Defendant in this particular case, Mr. Ploof,” or “William
Ploof, the Defendant in this particular case.” On none of these occasions did
defense counsel object based upon a lack of foundation under New Hampshire
Rule of Evidence 602. Rule 602 specifically provides that “[a] witness may not
testify to a matter unless evidence is introduced sufficient to support a finding
that the witness has personal knowledge of the matter.” N.H. R. Ev. 602. Rule
602 does not, however, “require that the witness’s knowledge be positive or rise
to the level of absolute certainty.” State v. Harris, 605 S.E.2d 809, 812 (W. Va.
2004) (discussing similar rule of evidence). The defendant could have
challenged the factual foundation for the witnesses’ testimony that the William
Ploof that they were discussing was indeed the defendant, but he did not do so.
We therefore conclude that the jury could properly have found that the
witnesses had personal knowledge that the William Ploof about whom they
testified was the defendant. Cf. United States v. Polizzi, 926 F.2d 1311, 1321-
22 (2d Cir. 1991) (fact finder may draw an inference against defendant from his
failing to question witnesses regarding disputed issues).
3
In People v. Kern, 149 N.W.2d 216, 217-18 (Mich. Ct. App. 1967), during
juror voir dire, the trial judge pointed out the defendant to the venire, both by
name and by his alias. On appeal, the defendant argued that the prosecution
failed to identify him at trial as the perpetrator of the charged offenses. Kern,
149 N.W.2d at 218. While agreeing with the defendant that the trial court’s
conduct during voir dire did not excuse the prosecutor from proving
identification at trial, it nevertheless concluded that testimony of the victim
about “the defendant” and “Bill” was sufficient to identify the defendant as the
perpetrator of the crimes. Id. Similarly, the jury here, who observed the
defendant at jury selection, could infer that William Ploof and “the defendant”
were interchangeably the subject of the testimony given by the witnesses.
“It is not necessary that any one witness should distinctly swear that the
defendant was the man, if the result of all the testimony, on comparison of all
its details and particulars, should identify him as the offender.” Com. v.
Cavanaugh, 385 N.E.2d 1006, 1009 (Mass. App. Ct. 1979) (quotation omitted).
Accordingly, we conclude that the repeated references to “Defendant, Mr.
William Ploof,” “the Defendant in this particular case, Mr. Ploof,” and “William
Ploof, the Defendant in this particular case,” without objection, provided the
“small amount of proof” necessary to identify the defendant as the perpetrator
of the crimes charged. Olson, 244 N.W.2d at 721 (quotation omitted); see also
Preston v. State, 287 N.E.2d 347, 348 (Ind. 1972) (concluding defendant
sufficiently identified as person who committed offense when three witnesses
referred to “defendant” as person who committed the crime).
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred by not declaring a
mistrial during J.Z.’s testimony, because a comment unequivocally conveyed
the defendant’s prior criminal conduct to the jury. The State asserts that the
issue was not preserved for appeal and, even if it were, J.Z.’s statement did not
improperly communicate to the jury that the defendant had been involved in
other criminal activity.
During cross-examination focusing upon J.Z.’s delay in reporting the
crimes, J.Z. testified that his father “was a drunk, an . . . abusive man, and I
was scared of him knowing about it. . . . I feared my father’s retribution . . . for
the bad thing that I did by sneaking out of the house.” J.Z. then stated to
defense counsel, “Do you understand now?”; “What don’t you understand?”;
and, finally, “No. This guy is a multiple offender.” Defense counsel
immediately moved for a mistrial, asserting that he did not “know how you put
this genie back in the bottle.” He continued: “At a minimum, that needs to be
stricken and the jury needs to know that they are to ignore it.” The trial court
denied the request for a mistrial, concluding that “in the context of the
testimony as a whole, and the way that particular answer was worded – or
statement was worded, I am going to find that the statement is not an
4
irreparable injustice that can’t be cured by an instruction.” The trial court
then instructed the jury, “Members of the jury, I’m striking the witness’ last
statement from the record, and instructing you to disregard it.”
“A mistrial is appropriate only if the evidence or comment complained of
was not merely improper, but also so prejudicial that it constituted an
irreparable injustice that cannot be cured by jury instructions.” State v.
Russo, 164 N.H. 585, 589 (2013) (quotation omitted). “[I]ncurable prejudice
may result when the testimony of a witness conveys to a jury the fact of a
defendant’s prior criminal offense.” Id. (quotation omitted). Accordingly, we
have held that a mistrial is appropriate when “a defendant’s prior criminal
conduct has been unambiguously conveyed to the jury.” Id. at 589-90
(quotation omitted).
When reviewing a trial court’s ruling on a motion for a mistrial, we
“recognize that the trial court is in the best position to gauge the prejudicial
nature of the conduct at issue and has broad discretion to decide whether a
mistrial is appropriate.” Id. at 589 (quotation omitted). “We will not overturn
the trial court’s decision on whether a mistrial or other remedial action is
necessary absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion.” Id. (quotation
omitted).
The State asserts that because defense counsel “did not take any
exception or object to the trial court’s [denial of his motion for mistrial] or
curative instruction . . . the defendant failed to properly preserve the issue of
the denial of his motion for a mistrial for appeal.” We disagree.
The purpose underlying our preservation rule is to afford the trial court
an opportunity to correct any error it may have made before those issues are
presented for appellate review. State v. Town, 163 N.H. 790, 792 (2012). Once
the trial court concluded that a mistrial was not required, no further objection
was necessary because the court was already aware of the substance of defense
counsel’s mistrial request.
The defendant contends that “the unsolicited statement that ‘this guy is
a multiple offender’ unambiguously conveyed [his] prior criminal conduct to the
jury.” The statement was made, however, while J.Z. was explaining his delay
in reporting the crimes, which he ascribed to fear of retribution from his
“abusive” father. Hence, the comment about “[t]his guy” being a “multiple
offender” was not an unambiguous reference to the defendant. Under the
circumstances, we conclude that J.Z.’s statement was not so prejudicial as to
constitute an irreparable injustice. See Russo, 164 N.H. at 589. Moreover, the
trial court’s curative instruction eliminated any prejudice that might have been
caused. The trial court immediately instructed the jury that it was striking
J.Z.’s statement from the record and that the jury should disregard it. The jury
5
is presumed to follow the trial court’s curative instruction. State v. Willey, 163
N.H. 532, 539 (2012).
In sum, we conclude that a rational jury, viewing all of the evidence and
all reasonable inferences from it in the light most favorable to the State, could
have found the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, see Wilmot, 163
N.H. at 154, and that the trial court’s denial of the motion for mistrial was not
an unsustainable exercise of discretion, see Russo, 164 N.H. at 589.
Accordingly, we affirm.
Affirmed.
HICKS, CONBOY, LYNN and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
6