THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2012-496
ROBERT AUDETTE & a.
v.
SUZYNNE D. CUMMINGS & a.
Argued: September 12, 2013
Opinion Issued: December 24, 2013
Casassa and Ryan, of Hampton (Daniel R. Hartley on the brief and
orally), for the plaintiffs.
Law Offices of Peter E. Hutchins, PLLC, of Manchester (Peter E. Hutchins
on the brief and orally), for the defendants.
LYNN, J. The defendants, Suzynne D. Cummings (Cummings) and S.D.
Cummings & Co., PC, appeal a final order of the Superior Court (McHugh, J.)
awarding $44,403 to the plaintiffs, Robert Audette (Audette) and his company,
H&S Construction Services, LLC (H&S), for breach of contract. We affirm.
I
The trial court found the following facts. Beginning in 1999, the
defendants provided various accounting and business services to Audette and
his then-partner, Paul Fogarty, including helping them to start their
construction business partnership, as well as preparing tax returns for both
the business and Audette and Fogarty personally. In 2007, the defendants
assisted Audette and Fogarty in dissolving their partnership, including drafting
a dissolution agreement and serving as an intermediary between the parties.
In February and March 2008, H&S performed framing work on a house
in Kingston (the property). On this project, H&S was a subcontractor of a
general contractor, Ledge Rock Construction, LLC (Ledge Rock), owned by Peter
Rizzo, for whom the plaintiffs had completed between twenty-five and thirty
framing jobs since 1999. Ledge Rock owned the property and was constructing
the house for Michael and Karen Greene, who were to purchase the property
upon completion. In early March, the plaintiffs were informed that the Town of
Kingston had issued a cease and desist order, halting construction on the
property. By that time, H&S had completed approximately ninety-five percent
of its work on the property and was owed $44,403.
Shortly thereafter, during a meeting regarding his taxes, Audette asked
Cummings to recommend an attorney to place a mechanic’s lien on the
property. Cummings responded that she could perform the work and drafted a
Representation Letter. The Representation Letter, dated March 10, 2008, set
forth a number of services that the defendants would provide with regard to
collecting the money owed to H&S for its work on the property, including:
3. Communicate with all pertinent parties in order to attempt to
collect the monies due you without the intervention of the Court
systems.
4. Prepare all documents necessary to secure your claim for
services rendered and monies due you and your company. This
will included, [sic] but not limited to preparation of all applications
for a mechanic[’]s lien, Court petitions and applicable municipality
forms.
5. Define all terms for collection of the monies due, including but
not limited to structure agreements, communications both written
and verbal, and preparation of mechanic’s lien for recording if
necessary.
The Representation Letter indicated that the defendants would be paid for their
services on an hourly basis. It also acknowledged that Audette had earlier
given Cummings his key to the property.
H&S provided Cummings with a final invoice for its work on the property
within a week of signing the Representation Letter. Cummings instructed
2
Audette not to have any further contact with Rizzo or the Greenes, and to refer
any calls from either party to her. Cummings had previously given Audette a
similar instruction not to communicate with Fogarty while advising him during
the dissolution of the Audette-Fogarty partnership.
Within a few weeks of executing the Representation Letter, Audette
received a call from Rizzo. Rizzo left a voicemail promising to pay Audette if he
returned to finish his remaining work on the house. Pursuant to Cummings’
direction, Audette immediately notified her, and she said she would contact
Rizzo. A few days later, Audette received a call from Michael Greene, whose
voicemail confirmed that he had paid Rizzo and that H&S would be paid if it
completed its work. Again, Audette immediately informed Cummings of the
call and did not return Greene’s message.
On October 8, 2008, Audette’s wife, Judy Audette, sent Cummings an e-
mail asking about the status of the property. Cummings responded by e-mail,
stating, “received a call [from] Kingston while I was away so need to return it.
Have everything else in motion.” Later that day, Cummings wrote in another e-
mail to Judy that she was “waiting on a return call from Kingston..never ending
phone tag.” On October 10, Cummings wrote in an e-mail to Judy, “I will keep
you posted when I hear on Kingston.” On November 18, 2008, Cummings
replied to another e-mail from Judy by saying she was “in Court in Kingston
right now. Will follow up with you. Keep your fingers crossed.” Finally, on
May 20, 2009, Cummings e-mailed Judy, “I will make an appointment for next
week for Kingston.” The plaintiffs understood these e-mails to mean that the
defendants had secured a mechanic’s lien on the property and had filed a
lawsuit on their behalf.
During the summer of 2009, the plaintiffs began having difficulty
contacting Cummings. In August, Judy Audette investigated the status of the
property and mechanic’s lien. After learning that the Greenes had moved into
the home, she went to the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds and
discovered that a warranty deed had been recorded, dated July 14, 2008,
transferring the property from Ledge Rock to the Greenes. No mechanic’s lien
on the plaintiffs’ behalf had been recorded. Because the plaintiffs’ 120-day
statutory lien had not been timely secured or recorded, it had lapsed in July
2008. RSA 447:2, :9 (2002). Judy continued her attempts to contact
Cummings into September, but Cummings failed to respond to her calls or e-
mails.
The plaintiffs brought suit against the defendants in November 2009 for
breach of contract. At trial, Cummings’ testimony conflicted with many of the
facts recited above, but the trial court, as fact finder, discounted most of her
testimony. The trial court found for the plaintiffs and awarded damages in the
amount of $44,403. This appeal followed.
3
II
“A breach of contract occurs when there is a failure without legal excuse
to perform any promise which forms the whole or part of a contract.” Lassonde
v. Stanton, 157 N.H. 582, 588 (2008) (quotation omitted). “We will uphold a
trial court’s ruling in an action for breach of contract unless the decision was
made without evidentiary support or was an unsustainable exercise of
discretion.” Id. “A trial court’s findings of fact in a breach of contract action
are binding upon us unless they are unsupported by the evidence or erroneous
as a matter of law.” Id.
“The interpretation of a contract is a question of law, which we review de
novo.” Czumak v. N.H. Div. of Developmental Servs., 155 N.H. 368, 373
(2007). “When interpreting a written agreement, we give the language used by
the parties its reasonable meaning, considering the circumstances and the
context in which the agreement was negotiated, and reading the document as a
whole.” Id. “Absent ambiguity, the parties’ intent will be determined from the
plain meaning of the language used in the contract.” Id.
On appeal, the defendants argue that the trial court erred in ruling: (1)
that the plaintiffs did not fail to mitigate their damages; (2) that the defendants’
breach of contract was the legal cause of the plaintiffs’ damages; and (3) that
expert testimony on the issues of reasonable care or legal causation was not
necessary. We address these arguments in turn.
A
First, the defendants argue that the plaintiffs failed to mitigate their
damages by: (1) not responding to the telephone calls from Rizzo and Greene
asking the plaintiffs to return to the property, finish the job, and collect the
monies owed them; and (2) not instituting legal action against Rizzo and/or the
Greenes within the statute of limitations. We disagree.
The claimant in a breach of contract claim must take such measures to
lessen his or her loss as can be effectuated “with reasonable effort and without
undue risk.” Coos Lumber Co. v. Builders Supply Co., 104 N.H. 404, 408
(1963); see also Grenier v. Barclay Square Commercial Condo. Owners’ Assoc.,
150 N.H. 111, 119 (2003) (“[A] party seeking damages occasioned by the fault
of another must take all reasonable steps to lessen his or her resultant loss.”).
But the claimant need not do so until the defendant refuses to perform its part
of the contract. Coos Lumber, 104 N.H. at 408. Put another way, “[t]here is no
obligation on a promisee to minimize his damages until he actually knows that
he is suffering damages because of a breach of contract by the promisor.”
Citizens Nat. Bank v. Hermsdorf, 96 N.H. 389, 394 (1951). Instead, the
promisee “may assume that the promisor will keep his contractual promise.”
4
Id. Further, “[t]he defendants bear the burden of proving that the plaintiffs
failed to mitigate damages.” Grenier, 150 N.H. at 119; see also Parem
Contracting Corp. v. Welch Const. Co., Inc., 128 N.H. 254, 259 (1986) (holding
that trial court was not permitted to conclude that damages could have been
avoided absent evidence to that effect, and that defendant bore burden of
presenting that evidence).
The defendants’ first mitigation argument fails because the plaintiffs did
not learn until August 2009 that the defendants had failed both to secure the
mechanic’s lien on the property and to take any action to recover the money
owed as promised in the March 2008 Representation Letter. Indeed, the trial
court found that the defendants led the plaintiffs to believe that “everything
was in motion,” meaning that they had secured the mechanic’s lien and filed a
lawsuit. Based upon his history with Cummings, Audette had every reason to
believe Cummings was upholding her end of the bargain. Because the
plaintiffs did not know of the defendants’ inaction until August 2009, more
than a year after the property had been transferred and the statutory
mechanic’s lien had lapsed, they were not obligated to mitigate their damages
before that time. Therefore, Audette’s decision in March 2008 to heed
Cummings’s instructions and not respond to the telephone calls from Rizzo
and Greene cannot be considered a failure to mitigate damages.
With respect to the defendants’ second argument, regarding the plaintiffs’
alleged failure to bring suit against Rizzo and/or the Greenes, counsel for the
defendants admitted at oral argument that the plaintiffs had no privity of
contract upon which to base a claim against the Greenes. Thus, we need not
address further the defendants’ argument as to them. As to a potential action
against Rizzo and/or Ledge Rock, the plaintiffs offered evidence at trial that
Audette in 2009 believed that Ledge Rock was out of business, that Rizzo had
no assets, and that Rizzo owed a significant amount of money to creditors. The
trial court found that Audette was aware that Rizzo had “hit hard times,” that
“his whereabouts [were] unknown,” and that others had told Audette that Rizzo
“owed a lot of money to a lot of people and disappeared.” The defendants argue
that the plaintiffs failed to prove that the money was uncollectable from Rizzo
or Ledge Rock in November 2009, but the plaintiffs had no burden to do so.
See Flanagan v. Prudhomme, 138 N.H. 561, 575-76 (1994) (holding that
defendants failed to carry burden of proof to show that plaintiffs failed to
mitigate damages when, among other things, they offered no evidence
contradicting the plaintiffs’ evidence). The defendants here offered no evidence
to show that it was reasonable for the plaintiffs to file an action against Rizzo,
whom they believed to be insolvent and whose whereabouts were unknown.
For these reasons, we find no error in the trial court’s ruling that the plaintiffs
did not fail to mitigate their damages.
5
B
The defendants next argue that the trial court erred in ruling that their
breach of contract was the legal cause of the plaintiffs’ damages. They contend
that causation is lacking because: (1) the plaintiffs could have collected the full
amount of the debt by returning to the job site and completing the work after
the telephone calls from Rizzo and Greene; (2) the plaintiffs failed to establish
that it would have been necessary to “obtain” a mechanic’s lien to collect the
money when Rizzo and Greene had already offered to pay them; (3) the
plaintiffs failed to establish that a “mechanic’s lien action” would have been
successful in procuring repayment of the debt; and (4) the plaintiffs failed to
institute legal action against Rizzo or the Greenes. We find none of these
arguments persuasive.
“The goal of damages in actions for breach of contract is to put the non-
breaching party in the same position it would have been in if the contract had
been fully performed.” Robert E. Tardiff, Inc. v. Twin Oaks Realty Trust, 130
N.H. 673, 677 (1988) (quotation omitted). A party claiming damages for breach
of contract must show, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the damages
were caused by the defendant’s alleged wrongful act, as well as the extent and
amount of such damages. Id. at 679.
In this case, the record establishes by a preponderance of the evidence
that the defendants caused their damages by failing to perform under the
Representation Letter. In the Representation Letter, the defendants promised,
in pertinent part, to “[c]ommunicate with all pertinent parties in order to collect
the monies due” and “[p]repare all documents necessary to secure [the
plaintiffs’] claim for services rendered and monies due [to the plaintiffs] . . .
[including] preparation of all applications for a mechanic[’]s lien, Court
petitions and applicable municipality forms.” However, the defendants did
none of these things, leading to the lapse of the plaintiffs’ statutory mechanic’s
lien and the loss of the plaintiffs’ opportunity to collect the monies owed them,
and thereby causing the plaintiffs’ damages.
The defendants’ inaction caused the lapse of the plaintiffs’ mechanic’s
lien. Under RSA 447:2:
If any person shall, by himself or others, perform labor or furnish
materials to the amount of $15 or more for erecting . . . a house or
other building . . . other than for a municipality, by virtue of a
contract with the owner thereof, he shall have a lien on any
material so furnished and on said structure, and on any right of
the owner to the lot of land on which it stands.
6
RSA 447:2 (2002). “[I]t is the provision of labor or materials that creates a
mechanic’s lien . . . as soon as any work or materials are furnished under the
contract, increasing in amount according to the progress of the work until
performance is completed.” Daniel v. Hawkeye Funding Ltd. P’ship, 150 N.H.
581, 583 (2004) (quotations omitted). The lien created by RSA 447:2 continues
for 120 days after the services are performed, unless payment for the services
is made. RSA 447:9 (2002). A mechanic’s lien may be secured beyond the
120-day period by attachment of the subject property during that period. RSA
447:10 (2002); see Alex Builders & Sons v. Danley, 161 N.H. 19, 22-23 (2010).
The legislative purpose of this statutory scheme is “to provide for special
treatment for mechanic’s liens in determining priority status so that laborers
could get paid for their services.” Lewis v. Shawmut Bank, 139 N.H. 50, 52
(1994); see also N.H.S. Jour. 1020 (1971) (comments of Sen. Morrissette). For
this reason, mechanic’s liens take precedence over all prior claims (except liens
for taxes), RSA 447:9; all subsequent lien claims for labor or materials, RSA
447:11 (2002); and construction mortgages, subject to certain exceptions, RSA
447:12-a (2002). This statutory scheme creates an exception to New
Hampshire’s general “race-notice” rule of priority. Lewis, 139 N.H. at 51-52.
If the defendants had properly secured the plaintiffs’ mechanic’s lien
within the 120-day period, Ledge Rock could not have transferred the property
to the Greenes by warranty deed — as it did 131 days after Audette gave his
key to the property to Cummings — without the plaintiffs’ lien first being
satisfied. The plaintiffs were not required to prove that the defendants’ breach
of contract was the sole or exclusive cause of the harm they suffered, but only
that the breach was a substantial factor in bringing about their damages. See
Indep. Mechanical Contractors v. Gordon T. Burke & Sons, 138 N.H. 110, 115
(1993) (“In all cases involving problems of causation and responsibility for
harm, a good many factors have united in producing the result. . . . In order to
establish liability the plaintiff must [merely] show that the defendant’s breach
was a substantial factor in causing the injury.” (alteration in original)
(quotation and citation omitted)). By establishing that the defendants failed to
secure the lien — or, indeed, to act at all until purportedly sending a demand
letter after the property had already been transferred — the plaintiffs
adequately proved that the defendants’ breach of contract was a substantial
factor in causing their harm.
Moreover, the alleged intervening causes proffered by the defendants did
not require the trial court to reach a different conclusion. The defendants first
assert that the plaintiffs could have been fully compensated simply by
returning to the job site as requested by Rizzo and Greene, and that the
plaintiffs’ failure to do so broke the chain of causation between the defendants’
breach and the plaintiffs’ damages. However, the evidence showed that
Cummings instructed Audette not only to have no contact with Rizzo or the
7
Greenes, but also to refer any calls to her and that she would communicate
with them. In light of that evidence, which the trial court found credible, this
argument amounts to a claim that the defendants did not cause the plaintiffs’
damages because the plaintiffs acted unreasonably in following the defendants’
own instructions. On the record before us, we have no difficulty in concluding
that the trial court could properly find that the plaintiffs’ reliance upon the
defendants’ instructions was reasonable. In the past, the plaintiffs had relied
heavily upon the defendants in myriad business matters, ranging from
preparing tax returns to creating and dissolving Audette’s business partnership
with Fogarty. Cummings had advised Audette in that dissolution not to speak
to Fogarty, his friend, saying that she would act as an intermediary between
the two. Based upon these prior dealings, as well as the promises contained in
the Representation Letter, Audette had every reason to believe that the
defendants were performing a similar role here. Communicating with
“pertinent parties” would certainly include responding to an offer of payment,
and the defendants’ failure to make such a communication constituted a
failure to perform as promised under the Representation Letter.
In addition, the plaintiffs did not need to show that they could “obtain” a
mechanic’s lien, as the defendants argue, because the plaintiffs already had
the lien by virtue of their work on the property at the time the parties signed
the Representation Letter. “[T]he contractor ‘creates’ its own lien by performing
the work or furnishing the materials.” Daniel, 150 N.H. at 583. Thus, the
plaintiffs’ mechanic’s lien existed and could have been secured regardless of
any offers to pay by Rizzo or Greene. Indeed, those offers to pay show that in
all likelihood the defendants would have been successful in securing the lien
on behalf of the plaintiffs within the 120-day period had the defendants
performed as promised because Ledge Rock indisputably owed money to the
plaintiffs for work on the property. If the defendants had secured the lien, the
plaintiffs would have been paid out of the closing proceeds, and the
opportunity to collect from Ledge Rock and Rizzo would not have been lost.
The defendants claim that proof of causation failed because the plaintiffs
did not institute legal proceedings against Rizzo or the Greenes. This is little
more than a rehashing of their mitigation argument, which we have already
addressed. The defendants have not cited, nor are we aware of, any authority
supporting the proposition that the plaintiffs were required to exhaust
collection efforts against Rizzo or the Greenes as a prerequisite to recovery for
the defendants’ breach of contract. As noted previously, the plaintiffs were
required to prove only that the defendants were a substantial factor in causing
their damages, not that they were the sole cause of the damages. Indep.
Mechanical Contractors, 138 N.H. at 115. In sum, the plaintiffs demonstrated
by a preponderance of the evidence that the defendants caused their damages.
8
C
Finally, the defendants argue that the trial court erred in ruling that
expert testimony was not required in order for the plaintiffs to prevail on the
issues of liability and causation. “Expert testimony is required where the
subject presented is so distinctly related to some science, profession or
occupation as to be beyond the ken of the average layperson.” Boynton v.
Figueroa, 154 N.H. 592, 601 (2006). “Expert testimony is not required where
the subject presented is within the realm of common knowledge and everyday
experience.” Id.
Contrary to the defendants’ contention, this was an action for breach of
contract, not for negligence or legal malpractice. Cf. Hawkins v. McGee, 84 N.H.
114, 115-16 (1929). The issue in this case was whether the defendants had
failed without legal excuse to perform as promised in the Representation Letter.
See Lassonde, 157 N.H. at 588 (finding breach of contract where defendants
failed to show legal excuse for not paying under contract). We acknowledge
that the defendants did not “guarantee” or otherwise “promise” in the
Representation Letter to collect the monies owed to the plaintiffs. However,
that fact is immaterial to the issue of whether the defendants breached the
contract and caused the plaintiffs’ damages.
The plaintiffs alleged that the defendants breached Articles 3, 4, and 5 of
the Representation Letter. It is not beyond the ken of the average layperson to
determine whether the defendants failed to “[c]ommunicate with all pertinent
parties” to collect the money due to the plaintiffs (Article 3), to “[p]repare all
documents necessary to secure [plaintiffs’] claim for services rendered and
monies due” (Article 4), or to “prepar[e a] mechanic’s lien for recording” (Article
5). Whether the defendants performed these tasks was well within the realm of
common knowledge and everyday experience. At best, the defendants sent only
a single letter to Rizzo and the Greenes on August 8, 2008, unsuccessfully
attempted to contact those parties by phone, and spent a year and a half
engaged in “never ending phone tag” with the Kingston building inspector to
determine whether the Greenes were living on the property. Expert testimony
was not necessary for the trial court to determine that this pattern of prolonged
delay and inaction breached the defendants’ performance obligations pursuant
to the Representation Letter.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
9