THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2012-599
LAWRENCE LEEDS
v.
BAE SYSTEMS
Argued: September 18, 2013
Opinion Issued: November 5, 2013
Gawryl MacAllister & O'Connor, of Nashua (Jared O'Connor on the brief
and orally), for the plaintiff.
Devine, Millimet & Branch, of Manchester (Daniel E. Will and Laurel A.V.
McClead on the brief, and Mr. Will orally), for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The plaintiff, Lawrence Leeds, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Nicolosi, J.) granting summary judgment to the defendant,
BAE Systems (BAE), in this wrongful discharge action. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts, presented in the light most
favorable to Leeds. Leeds worked for BAE as a quality control inspector from
2001 until his discharge in April 2009. Throughout his employment at BAE,
Leeds was an “at-will” employee. On April 30, 2009, BAE discharged Leeds for
violating the company’s standards of conduct as a result of two separate
incidents at the company’s Hudson facility. Leeds represents that, prior to
these incidents, he had never been involved in disciplinary action at BAE.
On February 17, 2009, BAE issued Leeds a “written warning” for
engaging in “abusive” behavior toward another employee in violation of BAE
policy. After interviewing Leeds, the employee, her supervisor, and another co-
worker who witnessed the incident, BAE determined that Leeds had “angrily
approached” the employee about her work and, while pointing a finger at her,
“yelled” obscenities. Leeds signed a form acknowledging receipt of the warning,
but denied BAE’s version of events. Specifically, Leeds wrote on the form that
he “[d]ispute[d] swearing.” Instead, Leeds maintains that he was doing his job
by criticizing the employee for a deficient work product and admits only that
his “voice level was a little bit higher” during the exchange.
The warning informed Leeds that his conduct was, in BAE’s view, a
“major violation of MDP 22:20: Standards of Conduct” (MDP 22:20). In
particular, BAE determined that Leeds had violated a provision against using
“abusive or threatening language” toward a co-worker. The warning also gave
Leeds a directive: “There must be an immediate and sustained improvement in
your conduct in the workplace. Failure to do so will result in further
disciplinary action up to and including termination of your employment.”
Approximately three months later, Leeds was involved in an altercation
that BAE determined was a second “major violation” of the same “abusive or
threatening language” provision of MDP 22:20, which also applied to language
directed toward “[a]ny other person on [BAE] premises.” On April 28, 2009,
while driving to work, Leeds passed a female driver as the road merged into one
lane. The driver then tailgated Leeds, gestured obscenely at him, and followed
him into the BAE parking lot even though she did not work there. After Leeds
parked, the driver pulled up and stopped perpendicular to Leeds’s car, blocking
his path to the BAE facility. While remaining in her car, the driver “stuck her
cell phone out of the window and pointed it at Leeds,” purportedly to take
pictures of Leeds’s license plate. Leeds, who did not recognize the object as a
cell phone and thought it may have been a weapon, swatted the phone away
from his face, causing part of it to break. The two engaged in a shouting match
involving obscenities for at least thirty seconds before Leeds was able, in his
words, to “squeeze” past the driver’s car and enter the BAE facility. Leeds does
not dispute that he swore at the driver and raised his voice during their
exchange.
BAE conducted an internal investigation by obtaining a statement from
the driver, interviewing both parties, and speaking with several BAE employees
who had indirect knowledge of the incident. In an April 30 interview with a
BAE investigator, which Leeds states lasted approximately five minutes, Leeds
2
portrayed the driver as the aggressor, yet, according to the investigator, he
acknowledged that he “got caught up in the moment.”
Following her interview with Leeds, the investigator asked for Leeds to
turn over his employee badge and to leave the premises. Upon the
investigator’s recommendation, a BAE management team made the decision to
discharge Leeds that same day, after taking into account both the parking lot
incident and the prior written warning. Leeds received notice of his discharge
by telephone that day and by letter.
Leeds’s discharge letter, dated April 30, indicated that he had committed
a “major violation” of MDP 22:20 by (a) “engag[ing] in an altercation with an
individual that involved abusive & threatening actions and language in the
parking lot of the Hudson, NH, facility” and (b) “[d]isobeying [BAE] policies or
proper instructions issued by [a] supervisor or other authority” in light of the
written warning against using abusive language. The letter also stated that
Leeds had violated BAE’s “Workplace Violence Policy.”
After an unsuccessful internal BAE appeal, Leeds sued BAE for, among
other things, wrongful discharge. The trial court granted BAE’s motion for
summary judgment and denied Leeds’s cross-motion for partial summary
judgment. Leeds filed a motion for reconsideration, arguing in part that the
court erred in its application of the summary judgment standard. In an order
denying the motion, the court acknowledged that it “may have inadvertently
drawn inferences more liberally in favor of the defendant than it should have.”
After reconsideration, the court again ruled that BAE was entitled to judgment
as a matter of law. Leeds appeals the grant of summary judgment in favor of
BAE.
Our standard of review is well established:
When reviewing a trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we
consider the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences
properly drawn from them, in the light most favorable to the non-
moving party. If our review of the evidence does not reveal a
genuine issue of material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law, we will affirm the trial court’s
decision. We review the trial court's application of the law to the
facts de novo.
Lacasse v. Spaulding Youth Ctr., 154 N.H. 246, 248 (2006) (quotation omitted).
The prevailing rule in New Hampshire is that, absent an agreement to the
contrary, employment contracts are “at-will,” meaning that “both parties are
free at any time to terminate the employment relationship, with or without
3
cause.” Porter v. City of Manchester, 151 N.H. 30, 37 (2004) (quotation and
brackets omitted). An exception to the “at-will” rule is that even at-will
employees may pursue a cause of action in tort for wrongful discharge. See id.
at 37-39. In order to succeed on a wrongful discharge claim, a plaintiff must
establish two elements: (1) that the discharge was “motivated by bad faith,
retaliation or malice”; and (2) that the plaintiff was discharged “for performing
an act that public policy would encourage or for refusing to do something that
public policy would condemn.” Karch v. BayBank FSB, 147 N.H. 525, 536
(2002). “Although ordinarily the issue of whether a public policy exists is a
question for the jury, at times the presence or absence of such a public policy
is so clear that a court may rule on its existence as a matter of law, and take
the question away from the jury.” Short v. School Admin. Unit 16, 136 N.H.
76, 84 (1992) (citation omitted).
Leeds argues that the trial court erred in granting summary judgment in
favor of BAE on each of the two wrongful-discharge prongs. Because we hold
that the trial court did not err in granting summary judgment on the public-
policy prong, we need not address the bad faith, retaliation, or malice prong.
See id. at 78.
Leeds argues that the trial court should have allowed a jury to determine
whether public policy would encourage his conduct, which he characterizes as
self-defense. As support for his argument, Leeds points to our case law
recognizing that “[t]he public policy contravened by the wrongful discharge can
be based on statutory or nonstatutory policy.” Cilley v. N.H. Ball Bearings,
Inc., 128 N.H. 401, 406 (1986). Leeds argues that, if a public policy can be
established on nonstatutory grounds, see id. at 406 (reversing summary
judgment in favor of employer because a jury could conclude plaintiff was
“discharged for refusing to lie and that public policy supports such
truthfulness”); Cloutier v. A. & P. Tea Co., Inc., 121 N.H. 915, 923 (1981)
(“[W]ith or without the existence of [the Occupational Safety and Health Act of
1970, 29 U.S.C. § 654(a)], the facts before us support the conclusion that the
plaintiff was discharged for furthering the laudable public policy objective of
protecting the employees who worked under him.”), “then surely pointing to a
statute meets the employee’s burden, especially on summary judgment.” Here,
Leeds relies upon RSA 627:4, which provides that self-defense is a justification
for certain actions that would otherwise be criminal. See RSA 627:4 (2007)
(amended 2010, 2011). Because the trial court assumed that “whatever force .
. . used [by Leeds] was appropriate,” implying that it would fall under the self-
defense statute, Leeds argues that public policy must support his “justified use
of force.”
We need not opine whether an employee’s use of self-defense could ever
constitute an act that public policy would encourage. Moreover, we need not
determine whether Leeds could rely upon RSA 627:4 were he to face criminal
4
charges. Rather, we hold that Leeds has failed to articulate a public policy that
would encourage the conduct which led to his discharge.
Whether the other driver was the primary aggressor, and whether Leeds
mistook the cell phone for a gun, are immaterial considerations. Even
assuming, without deciding, that Leeds’s contact with the cell phone was an
act of self-defense in response to unprovoked aggression, the remainder of his
conduct on company property was not self-defense. We therefore hold, as a
matter of law, that public policy neither encourages Leeds’s actions nor favors
them over BAE’s policy prohibiting abusive language and behavior in the
workplace. See Short, 136 N.H. at 84-85 (holding, as a matter of law, that
loyalty to one’s supervisor “does not form the basis of a public policy because a
countervailing public policy supports the [employer’s] exercise of its
employment and management responsibilities”).
After examining all material facts in the light most favorable to him, we
conclude that the trial court did not err in ruling that Leeds cannot show that
public policy would encourage his actions. See Lacasse, 154 N.H. at 248.
Because Leeds fails on the public-policy prong of his wrongful discharge claim,
and both prongs are required in order to succeed, BAE is entitled to judgment
as a matter of law. Id.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and CONBOY and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
5