THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Grafton
No. 2012-193
STRIKE FOUR, LLC
v.
NISSAN NORTH AMERICA, INC.
Argued: October 11, 2012
Opinion Issued: April 12, 2013
Holmes Law Offices PLLC, of Concord, (Gregory A. Holmes on the brief
and orally), and McDowell & Osburn, P.A., of Manchester (Elizabeth M.
Leonard on the brief), for the petitioner.
Bingham McCutchen LLP, of Boston, Massachusetts (William N.
Berkowitz & a. on the brief, and Mr. Berkowitz orally), for the respondent.
Baker Hostetler LLP, of Columbus, Ohio (Elizabeth A. McNellie on the
brief), and Cullen Collimore PLLC, of Nashua (Brian J.S. Cullen on the brief),
for the Association of Global Automakers, Inc., as amicus curiae.
Douglas, Leonard & Garvey, P.C., of Concord (Charles G. Douglas, III on
the brief), for the National Automobile Dealers Association, and Peter J.
McNamara, of Concord, by brief, for New Hampshire Automobile Dealers
Association, as amici curiae.
CONBOY, J. The respondent, Nissan North America, Inc. (Nissan),
appeals a decision of the Superior Court (Vaughan, J.) vacating a decision of
the New Hampshire Motor Vehicle Industry Board (Board) and ruling that RSA
chapter 357-C (Regulation of Business Practices Between Motor Vehicle
Maufacturers, Distributors and Dealers) renders unenforceable a provision of a
written settlement agreement between Nissan and the petitioner, Strike Four,
LLC, a Nissan dealer (Dealer). Nissan also appeals the superior court’s ruling
that it was entitled to neither specific performance of the settlement agreement
nor attorney’s fees. We affirm in part, vacate in part, and remand.
The trial court found, or the record supports, the following facts. On
July 8, 2005, Nissan issued to the Dealer a notice of termination of its
dealership franchise. The Dealer filed a protest with the Board (the 2005
protest). See generally RSA 357-C:7 (2009 & Supp. 2012). The parties jointly
moved to stay Board proceedings to allow for settlement negotiations. The
Board granted this motion on October 12, 2005.
The settlement negotiations took place over two years, with both parties
represented by counsel. On October 15, 2007, the parties entered into a
settlement agreement that provided that the Dealer and Nissan would execute
a new two-year term agreement, and the Dealer would withdraw its protest.
The combined terms of the settlement agreement and the term agreement
included relocation provisions (and a construction schedule for an exclusive
Nissan sales facility), exclusivity provisions, and “Dealer Minimum Sales
Performance” (MSP) requirements. The term agreement provided that if the
Dealer failed to meet any of its obligations by the specified deadlines, or
otherwise materially breached the agreements:
Dealer shall (a) within six (6) months after the relevant Term
Agreement Deadline secure a buy/sell of its Nissan dealership
assets to an unrelated third party acceptable to Nissan . . . and (b)
within twelve (12) months after the relevant Term Agreement
Deadline, consummate the sale of its Nissan dealership assets
(“First Standstill Period”).
. . . In no event shall Dealer be authorized to conduct Nissan
Dealership Operations after the expiration of the First Standstill
Period.
2
If the Dealer failed to meet MSP requirements, the same six-month and twelve-
month benchmarks applied, but the interval was called the “Second Standstill
Period.” The term agreement further provided that in the event of failure to
meet MSP requirements, “Dealer shall be issued a twelve (12) month term
agreement for the sole purpose of achieving sale of the Nissan dealership
assets,” and “failure to obtain Nissan’s approval for such sale or transfer within
this twelve-month period shall constitute good and due cause for termination.”
Both parties expressly agreed that the terms of the settlement agreement and
the term agreement were “fair and reasonable,” and waived any right to
challenge its “legality or enforceability” under RSA chapter 357-C.
On December 10, 2008, and January 14, 2009, the parties executed
amendments to the term agreement, which extended its expiration date – and
the date by which the Dealer was required to achieve MSP requirements – to
March 11, 2011. The first amendment reiterated many of the terms of the
settlement and term agreements: if the Dealer failed to achieve its sales
requirements by the revised date, it would sell the dealership assets to a
qualified buyer within one year thereafter; the terms of the agreement were
“fair and reasonable”; and the Dealer waived the right to protest the
agreements’ provisions, including under RSA chapter 357-C. Hereinafter, we
refer to the 2007 settlement agreement, term agreement, and the amendments
collectively as the “Agreement.”
By letter dated November 12, 2010, Nissan advised the Dealer that it was
“highly unlikely” that the Dealer would be able to fulfill its MSP obligations
under the Agreement by the March 11, 2011 deadline and suggested that the
Dealer “begin now to actively [look] for potential buyers” for the dealership’s
assets, a search with which Nissan offered to assist. Interpreting the November
12 letter as a notice of termination, the Dealer filed a protest with the Board on
December 29, 2010 (the 2010 protest). The Dealer argued that the sales
performance obligations under the Agreement were unreasonable, and
challenged the enforceability of the Agreement’s provisions requiring the Dealer
to voluntarily divest itself of the dealership assets as inconsistent with the
protections of RSA chapter 357-C. On February 3, 2011, Nissan filed a
counter-protest, alleging that the Dealer’s actions – including initiation of the
2010 protest challenging the enforceability of provisions contained in the
Agreement, which Nissan had signed in reliance upon the Dealer’s express
agreement that the Dealer would not challenge its provisions – constituted bad
faith conduct in violation of RSA 357-C:3, I (2009).
While these proceedings were pending before the Board, on March 14,
2011, Nissan notified the Dealer that it had not met the MSP requirements and
was therefore obligated to secure a buyer for the dealership within six months
(that is, by September 11, 2011) and to complete the sale by March 11, 2012.
On August 8, 2011, Nissan again wrote to the Dealer to reiterate its
“contractual obligation to divest of its Nissan dealership by March 11, 2012.”
3
As of September 11, 2011, the Dealer had not obtained a buyer for the
dealership assets. By letter dated September 21, 2011, Nissan notified the
Dealer of the material breach of the Agreement and called upon it to
immediately present to Nissan an acceptable buyer, and to consummate the
sale no later than March 11, 2012. Despite these notices, the Dealer did not
sell the dealership assets.
On May 5, 2011, the Board held a hearing on the Dealer’s 2010 protest
and Nissan’s counter-protest, at which both parties argued legal issues based
upon their briefs, but neither party presented testimony or documentary
evidence. On May 31, 2011, the Board dismissed the Dealer’s protest and
sustained Nissan’s counter-protest. The Board found that both parties had
entered into the Agreement in good faith and that Nissan had not cancelled or
failed to renew the franchise agreement. It reasoned that the Agreement
resolved a previous dispute, and therefore did not violate RSA 357-C:6 (2009),
which provides that all agreements between a manufacturer and dealer are
“subject to the provisions of the chapter, and provisions of such agreements
which are inconsistent with this chapter shall be void as against public policy
and unenforceable.” See RSA 357-C:6. The Board specifically found that the
Agreement did not deny the Dealer its right to file a termination protest if
Nissan were to issue a new notice of termination. As to Nissan’s counter-
protest, the Board found that the Dealer’s filing of the 2010 protest despite the
waiver provisions of the Agreement constituted bad faith in violation of RSA
357-C:3, I. It also found that the Dealer’s underperformance caused Nissan to
suffer harm in the form of lost sales, but it did not award damages. The Board
denied the Dealer’s motion for rehearing on August 15, 2011.
On September 13, 2011, the Dealer appealed to the superior court.
Nissan filed an answer and a two-count counterclaim, seeking: (1) recovery of
its attorney’s fees and costs pursuant to RSA 357-C:12, X (2009) based upon
the Board’s finding of the Dealer’s bad faith; and (2) specific performance of the
dealer’s contractual obligation to sell the dealership assets by March 12, 2012.
Nissan moved for summary judgment on both claims on January 4, 2012. The
Dealer had not yet responded to the motion when the superior court issued its
order, dated January 31, 2012, vacating the Board’s decision, granting the
Dealer’s petition, denying Nissan’s motion for summary judgment, and
dismissing Nissan’s counterclaims. The court denied Nissan’s motion for
reconsideration and this appeal followed.
On appeal, Nissan first argues that the superior court erred in declining
to give effect to the Dealer’s express waiver of its right to challenge either the
legality of the Agreement or the reasonableness of the MSP requirements,
asserting that the waiver was freely and voluntarily given, that it was based
upon valuable consideration, and that Nissan had relied to its detriment upon
the waiver. Nissan further contends that the superior court misconstrued RSA
chapter 357-C when it read the statute to invalidate certain provisions of the
4
Agreement, and that such a reading of the statute is inconsistent with both the
statutory purpose and New Hampshire’s public policy favoring settlement.
Nissan also appeals the superior court’s denial of its petition for specific
performance and request for attorney’s fees. We address each argument in
turn.
I. Standard of Review
“All findings of the [B]oard upon all questions of fact properly before the
court shall be prima facie lawful and reasonable,” and “[n]o additional evidence
shall be heard or taken by the superior court on appeals from the [B]oard.”
RSA 357-C:12, VII (2009). The Board’s decision shall not be set aside or
vacated except for errors of law. Id.
We review the trial court’s statutory interpretation de novo. Fog
Motorsports #3 v. Arctic Cat Sales, 159 N.H. 266, 267 (2009). In matters of
statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the legislature’s intent as
expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole. Id. at 268. When
examining the language of the statute, we ascribe the plain and ordinary
meaning to the words used. Id. We interpret legislative intent from the statute
as written and will not consider what the legislature might have said or add
language that the legislature did not see fit to include. Id. We also interpret a
statute in the context of the overall statutory scheme and not in isolation. Id.
II. Estoppel
Nissan first argues that the Dealer should be estopped from arguing that
the Agreement is not valid. The Dealer counters that Nissan did not raise
estoppel in its answer and counterclaim before the superior court, and
therefore waived the issue. It further asserts that, to the extent Nissan
preserved the issue, it has failed to establish the elements of estoppel.
Assuming, without deciding, that the estoppel issue was preserved, we
conclude that estoppel does not preclude the Dealer from challenging the
enforceability of the Agreement. “As a general rule, a party is not estopped
from asserting the illegality of a contract because of his participation in or
encouragement of the illegality.” Sumner Development Corporation v. Shivers,
517 P.2d 757, 762, 762 n.14 (Alaska 1974) (collecting cases); see also City
Lincoln-Mercury Company v. Lindsey, 339 P.2d 851, 856 (Cal. 1959) (“A party
to an illegal contract cannot ratify it, cannot be estopped from relying on the
illegality, and cannot waive his right to urge that defense.”). Accordingly,
estoppel does not bar the Dealer from contesting the legality of the Agreement
under RSA chapter 357-C.
5
III. Interpretation of RSA chapter 357-C
Nissan, joined by amicus Association of Global Automakers, Inc. (AGA),
argues that RSA chapter 357-C does not preclude enforcement of the
Agreement as written, and that the superior court erred when it invalidated
portions of the Agreement as contradicting the statutory scheme. They assert
that RSA chapter 357-C was not intended to regulate settlement agreements,
but rather to promote settlement in accordance with New Hampshire’s common
law and public policy favoring voluntary resolution of disputes. Nissan further
maintains that the Agreement is not inconsistent with RSA 357-C:7, governing
the discontinuance of a franchise, because the voluntary sale of a franchise is
not a termination and therefore is not subject to the statutory discontinuance
procedures. It alternatively contends that, even if RSA 357-C:7 does apply, the
Agreement satisfies all of the statutory requirements.
The Dealer, joined by amici National Automobile Dealers Association and
New Hampshire Automobile Dealers Association, responds that the superior
court correctly interpreted RSA chapter 357-C to establish a dealer’s right to
procedural protections that cannot be waived in advance, and that the portions
of the Agreement providing otherwise – i.e., providing for a severance of the
manufacturer-dealer relationship without the statutory discontinuance
procedures – are therefore unenforceable. We agree.
RSA 357-C:7, entitled “Limitations on Cancellations, Terminations and
Nonrenewals,” provides in part:
I. Notwithstanding the terms, provisions, or conditions of any
agreement or franchise, and notwithstanding the terms or
provision to any waiver, no manufacturer, distributor, or branch or
division thereof shall cancel, terminate, fail to renew, or refuse to
continue any franchise relationship with a licensed new motor
vehicle dealer unless:
(a) The manufacturer, distributor, or branch or division thereof
has satisfied the notice requirement of paragraph V;
(b) The manufacturer, distributor, or branch or division thereof
has acted in good faith;
(c) The manufacturer, distributor, or branch or division thereof
has good cause for the cancellation, termination, nonrenewal, or
noncontinuance; and
(d) (1) The New Hampshire motor vehicle industry board finds
after a hearing and after ruling on any motion to reconsider that is
timely filed in accordance with RSA 357-C:12, VII, that there is
6
good cause for cancellation, termination, failure to renew, or
refusal to continue any franchise relationship. The new motor
vehicle dealer may file a protest with the board within 45 days after
receiving the 90-day