THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2013-0257, State of New Hampshire v. Donald
J. Freese, the court on August 12, 2015, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
We affirm.
The defendant, Donald Freese, appeals his convictions on one count of
accomplice to simple assault, see RSA 631:2-a (2007); RSA 626:8 (2007), and
one count of criminal threatening with a deadly weapon, see RSA 631:4 (2007);
RSA 625:11 (2007). Because the jury found that the defendant was motivated
to commit the crime of simple assault because of hostility toward the victim’s
race, the charge was subject to enhanced penalties. See RSA 651:6, I(f) (2007).
The defendant argues that the Superior Court (Smukler, J.) erred in: (1)
denying his motions for a mistrial; and (2) admitting eyewitness testimony that
the defendant’s conduct was motivated by racism.
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred in denying his
motions for a mistrial. “A mistrial should be granted only with the greatest
caution, under urgent circumstances, and for very plain and obvious causes.”
Petition of Brosseau, 146 N.H. 339, 341 (2001) (quotation omitted). “Mistrial is
the proper remedy only if the evidence or comment complained of was not
merely improper, but also so prejudicial that it constitutes an irreparable
injustice that cannot be cured by jury instructions.” State v. Hearns, 151 N.H.
226, 232 (2004). “The trial court is in the best position to determine what
remedy will adequately correct the prejudice created by a prosecutor’s remarks,
and absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion, we will not overturn its
decision.” Id.
The defendant first moved for a mistrial at the conclusion of the State’s
opening statement. “The standard for reversible error in a prosecutor’s opening
statement is that the prosecutor must be shown to have acted in bad faith, the
opening statement must be completely unsupported by the evidence, and the
defendant must be prejudiced thereby.” State v. Gaudet, 166 N.H. 390, 397-98
(2014). The trial occurred the week before the Martin Luther King, Jr., holiday,
and the prosecutor started his opening statement by stating:
Next Monday you do not report for jury duty. You report on
Tuesday instead. You don’t report on Monday because it’s a
holiday. It’s a holiday in which we honor a man who once had a
dream. Almost 50 years ago Martin Luther King stood in front of
the Lincoln Memorial and spoke of his dream of the world without
racial prejudice, without racial bias, without racial hatred. Dr.
King would be sad if he were alive and here today. Because what
I’m going to have to talk to you about and what the witnesses are
going to be telling you about is racial hatred, bias, and animus at
its most ugly form.
The prosecutor returned to this theme at the end of his opening statement by
stating:
Fifty years ago Dr. King talked about his dream and he would be
sad if he were here today to know that blind hate still exists based
on the color of a person’s skin. Perhaps we can’t change that.
Immediately after the prosecutor’s opening statement, the defense moved for a
mistrial, stating:
I won’t say I’m speechless, but to the extent that [the prosecutor]
was doing his best to whip up inflammatory feelings toward my
client, I’m going to ask for a mistrial at this point. I don’t think
this jury’s going to be able to make a decision after what the State
has presented here.
The trial court denied the request for a mistrial, but agreed that the remarks
were improper, noting that, “It is beyond the scope of an opening to talk about
the holiday that is coming up.” The court gave the following curative
instruction:
Now, members of the jury, before you hear the opening statement
of the Defense, I just want to instruct you that of course your task,
as I’ve told you before, is to determine based on the evidence in the
courtroom and the reasonable inferences you can draw from that
evidence whether the State has or has not met its burden of
proving the elements of the crime charged. How somebody, even
such as Martin Luther King, would or would not feel about a
particular case has no bearing on whether or not the State can
meet its burden with respect to the elements.
We conclude that the prosecutor’s opening statement was improper because it
was plainly argumentative. See 6 W. LaFave et al., Criminal Procedure,
§ 24.7(a), at 453 (3d ed. 2007) (noting that opening statements “are not
supposed to be argumentative”). However, there is no evidence that the
prosecutor acted in bad faith. Moreover, we conclude that any possible
prejudice was negated by the court’s curative instruction. The court’s
2
instruction directly followed the prosecutor’s opening statement, specifically
identified the improper comment, instructed the jury not to consider how
Martin Luther King would feel about the case, and reminded the jury that the
State bore the burden of proving the elements of the crime charged. See
Hearns, 151 N.H. at 234 (discussing effectiveness of curative instruction). We
presume that the jurors followed the trial court’s instructions. See State v.
Boetti, 142 N.H. 255, 259 (1997). Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court
did not unsustainably exercise its discretion when it denied the defendant’s
motion for a mistrial based upon the challenged comments in the prosecutor’s
opening statement. See Hearns, 151 N.H. at 232.
We next address the defendant’s motion for mistrial based upon the
prosecutor’s closing argument. “In examining claims of prosecutorial
misconduct during closing argument, we face the delicate task of balancing a
prosecutor’s broad license to fashion argument with the need to ensure that a
defendant’s rights are not compromised in the process.” State v. Bisbee, 165
N.H. 61, 68 (2013). In his closing argument, the prosecutor stated:
Ladies and gentlemen, the facts and circumstances of right now is
that this is New Hampshire and that this is 2013. This is not 1963
in Alabama.
The prosecutor also stated:
You know, the fact of the matter is, you heard from multiple eye-
witnesses who told you about a terrible thing, not something that
we would expect to happen in this day and age, but it did.
The prosecutor added:
You could talk at great length about just what a terrible thing this
was, and the shocking fact that something like this could happen
in our State, in this day and age. It’s a sad thing. It’s a tragic
thing. But the fact of the matter is that it happened.
The prosecutor concluded his closing argument as follows:
I can’t ask you to cure hate. I can’t do it. It’s not within our
power. I can’t do anything about that. You may want to. But
what you can do is something about what he did that day, and you
can hold him accountable for what he did. You can’t fix all the
injustices of the world, you can’t make guys like [the defendant]
think differently. You just can’t do it.
What you can tell him, though, is he was wrong for what he did.
And what you can tell him is that he’s guilty, and I would ask you
3