THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2013-0315, State of New Hampshire v. Destin
Stewart, the court on February 18, 2015, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
defendant, Destin Stewart, appeals his convictions by a jury on one count of
second degree assault, RSA 631:2, I(f) (Supp. 2014), one count of criminal
restraint, RSA 633:2, I (2007), three counts of criminal threatening, RSA 631:4,
I(a), (d) (2007), three counts of simple assault, RSA 631:2-a, I(a) (2007), and
one count of stalking, RSA 633:3-a, I(a) (2007). On appeal, the defendant
argues that the Superior Court (Delker, J.) erred by: (1) prohibiting him from
cross-examining the complainant with her statement that had not been
previously disclosed to the State; and (2) granting the State’s motion in limine
to admit evidence of his uncharged acts under New Hampshire Rule of
Evidence 404(b). We remand.
The record establishes the following facts. The defendant and the
complainant were romantically involved from April to September 2011, and the
charges at issue stem from multiple incidents that occurred during that time
frame. Prior to trial, the State filed a motion in limine to admit numerous
uncharged acts that the defendant allegedly committed during his relationship
with the complainant. At a pretrial hearing, the defendant argued that, before
making its determination under Rule 404(b), the court must hear the
complainant’s live testimony to determine whether the uncharged acts
occurred. The State maintained that the trial court could proceed based on the
State’s offer of proof. The trial court agreed with the State and decided the
motion without requiring live testimony, ruling that the State had met the
requirements of Rule 404(b) for admission of the evidence, and granting the
State’s motion.
At trial, during his cross-examination of the complainant, the defendant
sought to impeach the complainant with a statement that she had made using
the social media website Twitter, under the username “Before Bad B[****],”
which stated: “Because I’m a nasty b[****]. I leave a n[*****] dead broke.” The
State objected, arguing that it had not been given a copy of the statement
during discovery. The trial court, citing unfair surprise, ruled that the
defendant could not use the statement.
Of the thirteen charges submitted to the jury, the defendant was
convicted on nine charges, and acquitted on four. This appeal followed.
On appeal, the defendant first argues that the trial court erred when it
precluded him from impeaching the complainant using her prior statement.
The defendant maintains that he was not obligated to disclose the
complainant’s prior statement in the absence of a court order. The State
argues that the trial court properly excluded the statement, and, even if it did
err, the error was harmless. Alternatively, the State argues that allowing cross-
examination of the complainant using her statement would have been
unnecessarily cumulative under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 403. Next,
the defendant argues that the trial court erred when it admitted evidence of
other alleged acts by the defendant under Rule 404(b), and further challenges
the sufficiency of the court’s limiting instructions regarding the use of that
evidence. The State counters that the trial court properly admitted the Rule
404(b) evidence and that the limiting instructions were sufficient.
Superior Court Rule 98/Disclosure of Statements
We will not reverse the trial court’s decision with respect to alleged
discovery violations absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See State
v. Gamester, 149 N.H. 475, 478 (2003). “To show that the trial court’s exercise
of discretion is unsustainable, the defendant must show that the decision was
clearly unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.” Id.
Superior Court Rule 98 governs discovery obligations in criminal cases.
Id.; Super. Ct. R. 98 (2007) (amended 2014). Specifically, Rule 98(C) governs
the parties’ responsibilities relating to the exchange of information concerning
trial witnesses. As relevant to a criminal defendant, Rule 98(C)(2) states that
prior to trial, “the defendant shall provide the state with a list of the names of
the witnesses the defendant anticipates calling at the trial . . . .” Super. Ct. R.
98(C)(2). In addition, “[c]ontemporaneously with the furnishing of such witness
list, the defendant shall also provide the state with all statements of witnesses
the defendant anticipates calling at the trial . . . .” Id. (emphasis added).
Here, the complainant testified in the State’s case-in-chief and was not
called as a defense witness. Further, the defendant sought to use the
statement solely for purposes of impeachment and was not offering it as
substantive evidence. Notably, on appeal, the State does not cite any section of
Rule 98 — or any other rule — that required disclosure of the statement under
these circumstances.
Rather, the State argues that the trial court’s ruling is consistent with
the modern trend regarding liberal discovery, which disfavors trial by surprise.
To be sure, liberal discovery rules recognize that “the ends of justice are best
served by a system which gives both parties the maximum amount of
information available, thus reducing the possibility of surprise at trial.” State
v. Nadeau, 126 N.H. 120, 124 (1985) (quotation omitted). To accomplish that
goal, in addition to the mandatory disclosure requirements, Rule 98 specifically
2
provides that “this rule does not preclude any party from filing motions to
obtain additional discovery.” Super. Ct. R. 98(E); see, e.g., State v. Chagnon,
139 N.H. 671, 672 (1995) (analyzing a trial court’s order, under a prior rule,
requiring parties to disclose any statements of witnesses to be called at trial).
However, the State does not contend that it filed a motion for such discovery.
Thus, we discern no basis for concluding that the defendant was obligated to
disclose the statement to the State prior to trial. Accordingly, absent a
discovery violation, the trial court erred by preventing the defendant, as a
discovery sanction, from cross-examining the complainant using her
statement.
We agree with the defendant that, on the record before us, we cannot
determine whether the defendant was prejudiced by the trial court’s error. At
trial, the defendant did not have the opportunity to fully explain the particular
purpose and extent of the proposed cross-examination. Therefore, we
conclude, as the defendant suggests, that the remedy under these
circumstances is to remand the issue to the trial court for a hearing so that the
defendant may fully explain his proposed cross-examination and impeachment
of the complainant. The trial court then can determine, in the first instance,
whether the absence of that cross-examination prejudiced the defendant’s case.
To the extent the State argues that, if we conclude that the trial court
erred, the error was harmless, the argument is not adequately developed in the
State’s brief, and we decline to address it. See State v. Munroe, 161 N.H. 618,
629 (2011).
Finally, the State contends, for the first time on appeal, that because the
admission of the impeachment evidence would have been needlessly
cumulative, we should sustain the trial court’s exclusion of the statement. See
N.H. R. Ev. 403 (“Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative
value is substantially outweighed by the . . . needless presentation of
cumulative evidence.”). “We will not reverse a trial court decision . . . when it
reaches the correct result and valid alternative grounds exist to reach that
result.” State v. Berry, 148 N.H. 88, 91 (2002). However, because the Rule
403 argument was not made to the trial court, and given the fact that we are
remanding for a hearing on the prejudice issue, we remand this issue for the
trial court to make a determination in the first instance.
New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 404(b)
The defendant next asserts that the trial court violated New Hampshire
Rule of Evidence Rule 404(b) when it admitted evidence of other uncharged
acts that the defendant allegedly committed against the complainant. “The
decision to admit ‘bad acts’ evidence lies within the trial court’s sound
discretion and will be overturned only if the defendant can show that the
decision was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.”
3