THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Coos
No. 2013-828
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
MAKENZY THELUSMA
Argued: January 7, 2015
Opinion Issued: March 20, 2015
Joseph A. Foster, attorney general (Stephen D. Fuller, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Christopher M. Johnson, chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
LYNN, J. Following a jury trial in Superior Court (Bornstein, J.), the
defendant, Makenzy Thelusma, was convicted of possession of heroin, cocaine,
and marijuana. See RSA 318-B:2, I (Supp. 2014). The defendant appeals,
arguing that: (1) an inculpatory statement he made to the police should have
been suppressed; and (2) the evidence was insufficient to support his heroin
and cocaine convictions. We affirm.
I
The following facts are derived from the record. On August 9, 2012,
Sergeant Roy, a Berlin police officer, observed the defendant driving the wrong
way on a one-way street. Roy stopped the car and the defendant produced a
New York state identification card, but not a driver’s license. While Roy was in
his cruiser unsuccessfully seeking to determine whether the defendant had a
valid driver’s license, Officer White arrived to assist. White obtained the
defendant’s consent to search the vehicle. At that point, two individuals, Nika
Wedge and “Chance,” approached the scene on foot. The individuals spoke to
the defendant and approached his car. Roy told them to “back off.” The
defendant got out of his car and walked over to the two, saying that he was
going to give Wedge his wallet. Roy saw that the defendant had more than a
wallet in his hand, but could not say what else the defendant had. Roy told the
defendant to stop, but the defendant and Wedge “made an exchange.” Roy
then observed that Wedge had a wallet and a “wad” of cash in her hand and
that she appeared to be tucking something into her bra. Roy then took custody
of Wedge, and pinned her against the defendant’s car near the open driver’s
side window. At this time, White took custody of the defendant. While Roy and
White were making these arrests, Chance approached and began yelling and
threatening them. Roy used one hand to point his taser at Chance, holding
Wedge by her left arm, leaving her right arm free. White performed a quick
search of the defendant and put him in his cruiser, and then unsuccessfully
attempted to apprehend Chance.
Officer Santos from the Gorham Police Department then arrived to assist
Roy and White. Before transporting the defendant to the Berlin police station,
Santos searched him and found marijuana. Before transporting Wedge to the
station, Roy searched the area where he had held her against the car to see if
she had dropped anything. He found nothing. At the station, a female
dispatcher watched Wedge undress and also found nothing. After the
defendant and Wedge were brought to the station, White performed an
inventory search of the car. On the passenger’s seat he discovered a small
cloth bag that contained heroin and crack cocaine. The bag had not been there
earlier when White had commenced his search of the car before the arrival of
Chance and Wedge. Roy could not say whether the bag was one of the items
that the defendant handed to Wedge.
At the police station, Roy asked the defendant to review a Miranda rights
form. See Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966). The defendant read the
form and initialed it, indicating that he understood his rights, but did not sign
the waiver portion of the form. Hours later, Detective Goulet came to the
defendant’s holding cell to serve written notice that the police intended to seek
forfeiture of the money found on him. Goulet explained that the defendant
could forfeit the money voluntarily or contest the forfeiture. Goulet advised
that the State seeks forfeiture when money is involved with drugs and that the
2
defendant “had a good chunk of drugs” on him when he was arrested. The
defendant said that he had no drugs on him other than marijuana, to which
Goulet replied that they had other statements in reference to the drugs. Goulet
continued explaining voluntary forfeiture and showed the defendant a form on
which he could indicate whether he intended to contest it. Goulet asked the
defendant if he understood the form and the defendant asked Goulet if the
police were going to take his money. Goulet replied that the police were going
to seek forfeiture whether the defendant contested it or not. The defendant
then asked Goulet what the police were going to do with him. Goulet
responded that the defendant would have a bail hearing. The defendant asked
what would happen at the bail hearing, and Goulet explained the process and
possible outcomes, including personal recognizance bail. The defendant told
Goulet that he had been stopped only because he was not familiar with Berlin
and went the wrong way on the street. He further said that the police thought
he had given Wedge drugs, but he had only given her a “duffle bag” that he
found behind a local restaurant. The defendant stated that he had put the bag
in his pocket, and later gave it to Wedge.
The defendant was charged with two felony counts of possession of a
controlled drug — heroin and crack cocaine — and one misdemeanor count of
possession of marijuana. The defendant moved to suppress statements he
made to Roy and Goulet, claiming that they were obtained in violation of
Miranda. The trial court granted the motion in part, but allowed the State to
admit the defendant’s statement to Goulet that he found the bag behind the
restaurant and later gave it to Wedge. The trial court ruled that, although the
defendant had not waived his Miranda rights, the statement was volunteered
and not the product of interrogation. After the State presented its evidence at
trial, the defendant moved to dismiss the heroin and cocaine indictments on
the grounds that the State had presented insufficient evidence to convict. The
court denied the motion, and the jury convicted the defendant. This appeal
followed.
II
The defendant first argues that his statement regarding the bag was the
product of interrogation and, therefore, obtained in violation of Miranda. See
Miranda, 384 U.S. 436. Whether a defendant is subject to interrogation is a
mixed question of law and fact. State v. Spencer, 149 N.H. 622, 625 (2003).
Thus, we defer to the trial court’s factual findings unless they are contrary to
the manifest weight of the evidence, but we review the ultimate determination
of interrogation de novo. Id. As the defendant bases his claim upon both the
State and Federal Constitutions, we first address it under the State
Constitution and rely upon federal law only to aid in our analysis. See State v.
Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
3
Part I, Article 15 of the New Hampshire Constitution and the Fifth and
Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution afford individuals a
privilege against self-incrimination. N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 15; U.S. CONST.
amends. V, XIV. To protect this privilege, statements obtained through
custodial interrogation cannot be used unless the procedural safeguards
outlined in Miranda are followed. See State v. McKenna, 166 N.H. 671, 676
(2014). Here, there is no dispute that the defendant was in custody when he
made the statement at issue. The question is whether the statement was the
product of interrogation. “Interrogation for Miranda purposes occurs when a
person in custody is subjected to either express questioning or its functional
equivalent.” State v. Gribble, 165 N.H. 1, 11 (2013). The “functional
equivalent” of interrogation means “any words or actions on the part of the
police (other than those normally attendant to arrest and custody) that the
police should know are reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response
from the suspect.” Rhode Island v. Innis, 446 U.S. 291, 301 (1980). Although
the “functional equivalent” inquiry “focuses primarily upon the perceptions of
the suspect, rather than the intent of the police,” officers “cannot be held
accountable for the unforeseeable results of their words or actions.” Id. at 301-
02. Therefore “the definition of interrogation can extend only to words or
actions on the part of police officers that they should have known were
reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response.” Id. The State has the
burden to prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, that it did not violate a
defendant’s rights under Miranda. Gribble, 165 N.H. at 10.
Under certain circumstances, statements obtained by police from a
subject in custody do not violate Miranda. “Volunteered statements of any
kind” are not affected by Miranda. Miranda, 384 U.S. at 478. In addition,
courts have recognized that certain types of police conduct do not constitute
interrogation for purposes of Miranda. For example, there is no need for police
to provide warnings before asking a person under arrest routine booking or
administrative questions. Pennsylvania v. Muniz, 496 U.S. 582, 601-02 (1990);
South Dakota v. Neville, 459 U.S. 553, 564 n.15 (1983). Police can inform
individuals about charges against them or about evidence. State v. Guajardo,
135 N.H. 401, 403-04 (1992); United States v. Collins, 683 F.3d 697, 703 (6th
Cir. 2012). Police also may respond to direct questions asked by defendants.
Gribble, 165 N.H. at 12; Spencer, 149 N.H. at 625; United States v. Briggs, 273
F.3d 737, 740-41 (7th Cir. 2001) (collecting cases); United States v. Conley,
156 F.3d 78, 83 (1st Cir. 1998).
The defendant argues that, because Goulet initiated the civil forfeiture
conversation, the defendant’s statement about the bag was the product of
interrogation. The defendant argues that, although he asked Goulet a
question, he did so in the context of the forfeiture conversation. He contends
that, because there are logical links between forfeiture of the money found in
his possession, bail, and his statement about finding the bag, Goulet should
have known that the conversation was reasonably likely to lead to inculpatory
4
statements. The State responds that the defendant changed the topic of the
conversation on his own initiative, and, therefore, his statement regarding the
bag was volunteered.
The defendant is correct that Goulet initiated the conversation about
forfeiture, during which Goulet stated that the money was connected to drugs.
However, before the defendant answered whether he would voluntarily forfeit
the money, the defendant asked what the police were going to do with him.
Goulet responded that he would have a bail hearing. Goulet then answered the
defendant’s follow-up question by explaining more about the bail process and
types of bail. It was then that the defendant made the inculpatory statement
about finding the bag and later giving it to Wedge.
We cannot find that Goulet should have known that notifying the
defendant about forfeiture of money, or answering his question about bail, was
reasonably likely to lead to the defendant making inculpatory statements about
his discovery of the bag or what he did with it. The defendant may be correct
that, viewed after the fact, the conversation flows logically, but our task is not
to “connect the dots” with the benefit of 20/20 hindsight. Rather, we consider
the “words or actions on the part of police officers that they should have known
were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response.” Innis, 446 U.S. at
302. That words or actions actually did elicit an incriminating response from a
defendant is not the controlling factor in our analysis because “the nature of [a
police officer’s] statements and their effect are separate issues.” State v. Plch,
149 N.H. 608, 614 (2003).
The trial court did not find, and the defendant does not argue, that
Goulet’s actions of notifying the defendant about the State’s intent to seek
forfeiture, explaining the options, and asking whether the defendant would
voluntarily agree to forfeiture did not serve a legitimate administrative purpose,
or that the officer’s conduct was a pretext designed to secure incriminating
admissions. See Muniz, 496 U.S at 602, n.14, 604-05 (finding no interrogation
when officer provided defendant with relevant information about breathalyzer test
and Implied Consent Law and asked defendant only whether he understood
instructions and wished to submit to test, notwithstanding that defendant
responded by commenting on his state of inebriation). That Goulet mentioned
the connection between the drugs and the money and indicated that there was
other evidence tying the defendant to the drugs did not turn his explanations of
administrative and other routine matters into the functional equivalent of
interrogation. See Spencer, 149 N.H. at 625-26 (showing defendant bank
surveillance photographs in response to defendant’s claims of innocence and
repeated questions about the basis for her arrest was not the functional
equivalent of interrogation). Similarly, Goulet’s responses to the defendant’s
direct questions about what the police were going to do with him and about the
bail process did not constitute interrogation or its functional equivalent. See
Gribble, 165 N.H. at 12 (holding it was not the functional equivalent of
5
interrogation when police officer answered defendant’s questions about his job,
the death penalty, or murder charges in general); Briggs, 273 F.3d at 740-41
(holding police did not engage in functional equivalent of interrogation when
police officer responded to suspect’s question about what would happen to him).
The defendant himself initiated the general discussion about what lay
ahead for him and the bail process. Cf. Oregon v. Bradshaw, 462 U.S. 1039,
1045-46 (1983). Goulet limited his responses to a factual description of the
bail process, and his explanations did not call for any reply from the defendant.
The defendant volunteered the statement about the bag, and we cannot say
that Goulet should have known that answering the defendant’s questions was
reasonably likely to elicit it or any other inculpatory statement. See Spencer,
149 N.H. at 626. As his argument suggests, the defendant might have been
thinking about his chances for release on personal recognizance bail, which
spurred him to make the statement, but his “anxiety to be released on bail
does not amount to coercion to incriminate himself.” Fenner v. State, 846 A.2d
1020, 1029 (Md. 2004) (quotation omitted). In sum, we conclude that the trial
court did not err in allowing the State to admit the statement.
The Federal Constitution offers the defendant no greater protection than
does the State Constitution under these circumstances. See Gribble, 165 N.H.
at 14; Spencer, 149 N.H. at 629; Innis, 446 U.S. at 300-02. Accordingly, we
reach the same result under the Federal Constitution as we do under the State
Constitution.
III
The defendant next argues that the evidence was insufficient to convict
him of possession of heroin and cocaine. When considering a challenge to the
sufficiency of the evidence, “we objectively review the record to determine
whether any rational trier of fact could have found the essential elements of the
crime beyond a reasonable doubt, considering all the evidence and all
reasonable inferences therefrom in the light most favorable to the State.” State
v. Germain, 165 N.H. 350, 354-55 (2013) (quotation omitted). “It is the
defendant who bears the burden of demonstrating that the evidence was
insufficient to prove guilt.” Id. at 355 (quotation omitted). “In reviewing the
evidence, we examine each evidentiary item in the context of all the evidence,
not in isolation.” Id. (quotation omitted). “Further, the trier may draw
reasonable inferences from facts proved and also inferences from facts found as
a result of other inferences, provided they can be reasonably drawn therefrom.”
Id. (quotation omitted).
To convict a defendant of possession of a controlled drug, the State must
prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant: “(1) had knowledge of the
nature of the drug; (2) had knowledge of its presence in his vicinity; and (3) had
custody of the drug and exercised dominion and control over it.” State v.
6
Trebian, 164 N.H. 629, 632 (2013). If the drug was not found in the
defendant’s physical possession, the State must prove constructive possession,
which “can be inferred from circumstances linking the defendant to the drugs.”
Id.
Here, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, a
rational trier of fact could have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. The
State’s theory at trial was that the defendant had the bag with drugs in his
possession when he was stopped by police. When he was about to be arrested,
he passed the bag to Wedge. While Wedge was being arrested, she dropped the
bag into the defendant’s car, where the police found it. The State presented
evidence that the defendant told Goulet that he found the bag, put it in his
pocket, and later gave it to Wedge. The defendant argues that this statement
should be disregarded because there is ambiguity as to which bag the
defendant’s statement refers, inasmuch as the defendant called it a duffle bag,
while the police described it as a “Crown Royal bag,” jewelry bag, or purse.
However, we examine the defendant’s statement in the context of all the other
evidence and not in isolation. See Germain, 165 N.H at 355. There was no
evidence of another bag of any kind found at the scene, in the car, on Wedge,
or on the defendant, and there was no evidence that a bag could have been
passed to Chance, the other person in the area. A rational trier of fact could
have found that the defendant’s statement referred to the bag containing the
drugs.
Along with the defendant’s statement, the State offered other evidence to
support its theory. The police saw the defendant pass something to Wedge and
saw Wedge tuck something into her bra immediately after the exchange. As
Wedge was arrested, Roy was distracted by Chance, and Wedge had a free
hand near the open car window. The bag was found in the car after this point,
but had not been there when the police first looked in the car. Taking this
evidence and inferences drawn therefrom, the jury could have concluded that
the defendant had custody and exercised dominion and control over the drugs.
The jury likewise could have found that the defendant knew that the drugs
were present in his vicinity. The jury could have inferred from the evidence
that, while being arrested, the defendant gave the bag to Wedge and that he
then attempted to “explain away” the bag when he spoke to Goulet. The jury
also could have inferred from the totality of these circumstances that the
defendant had knowledge of the nature of the drugs. Considering all the
evidence and all reasonable inferences therefrom in the light most favorable to
the State, a rational trier of fact could have found all of the elements of drug
possession beyond a reasonable doubt. Germain, 165 N.H at 354-55.
The defendant argues, nonetheless, that the evidence could also prove an
alternative hypothesis — that Wedge brought the bag with drugs to the scene
and dropped it in the defendant’s car while she was being arrested. However,
this theory does not fit with the defendant’s own statement that he found the
7
bag and gave it to Wedge. As noted above, there was no other bag in this case,
and the defendant does not explain how his statement to Goulet fits with his
alternative theory. Even if the defendant’s alternative theory were possible, we
do not review whether another hypothesis “could explain the events in an
exculpatory fashion,” but “whether the alternative hypothesis is sufficiently
reasonable that a rational juror could not have found proof of guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt.” Germain, 165 N.H at 361-62. Given the defendant’s
statement to Goulet, the alternative theory is not reasonable. The defendant
has not met his burden to show that no rational trier of fact could have found
the State’s view of the evidence to be the only reasonable conclusion.
Therefore, we conclude that the evidence was sufficient to convict the
defendant of possession of heroin and cocaine.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY, and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
8