THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Coos
No. 2013-743
RAYMOND CHOQUETTE & a.
v.
JASON ROY
RAYMOND CHOQUETTE & a.
v.
THOMAS ROBICHAUD & a.
RAYMOND CHOQUETTE & a.
v.
PHILIPPE E. ROY & a.
Submitted: January 7, 2015
Opinion Issued: April 3, 2015
Cooper Cargill Chant, P.A., of North Conway (Christopher T. Meier on the
brief), for Raymond and Pamela Choquette.
John L. Riff, IV, of Lancaster, by brief, for Jason Roy, Thomas and Kelly
Robichaud, and Philippe E. Roy.
CONBOY, J. Raymond and Pamela Choquette (the petitioners), filed
separate petitions against Philippe E. Roy (P.E. Roy), individually and as
trustee of the Roy Family Trust, Jason Roy, and Thomas and Kelly Robichaud
(the respondents). These consolidated actions relate to the transfer of, use of,
and access to certain parcels of land originally owned by the petitioners and
currently owned by the respondents. The petitioners appeal an order of the
Superior Court (Vaughan, J.), and the respondents cross-appeal. We affirm in
part, reverse in part, and remand.
I. Background
The trial court found, or the record supports, the following facts. In
1986, the petitioners purchased approximately 400 acres of land off Hall
Stream Road in Pittsburg. By 1988, the petitioners had begun subdividing and
selling portions of this 400-acre parcel, some of which they conveyed to various
buyers on a lot-by-lot basis. Between 1988 and 2002, many of the parcels
conveyed were subject to restrictive covenants; the deeds, however, did not
contain uniform covenants.
In 1999, the petitioners sold a 103-acre tract to P.E. Roy and his late
wife. The deed for this parcel contained two easements over the petitioners’
land: a fifty-foot right-of-way to Hall Stream Road and a twenty-foot right-of-
way. The fifty-foot right of way would have connected the 103-acre parcel
directly to Hall Stream Road, but it has not been constructed.
The deed stated that P.E. Roy and his wife were responsible for the
construction costs of the twenty-foot right-of-way and also for its maintenance,
as long as they were the “sole users of said right-of-way.” The deed further
specified that when they were no longer its sole users, the maintenance was to
be “apportioned equally between the users.” The twenty-foot right-of-way was
constructed and now is referred to as “Roy Boulevard.” Roy Boulevard
connects the 103-acre parcel to “Sugar Shack R.O.W.,” which is a road owned
by petitioner Raymond Choquette. Roy Boulevard was intended to be a
driveway for a future residence on the 103-acre parcel, and was never intended
to provide access to permit future development of the parcel; it was,
nonetheless, eventually physically widened to fifty feet.
Sugar Shack R.O.W. connects to Hall Stream Road and terminates at the
northeastern corner of the 103-acre parcel. Although the only way to access
Roy Boulevard is to travel from Hall Stream Road over Sugar Shack R.O.W., the
deed to P.E. Roy does not expressly grant him an easement over Sugar Shack
R.O.W. P.E. Roy’s testimony suggests that he has used Sugar Shack R.O.W. to
access the northeastern corner of the 103-acre parcel since he acquired title to
the property. P.E. Roy has previously performed maintenance and repairs on
both Sugar Shack R.O.W. and Roy Boulevard. The petitioners have objected to
2
P.E. Roy’s maintenance of both roads, and, at times, have interfered with P.E.
Roy’s use of the roads.
In 2002, the petitioners filed an “Application for Registration of a
Subdivision” (Subdivision Application) with the New Hampshire Attorney
General, which proposed a subdivision of their property with six restrictive
covenants (application covenants) for the future lots. In May 2002, a
Certificate of Registration was recorded in the Coos County Registry of Deeds,
but it did not recite or refer to any restrictive covenants.
In 2004, the petitioners conveyed two parcels identified in the
Subdivision Application. First, they sold Lot 33-12 to the Robichauds’
predecessor-in-title by a warranty deed that contained restrictive covenants
that were “substantively and materially different” from the application
covenants. Next, the petitioners conveyed Lot 33-13 to P.E. Roy, as trustee of
the George M. Roy Trust, by a warranty deed that also included restrictive
covenants that were “substantively and materially different” from the
application covenants. At the time that these lots were conveyed, no other lots
identified in the Subdivision Application had been conveyed, and the
application covenants had not been recorded in the Coos County Registry of
Deeds.
The Robichauds purchased Lot 33-12 in 2007 by a warranty deed with a
description identical to that contained in their predecessor’s 2004 deed. In
2010, Jason Roy acquired Lot 33-13 by a warranty deed with a description
identical to that in his predecessor’s 2004 deed. In 2011, the petitioners
notified the Robichauds and Jason Roy that they wanted to amend the deeds
for Lot 33-12 and Lot 33-13 to include the application covenants. The
Robichauds and Jason Roy objected to the proposed amendments.
Subsequently, the petitioners filed a petition for declaratory relief against
P.E. Roy to prohibit him from using and maintaining Sugar Shack R.O.W. and
from maintaining Roy Boulevard. They also filed separate petitions to reform
the deeds held by Jason Roy and the Robichauds. The respondents each filed
answers and counterclaims, and the trial court consolidated the actions.
Following a bench trial, the trial court denied the petitioners’ requests to
reform the Robichauds’ and Jason Roy’s deeds. With respect to the petitioners’
request for declaratory relief against P.E. Roy, the trial court concluded that
P.E. Roy has the right to travel over Sugar Shack R.O.W. for ingress and egress
to his 103-acre parcel but that he has “no right to maintain . . . or interfere
with the road.” The trial court also ruled that Roy Boulevard “is a common
right-of-way that the adjacent landowners may agree to maintain by sharing
the costs and responsibilities,” and that the petitioners have no independent
right to maintain Roy Boulevard. Finally, the trial court found no basis for the
respondents’ counterclaims for breach of title and bad faith and, consequently,
3
denied their requested recovery of attorney’s fees and costs. This appeal
followed.
II. Trial Court’s Ruling Regarding P.E. Roy’s Easement over Sugar Shack
R.O.W.
We first address the petitioners’ argument that the trial court erred by
granting P.E. Roy an easement over Sugar Shack R.O.W. They assert that the
deed to the 103-acre parcel does not include a right of access over Sugar Shack
R.O.W. and that the trial court “ignore[d] the doctrine of merger” by relying
upon language in the purchase and sale agreement to authorize such a right.
Under the merger doctrine, “prior negotiations must be taken, so far as
the construction of the deed is concerned, to have been merged in that
instrument, the conclusive presumption being that the whole engagement of
the parties, and the extent and manner of it, were reduced to writing.” Wells v.
Company, 47 N.H. 235, 253 (1866) (quotation omitted); see also Russell v.
Hixon, 117 N.H. 35, 38 (1977). Accordingly, pursuant to this doctrine,
agreements between the parties that were included in a contract for sale are
extinguished and merged into the deed. See 77 Am. Jur. 2d Vendor and
Purchaser § 241, at 318 (2006). “The rule that a contract is merged in a deed
applies where the deed contains provisions which are inconsistent with
provisions in the contract, where the deed varies from that stipulated for in the
contract and where the purchaser protests against accepting the deed tendered
as full performance of the contract.” Id. at 319 (footnotes omitted).
The trial court, in evaluating the petitioners’ request to prohibit P.E. Roy
from using a portion of Sugar Shack R.O.W., “examined” both the deed and the
purchase and sale agreement for the 103-acre parcel. The purchase and sale
agreement states that the “Seller agrees to give buyers deeded access over
existing road owned by Raymond Choquette”; the trial court found that Sugar
Shack R.O.W. is the “existing road” referred to in the agreement.
The interpretation of a trial court order is a question of law, which we
review de novo. State v. Kay, 162 N.H. 237, 242 (2011). Based upon our
review of the order in this case, we cannot conclude that the trial court relied
upon the language in the purchase and sale agreement to reach its decision
that P.E. Roy was granted a right to use Sugar Shack R.O.W. Rather, the trial
court recognized that P.E. Roy’s deed did not include language granting P.E.
Roy “‘deeded access over [the] existing road[],’” and then correctly recited the
law on merger, stating: “As the result of the doctrine of Merger, the purchase
and Sale agreement merged into the deed of conveyance and was
extinguished.” Consequently, we are not persuaded by the petitioners’
argument that the trial court ignored the merger doctrine and “pull[ed] the
right of access from language in the [purchase and sale agreement], and
add[ed] such a right where it is not included in the deed.”
4
We also disagree with the petitioners to the extent that they argue that
the trial court erred by granting P.E. Roy a right of access over Sugar Shack
R.O.W. because the access was not necessary. Although not expressly stated
by the trial court, we interpret its order as finding that P.E. Roy had an
easement by implication over Sugar Shack R.O.W.
An easement by implication is presumed to exist if, “during unity of title
the owner imposes an apparently permanent and obvious servitude on one
tenement in favor of another, which at the time of severance of title is in use
and is reasonably necessary for the fair enjoyment of the tenement to which
such use is beneficial.” Blaisdell v. Raab, 132 N.H. 711, 716 (1990) (quotation
and ellipsis omitted). However, because “this doctrine is based on the theory of
an implied grant, the circumstances surrounding the conveyance control.” Id.
The question is whether “the parties could reasonably have thought that the
right was not granted.” Id. (quotation omitted). The law is well-settled that an
easement by implication will not be found merely because it would be
convenient to have the grant. Id. An easement by implication arises only
because the parties so agreed. Id. at 717. The issue of whether there was an
implied easement is a question of fact for the trial court, and we will not
disturb its finding if a reasonable person could have reached the same
conclusion based on the evidence presented. Id.
The trial court concluded that, at the time of conveyance from the
petitioners to P.E. Roy, the parties intended to permit access by P.E. Roy over
Sugar Shack R.O.W. to the point of its intersection with Roy Boulevard and to
the northeast corner of the 103-acre parcel. The trial court granted specific
requested factual findings to support this conclusion, including requested
findings relating to the easement’s necessity. For example, the trial court
granted P.E. Roy’s requested finding of fact that, at the time of conveyance,
“the only road in existence for th[e] subdivision was ‘Sugar Shack [R.O.W.],’”
and that the only access to Roy Boulevard, and therefore to the 103-acre
parcel, is over Sugar Shack R.O.W. to Hall Stream Road. The trial court also
found that the separate 50-foot right-of-way to connect the 103-acre parcel
directly to Hall Stream Road had not been built. In addition, P.E. Roy testified
that he would not have bought the property without the right to travel over
Sugar Shack R.O.W. and that he needs the access to reach his house and to
repair culverts on his property. The trial court found that P.E. Roy’s testimony
suggests that he has used Sugar Shack R.O.W. since he acquired title to the
103-acre parcel. The trial court specifically credited P.E. Roy’s testimony on
this issue and found that Raymond Choquette’s testimony to the contrary was
not credible. Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court’s findings are
supported by the record, and such findings are sufficient to establish that a
reasonable person would have concluded that, at the time of conveyance, the
easement over Sugar Shack R.O.W. was “permanent and obvious” and
“reasonably necessary for the fair enjoyment of the [103-acre parcel].”
Blaisdell, 132 N.H. at 716.
5
The petitioners’ argument that the trial court “did not consider that the
use of Sugar Shack [R.O.W.] may have been permissive” is misplaced.
Adversity is not a requirement for finding an easement by implication. See id.
at 716-17. Consequently, we conclude that the petitioners have failed to
demonstrate that the trial court erred by granting P.E. Roy an easement by
implication over Sugar Shack R.O.W.
III. Trial Court’s Ruling Regarding Maintenance of Sugar Shack R.O.W.
We next consider P.E. Roy’s argument that the trial court erred when it
concluded that he, as the dominant estate holder, could not maintain Sugar
Shack R.O.W. He asserts that, “unless specifically stated to the contrary, the
grantee of a right-of-way takes by implication whatever rights are necessary to
enjoy the right-of-way,” and that there was no evidence that the parties
intended to limit P.E. Roy’s use and maintenance of Sugar Shack R.O.W.
(Quotation omitted.) We agree.
“Generally, the dominant tenant of an easement has a right and the duty
to maintain an easement so that it can be used for the purpose for which it was
granted, . . . unless otherwise required by the easement or other agreement to
the contrary.” Village Green Condominium Ass’n v. Hodges, 167 N.H. ___, ___
(decided March 20, 2015) (quotation and ellipsis omitted); see also White v.
Hotel Co., 68 N.H. 38, 42 (1894) (“The grantee of a defined way has the right to
do whatever is necessary to make it passable or usable for the purposes named
in the grant.”). In so doing, however, the owner of the easement may not
“increase the burden on the servient estate or unreasonably interfere with the
rights” of its owner. 25 Am. Jur. 2d Easements and Licenses § 82, at 581
(2004). The petitioners suggest that the rule granting the dominant estate
holder the right and duty to maintain the easement is dependent upon whether
the easement existed prior to conveyance; they, however, cite no authority, nor
have we found any, to support this proposition.
Although the trial court concluded that P.E. Roy has the right to travel
over Sugar Shack R.O.W. to reach his 103-acre parcel, it found that he had “no
right to maintain the road or interfere with the road in any way, including
maintenance. . . . Only the [petitioners] have the right to maintain Sugar
Shack [R.O.W.].” As explained above, however, the deed makes no mention of
Sugar Shack R.O.W., and, therefore, as the trial court noted, the parties did
not address its maintenance in the conveyance. The petitioners have not
identified any other agreement with P.E. Roy that displaces the common law
rule regarding easement maintenance. In the absence of such an agreement to
the contrary, P.E. Roy has the right and duty to maintain his easement over
Sugar Shack R.O.W. See Village Green, 167 N.H. at ___.
6
The petitioners argue that the trial court correctly prohibited P.E. Roy
from maintaining Sugar Shack R.O.W. because “the maintenance [was] already
being accomplished by [the petitioners] to serve other lots in [the] subdivision.”
We note that, even if, as the petitioners assert, “maintenance [is] already being
accomplished by [the petitioners],” this fact alone does not affect P.E. Roy’s
right to also maintain Sugar Shack R.O.W. See id. at ___ (discussing
maintenance obligations when both dominant and servient estates utilize an
easement); Restatement (Third) of Property: Servitudes § 4.13, at 631-32
(2000).
The petitioners further assert that the trial court found that P.E. Roy’s
“maintenance would interfere with the road,” and “this interference would
subject [them] to ‘unnecessary inconvenience.’” Our review of the trial court’s
order does not support this assertion. Rather, because the trial court found
that P.E. Roy “has no right to maintain the road,” it did not reach the issue of
whether P.E. Roy’s specific acts of maintenance interfered with the rights of the
petitioners or other users of the easement. We, therefore, hold only that the
trial court erred in ruling that P.E. Roy does not have the right and duty to
maintain the easement over Sugar Shack R.O.W. Accordingly, we reverse the
trial court’s ruling on this issue and remand for further proceedings as the trial
court deems warranted, including, if necessary, determination of whether P.E.
Roy’s actions interfered with the rights of the petitioners or other users of the
easement. See 25 Am. Jur. 2d Easements and Licenses § 82, at 581.
IV. Trial Court’s Denial of Deed Reformation Request
The petitioners argue that the trial court erred by denying their request
to reform the deeds relating to the lots owned by the Robichauds and by Jason
Roy to include the subdivision application covenants. “In order to support
reformation, the evidence must show that the instrument is not the true
expression of the agreement.” Gagnon v. Pronovost, 97 N.H. 58, 64 (1951)
(quotation omitted). The petitioners’ “burden of proof in a reformation action is
a heavy one.” Sommers v. Sommers, 143 N.H. 686, 690 (1999) (quotation
omitted). Here, “[a]fter reviewing all of the testimony and exhibits,” the trial
court concluded that the petitioners “ha[d] failed to meet their burden of proof
by clear and convincing evidence” that the deed does not express the true
agreement of the parties.
As the appealing parties, the petitioners have the burden of
demonstrating reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014).
Based upon our review of the trial court’s order, the petitioners’ challenges to
it, the record submitted on appeal, and the relevant law, we conclude that they
have not demonstrated reversible error. See id.
7
V. Trial Court’s Denial of Fee Request Based upon Claimed Breach of
Warranty Deed
On cross-appeal, the respondents argue that the trial court erred by
denying their request for attorney’s fees and costs incurred in defending their
warranty deeds against the petitioners’ claims. The respondents assert that, in
accordance with the statutory requirements relating to warranty deeds, the
petitioners were required to defend the respondents’ deeds from challenges by
“all persons,” even from challenges brought by the petitioners themselves. See
RSA 477:27 (2013). The trial court concluded that the respondents
“misinterpret[] RSA 477:27, particularly in context of the claim by the
[petitioners] . . . to reform [the] deed[s],” and denied their requested recovery.
This issue presents a question of statutory interpretation. “We are the
final arbiter of the intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of the
statute considered as a whole.” Wells Fargo Bank v. Schultz, 164 N.H. 608,
610 (2013) (quotation omitted). We review the trial court’s interpretation of a
statute de novo. Id. “We are guided by a number of well-settled principles of
statutory construction. Our goal is to apply statutes in light of the legislature’s
intent in enacting them, and in light of the policy sought to be advanced by the
entire statutory scheme.” Coco v. Jaskunas, 159 N.H. 515, 518 (2009)
(quotation omitted). “When construing the meaning of a statute, we first
examine the language found in the statute, and where possible, we ascribe the
plain and ordinary meanings to words used.” Id. at 518-19 (quotation omitted).
“We interpret statutes not in isolation, but in the context of the overall
statutory scheme.” Id. at 519 (quotation omitted).
“New Hampshire generally follows the American Rule; that is, absent
statutorily or judicially created exceptions, parties pay their own attorney’s
fees.” Appeal of Local Gov’t Ctr., 165 N.H. 790, 813 (2014) (quotation omitted).
The respondents contend that they are entitled to attorney’s fees and costs
based upon RSA 477:27 and, thus, invoke the statutory exception to the rule.
RSA 477:27 states, in relevant part:
A deed in substance following the form appended to this section
shall, when duly executed and delivered, have the force and effect
of a deed in fee simple to the grantee, heirs, successors and
assigns, to their own use, with covenant on the part of the grantor,
for himself or herself, heirs, executors and administrators, that, at
the time of the delivery of such deed, the grantor was lawfully
seized in fee simple of the granted premises, that the said premises
were free from all incumbrances, except as stated, that the grantor
had good right to sell and convey the same to the grantee, heirs,
successors and assigns, and that the grantor will, and the heirs,
8
executors, and administrators shall, warrant and defend the same
to the grantee and heirs, successors and assigns, against the
lawful claims and demands of all persons.
The statute, therefore, mandates four separate covenants on the part of the
grantor: (1) “that, at the time of the delivery of such deed, the grantor was
lawfully seized in fee simple of the granted premises”; (2) “that the said
premises were free from all incumbrances, except as stated”; (3) “that the
grantor had good right to sell and convey the same to the grantee, heirs,
successors and assigns”; and (4) “that the grantor will . . . warrant and defend
the same to the grantee and heirs, successors and assigns, against the lawful
claims and demands of all persons.” RSA 477:27; see also Coco, 159 N.H. at
523. “The fourth covenant requires the grantor to warrant and defend ‘the
same,’ that is, the clear title and right to convey set forth in the first three
covenants.” Coco, 159 N.H. at 523. We have previously interpreted this
covenant, referred to as the covenant of warranty or the duty to defend, as
requiring a grantor who conveys property by warranty deed to either defend the
title to the property or indemnify the grantees for their reasonable expenses in
doing so, including attorney’s fees. See id. at 523-24. Generally, the scope of
the covenant of warranty encompasses the duty to warrant and defend against
all lawful claims by third persons. See 4 H. T. Tiffany, The Law of Real
Property § 1010, at 276 (3d ed. 1975 & Supp. 1990); McCormick v. Crane, 37
A.3d 295, 298 (Me. 2012).
The respondents contend that they are, “as a matter of law,” entitled to
their attorney’s fees and costs because the petitioners failed to defend their
warranty deeds. Because the challenges differ among the respondents, we
consider P.E. Roy’s claims separately from those of Jason Roy and the
Robichauds. With respect to P.E. Roy’s claims, we first note that, although he
raised the breach of warranty covenants in his answer to the petition, the trial
court appears to have directed its ruling on this issue to the counterclaims
made by only Jason Roy and the Robichauds. However, because the
applicability of RSA 477:27 to P.E. Roy’s counterclaim presents a question of
law, we need not remand the issue for the trial court’s determination in the
first instance.
The petitioners challenged P.E. Roy’s use and maintenance of Sugar
Shack R.O.W., a road owned by petitioner Raymond Choquette and not
included in the deed to the 103-acre parcel. In order to trigger the fourth
covenant in RSA 477:27 — the covenant of warranty or duty to defend — the
petitioners’ suit must constitute a lawful claim or demand within the meaning
of one of the first three covenants. See Coco, 159 N.H. at 523. P.E. Roy has
not articulated an argument as to which of the covenants are implicated by the
petitioners’ suit, and we do not interpret the suit as a challenge to “the clear
title and right to convey set forth in the first three covenants.” Id.
9
Furthermore, P.E. Roy’s implied easement to traverse the petitioners’ land
using Sugar Shack R.O.W. does not implicate the petitioners’ covenant against
encumbrances with respect to P.E. Roy’s land. Because the petitioners’ suit
did not involve any of the covenants in RSA 477:27, we hold that P.E. Roy is
not entitled to statutory attorney’s fees or costs.
We next consider whether the trial court erred in “find[ing] no basis for
the counterclaims for breach of title” made by Jason Roy and the Robichauds.
Although not expressly stated, we interpret Jason Roy’s and the Robichauds’
argument to be that the petitioners’ actions against them amounted to a
challenge under the second covenant in RSA 477:27 — that the properties
“were free from all incumbrances, except as stated.” RSA 477:27.
“The purpose of the [covenant] of freedom from encumbrances is to
ensure that the value of the property conveyed is not diminished by any
encumbrances that have not been disclosed in the deed.” McCormick, 37 A.3d
at 299. A covenant against encumbrances, however, “is generally regarded as
relating to things in existence at the time it was made,” and “depends upon the
facts as they exist at the time the warranty deed is delivered.” 20 Am. Jur. 2d
Covenants, Etc. § 89, at 628 (2005) (footnotes omitted); see Gill v. Ferrin, 71
N.H. 421, 425 (1902) (“[T]he word ‘incumbrance’ is not ordinarily used in a
deed in its broad, generic sense, but is qualified and limited by the apparent
purposes of the parties.”). “[A] claim for breach of the [covenant] of freedom
from encumbrances arises from a complete failure to disclose an
encumbrance.” McCormick, 37 A.3d at 299. Accordingly, “[w]hen an
encumbrance has been disclosed in a deed, even if only by strong implication,”
the covenant has not been breached. Id.
Reformation, in contrast, “is made to effectuate all the parties’ common
intentions that were incorrectly reduced to writing and to make an erroneous
instrument express the real agreement.” 66 Am. Jur. 2d Reformation of
Instruments § 5, at 253 (2011) (footnotes omitted).
Equity has jurisdiction to reform written instruments in but two
well-defined cases: (1) Where there is a mutual mistake, — that is,
when there has been a meeting of minds, an agreement actually
entered into, but the contract, deed, settlement, or other
instrument, in its written form, does not express what was really
intended by the parties thereto; and (2) where there has been a
mistake of one party, accompanied by fraud or other inequitable
conduct of the remaining parties.
Mullin v. Eaton, 19 A. 371, 372 (N.H. 1889) (quotation omitted). “The purpose
of an action for reformation is to change a written instrument by inserting
some omitted provision or deleting some existing provision so that the
10
document conforms to the original agreement of the parties.” 66 Am. Jur. 2d
Reformation of Instruments § 5, at 253 (footnote omitted). “In order to support
reformation, the evidence must show that the instrument is not the true
expression of the agreement.” Gagnon, 97 N.H. at 64 (quotation omitted).
Generally, “to be entitled to the reformation of a deed, one must be a party to
the deed or in privity with a party to the deed.” 66 Am. Jur. 2d Reformation of
Instruments § 59, at 304; see id. § 60 (entitled “Persons in privity with original
parties to instruments”); Bourne v. Lajoie, 540 A.2d 359, 361 (Vt. 1987)
(recognizing that “the right to seek reformation of a deed is limited to the
original parties to the deed and their successors in title”).
The nature of an action to reform a deed is, therefore, qualitatively
different from an action challenging title. Compare McCormick, 37 A.3d at 298
(explaining that covenant of warranty is a promise to defend lawful claims by
third persons), with Bourne, 540 A.2d at 361 (stating that reformation is
limited to the original parties and their successors in title). Consequently, we
hold that RSA 477:27 does not authorize attorney’s fees for an action seeking
reformation of a deed. See Anderson v. Selby, 700 N.W.2d 696, 702 (N.D.
2005) (declining to award attorney’s fees under warranty deed in reformation
action by grantor); see also Civic Realty, Inc. v. Development, Inc., 641 P.2d
1361, 1362-63 (Haw. Ct. App. 1982) (recognizing distinction between attack on
title by third party and complaint alleging mutual mistake in deed).
Here, the petitioners asserted that, by mutual mistake, Jason Roy’s and
the Robichauds’ deeds did not include the application covenants, and thus
they did not reflect the true intention of the parties. By their suits, the
petitioners attempted to modify the deeds to reflect the agreement they alleged
existed at the time of conveyance. Consequently, we conclude that the
petitioners’ suits against Jason Roy and the Robichauds were in the nature of
reformation and were not actions under the deed. As such, the petitioners’
suits did not implicate RSA 477:27, and the trial court did not err in denying
Jason Roy’s and the Robichauds’ request for recovery on their breach of
warranty claims.
The respondents also argue that “[f]urther support for ordering the
[petitioners] to pay the [respondents’] costs and legal fees, incurred in
defending their Warranty Deeds, is found in RSA 356-A:16, II.” See RSA 356-
A:16 (2009) (providing civil remedies as part of the “Land Sales Full Disclosure
Act,” including court’s discretion to award attorney’s fees). However, the record
does not reflect, and the respondents have not pointed to, any evidence that
they made this argument in the trial court. See Lakes Region Gaming v. Miller,
164 N.H. 558, 560 (2013). Consequently, the respondents have failed to satisfy
their burden, as the appealing party, to provide this court with a record
sufficient to demonstrate that the issue was raised before the trial court and
11
preserved for our review. See id. We, therefore, conclude that the trial court
did not err in denying the respondents’ request for attorney’s fees and costs.
Affirmed in part; reversed
in part; and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, LYNN, and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
12