THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Compensation Appeals Board
No. 2013-867
APPEAL OF BRANDON KELLY
(New Hampshire Compensation Appeals Board)
Argued: September 18, 2014
Opinion Issued: March 20, 2015
Nixon, Vogelman, Barry, Slawsky & Simoneau, P.A., of Manchester
(Leslie C. Nixon and David L. Nixon on the brief, and Ms. Nixon orally), for the
petitioner.
Mullen & McGourty, of Salem (Craig A. Russo on the brief and orally), for
the respondent.
Douglas, Leonard & Garvey, P.C., of Concord (Benjamin T. King on the
brief), for New Hampshire Association for Justice, as amicus curiae.
BASSETT, J. The petitioner, Brandon Kelly, appeals a decision of the
New Hampshire Compensation Appeals Board (CAB) denying his claim for
workers’ compensation benefits for severe injuries he sustained while driving
between a job site and his place of employment. The CAB ruled that the
injuries did not arise out of his employment as required by RSA 281-A:2, XI
(2010). We reverse and remand.
The CAB found, or the record supports, the following facts. The
petitioner was an employee of Advanced Sheet Metal in Hudson. His job
involved traveling to job sites in a company truck. On March 16, 2012, after
working at a job site in Massachusetts, the petitioner departed for the company
shop in Hudson where he intended to unload the truck. While driving, he fell
asleep and hit a utility pole. As a result of the accident, his lower leg was
amputated.
The petitioner sought workers’ compensation benefits. After the
respondent, Arbella Insurance Company, denied his claim, a hearing was held
before the New Hampshire Department of Labor, which awarded benefits. The
respondent appealed to the CAB, which, in a 2-1 decision, denied the
petitioner’s claim. The CAB found that it was undisputed that the petitioner
was acting in the course of his employment at the time of the accident, and
that the accident occurred because he fell asleep while driving. However, the
CAB ruled that the injuries did not arise out of his employment. The CAB
found that the injury was caused by a “mixed risk,” see Appeal of Margeson,
162 N.H. 273, 278 (2011), but that the petitioner failed to prove that “whatever
abnormal weariness, if any, [he] might have been suffering that day was caused
by his employment.” The petitioner’s motion for reconsideration was denied,
and this appeal followed.
“We will not disturb the CAB’s decision absent an error of law, or unless,
by a clear preponderance of the evidence, we find it to be unjust or
unreasonable.” Id. at 276; see RSA 541:13 (2007). We review the factual
findings of the CAB deferentially and review its statutory interpretation de
novo. Appeal of Phillips, 165 N.H. 226, 230 (2013). “We construe the Workers’
Compensation Law liberally to give the broadest reasonable effect to its
remedial purpose.” Id. Thus, we resolve all reasonable doubts in favor of the
injured worker. Id.
To recover under the Workers’ Compensation Law, an employee must
show that his injuries arose out of and in the course of employment. RSA 281-
A:2, XI. The phrase “in the course of” employment refers to whether the injury
“occurred within the boundaries of time and space created by the terms of
employment” and “occurred in the performance of an activity related to
employment.” Murphy v. Town of Atkinson, 128 N.H. 641, 645 (1986). The
phrase “arising out of” employment refers to the causal connection between the
injury and the risks of employment, and requires proof that the injury “resulted
from a risk created by the employment.” Id. Here, the parties agree that the
petitioner’s injury occurred in the course of his employment. The sole issue in
this case, therefore, is whether the petitioner’s injury “arose out of” his
employment.
2
Although the parties devote much of their argument on appeal to
whether this case falls within the so-called “traveling employee rule,” see
Appeal of Griffin, 140 N.H. 650 (1996), we need not address that issue. Neither
party challenges the CAB determination that the case involves a mixed risk.
The parties do, however, disagree as to whether the CAB properly construed
and applied Margeson. The petitioner argues that, because he was a traveling
employee, his injury was compensable as a matter of law, and that the CAB
need not have engaged in an analysis under Margeson. The respondent
counters that, because the CAB properly determined that this case involves a
mixed risk, the test for determining whether the petitioner’s injury arose from
his employment is the test set forth in Margeson for mixed risks. Accordingly,
for purposes of this appeal, we will assume, without deciding, that this case
involves a mixed risk and therefore consider the question as framed by the
respondent in its brief: whether the CAB erred in its application of Margeson to
the facts of this case.
In Margeson, we identified four types of injury-causing risks commonly
faced by an employee at work. Margeson, 162 N.H. at 277. The first category
of risks includes employment-related risks, which include the risk of injuries
generally recognized as industrial injuries, such as fingers being caught in
gears. Id. We stated that “[t]his category of risks always arises out of
employment.” Id.
The second category, personal risks, includes risks that are so clearly
personal that they could not possibly be attributed to employment. Id. A fall
caused solely by an employee’s personal condition, such as a “bad” knee,
epilepsy, or multiple sclerosis, falls into this category. Id. at 277-78. We
stated that “[i]njuries falling squarely into this category are never
compensable.” Id. at 278.
The third category of risks, mixed risks, involves a personal risk and an
employment risk combining to produce injury. Id. A common example is when
a person with heart disease dies because of employment-related strain on his
heart. Id. Although not all injuries resulting from mixed risks are
compensable, the concurrence of a personal risk and an employment risk does
not necessarily defeat compensability if the employment was also a substantial
contributing factor to the injury. Id. We explained that the test to be applied
in mixed-risk cases is the Steinberg I test. Id. at 284; New Hampshire Supply
Co. v. Steinberg, 119 N.H. 223 (1979) (Steinberg I). The Steinberg I test was
developed and originally intended to apply only to heart attack injuries.
Margeson, 162 N.H. at 282. Over time, “the test’s application was logically
extended to those injuries likely to be caused by a pre-existing condition
because of the similar difficulty in determining whether such injuries result
from an employment-related risk or some other cause.” Id.
3
The Steinberg I test is a two-part causation test, which requires proof of
legal and medical causation. Id. at 279. Legal causation requires a showing
that “the claimant’s injury is in some way work-related, while medical
causation requires a showing that the injury was actually caused by the work-
related event.” Id. The test to be used for legal causation depends upon the
previous health of the employee. Id. “If the employee suffers from a prior
weakness, the employment-connected stress or strain must be greater than
that encountered in normal non-employment life. If there is no prior weakness,
any work-related stress or strain connected with the injury as a matter of
medical fact satisfies the legal causation test.” Id. at 285 (citation and
emphasis omitted).
The fourth category, neutral risks, includes risks that are “of neither
distinctly employment nor distinctly personal character.” Id. at 278 (quoting 1
A. Larson, Larson’s Workers’ Compensation Law § 4.03, at 4-2 (Matthew
Bender ed. rev. 2011)). These risks include fortuitous incidents such as being
struck by lightning or being hit by a stray bullet. Id. This category also
includes cases in which “the cause itself, or the character of the cause, is
simply unknown.” Id. (quotation omitted). An unexplained fall, for example, is
considered to be a neutral risk. Id. Injuries resulting from a neutral risk may
be compensable if they result from “a risk greater than that to which the
general public is exposed.” Id. at 283 (quotation omitted). This is known as
the “increased-risk test.” Id. Even if the risk faced by the employee is not
qualitatively peculiar to the environment, the injury may be compensable if the
employee faces an increased quantity of a risk. Id.
In Margeson, we instructed the CAB that, in all future cases, it should
make a finding regarding the cause of the claimant’s injury. Id. at 284-85. If
the cause is a neutral risk, the increased-risk test applies. Id. at 285. If the
cause is a non-neutral risk, the claimant must prove legal and medical
causation under the Steinberg I test. Id.
In this case, after concluding that the injury-causing risk was a mixed
risk, i.e., a personal risk combined with an employment risk, the CAB ruled
that, to be compensated, the petitioner had to prove that his weariness was
work-induced, and that the petitioner failed to do so. We do not agree with the
CAB that the petitioner has to prove work-induced weariness as a prerequisite
to receiving compensation in this case.
As a preliminary matter, we again note that, because neither party
argues that this case does not present a mixed risk, we are assuming, without
deciding, that the CAB was correct in ruling that this case involves a personal
risk as well as an employment risk. In Margeson, we provided examples of
personal risks — an employee’s bad knee, epilepsy, or multiple sclerosis — all
of which relate to an employee’s physical constitution, disease, or internal
weakness. See Margeson, 162 N.H. at 278. Here, there is no contention that
4
the petitioner suffered from a disease or internal weakness that caused him to
fall asleep — rather, the CAB referred to the petitioner’s “weariness” and
considered whether or not the petitioner had proved “work-related tiredness.”
Whether being tired and then falling asleep on the job constitutes a mixed risk
is an issue that we leave for another day.
Turning to the issue before us, we begin by reiterating our observation in
Margeson that the concurrence of a personal risk with an employment risk
does not necessarily defeat compensability “if the claimant’s employment was
also a substantial contributing factor to the injury.” Id. at 278 (emphasis
added). Although we stated that the Steinberg I test should continue to be
used for determining compensability for non-neutral risk injuries, application
of that test must conform to the nature of the personal and employment risks
at issue. The test looks to whether employment-connected “stress or strain” is
connected with the injury. Id. at 285. The purpose of looking to work-related
stress or strain is to determine whether the stress or strain was a contributing
factor in causing the employee’s physical condition, e.g., whether, as in
Steinberg I, “the work-related stresses in the particular case at issue were a
causal factor in the heart attack which ensued.” Steinberg I, 119 N.H. at 230
(quotation omitted).
Here, the CAB characterized the petitioner’s tiredness as a personal risk,
and found that the petitioner failed to prove that his tiredness was caused by
his work. However, unlike mixed-risk cases in which the petitioner’s injury
resulted from a medical condition, here, the injuries resulted from a motor
vehicle accident. The issue before the CAB was whether the petitioner’s
employment was a substantial contributing factor to the petitioner’s injury.
Margeson, 162 N.H. at 278. Application of the test for proving legal and
medical causation must be considered in that context.
We find guidance in our discussion of idiopathic falls, i.e., falls due to
conditions personal to the employee, in Dustin v. Lewis, 99 N.H. 404 (1955).
Consistent with what we said in Margeson, such falls, which are the result of a
personal risk, are generally deemed not compensable — to routinely grant
compensation in such cases would “read out of the Compensation Law the
requirement that the injury must arise out of the employment.” Dustin, 99
N.H. at 408. We further noted, however, Professor Larson’s summary of the
applicable law: “The only principle on which the effects of falls, caused by
internal weakness or disease, can be made attributable to the employment is
the idea that the environment supplied a hazard which, added to the idiopathic
fall, produced the ultimate injury.” Id. at 407 (quotation omitted). In holding
that the claimant in Dustin was not entitled to compensation, we stated:
When we reach consideration of the idiopathic fall to the level floor,
not from a height, not on to or against an object, not caused or
induced by the nature of the work or any condition of the floor, we
5
are dealing with an injury which is in no real sense caused by any
condition, risk or hazard of the employment.
Id. at 408 (quotation omitted).
In its order in this case, the CAB took note of Dustin, stating: “In Dustin
v. Lewis, our Supreme Court held what is still good law today: where
‘employment is not a contributory or additional risk in bringing [the accident]
about, compensation should be denied.’” That the CAB may have misread
Dustin is suggested by the CAB’s insertion of the bracketed term “the accident”
when it quoted a portion of a sentence from Dustin. The full sentence from
Dustin reads as follows: “Where the floor is merely an incident or an occasion
that accompanies the injury and the employment is not a contributory or
additional risk in bringing it about, compensation should be denied.” Dustin,
99 N.H. at 408 (emphasis added). Thus, the CAB should have used the term
“the injury” rather than “the accident” when quoting Dustin. By focusing upon
the accident, rather than the nature or extent of the injury, the CAB appears to
have overlooked Dustin’s explanation that the employment can supply a
hazard which, when added to the petitioner’s acts of driving while tired and
falling asleep, produced the ultimate injury. Just as the effects of an idiopathic
fall can be made attributable to the employment when the employment
supplied a hazard that contributed to the ultimate injury, here, the effects of
the petitioner’s tiredness and falling asleep can be attributed to the
employment, provided that conditions of the job gave rise to a hazard that
contributed to the ultimate injury.
Here, the petitioner’s job required him to drive to various job sites in a
company truck. On the day of the accident, he was driving a company truck
from a job site in Massachusetts to the company shop in Hudson in order to
unload the truck. There can be no question that the injurious effects of falling
asleep were increased by the environment in which the petitioner found himself
at the time he fell asleep — behind the wheel of a moving truck. We have no
difficulty concluding on this record, as a matter of law, that the petitioner’s
employment was “a substantial contributing factor to the injury.” Margeson,
162 N.H. at 278 (emphasis added); cf. Whittemore v. Sullivan Cty.
Homemaker’s Aid Serv., 129 N.H. 432, 436 (1987) (“Where the employment
requires travel, the employee is consequently exposed to hazards she would
otherwise have the option of avoiding. Thus, the hazards of the route become
the hazards of the employment.”).
Our conclusion is in accord with decisions in other jurisdictions.
Marshall v. Bob Kimmel Trucking, 817 P.2d 1346, 1347 (Or. Ct. App. 1991)
(holding a worker’s injuries from a truck accident compensable, though the
cause of the accident was unknown, because “[t]he risk of serious injury from
any loss of consciousness, of idiopathic origin or not, was greatly increased by
the fact that claimant was driving a log truck for his employer’s benefit”); Hill v.
6
Faircloth Mfg. Co., 630 N.W.2d 640, 646 (Mich. Ct. App. 2001) (holding injuries
from vehicular accidents caused by workers’ diabetic seizures were
compensable “[b]ecause the activity required by their employment placed them
in a position of increased risk or aggravated their injuries, the injuries would
be compensable even if an idiopathic condition caused them to lose
consciousness”).
Our holding also promotes the remedial purpose of the Workers’
Compensation Law. As we explained in Mulhall v. Nashua Manufacturing Co.,
80 N.H. 194, 198 (1921), the intention of the Workers’ Compensation Law was
to “make the business bear the burden of incidental and accidental injuries
without regard to the question of negligence, either on the part of the employer
or the employee.” See also RSA 281-A:14 (2010); McKay v. N.H. Compensation
Appeals Bd., 143 N.H. 722, 725 (1999) (“[T]he act provides for no-fault liability
. . . .”). As noted above, this is not a case involving an employee’s disease or
internal weakness. Rather, this case involves a tired employee who fell asleep
while driving a company truck to the company shop in order to unload the
truck, all within the course of his employment. Even if we were to assume that
the petitioner was negligent in choosing to drive and in falling asleep while
doing so, barring recovery on that basis would be contrary to the remedial
purpose of the Workers’ Compensation Law. See Phillips, 165 N.H. at 230
(stating that Workers’ Compensation Law is construed liberally to give broadest
reasonable effect to its remedial purpose).
Accordingly, we reverse the CAB’s ruling that the petitioner’s injury did
not arise out of his employment and remand for further proceedings consistent
with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY, and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
7