THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Coos
No. 2013-217
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
ROBERT TOWLE
Argued: September 11, 2014
Opinion Issued: January 29, 2015
Joseph A. Foster, attorney general (Elizabeth C. Woodcock, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Christopher M. Johnson, chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
HICKS, J. After a jury trial in Superior Court (Bornstein, J.), the
defendant, Robert Towle, was convicted on four counts of aggravated felonious
sexual assault for engaging in fellatio and anal penetration with his minor son,
and on four counts of criminal liability for the conduct of another for
encouraging his wife and another adult to engage in sexual acts with his minor
son. See State v. Towle, 162 N.H. 799, 800 (2011); see also RSA 632-A:2
(2007) (amended 2008, 2012, & 2014); RSA 632-A:3 (Supp. 2003) (amended
2006, 2008, 2010, & 2014); RSA 626:8 (2007). The trial court sentenced the
defendant to serve 57 to 114 years in prison and ordered the defendant to have
no contact with the victim, the reporting witness, and his other minor son. On
appeal, the defendant raises two challenges to his convictions and one
challenge to his sentence. The defendant argues that the trial court erred by:
(1) permitting the State to use prior statements to refresh the victim’s
recollection when the victim had not demonstrated an inability to recall the
relevant event; and (2) permitting the State to introduce testimony referring to
inadmissible photographic evidence. In addition, the defendant argues that the
trial court erred by imposing the no-contact order. We affirm the convictions
and reverse the no-contact order.
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred by permitting the
State to use prior statements to refresh the victim’s recollection of the final
sexual assault that occurred in early 2006, after the victim had been removed
from the defendant’s custody. The defendant asserts that the victim testified
unequivocally that the defendant had not sexually assaulted him on that
occasion and was neither confused nor uncertain. Therefore, he argues, the
State had no justification for refreshing his recollection.
The record reflects the following exchange on direct examination:
[State]: And did anything happen at that time when your father
[was] there?
[Victim]: Well, I had showed up. And he was in the computer room
with the baby. I went back there. And we were chit-chatting. He
was doing whatever on the computer and drinking a beer. And
then he had asked me to take my pants off. And I was like, really?
You know, we’re already in this situation and you’re right here
asking me to take my pants off. And I just had a serious problem
with that.
[State]: And then what ended up happening?
[Victim]: To the best of my knowledge, I just decided against it. I
was really uncomfortable with the whole situation. I didn’t want it
to happen, period. You know? It was I’m here to see my brother,
not to engage with you. You know? It’s unnecessary.
. . . .
[State]: [D]id you argue with him or what?
[Victim]: No, I don’t believe there was any real arguing. Just, you
know, I felt my time being there was over and I believe I left.
. . . .
2
[State]: And so did anything happen between you and your father
at that location?
[Victim]: No, because I believe I made sure it didn’t.
The defendant, who represented himself at trial, revisited the incident
during his cross-examination of the victim:
[Defendant]: [The State] asked you -- he was trying to ask you, you
know, if you were assaulted by me at the Reed’s [sic] house on
High Street.
[Victim]: Right.
[Defendant]: And just in your testimony, you conveyed to him that
nothing happened?
[Victim]: To the best of my memory, nothing happened. I put it --
you know, I said no.
[Defendant]: Just a second ago, did you not just say to me that it
wasn’t in front of [infant son], it was --
[Victim]: Well, the situation that you were trying to do wasn’t
happening in front of [infant son].
[Defendant]: My question to you was not whether there was a
situation. My question was --
[Victim]: Well, if you’re referring to nothing happening, you know,
you trying to get me to take my pants off, and if that’s not it, then
please fix me -- point me to where I’m supposed to go with that.
Correct me. That’s what I’m trying to say.
On redirect, the State attempted to use the victim’s prior statements to
refresh his recollection of the incident. The defendant objected on the basis
that the State had not laid a foundation for refreshing the victim’s recollection.
The trial court sustained the objection and ordered the State to first establish
that the victim’s recollection needed refreshing. The following exchange
occurred:
[State]: Now, in terms of your testimony yesterday during direct
and cross-examination, you talked about visiting your brother . . . .
[Victim]: Uh-huh.
3
. . . .
[State]: And you recall the Defendant propositioning you at that
time to do what had happened many times before that you
testified?
[Victim]: Yes, sir.
[State]: And at that point you testified that you didn’t recall him
actually performing oral sex on you at that time; is that correct?
[Victim]: I did.
Next, the State asked the victim to review a portion of his interview with a staff
member at the Child Advocacy Center and whether the interview refreshed his
recollection about the incident that had occurred in early 2006. The victim
stated that the interview did refresh his recollection, and the defendant
objected.
During the ensuing sidebar conference, the defendant argued that the
State was attempting to refresh the victim’s recollection when the victim, on
direct examination, had never stated that he could not remember what had
occurred and stated clearly that nothing had happened. The State argued that
the victim had just declared that he did not recall what had occurred, and only
at that point did the State ask the victim to review the interview transcript.
The trial court overruled the objection and allowed the State’s examination to
continue. The State continued its redirect examination and the victim stated
that he remembered the defendant asking him to take his pants off and the
defendant actually performing oral sex on him.
The defendant reiterated his objection during the next day of trial and in
a motion to dismiss after the conclusion of the State’s case. The State argued
that the victim had stated on redirect examination that he did not remember if
anything had occurred during that visit with the defendant in early 2006 and
that its efforts to refresh the victim’s recollection were proper. After noting that
it had “observed and heard the entire course of trial and . . . the circumstances
presented,” the trial court ruled that refreshing the victim’s memory was
proper.
The trial court has broad discretion to determine the admissibility of
evidence, and we will not upset its ruling absent an unsustainable exercise of
discretion. State v. Miller, 155 N.H. 246, 249 (2007). For the defendant to
prevail under this standard, he must demonstrate that the trial court’s decision
was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Id.
4
It is well-settled that counsel can use a prior written statement to
stimulate the recollection of a witness who demonstrates a doubtful memory
while testifying. See State v. Cote, 143 N.H. 368, 372 (1999); see also N.H. R.
Ev. 612; State v. Slocinski, 89 N.H. 262, 265 (1938). For an effort to refresh
recollection to be proper, it is widely recognized that there must be a “lack of
effective present recollection without stimulation by the memorandum.”
Maguire & Quick, Testimony: Memory and Memoranda, 3 How. L.J. 1, 21
(1957); 3 J. Wigmore, Evidence § 758, at 125 (Chadbourn rev. 1970). The
defendant argues that absent a sufficient basis to conclude that the victim’s
memory had failed, any effort to refresh his recollection was improper and
prejudicial.
A witness’s clear statement indicating that the witness’s memory has
failed provides the most direct method for a trial court to determine that a
witness lacks effective present recollection. Cf. Bartis v. Warrington, 91 N.H.
415, 416 (1941) (concluding that where a witness has testified positively and
not indicated a failing memory that no basis exists for refreshing recollection).
Nevertheless, that is not the only way to determine that a witness lacks
effective present recollection. See Wigmore, Evidence, supra § 765, at 145. We
have recognized that a trial court is in the best position to consider the
demeanor of a witness and determine whether the witness lacks present
recollection, and we have held that a trial court properly exercised its
discretion in permitting a party to refresh a witness’s recollection without a
statement that the witness’s memory has failed. See Cote, 143 N.H at 372.
The defendant argues that Cote is distinguishable from the present
matter because in Cote the witness was a young child, and the trial court
found he was giving one word answers to questions in order to end the
examination and avoid discussing traumatic events. Id. at 371-72. The
defendant contends that Cote is inapplicable because the witness was an adult,
albeit one who was testifying about serious abuse he had suffered for many
years as a child, and because he was able to give “a comprehensive and
detailed account of the events on the day in question.”
These factual distinctions are not dispositive. Our decision in Cote is
neither limited to its facts nor anomalous. In fact, Cote is consistent with other
jurisdictions that grant broad discretion to trial courts to determine whether
refreshing a witness’s recollection is warranted. See, e.g., Thompson v. United
States, 342 F.2d 137, 140 (5th Cir. 1965) (holding that the trial court’s ability
to observe the witness’s demeanor and responses to questions supported its
conclusion that a witness’s memory was exhausted); Montgomery v. Tufford,
437 P.2d 36, 39 (Colo. 1968) (“[B]ecause of the wide variety of situations to
which the procedure [for refreshing recollection] must be adapted, considerable
discretion is allowed the trial court.”). Thus, a trial court can rely on factors
other than direct statements to evaluate whether a witness’s memory has been
exhausted.
5
Furthermore, we disagree with the defendant’s assertion that “[n]othing
in [the victim’s] trial testimony . . . afforded a basis to allow the prosecutor to
employ the refreshing-recollection device.” In his testimony, the victim
described a myriad of abuses inflicted on him by the defendant. He testified
with clear and unambiguous language to such things as statements the
defendant made to him, acts the defendant made him perform or performed on
him, and where and when such acts occurred. When he began to detail the
incident that occurred in early 2006, however, the tone of his language became
uncertain and ambiguous. In his description of that incident, he began using
phrases such as “I believe,” “to the best of my knowledge,” or “to the best of my
memory” before detailing what he believed had occurred. This phraseology
suggests uncertainty or a failure of memory, and the shift from clear and
unambiguous language to uncertain language, along with the trial court’s
ability to observe the victim’s demeanor, supports the trial court’s reasonable
conclusion that the victim’s memory was exhausted. Furthermore, the victim,
on redirect examination, testified that he “didn’t recall [the defendant] actually
performing oral sex on [him]” in early 2006. Accordingly, we conclude that the
trial court properly exercised its discretion by permitting the State to use the
victim’s prior statements to refresh his recollection.
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred by permitting the
State to elicit testimony referencing evidence that had been excluded prior to
trial. The defendant asserts that the repeated references to the excluded
evidence unfairly prejudiced his case.
The record reflects the following relevant facts. Before the trial began,
the defendant filed a pre-trial motion to exclude five photographs that depicted
the defendant and the victim nude and in various states of arousal. The trial
court granted the motion to the extent that the photographs and any “explicit
inflammatory testimony” describing the photographs would not be admissible
at trial unless the defendant “opened the door.” Nevertheless, the trial court
allowed the State to elicit testimony regarding the photographs and their
“inappropriate” nature to explain why E.J., the witness who brought the sexual
abuse to the attention of the police and the New Hampshire Division for
Children, Youth, and Families (DCYF), came forward with her allegations.
Then, prior to E.J.’s testimony, the trial court ruled that the photographs could
be described as evidence that E.J. believed would implicate the defendant in
criminal activity. In reaching this conclusion, the trial court found that the
photographs had significant probative value, particularly with respect to
explaining why E.J. went to the police and DCYF and why those agencies took
action against the defendant, but the photographs could unfairly prejudice the
defendant. Therefore, the trial court excluded the photographs and any
graphic descriptions thereof but permitted testimony that E.J. had evidence
that she believed substantiated her allegations in order to provide context to
her actions and testimony.
6
During the trial, other witnesses briefly discussed the photographs in
various contexts. The victim, during the State’s direct examination, testified
that he finally “opened up” about the sexual abuse after his guardian ad litem
(GAL) confronted him with the fact that she had “[seen] the pictures.” This was
the only time during trial that this evidence was referred to as being
photographic in nature.1 Attorney Jennifer Dougherty and Karen York, who
were both affiliated with DCYF, Detective Karl Nelson of the Berlin Police
Department, and Attorney Wendy Roberts, the victim’s GAL, were all asked on
cross-examination by the State about physical evidence, specifically referring to
the photographs, brought by E.J. to substantiate the allegations she made to
DCYF and the Berlin police. The trial court overruled the defendant’s
objections to these lines of questioning because it found that the defendant,
during his direct examination of each witness, had challenged E.J.’s credibility
regarding the claims she had made to DCYF and the Berlin police, as well as
the bases for both entities to take action against him. The trial court
concluded that the defendant had “opened the door” for the State to correct any
false or misleading impressions the witnesses’ responses may have created
and, further, that the probative value of the testimony the State sought to elicit
was not substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to the
defendant.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred by permitting
the State to reference the excluded photographs, whose unfair prejudice, it
previously had ruled, substantially outweighed any probative value. He asserts
that the cumulative effect of the references to the photographs “created the
same impression that would have been created had more explicit testimony
describing the photographs been admitted.” He contends that the cumulative
effect of these references unfairly prejudiced him in a manner that necessitates
reversing his convictions. We disagree.
To determine whether alleged cumulative errors require reversal, we first
determine whether the trial court did, in fact, err. See State v. Ellsworth, 142
N.H. 710, 721 (1998). The defendant challenges the trial court’s application of
New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 403, which states, in relevant part, that
“[a]lthough relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative value is
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice . . . .” N.H. R. Ev.
403. We have recognized that evidence that provides context to a witness’s
statements or actions may have significant probative value. See State v. Willis,
165 N.H. 206, 223 (2013) (describing potentially prejudicial statements during
an interview that provided context to defendant’s evasive answers as
“probative”). Nevertheless, where the probative value of that evidence is
1 We note that this testimony occurred prior to the trial court’s decision to prevent E.J. from
referring to the photographs as anything but “evidence.” After the trial court imposed this
limitation, the photographs were referred to as either evidence or evidence that E.J. believed was
substantial or credible.
7
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, it must be
excluded. N.H. R. Ev. 403.
Evidence is unfairly prejudicial if its primary purpose or effect is to
appeal to a jury’s sympathies, arouse its sense of horror, provoke its instinct to
punish, or trigger other mainsprings of human action that may cause a jury to
base its decision on something other than the established propositions in the
case. State v. Perri, 164 N.H. 400, 408 (2012). Unfair prejudice is not mere
detriment to a defendant from the tendency of the evidence to prove guilt, in
which sense all evidence offered by the prosecution is meant to be prejudicial.
State v. Tabaldi, 165 N.H. 306, 322 (2013). Rather, the prejudice required to
necessitate reversible error is an undue tendency to induce a decision against
the defendant on some improper basis, commonly one that is emotionally
charged. Id. Among the factors we consider in weighing the evidence are: (1)
whether the evidence would have a great emotional impact upon a jury; (2) its
potential for appealing to a juror’s sense of resentment or outrage; and (3) the
extent to which the issue upon which it is offered is established by other
evidence, stipulation, or inference. Id. at 322-23.
The trial court can, however, obviate the danger of unfair prejudice by
such actions as issuing a limiting instruction to the jury or limiting the scope
of the evidence that the parties are permitted to present to the jury. See, e.g.,
Willis, 165 N.H. at 224 (holding that a limiting instruction to the jury on how to
interpret potentially prejudicial evidence cured any error created by admitting
the evidence); Perri, 164 N.H. at 408-09 (finding that limiting the scope of the
parties’ ability to introduce prejudicial details to the jury cured the danger of
creating unfair prejudice). The trial court is in the best position to gauge the
potential prejudicial impact of particular testimony, and to determine what
steps, if any, are necessary to obviate the potential prejudice. Id. at 323.
Thus, we afford considerable deference to the trial court’s determination in
balancing prejudicial impact and probative worth. State v. Beltran, 153 N.H.
643, 649 (2006) (applying the same evidentiary standard under New
Hampshire Rule of Evidence 404(b)). To prevail, the defendant must show that
the trial court’s ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice
of his case. Id.
With respect to each reference to the excluded photographs, we conclude
that the trial court’s ruling is sustainable. The references to the photographs
provided necessary context to testimony of the witnesses. In ruling on the
defendant’s pre-trial motion, the trial court stated: “[T]he photographs
themselves are not admissible. Explicit inflammatory testimony describing the
contents of the photos is not admissible; however, the State [may] elicit
reasonable evidence describing, again, at least the photographs insofar as they
offer an explanation of why [E.J.] went to the police and what she said . . . .” At
that time, the trial court permitted the State to refer to the contents of the
photographs as “inappropriate,” but prior to E.J.’s testimony it revised its
8
ruling and limited E.J.’s ability to characterize the photographs to “evidence of
a crime that [the defendant] committed.” In making these rulings, the trial
court accepted the State’s argument that reference to the photographs was
necessary to explain why E.J. went to the police and DCYF to report the
defendant’s activities with the victim and why the police took her allegations
seriously. In reaching this conclusion, the trial court recognized that the
photographs had substantial probative value, due to the context they provided,
but also created a substantial danger of unfair prejudice, due to their graphic
nature, and tailored its response accordingly to permit the most probative
aspects to be introduced while excluding the most prejudicial aspects.
In response to the defendant’s objection after the victim had testified that
he disclosed the abuse to his GAL after she told him that she had “[seen] the
pictures,” the trial court found that the statement provided context to the
victim’s testimony regarding why he finally came forward with his story. The
trial court also found that nothing in that passing statement violated its ruling
on the defendant’s pre-trial motion concerning how the photographs could be
characterized and did not unfairly prejudice the defendant. Thus, the trial
court sustainably concluded that the testimony was proper.
In response to the defendant’s efforts to attack the testifying witnesses’
credibility, E.J.’s credibility, and the actions of the police and DCYF in
response to E.J.’s complaint, the trial court found that:
the Defendant had questioned [his witnesses] . . . about the
conclusions at which they had arrived as to whether the Defendant
may have sexually assaulted or otherwise sexually abused [the
victim], and about the actions that they took based on those
concerns and conclusions in the years 2006, 2007 and 2008.
The trial court found that the witnesses’ testimony could, without clarification,
lead the jury to conclude that the Berlin police and DCYF had no justification
for taking action against the defendant. The trial court thus concluded that
the probative value of such clarification was not substantially outweighed by
the risk of unfair prejudice. Accordingly, the trial court ruled that the
defendant had “opened the door” for the State to elicit limited testimony
regarding the photographs.
On appeal, the defendant does not argue that the trial court erred by
concluding that the testimony elicited from his witnesses on direct examination
“opened the door”; instead, he argues that the references to the photographic
evidence created an impression that unfairly prejudiced him. We will assume
without deciding that New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 403 applies to the
testimony in question, regardless of whether the door had been opened.
9
The trial court excluded, in its ruling on the pre-trial motion, the most
prejudicial aspect of the evidence, the photographs themselves and any
descriptions of the photographs’ contents. These limitations minimized the
danger of unfair prejudice while preserving the probative aspect of the evidence
– that is, explanation as to why witnesses undertook actions leading to the
investigation of the defendant. See Perri, 164 N.H. at 408-09. Throughout the
trial, the trial court ruled that the testimony regarding the photographs was
necessary to provide context to the witnesses’ actions. Accordingly, we
conclude that the trial court did not unsustainably exercise its discretion in
permitting the defendant’s witnesses to explain, on cross-examination, that
they had seen or were aware of photographic evidence of criminal conduct by
the defendant. Furthermore, the trial court offered to issue a limiting
instruction to the jury to cure any potential unfair prejudice that the defendant
believed to exist; the defendant declined the offer. Thus, because the trial
court did not err in admitting any of the challenged statements, there is no
“cumulative error.” See Ellsworth, 142 N.H. at 721.
We next address the defendant’s challenge to the no-contact order
imposed on him as a condition of his sentence. The defendant asserts that,
pursuant to RSA 651:2 (Supp. 2014), a trial court cannot impose a no-contact
order as part of a sentence of imprisonment. He contends that a trial court can
impose such a condition only on suspended or probationary sentences or
conditional discharges, where violation of the condition may lead to imposition
of the sentence or revocation of probation. We agree.
We first determine whether this challenge was properly preserved for our
review. See State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 48 (2003). The general rule is that
a contemporaneous and specific objection is required to preserve an issue for
appellate review. Id. Here, during the sentencing hearing, the defendant
challenged the no-contact order only with respect to his minor son. To the
extent that he challenges the entire no-contact order, the defendant did not
preserve that issue for our review. Nevertheless, we will, as the defendant
requests, review the imposition of the entire no-contact order under our plain
error rule. See Sup. Ct. R. 16-A.
Under the plain error rule, we may consider errors not raised in the trial
court. See id. However, the rule should be used sparingly, its use limited to
those circumstances in which a miscarriage of justice would otherwise result.
State v. Hancock, 156 N.H. 301, 302-03 (2007). To find error under this rule:
(1) there must be error; (2) the error must be plain; (3) the error must affect
substantial rights; and (4) the error must seriously affect the fairness, integrity,
or public reputation of judicial proceedings. Id. at 303.
We first address whether the trial court exceeded its statutory authority.
See State v. Parmenter, 149 N.H. 40, 45 (2002) (imposing a sentence in excess
of that authorized by statute constitutes reversible error). Whether the trial
10
court exceeded its statutory authority is a question of law, which we review de
novo. Id. In order to determine whether the trial court exceeded its statutory
authority, we must engage in statutory interpretation. See Hancock, 156 N.H.
at 303. In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of the
intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of a statute considered as a
whole. Id. We construe provisions of the Criminal Code according to the fair
import of their terms and to promote justice. Id.
RSA 651:2 defines the types of sentences that a trial court may impose
upon a person convicted of a felony and limits those options to “imprisonment,
probation, conditional or unconditional discharge, or a fine.” RSA 651:2, I. We
have held that within those parameters, the trial court has broad discretion to
“assign different sentences, suspend sentence, or grant probation in order to
achieve the goals of punishment, deterrence, protection of society and
rehabilitation.” State v. Evans, 127 N.H. 501, 505 (1985). A trial court cannot
exceed those parameters because to do so would exceed its statutory authority.
See, e.g., Parmenter, 149 N.H. at 46-47 (vacating, as exceeding statutory
authority, a sentence provision that required the defendant to attend AA or NA
meetings in addition to imposition of a fine and driver’s license suspension);
State v. Buckingham, 121 N.H. 339, 342-43 (1981) (vacating a sentence that
revoked the defendant’s driver’s license because RSA 651:2 did not specifically
authorize such a sentence).
For example, a trial court may choose, without exceeding its statutory
authority, to set a term of imprisonment and partially suspend that sentence or
exempt the defendant from punishment, so long as the defendant complies
with the conditions imposed. See, e.g., State v. W.J.T. Enterprises, 136 N.H.
490, 495-96 (1992) (affirming a sentence that combined a term of
imprisonment, a suspended sentence, and a conditional exemption from
punishment). A trial court may not, however, set a term of imprisonment or
fine and then impose additional conditions upon the defendant as part of the
term of imprisonment or fine. See, e.g., Parmenter, 149 N.H. at 46-47. When
this occurs, we review those additional conditions as if they were independent
terms and determine whether a trial court has the authority to impose them.
See id.
Here, the trial court sentenced the defendant to 57 to 114 years in
prison. In addition, the trial court ordered that the defendant not contact
certain individuals, including the victim, E.J., and the defendant’s youngest
son. The trial court did not, however, suspend or defer any part of the
sentence, or impose a conditional discharge. Because the trial court sentenced
the defendant to imprisonment, the no-contact order is an independent term
that requires statutory authority for its imposition.
The State argues that the provisions of RSA 651:2 do not prevent the
trial court from imposing additional conditions on a term of imprisonment,
11
relying upon on our decision in State v. Smith, 163 N.H. 13 (2011). In Smith,
however, we were not asked to consider whether the trial court had exceeded
its statutory authority by imposing the sentence in question. Smith, 163 N.H.
at 16. Accordingly, we do not consider Smith as having decided the question
before us here.2 Instead, we look to the plain language of RSA 651:2, which
does not give trial courts the authority to impose no-contact orders as part of a
sentence. RSA 651:2; cf. Parmenter, 149 N.H. at 46-47. Thus, by imposing
the no-contact order in addition to the term of imprisonment, the trial court
exceeded its statutory authority. See Parmenter, 149 N.H. at 46-47.
With respect to the remaining plain error factors, we conclude that they
have been satisfied. Because we have previously defined the scope of RSA
651:2, see, e.g., Buckingham, 121 N.H. at 343, and the authority of trial courts
to impose conditions on sentences that are suspended or subject to conditional
discharge or probation, see, e.g., Parmenter, 149 N.H. at 46-47, the trial court’s
error was plain.3 See State v. Pandelena, 161 N.H. 326, 331 (2010) (defining
what causes error to be plain). Further, because the sentence is illegal to the
extent that the trial court exceeded its authority under RSA 651:2, the third
and fourth elements of the plain error rule have been satisfied. State v. Matey,
153 N.H. 263, 266 (2006). Accordingly, we reverse that portion of the sentence
that imposed the no-contact order.
Convictions affirmed;
sentence affirmed in part
and reversed in part.
DALIANIS, C.J., and CONBOY, LYNN, and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
2 To the extent that the State argues that Smith is factually similar to this case, we note that in
Smith the no-contact order was first imposed as a condition of a suspended sentence, not as a
condition of a term of imprisonment, which is factually distinct from the present matter. Smith,
163 N.H. at 15-16.
3 We note that our holding today does not prevent those listed in the no-contact order from
pursuing alternative remedies to prevent the defendant from contacting them. We also note that
our holding does not address the issue of the Department of Corrections’ authority to place
limitations on the defendant’s contact with third persons, including those covered by the trial
court’s no-contact order, while he serves his sentence.
12