THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2008-945
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
MICHAEL ADDISON
(CAPITAL MURDER)
Argued: November 14, 2012
Opinion Issued: November 6, 2013
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Peter Hinckley, assistant attorney
general, Janice K. Rundles, senior assistant attorney general, and Thomas E.
Bocian, assistant attorney general, on the brief, and Elizabeth C. Woodcock,
assistant attorney general, Mr. Hinckley, and Ms. Rundles orally), for the State.
David M. Rothstein, deputy chief appellate defender, Christopher M.
Johnson, chief appellate defender, Richard C. Guerriero, New Hampshire
public defender, and Heather S. Ward, New Hampshire public defender, of
Concord, on the brief, and Mr. Rothstein orally, for the defendant.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. THE CAPITAL MURDER...…………………………………….…………… 4
II. PROCEDURAL HISTORY....…………………………………….…………. 6
III. PROCEDURE IN CAPITAL MURDER..………………...…….…….…... 8
IV. APPELLATE STANDARDS OF REVIEW…..…………….….…………... 10
V. VENUE AND JURY SELECTION REVIEW.......……….….…………… 11
A. VENUE..….……….………………………………….…..………….. 13
B. PEREMPTORY CHALLENGES…………………….…………….. 31
C. CHALLENGES FOR CAUSE……………………….……........... 35
VI. GUILT PHASE REVIEW……………………………………….………….... 44
A. RULE 404(B) PRIOR CRIMES EVIDENCE…………….……... 48
B. REASONABLE DOUBT INSTRUCTION……………………..... 65
VII. SENTENCING PHASE REVIEW..…………………………………….….. 70
A. ELIGIBILITY PHASE TRIAL.……..………………………….….. 78
1. ADDISON’S STATEMENT……………..……………….….. 80
B. SENTENCE SELECTION PHASE TRIAL….….………….…… 89
1. VICTIM IMPACT EVIDENCE.……………………….…….. 91
2. CONDITIONS OF CONFINEMENT AND MODE OF
EXECUTION…………………...…………..………….……... 104
3. PRIOR CRIMES……………………..……………….………. 117
4. CLOSING ARGUMENT……………..…………….………… 134
VIII. CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY REVIEW..….……….……….. 153
A. DEATH PENALTY CHALLENGE UNDER STATE
CONSTITUTION……………...……..………………….…….…... 153
B. STATUTORY AGGRAVATING FACTORS (NARROWING
FUNCTION)……………..……………………………….…….…… 165
C. STATUTORY BURDENS OF PROOF………………..………… 175
D. INAPPLICABILITY OF RULES OF EVIDENCE……………... 185
E. IMPACT OF RACE IN CAPITAL SENTENCING…….……….. 190
F. DEATH-QUALIFIED JURY…………………………..………..... 206
G. NON-STATUTORY AGGRAVATING FACTORS
(SEPARATION OF POWERS; GRAND JURY INDICTMENT;
DUPLICATIVE FACTORS)……………………..…………..……. 215
H. POST-VERDICT REQUEST FOR DISCOVERY……………... 229
IX. MANDATORY SUPREME COURT REVIEW..……..…………..……… 240
A. PASSION, PREJUDICE OR OTHER ARBITRARY FACTOR. 241
B. EVIDENCE OF AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES………. 242
2
X. APPENDIX
A. SPECIAL FINDINGS FORM.…………………………………… 244
B. SPECIAL VERDICT FORM.………………………..………….. 249
PER CURIAM. The defendant, Michael Addison, was convicted in
Superior Court (McGuire, J.) of the capital murder of Manchester Police Officer
Michael Briggs and sentenced to death. This is the first death sentence
imposed in New Hampshire since the enactment of the current statutory
scheme in 1977. See Laws 1977, 440:2. The defendant appeals his conviction
and his sentence. Sup. Ct. R. 7. The capital sentencing statute also requires
independent review by this court when a defendant has been sentenced to
death. RSA 630:5, X-XII (2007).
On appeal, the defendant contends that numerous errors undermine his
conviction and sentence. This opinion addresses each of the twenty-two issues
briefed by the defendant. Regarding his capital murder trial, the defendant’s
claims of error relate to venue, peremptory challenges and challenges for cause
to prospective jurors, prior crimes evidence under New Hampshire Rule of
Evidence 404(b), and the jury instruction on reasonable doubt. Regarding
sentencing, the defendant’s claims of error relate to his custodial statement,
victim impact evidence, evidence of conditions of confinement, evidence of and
jury instruction on mode of execution, prior crimes evidence, and closing
argument. He also raises several constitutional and statutory issues that
relate to the constitutionality of the capital punishment statute, the narrowing
function of the statutory aggravating factors, the statutory burdens of proof,
the inapplicability of the rules of evidence, the impact of race in capital
sentencing, the process of “death qualifying” the jury, the non-statutory
aggravating factors’ compliance with certain constitutional requirements, and
his post-verdict request for discovery.
In addition, we are statutorily required to address: (1) whether the
sentence of death was imposed under the influence of passion, prejudice or any
other arbitrary factor; (2) whether the evidence supports the jury’s finding of an
aggravating circumstance, as authorized by law; and (3) whether the sentence
of death is excessive or disproportionate to the penalty imposed in similar
cases, considering both the crime and the defendant. RSA 630:5, XI. Only the
first two statutory questions are before us at this stage of the proceeding; we
will address the third question after further briefing and oral argument.
With respect to the issues raised by the defendant on appeal, we find no
reversible error. Accordingly, we affirm the defendant’s conviction for capital
murder. Furthermore, we conclude that the sentence of death was not
imposed under the influence of passion, prejudice or any other arbitrary factor,
and that the evidence was sufficient to support the jury’s findings of
aggravating circumstances. We note that our review of the defendant’s
3
sentence is not yet complete. Only after additional briefing and oral argument
on comparative proportionality under RSA 630:5, XI(c) will we conclude our
review of the defendant’s sentence of death, at which time we will issue a
further opinion.
I. THE CAPITAL MURDER
The following facts are based upon the evidence adduced at the guilt
phase of the trial and upon the jury’s findings and verdict. On October 16,
2006, the defendant shot Officer Briggs in the head in order to evade
apprehension by the police. The shooting occurred at approximately 2:45 a.m.
in Litchfield Lane, an alley in Manchester. The defendant fled the crime scene,
but the police located him later that day at his grandmother’s home in
Massachusetts and took him into custody. Officer Briggs died the following
day.
During the week before the shooting, the defendant committed several
violent crimes in the area. On October 10, he and Antoine Bell-Rogers robbed
the El Mexicano Restaurant in Manchester. The defendant, a convicted felon,
was armed with a knife, and Bell-Rogers fired his semiautomatic handgun
twice during the robbery. After the men fled the scene, Manchester police
officers recovered two empty shell casings from the floor and a bullet lodged in
the ceiling.
The following morning, the defendant and Bell-Rogers robbed at
gunpoint the clerk of a 7-Eleven convenience store in Hudson. As the
defendant brandished the same weapon that had been used in the restaurant
robbery, Bell-Rogers took the cash drawer, and the men fled. A store
surveillance camera recorded the robbery.
In the early morning of October 15, the defendant and Bell-Rogers drove
to an apartment complex on Edward J. Roy Drive in Manchester. They
approached the building, at which Bell-Rogers fired several rounds, and the
two men fled. Manchester police recovered shell casings, bullet fragments in a
parked car, and a bullet lodged in the bedroom wall of an apartment. The
police later found a bullet lodged in the living room floor of another apartment.
Prior to the shooting of Officer Briggs, the defendant knew that the police
were searching for him, and throughout the week he told friends that if the
police approached him he would shoot. On the day of the Roy Drive shooting,
Manchester police interviewed several people associated with the defendant
and Bell-Rogers. A friend warned the men that the police were nearby looking
for them; the defendant and Bell-Rogers responded by declaring that they were
“out for blood.” That afternoon, the men brought the car that they had used in
4
two of the previous crimes to a friend so that he could “wipe it out,” and they
made plans to leave the state.
That evening, Officer Briggs and his partner, Officer John Breckinridge,
reported to the Manchester Police Department for the 6:30 p.m. to 3:00 a.m.
shift. Their shift began with a roll call and briefing during which they learned
that the defendant and Bell-Rogers were wanted in connection with a shooting.
The officers received physical descriptions and photographs of the defendant
and Bell-Rogers, as well as information about the people, places, and vehicles
associated with them. A detective told the officers that the defendant and Bell-
Rogers likely were armed and dangerous and that, if apprehended, they should
be held for questioning. Officer Briggs was familiar with the defendant as a
result of a prior encounter with him.
Officers Briggs and Breckinridge were assigned to bicycle patrol on the
east side of Manchester. They were in uniform and wearing bicycle helmets
marked “Police.” Numerous officers in patrol vehicles were canvassing the
area, searching for the defendant and Bell-Rogers. By the early morning of
October 16, arrest warrants had been issued for both men, and the officers
were instructed to arrest the defendant and Bell-Rogers on sight. At that time,
the defendant and Bell-Rogers were at an apartment on Lake Avenue in
Manchester, aware that the police were in the immediate vicinity looking for
them.
Shortly before 2:00 a.m., Officers Briggs and Breckinridge heard a
dispatch report of a gunshot having been fired during a domestic incident at an
apartment on Lake Avenue. They responded to assist and, while on their way,
learned that the suspects had fled on foot. At the scene, the police searched
the apartment building to make sure that the shooter was no longer there.
Officers Briggs and Breckinridge assisted with that investigation, and learned
that the defendant and Bell-Rogers had been involved.
At approximately 2:45 a.m., Officers Briggs and Breckinridge left the
Lake Avenue apartment. At that time, the defendant and Bell-Rogers were
walking past a marked police vehicle and entering the Litchfield Lane alley.
Both men were wearing sweatshirts with hoods over their heads and the
defendant had Bell-Rogers’s loaded semiautomatic handgun tucked in his
waistband; the gun was concealed by his sweatshirt. As Officers Briggs and
Breckinridge were crossing the intersection of Lincoln Street and Litchfield
Lane, they spotted the defendant and Bell-Rogers in the alley. Another officer
in a police vehicle traveling on the same street also saw the defendant and Bell-
Rogers in the alley and maneuvered his vehicle to get a closer look at them.
Officer Briggs turned his bicycle sharply to pursue the defendant and Bell-
Rogers. Officer Breckinridge quickly followed.
5
As Officer Briggs approached the two suspects, he commanded, “Stop,
Police!” Bell-Rogers stopped almost immediately, but the defendant continued
walking away, keeping his hands near his waist and out of the officer’s sight.
His head was “leaning down and forward a little bit.” As Officer Briggs neared
the defendant, he again issued the same command — “Stop, Police!” The
defendant continued walking away, “rolling his shoulders forward” and “looking
downward” in a “balling-up sort of a motion.” He slowed his pace while Officer
Briggs closed the gap between them. When Officer Briggs was within an arm’s
length, he issued a third command — “Stop, Police!” The defendant suddenly
turned, raised both arms together “in a unified motion” about “chest to head
high,” and fired a single gunshot at Officer Briggs. The bullet penetrated the
side of Officer Briggs’s helmet and he instantly collapsed to the ground. The
defendant turned and ran up the alley as Officer Breckinridge fired several
shots at him.
Police officers in the area responded immediately. One officer saw the
defendant in the alley looking for a way to escape. The officer saw the
defendant turn and raise his arm toward the officers as though he was going to
fire a gun at them; the officer took aim at the defendant and fired his weapon
four or five times. Another officer also took aim at the defendant but did not
fire because she could not take a clear shot. The defendant looked back at the
officers, then “hunched down” and moved his arm back and forth at waist level
as if trying to clear a jam from his gun. Several officers chased the defendant
up the alley, while others went to Officer Briggs’s aid.
The police discovered the defendant’s cellular telephone at the scene and
his red sweatshirt nearby. Later that day, they tracked him to his
grandmother’s Boston apartment, where he surrendered to the police and was
taken into custody. A resident in the neighborhood of the shooting later found
the gun in her backyard where the defendant had discarded it while fleeing,
and she notified the police.
Officer Briggs never regained consciousness. He died the next day,
October 17, from a single gunshot wound to his head.
II. PROCEDURAL HISTORY
On February 20, 2007, a grand jury indicted the defendant on one count
of capital murder. The indictment alleged that
Michael K. Addison . . . of Manchester, New Hampshire, on
or about October 16, 2006, at Manchester in the County of
Hillsborough, with force and arms, . . . knowingly caused the
death of Manchester Police Officer Michael L. Briggs, a law
enforcement officer, by shooting Officer Briggs in the head
6
with a firearm, while Officer Briggs was acting in the line of
duty . . . .
See RSA 630:1, I(a) (2007). The indictment also alleged certain statutory
aggravating factors that would make the defendant eligible to receive a death
sentence. On May 7, 2007, the State filed its notice of intent to seek the death
penalty, identifying statutory and non-statutory aggravating factors pursuant
to RSA 630:5, I (2007). This notice was later amended.
The defendant’s capital murder trial took place from October to
December 2008. At the defendant’s request, the trial court bifurcated
sentencing into two stages. Consequently, the trial consisted of three phases:
(1) the guilt phase, in which the jury determined whether the defendant
committed capital murder; (2) the eligibility phase, in which the jury
determined whether there existed statutory aggravating factors making the
defendant eligible for the death penalty; and (3) the sentence selection phase,
in which the jury determined, based upon consideration of all the evidence,
including aggravating and mitigating factors, whether to sentence the
defendant to life imprisonment without possibility of parole or to death.
The guilt phase began on October 20, 2008, and the evidence included
numerous exhibits and the testimony of more than forty witnesses. The guilt
phase ended on November 13, when the jury found the defendant guilty of
capital murder for having knowingly killed a law enforcement officer acting in
the line of duty. See RSA 630:1, I(a). The eligibility phase lasted one day,
November 17, and included one witness who testified for the State, and a
stipulation relating to the defendant’s prior incarceration. At the conclusion of
this phase, the jury determined that the State had proven statutory
aggravating factors making the defendant eligible for the death penalty. See
RSA 630:5, VII (2007). The jury recorded these findings on a Special Findings
Form, which is included in Appendix A to this opinion. The sentence selection
phase began on November 21, and the evidence included numerous exhibits
and the testimony of more than fifty witnesses. This final phase ended on
December 18, when the jury returned findings on the non-statutory
aggravating factors evidence proffered by the State and the mitigating factors
evidence proffered by the defendant, and recommended that the defendant be
sentenced to death. See RSA 630:5, IV (2007). The jury recorded these
findings and its verdict on a Special Verdict Form, which is included in
Appendix B to this opinion. As required by statute, the superior court imposed
the recommended death sentence on December 22. See RSA 630:5, V (2007).
On December 31, 2008, this court docketed the automatic appeal required
under RSA 630:5, X (2007). On May 1, 2009, the defendant filed his notice of
appeal pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 7.
7
We previously have issued several decisions related to this case. In
2009, we concluded that formal rulemaking for review of death penalty cases
was not required. State v. Addison, 159 N.H. 87, 93 (2009). In 2010, we
determined the standard applicable for comparative proportionality review
under RSA 630:5, XI(c) (2007), and noted that we would decide the applicable
standards under sections XI(a) and (b) as necessary in our decision on the
appeal. State v. Addison, 160 N.H. 732, 741 (2010). Also in 2010, the
defendant moved for a partial remand to the trial court for additional discovery
and proceedings. We granted his motion, in part, to allow the trial court to rule
upon his post-verdict motion for discovery. The trial court conducted further
proceedings and denied the defendant’s post-verdict motion.
We also issued decisions in the appeals of three non-capital cases
involving the defendant. During the sixteen months between the State’s filing
of its initial notice to seek the death penalty and the start of the defendant’s
capital murder trial, the parties tried three felony cases arising out of the
events that occurred during the week preceding the shooting of Officer Briggs.
These three cases are relevant to the capital murder proceedings because they
relate to certain non-statutory aggravating factors identified in the State’s
amended notice of intent to seek the death penalty.
First, the defendant was convicted of armed robbery and of being a felon
in possession of a deadly weapon for participating in the robbery of the El
Mexicano Restaurant in Manchester on October 10, 2006. Second, he was
convicted of conspiracy to commit robbery, armed robbery, and of being a felon
in possession of a firearm for participating in the robbery of the 7-Eleven
convenience store in Hudson on October 11, 2006. Third, he was convicted of
conspiracy to commit criminal threatening and accomplice to reckless conduct
with a firearm for participating in the shooting at the apartment complex
located on Edward J. Roy Drive in Manchester on October 15, 2006. He was
acquitted of the charge of being a felon in possession of a deadly weapon
during the Roy Drive shooting. We affirmed the defendant’s non-capital
convictions in all three cases. See State v. Addison, 160 N.H. 493 (2010)
(7-Eleven robbery); State v. Addison, 160 N.H. 792 (2010) (El Mexicano
Restaurant robbery); State v. Addison, 161 N.H. 300 (2010) (Roy Drive
shooting). The trial court imposed sentences for each of these convictions on
December 22, 2008, the same day it imposed the death sentence for the capital
murder.
III. PROCEDURE IN CAPITAL MURDER
Under New Hampshire law, a defendant is eligible for a death sentence if
a unanimous jury finds beyond a reasonable doubt both that the defendant is
guilty of capital murder as defined under RSA 630:1 (2007) (amended 2011),
and, following a sentencing hearing, that the State has proven two statutory
8
aggravating factors. RSA 630:5, I, II, IV, VII (2007). When the crime in this
case occurred, the statute identified six types of capital murder, each defined
as “knowingly caus[ing] the death of another” in specific circumstances. RSA
630:1; see RSA 630:1, I(g) (Supp. 2012) (statute amended in 2011 to add
seventh type of capital murder). One type of capital murder is defined as
knowingly killing “a law enforcement officer acting in the line of duty.” RSA
630:1, I(a). One of the two requisite statutory aggravating factors relates to
whether the defendant acted “purposely” when committing the capital murder.
RSA 630:5, VII(a)(1)-(3). The second relates to the circumstances of the crime,
the background of the defendant, or the status of the victim. RSA 630:5,
VII(b)-(j).
At a capital sentencing hearing, the jury also considers whether
additional aggravating factors exist, provided such factors were set forth in the
State’s notice of intent to seek the death penalty. RSA 630:5, I, III (2007).
These additional factors may be those identified in the statute (statutory
aggravating factors) or may be “other aggravating factors which the state will
seek to prove as the basis for the death penalty” (non-statutory aggravating
factors). RSA 630:5, I(b). Further, each juror considers whether mitigating
factors exist. RSA 630:5, III. Although the jury’s finding with respect to an
aggravating factor must be unanimous, “any member of the jury who finds the
existence of a mitigating factor may consider such a factor established.” RSA
630:5, IV. The State bears the burden of proving the existence of an
aggravating factor beyond a reasonable doubt; the defendant bears the burden
of proving the existence of a mitigating factor by a preponderance of the
evidence. RSA 630:5, III.
If a sentencing jury unanimously finds the existence of the two statutory
aggravating factors that are necessary to make the defendant eligible for a
death sentence, then each juror considers whether all of the aggravating
factors found to exist “sufficiently outweigh any mitigating factor or factors
found to exist, or in the absence of mitigating factors, whether the aggravating
factors are themselves sufficient to justify a sentence of death.” RSA 630:5, IV.
A recommendation “that a sentence of death be imposed rather than a
sentence of life imprisonment without possibility of parole” must be “by
unanimous vote.” Id. Moreover, “[t]he jury, regardless of its findings with
respect to aggravating and mitigating factors, is never required to impose a
death sentence and the jury shall be so instructed.” Id. Should the jury
recommend a death sentence, the court is required to impose that sentence.
RSA 630:5, V (2007).
9
IV. APPELLATE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
The issues before us raise questions of statutory and constitutional
interpretation and require our review of the trial court’s evidentiary rulings.
Our settled principles of judicial review apply to this appeal. The trial court’s
rulings on questions of law, including statutory interpretation and
constitutional questions, are reviewed de novo. State v. Marshall, 162 N.H.
657, 661 (2011). Because we decide cases on constitutional grounds only
when necessary, when a claim of error is based upon both a statutory provision
and a constitutional provision, we first will address the statutory argument.
See State v. Wamala, 158 N.H. 583, 592 (2009).
In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of the
intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of a statute considered as a
whole. State v. Etienne, 163 N.H. 57, 71 (2011). We first examine the
language of the statute and ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the
words used. State v. Moussa, 164 N.H. 108, 128 (2012). Absent an ambiguity
we will not look beyond the language of the statute to discern legislative intent.
Etienne, 163 N.H. at 72. We interpret legislative intent from the statute as
written and will not consider what the legislature might have said or add
language it did not see fit to include. State v. Addison, 160 N.H. 732, 754
(2010). Our goal is to apply statutes in light of the policy sought to be
advanced by the entire statutory scheme. Id. Accordingly, we interpret a
statute in the context of the overall statutory scheme and not in isolation. Id.
Additionally, “we construe provisions of the Criminal Code according to the fair
import of their terms and to promote justice.” Id. (quotation and citation
omitted).
Legislative acts are presumed to be constitutional and will not be
declared invalid “except upon inescapable grounds.” Duquette v. Warden, N.H.
State Prison, 154 N.H. 737, 745 (2007). “This means that we will not hold a
statute to be unconstitutional unless a clear and substantial conflict exists
between it and the constitution.” Petition of S. N.H. Med. Ctr., 164 N.H. 319,
324 (2012) (quotation omitted). “It also means that when doubts exist as to the
constitutionality of a statute, those doubts must be resolved in favor of its
constitutionality.” Id. (quotation omitted). “The party challenging a statute’s
constitutionality bears the burden of proof.” State v. Pierce, 152 N.H. 790, 791
(2005). To prevail on a facial challenge, the defendant must establish that no
set of circumstances exists under which the challenged statute would be valid.
State v. Hollenbeck, 164 N.H. 154, 158 (2012).
Where the defendant claims a violation of both the State and Federal
Constitutions, we first address his claims under the State Constitution, and
rely upon federal law only to aid our analysis. See State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226,
231-33 (1983). When the United States Supreme Court has decided an issue
10
of federal law, we must “follow the case [that] directly controls, leaving to [the
Supreme Court] the prerogative of overruling its own decisions.” Rodriguez de
Quijas v. Shearson/Am. Exp., 490 U.S. 477, 484 (1989); see State v. Melvin,
150 N.H. 134, 140 (2003) (“When interpreting federal law, . . . we are bound by
the United States Supreme Court’s current explication of it.”).
The admission of evidence falls within the trial court’s sound discretion.
State v. Oakes, 161 N.H. 270, 280 (2010); State v. Giddens, 155 N.H. 175, 179
(2007). We review the trial court’s ruling for an unsustainable exercise of
discretion. See Giddens, 155 N.H. at 179. To prevail under this standard, the
defendant must demonstrate that the challenged evidentiary ruling was “clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.” Id. Additionally, we
review the propriety of the trial court’s pretrial rulings in the context in which
evidentiary disputes were presented to the court. See State v. Glodgett, 144
N.H. 687, 694 (2000); State v. Bassett, 139 N.H. 493, 497 (1995).
V. VENUE AND JURY SELECTION REVIEW
On appeal, the defendant raises one challenge to venue and two to jury
selection. He first argues that the trial court erred in denying his motions for
change of venue. Regarding jury selection, he argues that the trial court erred
in denying his request that he be allotted thirty peremptory challenges and in
denying his motions to dismiss two prospective jurors for cause. We first
provide an overview of the jury selection process in this case.
In September 2008, at the start of the first day of juror voir dire, the trial
court described the jury selection process that had taken place to that point.
Approximately 1,200 prospective jurors had been summoned for the case and
those who responded to the summons submitted a completed five-page
preliminary questionnaire. Counsel jointly determined which individuals
should be excused immediately based upon the questionnaire responses alone,
and they met periodically with the trial court to discuss their
recommendations. The court noted that counsel “almost always agreed on who
should be excused and . . . whose request should be denied.” In addition, the
court excused persons who clearly were not eligible for jury service, as well as
those who were entitled to be excused.
Juror voir dire lasted approximately seventeen days, generating
approximately 2,800 pages of transcript testimony. Over 300 prospective
jurors reported to the courthouse for jury selection and the trial court divided
them into several panels. Each panel was brought before the court for
preliminary voir dire, during which the trial court described the charge against
the defendant, the jury selection process, and the law generally applicable to
criminal cases, including capital cases. Prospective jurors who knew any of the
11
potential witnesses were excused, and the remainder completed a long-form
juror questionnaire, specially prepared for the case.
This forty-one page form, modeled largely upon the defendant’s proposed
questionnaire, covered a variety of topics ranging from the prospective juror’s
views on racial discrimination, the death penalty, and the criminal justice
system, to opinions that he or she might have formed about the guilt or
innocence of the defendant or the possible punishment if he were convicted.
The questionnaire included several questions about the prospective juror’s
media exposure, including his or her sources for news (e.g., newspaper, talk
radio, television, or internet) and frequency of reading or listening to the news.
The questionnaire included a list of television shows and channels, and radio
stations and programs and prompted the prospective juror to indicate which he
or she watched or listened to on a regular basis. The questionnaire asked
whether the individual participated in social media such as MySpace or
Facebook. In addition, the questionnaire asked a series of questions
concerning aspects of the case that the prospective juror might have read
about, heard, or discussed with anyone, including information about the
defendant and Officer Briggs. Many of the questions were designed to prompt
narrative or explanatory answers, and each prospective juror signed his or her
completed questionnaire under oath.
Next, approximately 114 prospective jurors participated in individual,
sequestered voir dire. Before each prospective juror entered the courtroom, the
trial court asked counsel whether specific questioning was necessary in light of
the individual’s answers to the long-form questionnaire. If requested by either
party, the trial court asked targeted questions of the prospective juror based
upon information provided in response to questions in the questionnaire. The
court then questioned each prospective juror as to whether he or she
understood, and accepted, certain principles of law, including that the
defendant was presumed innocent unless and until the State convinced a
unanimous jury beyond a reasonable doubt that he was guilty. The court
explained to each individual the phases of a death penalty case and questioned
each as to his or her understanding of these phases. The court also asked the
prospective juror whether he or she understood that the jury would not be
required to impose the death penalty, and that the jury could impose the death
penalty only if it unanimously found that aggravating factors sufficiently
outweighed mitigating factors. It asked each prospective juror if there was any
reason that he or she could not be a fair and impartial juror in the case.
Following this questioning, counsel for both the defendant and the State were
allowed equal time to question the prospective juror, including questioning
about information provided on the long-form questionnaire. Counsel’s
questioning ranged from exposure to media coverage, community ties, and
opinions of police officer credibility, to the ability to be fair and impartial and
opinions about the death penalty.
12
During voir dire, the State and the defendant moved to dismiss certain
prospective jurors for cause; some of the motions were granted, and others
were not. Individuals were dismissed by the trial court for a variety of reasons
including their particular views about the death penalty, and other statements
indicating a lack of impartiality or an inability to follow the law. The State
exercised eleven of its twelve allotted peremptory challenges. The defendant
exercised the last of his twenty-four allotted peremptory challenges after the
seventeenth juror was seated. Ultimately, the trial court seated eighteen
jurors, including six alternates. The defendant did not move to dismiss the
eighteenth selected juror for cause.
A. Venue
1. Background
The superior court for the Hillsborough-North judicial district is located
in Manchester. Approximately six months before trial, the defendant moved for
a change of venue, arguing that “[t]he crime with which he is charged set in
motion an unprecedented wave of public passion, outcry, and outrage in the
community in which the prospective venire resides,” and that “[t]his
community has rallied around the victim, his surviving family, and his brother
officers, and against [the defendant], such that it would be fundamentally
unfair to compel [him] to select his jury in the Hillsborough-North district.” In
support of this argument, the defendant alleged, among other things, that:
“[w]ithin roughly two hours of [Officer Briggs’s] death, in a widely broadcast
press conference, [then] Attorney General Kelly Ayotte announced that the
State would seek to execute the man responsible for killing [him]”; the
community’s reaction to Officer Briggs’s death “reveals how the community . . .
felt about the crime, the police, and the level of violence in the community”;
and “[t]he case has prompted politicians, public figures, and the media to
emphasize the threat posed by crime to the community, and to focus
community outrage at [the defendant].”
The defendant included with his motion copies of Union Leader and
Concord Monitor newspaper articles, WMUR Channel 9 telecasts, a summary
of reader comments posted on the Union Leader website, a list of blogs and
websites that mentioned Officer Briggs, a table of the Union Leader’s print
circulation figures, the Manchester Police Department 2006 annual report,
population figures for New Hampshire counties and selected cities,
photographs and maps establishing the relative locations of the Manchester
Police Department and the Hillsborough-North Superior Court, and
memoranda documenting the Union Leader’s coverage of two other high-profile
murder cases. He argued that the “voluminous” publicity “in itself justifies
moving th[e] trial from Hillsborough-North.” In addition, the defendant alleged
that on a blog maintained on the Union Leader website, “many Manchester
13
residents have expressed their views on the proper outcome of th[e]
prosecution.” According to the defendant, “[b]ecause this community has
reacted so powerfully to the crime, the trial must be moved to a less deeply
affected judicial district . . . [where he] can . . . get the fair and impartial trial
society mandates.” The defendant subsequently supplemented his motion with
additional materials.
The State objected, arguing that the motion should be denied because
the defendant “has failed to meet his burden to establish that the media
coverage of his case has inherently or presumptively prejudiced the potential
jury pool.” According to the State, the “overwhelming bulk of the media
coverage, which the defendant cites, occurred over eighteen months [earlier], in
the immediate aftermath of the murder of [Officer] Briggs,” and “the media
coverage has been primarily factual.” The State noted that for jury selection,
the trial court intended to call a larger pool of potential jurors than usual, that
each juror would receive a detailed questionnaire asking about familiarity with
the case, and that the court and the parties would undertake individual,
sequestered voir dire of the prospective jurors. Thus, the State argued, “[t]he
extensive voir dire by the Court and the parties . . . will resolve whether it is
possible to obtain a fair and impartial jury.”
Following a hearing, the trial court denied the defendant’s motion by
written order dated June 25, 2008. Having examined the publicity
surrounding the case, the trial court found that much of it “occurred
immediately after the shooting of Officer Briggs.” It noted that the television
clips were “largely factual, discussing developments in the investigation of the
death of Officer Briggs and subsequent charging and prosecution of the
defendant,” while other articles and television clips discussed “debates over the
death penalty in general, . . . the defendant’s personal history, and ways in
which people have posthumously honored Officer Briggs and supported his
widow and children.” In addition, however, the trial court found that “[s]ome of
the articles and television clips refer to evidence that may be inadmissible
during the defendant’s capital murder trial”; for example, extensive coverage of
the three non-capital trials and articles about the defendant’s criminal history.
Regarding comments posted by readers on the Union Leader website, the trial
court found that many were “personal attacks on the defendant” or were
“messages of support to the Briggs family or remembrances of Officer Briggs,”
that others concerned “crime in Manchester” or “the death penalty in general,”
and that some were reactions to developments in the defendant’s case.
After reviewing the materials submitted by the defendant, the trial court
concluded that “while the press concerning this case has been voluminous,
especially immediately after the death of Officer Briggs, it is not the kind of
adverse inflammatory publicity that raises a concern about inherent prejudice.”
The trial court found that although “some of the pieces are hostile in tone and
14
accusatory in content, the overwhelming bulk of the material submitted
consists of straightforward, unemotional factual accounts,” and that “[w]hile
some of the articles and television clips about the death of Officer Briggs had
an emotional tone, very few related facts about the defendant in a way that
could be described as prejudicial.” (Quotation omitted.) In addition, the trial
court stated that “very few editorials about the case displayed hostility towards
the defendant”; rather, “[m]ost expressed sadness about the death of Officer
Briggs, debated the value of the death penalty, and generally discussed crime
in Manchester.” While some of the media coverage revealed facts about the
defendant’s criminal history that might be inadmissible during the guilt phase
of his trial, the court noted that “[e]xposure to inadmissible evidence . . . is not
sufficient to presume jury prejudice.” (Quotation omitted.)
The trial court declined to consider media website comments such as
those posted on the Union Leader website as “publicity” for the purposes of its
analysis of inherent prejudice, characterizing media websites as “merely places
where members of the public can express their opinions about any topic, a
kind of electronic general store,” and stating that such comments were “clearly
not posted to transmit information or news in an objective fashion but [were]
often emotional reactions to articles posted on the Union Leader website.”
Further, the court rejected the defendant’s argument that internet comments
and community reaction as reported in the media reflected a deep hostility that
would make it impossible to select an impartial jury in the Hillsborough-North
judicial district. The trial court found that: “the total number of comments is
small”; the majority of the comments were from webboards where the writers
were often anonymous and posted opinions more than once, and therefore the
number of “commenters” could not be accurately gauged; about two-thirds of
the “commenters” who identified themselves lived in towns outside the judicial
district; and “the vast majority of the comments express support for Officer
Briggs, his family, the police department, or describe memories of Officer
Briggs.” The court’s “informal” review revealed that less than one quarter of
the small number of comments were of “an inflammatory nature,” which, in a
judicial district of more than 190,000 people, “does not signal inherent
community prejudice.”
The trial judge noted that, because she had previously presided over the
defendant’s two non-capital trials held in Manchester, she “ha[d] been able to
test the effect of pretrial publicity on jurors” and that, through juror voir dire,
the court had been “able to secure fair and impartial juries in those cases
without exhausting the jury pools.” Finally, the trial court disagreed with the
defendant’s assertion that the close proximity of the Manchester Police Station
— where a monument to fallen officers, including Officer Briggs, was located —
to the courthouse weighed in favor of a change of venue because jurors could
be prejudiced as they entered the courthouse. The court found that the
Manchester Police Station, located diagonally across the street from the
15
courthouse, was a nondescript building and that the monument was not
readily visible from the courthouse. In addition, the court found that the
monument listed Officer Briggs “as one of four downed police officers in
Manchester’s history” and that the names of the officers could be read only
upon close inspection. The trial court noted that “during the trial, the jurors
will park at an off-site location and be bused to the courthouse each day where
they will enter through the backdoor, out of sight of the Manchester Police
Station.”
The defendant then petitioned this court to exercise its original
jurisdiction and order the trial court to grant a change of venue. We denied the
petition.
Following jury selection, the defendant renewed his motion for change of
venue, arguing that “[a] review of actual juror comments, both to the Court and
in questionnaires, indicates that this community is so aligned with the
Manchester Police, and so hostile to [him], that a trial in this judicial district is
fundamentally unfair.” The defendant argued that “in spite of the jury
selection process, he [would] suffer actual prejudice by having his trial in [the
Hillsborough-North] judicial district,” and asked the court to strike the panel
and change venue.
The State objected, arguing that the defendant had not provided “any
objective factual basis that even call[ed] into question, let alone undermine[d],
the propriety of the Court’s earlier rejection of his request for a change of
venue, or to strike the eighteen jurors who were fully vetted by the Court and
the parties and who are qualified to serve on this case.” The State argued that
“the ‘data’ selectively culled by the defendant in support of his renewed motion
[did] not accurately portray the pool of prospective jurors and altogether
ignore[d] the views expressed by those jurors that he ultimately ha[d] agreed to
hear his case.” As to the pool of prospective jurors who participated in the
individual voir dire, the State noted that the “vast majority of those . . . excused
by the Court for cause were not removed because of prejudgment of the case or
worry over community pressure, but for hardship or because their views
regarding the death penalty, both for and against, disqualified them from
service on this case.”
In addition, the State noted that the process of selecting fair and
impartial jurors, although lengthy, resulted in the selection of prospective
jurors “acceptable to both sides to serve and hear the case” and that those
jurors “gave unequivocal assurances that their decisions in the case would not
at all be influenced by any community reaction as to verdict or sentence.” The
State argued that the defendant’s concerns about “prejudice, prejudgment, and
community pressures . . . were fully addressed by the exhaustive and multi-
tiered selection process that all prospective jurors had to go through.” By
16
written order dated October 20, 2008, the trial court denied the defendant’s
renewed motion for “change of venue based on data collected during jury
selection,” in light of the law set out in its previous order on the defendant’s
original motion to change venue and “for the reasons set forth in the State’s
objection.”
2. Appellate Argument
The defendant argues that the trial court erred in denying his motions for
change of venue. He contends that “jurors not only had been exposed to an
amount of adverse publicity unprecedented in this State, but were also
uniquely susceptible to the State’s pleas for the condemnation of the murderer
of a Manchester police officer.” Further, he argues that “[e]ven if jury selection
procedures addressed the concern about publicity, they could not have
remedied the prejudice inherent in holding a capital murder trial before jurors
drawn from the community that suffered the loss of Officer Briggs.” He asserts
that “[i]f the volume and nature of the media coverage did not create such
presumptive prejudice as to warrant a change of venue, the bond between the
community and the highly decorated police officer who protected it did.” The
defendant contends that “[t]he trial court’s denial of [his] motions for change of
venue violated his State and Federal Constitutional rights to due process, a fair
trial, and an impartial jury.” See N.H. CONST. pt. I, arts. 15, 17, 35; U.S.
CONST. amends. V, VI, XIV.
3. Discussion
“It is well established that due process requires that an accused must
receive a trial by a fair and impartial jury.” State v. Laaman, 114 N.H. 794,
798 (1974); see Irvin v. Dowd, 366 U.S. 717, 722 (1961). Part I, Article 17 of
the New Hampshire Constitution provides:
In criminal prosecutions, the trial of facts, in the vicinity
where they happened, is so essential to the security of the
life, liberty and estate of the citizen, that no crime or offense
ought to be tried in any other county or judicial district than
that in which it is committed; except in any case in any
particular county or judicial district, upon motion by the
defendant, and after a finding by the court that a fair and
impartial trial cannot be had where the offense may be
committed, the court shall direct the trial to a county or
judicial district in which a fair and impartial trial can be
obtained.
N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 17; see N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 35 (“It is the right of
every citizen to be tried by judges as impartial as the lot of humanity will
17
admit”); U.S. CONST. amend VI (“In all criminal prosecutions, the accused
shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the
state and district wherein the crime shall have been committed”).
As we have explained, “Part I, Article 17 grants a criminal defendant two
rights: the right to be tried where the crime was committed and the right to
obtain a change of venue upon proof that he cannot obtain a fair trial there.”
Petition of State of N.H. (State v. Johanson), 156 N.H. 148, 154 (2007).
This provision in our bill of rights, designed for the
protection of the accused, was regarded by the framers of the
constitution as a privilege of the highest importance,
because it would prevent the possibility of sending him for
trial in a remote county, at a distance from friends, among
strangers, and perhaps among parties animated by
prejudices of a personal or partisan character.
State v. Albee, 61 N.H. 423, 429 (1881). But, “upon proof that a fair trial
cannot be had in the place of proper venue, the defendant has an
absolute right to a change of venue.” Johanson, 156 N.H. at 154. “In
this way . . . Part I, Article 17 provides the same level of protection as the
Federal Constitution . . . .” Id.; see State v. Smart, 136 N.H. 639, 646
(1993) (change of venue principles are the same under the State and
Federal Constitutions).
The defendant argues under both the State and Federal
Constitutions. We first address the defendant’s claim under the State
Constitution and rely upon federal law only to aid our analysis. See
State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
Publicity about a case can result in two types of
prejudice with regard to the accused’s right to a fair trial.
The first is inherent prejudice which exists when the
publicity by its nature has so tainted the trial atmosphere
that it will necessarily result in lack of due process. In such
cases the defendant need not show actual identifiable
prejudice. The second is actual prejudice which exists when
the publicity has infected the jurors to such an extent that
the defendant cannot or has not received a fair and impartial
jury trial. In this situation the defendant must show that
the nature of the opinions formed by the jurors as a result of
the publicity are such that they cannot be set aside by the
jurors to enable them to render a verdict based on the
evidence presented in court.
18
Laaman, 114 N.H. at 798 (citations omitted). The defendant argues that the
adverse pretrial publicity and evidence of community sentiment reflected at
jury selection compel the conclusion that inherent prejudice denied him his
constitutional rights. We address these arguments in turn.
a. Pretrial Publicity
A trial court’s determination of the impartiality of the selected jurors “is
entitled to special deference.” Smart, 136 N.H. at 653. “Particularly with
respect to pretrial publicity . . . primary reliance on the judgment of the trial
court makes good sense.” Id. (quotation omitted). “The judge of that court sits
in the locale where the publicity is said to have had its effect, and brings to his
evaluation of any such claim of prejudice his own perception of the depth and
extent of news stories that might influence a juror.” Id. (quotation and
brackets omitted). Accordingly, we will not reverse the trial court’s decision
unless it amounts to manifest error. Id.; see State v. Gribble, 165 N.H. 1, 18
(2013).
“The theory of our trial system is that the conclusions to be reached in a
case will be induced only by evidence and argument in open court, and not by
any outside influence, whether of private talk or public print.” Skilling v.
United States, 130 S. Ct. 2896, 2913 (2010) (quotation and brackets omitted).
Therefore, presumptive, or inherent, prejudice may arise when a “barrage of
inflammatory publicity immediately prior to trial,” Murphy v. Florida, 421 U.S.
794, 798 (1975), amounts to a “huge . . . wave of public passion,” Irvin, 366
U.S. at 728. “[P]rejudice may properly be presumed where prejudicial,
inflammatory publicity about a case so saturated the community from which
the defendant’s jury was drawn as to render it virtually impossible to obtain an
impartial jury.” United States v. Angiulo, 897 F.2d 1169, 1181 (1st Cir. 1990)
(quotation and brackets omitted). A presumption of prejudice because of
adverse publicity “attends only the extreme case.” Skilling, 130 S. Ct. at 2915.
“[I]t is the adverse nature of the publicity, not merely its quantity, that is
critical in finding presumptive prejudice.” Smart, 136 N.H. at 649; see United
States v. Misla-Aldarondo, 478 F.3d 52, 58 (1st Cir. 2007) (publicity must be
both extensive and sensational in nature). “Distinguishing between
straightforward factual publicity about a celebrated case and inflammatory,
adverse press is crucial.” Smart, 136 N.H. at 649. “To ignore these real
differences in the potential for prejudice would not advance the cause of
fundamental fairness, but only make impossible the timely prosecution of
persons who are well known in the community, whether they be notorious or
merely prominent.” Id. (quotation omitted).
Never have we found inherent prejudice in a case such that a change of
venue was compelled. In Smart, we considered a claim of inherent prejudice
19
based upon “enormous” pretrial publicity, characterized by some as
“unprecedented in this State.” Id. at 649. There, the defendant was charged
with, among other things, being an accomplice to the first-degree murder of her
husband. Id. at 643-45. In the aftermath of the crime and leading up to the
trial, there was “extraordinarily heavy and widespread media coverage.” Id. at
646. Numerous articles appeared in the local newspapers, in addition to news
coverage in Boston, Massachusetts, and national media outlets including Time
magazine. Id. Several days before jury selection was to begin, WMUR Channel
9 aired a special program titled “Anatomy of a Murder.” Id. at 649. The
program consisted of “footage from earlier news broadcasts that included film
of pre-arrest interviews with the defendant, of her arrest and that of the [co-
defendant] teenage boys, along with commentary by a station reporter.” Id.
The program also referred to three new indictments against the defendant,
including one charging her with attempting to murder a potential witness. Id.
at 649-50. The pretrial publicity generated a “several-inch-thick volume of
newspaper accounts and videotaped television news stories,” which the
defendant submitted in support of her motion for a change of venue. Id. at
649.
We rejected the defendant’s argument that this publicity was “so
pervasive and prejudicial” as to establish a presumption that it was impossible
to select an impartial jury in the judicial district. Id. at 646. After reviewing
“the massive amount of pretrial media material submitted by the defendant,”
we concluded that, although some of the news pieces were “hostile in tone and
accusatory in content, the overwhelming bulk of the material submitted”
consisted of “straightforward, unemotional factual accounts of events and of
the progress” of the case. Id. at 649 (quotation, brackets, and ellipses omitted).
In addition, we stated that exposure to facts that were not admissible at trial
was not sufficient to presume prejudice. Id. at 650. At most, the defendant
had shown “that the community from which her jury was drawn was exposed
to extensive pretrial publicity that resulted in familiarity with her case,” but we
concluded that “[m]ere familiarity . . . is not sufficient to presume prejudice.”
Id.
Only once has the United States Supreme Court reversed a conviction
solely based upon presumptive prejudice resulting from pretrial publicity
without regard to the jurors’ own voir dire testimony concerning their
impartiality. See id. at 647-48. In Rideau v. Louisiana, 373 U.S. 723 (1963),
police interrogated the defendant in jail, without counsel present, and obtained
his confession. Rideau, 373 U.S. at 724. The police filmed the interrogation
and, on three separate occasions before trial, a local television station
broadcast the film to audiences ranging from 24,000 to 53,000 individuals, in a
parish with a population of approximately 150,000. Id. Reversing the trial
court’s denial of the defendant’s motion for change of venue, the Supreme
Court observed that “[w]hat the people [in the community] saw on their
20
television sets was [the defendant], in jail, flanked by the sheriff and two state
troopers, admitting in detail the commission of the robbery, kidnapping, and
murder.” Id. at 725. As the Court explained, “to the tens of thousands of
people who saw and heard it, [the interrogation and confession] in a very real
sense was [the defendant’s] trial — at which he pleaded guilty to murder.” Id.
at 726. Therefore, the Court “d[id] not hesitate to hold, without pausing to
examine a particularized transcript of the voir dire examination of the members
of the jury, that due process . . . required a trial before a jury drawn from a
community of people who had not seen and heard [the defendant’s] televised
‘interview.’” Id. at 727. Thus, as Smart and Rideau underscore, in order to
establish inherent prejudice, the nature of the publicity must be adverse and
so inflammatory that it is not possible to select an impartial jury.
The defendant argues that we “should not rule that there can be no
inherent prejudice unless the facts of the case approximate those involved in
Rideau.” He asserts that “the publicity and community prejudice attendant to
the murder of Officer Briggs, in combination with factors deemed relevant to
the inquiry by other courts, established that the trial court erred by holding the
trial in the Hillsborough-North judicial district.” The defendant points out that
courts in other jurisdictions consider a number of factors in determining
whether there exists a presumption of community prejudice sufficient to
require a change of venue. One factor is the lapse of time between the crime
and the trial. See, e.g., Skilling, 130 S. Ct. at 2916; Irvin, 366 U.S. at 725;
Hayes v. Ayers, 632 F.3d 500, 509 (9th Cir. 2011). Another is the size of the
community in the judicial district. See, e.g., Skilling, 130 S. Ct. at 2915;
Mu’Min v. Virginia, 500 U.S. 415, 429 (1991); State v. Galindo, 774 N.W.2d
190, 227 (Neb. 2009). Other factors include the prominence of either the
victim or the defendant in the community and the nature and gravity of the
offense. See State v. Biegenwald, 594 A.2d 172, 182 (N.J. 1991).
The defendant argues that his relative standing in the community in
comparison with that of Officer Briggs “weighed in favor of moving the case
away from Manchester.” He asserts that this was a “rare case in which the
victim is so beloved by the community, the defendant so reviled, and the local
media coverage reflect[ed] and perpetuate[d] the divide,” that there was an
increased risk that the verdict might be based “on a desire for revenge, or the
fear of social ostracism as the cost of a mitigated verdict.” (Quotation omitted.)
One of the cases cited by the defendant in support of this argument is
instructive. In State v. Stubbs, 123 P.3d 407, 409 (Utah 2005), the seventeen-
year-old rape victim’s family was well-known and well-regarded in the
community. The jury selection voir dire indicated that a large number of the
prospective jurors knew members of the victim’s family and four of the seated
jurors knew the victim or the prosecution witnesses. Id. The court found that
the voir dire reinforced the conclusion that a fair and impartial jury could not
21
be found because the victim had so many contacts within the community. Id.
at 412. “Indeed, as it was eventually composed, the jury was still populated
with jurors who personally knew the victim’s family or prosecution witnesses
. . . .” Id. Given so many connections between the jurors and the victim’s
family, the court held that “fairness can better be ensured in a different venue.”
Id. In the case before us, however, there is no suggestion that any seated juror
personally knew Officer Briggs’s family. Neither is there a suggestion that the
voir dire showed an overriding concern on the part of prospective jurors with
community reaction to a verdict of not guilty on the capital murder charge or a
sentence less than death based upon the relative standing of either the
defendant or Officer Briggs.
The defendant next argues that his case is distinguishable from Smart
and thereby compels the conclusion that he has established inherent
prejudice. First, he points to the fact that he “exhausted all of his 24
peremptory challenges,” unlike the defendant in Smart. See Smart, 136 N.H.
at 648. The defendant, however, does not develop this argument or explain
why exhausting his peremptory challenges requires a different conclusion. See
State v. Chick, 141 N.H. 503, 504 (1996).
Second, the defendant argues that ninety-eight percent of the prospective
jurors who filled out questionnaires knew about his case, unlike the jurors in
Smart, many of whom knew little about the murder prosecution. Impartiality,
however, does not require that “the juror be totally ignorant of the facts and
issues involved.” Laaman, 114 N.H. at 800 (quotation omitted). “[E]xtensive
knowledge in the community of either the crimes or the putative criminal is not
sufficient by itself to render a trial constitutionally unfair.” Dobbert v. Florida,
432 U.S. 282, 303 (1977); see Mu’Min, 500 U.S. at 429 (“Any killing that
ultimately results in a charge of capital murder will engender considerable
media coverage . . . .”).
Simply because prospective jurors may have heard about a
case through media reports does not render them incapable
of jury service, since, in today’s “information age,” where
news of community events [is] disseminated virtually
instantaneously by an ever multiplying array of delivery
methods, it would be difficult to find 12 jurors who do not at
least have some knowledge of the facts of an important and
tragic incident like this one.
Commonwealth v. Briggs, 12 A.3d 291, 313 (Pa. 2011), cert. denied, Briggs v.
Pennsylvania, 132 S. Ct. 267 (2011); see Laaman, 114 N.H. at 800.
Third, the defendant contends that the State Constitution contains
enhanced due process protection, an argument that he avers was not directly
22
addressed in Smart. However, despite noting in Smart that the defendant
“[did] not argue for a higher standard under the New Hampshire Constitution,”
we nonetheless concluded that the protections afforded in this area under the
State Constitution are the same as those afforded under the Federal
Constitution. Smart, 136 N.H. at 646. The defendant here does not set forth
any arguments sufficient to persuade us otherwise.
Fourth, the defendant asserts that “motions to change venue in capital
cases warrant special consideration” and that “[t]he capital nature of this
prosecution distinguishes it from Smart.” See State v. Koedatich, 548 A.2d
939, 968 (N.J. 1988) (trial courts should grant motions for change of venue in
capital cases liberally). Even assuming that the defendant is correct that the
change of venue analysis should be different in capital cases, we would reach
the same result applying “special consideration” to this issue. Furthermore, it
is apparent that the trial court, well aware of the gravity of the charges facing
the defendant, took proper measures to ensure that an impartial jury was
seated: it enlarged the pool of summoned jurors, required potential jurors to
complete an extensive questionnaire, conducted thorough individual,
sequestered voir dire, and increased the number of peremptory challenges. Cf.
People v. Jenkins, 997 P.2d 1044, 1075 (Cal. 2000) (murder of police officer
weighs in favor of a change of venue but does not by itself require a venue
change). He also argues that because in Smart we recognized that “[a] claim of
inherent prejudice does not require the defendant to show actual identifiable
prejudice,” Smart, 136 N.H. at 647 (quotation omitted), he need only “show a
reasonable likelihood that a fair trial was not had.” However, even assuming,
without deciding, that this standard applies, as discussed below we conclude
that it was not met in this case.
Fifth, the defendant argues that the volume of the publicity was greater
than in Smart and its adverse nature was more pervasive. We have reviewed
the materials submitted by the defendant in support of his initial motion for a
change of venue. Regarding the nature of the pretrial publicity, we agree with
the trial court that the bulk of the articles and news clips were factual reports,
consisting of “descriptions and depictions of [the] circumstances of Officer
Briggs’s death and funeral, the defendant’s arrest for capital murder, and the
legal happenings in the capital case.” Factual coverage “undermines any claim
for a presumption of prejudice.” Angiulo, 897 F.2d at 1181. We also agree
with the trial court that few of the articles and television clips “related facts
about the defendant in a way that could be described as prejudicial,” that “very
few editorials about the case displayed hostility towards the defendant,” and
that the pretrial publicity was “not the kind of adverse inflammatory publicity
that raises a concern about inherent prejudice.” See Commonwealth v.
Morales, 800 N.E.2d 683, 688 (Mass. 2003) (although media coverage
frequently mentioned the defendant’s confession and his criminal record, as
well as the victim’s twenty-one-year service as a police officer, his popularity in
23
the community, and the memorials in his honor, those references fell far short
of the type of emotionally charged, inflammatory, sensational coverage needed
to support a presumption of prejudice). Although some media reports
contained information about the defendant that might be inadmissible at trial,
we agree with the trial court that such facts were not “as unforgettable as the
spectacle of Rideau’s dramatically staged and broadcast confession.”
(Quotation omitted.) See Rideau, 373 U.S. at 726.
Importantly, the record supports the trial court’s finding that “the
publicity . . . was at its heaviest immediately after the death of Officer Briggs
and ha[d] diminished substantially since that time.” The trial court noted that
approximately seventy articles appeared in the Union Leader in October 2006,
but fewer than ten appeared in May 2008 when the defendant filed his first
motion for a change of venue. “Where there has been a substantial lapse of
time between the publicity and the trial, there is a far less likelihood the
publicity will affect the juror’s deliberations.” Calley v. Callaway, 519 F.2d 184,
208 (5th Cir. 1975) (en banc); see Patton v. Yount, 467 U.S. 1025, 1033 (1984)
(lapse of time of over one year had a profound effect on the jury in softening or
effacing opinion); Gribble, 165 N.H. at 22 (passage of nearly a year and a half
between the crimes and the defendant’s trial “diminished any presumptive
impact of the publicity at the time the crime was committed”). Finally, we
agree with the trial court’s evaluation of comments posted on-line. Other
courts have reached similar conclusions. See State v. Dwyer, 985 A.2d 469,
476 (Me. 2009) (website comments represent the views of a select group that
are addressed to a limited audience and do not necessarily represent the views
held by the public at large); see also United States v. Cassel, No. CIVA 706CR-
00098-04, 2007 WL 419574, at *1 (W.D. Va. Feb. 5, 2007) (because the
internet is available in every judicial district, the risk that prospective jurors
will encounter these stories cannot be cured by change of venue).
Although the media coverage was extensive, it was primarily factual and
the bulk of the publicity that contained material that may be characterized as
“inflammatory” appeared during the weeks immediately following the murder,
nearly two years before jury selection. In short, the defendant has not
presented us with the “type of emotionally charged, inflammatory,
sensationalistic coverage needed to support a presumption of prejudice.”
Angiulo, 897 F.2d at 1181; see Busby v. Dretke, 359 F.3d 708, 726 (5th Cir.
2004).
b. Jury Voir Dire
The defendant argues that we “must examine the voir dire and other
procedures designed to screen for qualified jurors.” He argues that the jury
selection voir dire in this case “demonstrates that the pretrial publicity
permeated the venire” and that “no amount of voir dire could have adequately
24
addressed the prejudice attendant to trying the case before jurors drawn from
Manchester and its environs.” In support, the defendant cites decisions from
other courts that have “deemed it significant that, as in this case, an
exceptionally high percentage of the venire knew about the case” and a
significant number of prospective jurors had a personal connection to the case.
The defendant asserts that “nearly half of the jurors who completed
questionnaires expressed an opinion on [his] guilt or sentence” and “the fact
that roughly 60% of the jurors who came into court either had contact with a
Manchester police officer or expressed a case-specific opinion cast doubt on the
assurances of impartiality given by the remainder, many of whom had been
exposed to the negative publicity this case generated.”
As we have stated, a trial court’s determination of the impartiality of the
jurors selected is entitled to “special deference” and will not be overturned
unless it amounts to manifest error. Smart, 136 N.H. at 653.
Appellate courts making after-the-fact assessments of the
media’s impact on jurors should be mindful that their
judgments lack the on-the-spot comprehension of the
situation possessed by trial judges.
Reviewing courts are properly resistant to second-
guessing the trial judge’s estimation of a juror’s impartiality,
for that judge’s appraisal is ordinarily influenced by a host of
factors impossible to capture fully in the record — among
them, the prospective juror’s inflection, sincerity, demeanor,
candor, body language, and apprehension of duty. In
contrast to the cold transcript received by the appellate
court, the in-the-moment voir dire affords the trial court a
more intimate and immediate basis for assessing a venire
member’s fitness for jury service.
Skilling, 130 S. Ct. at 2918 (citation omitted); see Mu’Min, 500 U.S. at 424
(trial judge’s function at voir dire is to reach conclusions as to impartiality and
credibility by relying upon judge’s own evaluations of demeanor evidence and of
responses to questions).
Moreover, impartiality does not require that jurors
be totally ignorant of the facts and issues involved. In these
days of swift, widespread and diverse methods of
communication, an important case can be expected to
arouse the interest of the public in the vicinity and scarcely
any of those best qualified to serve as jurors will not have
formed some impression as to the merits of the case. This is
25
particularly true in criminal cases. To hold that the mere
existence of any preconceived notion as to the guilt or
innocence of an accused, without more, is sufficient to rebut
the presumption of a prospective juror’s impartiality would
be to establish an impossible standard. It is sufficient if the
juror can lay aside his impression or opinion and render a
verdict based on the evidence presented in court.
Laaman, 114 N.H. at 800 (quotation omitted). “In order for the reviewing court
to reach a presumption that inflammatory pretrial publicity so permeated the
community as to render impossible the seating of an impartial jury, the court
must find that the publicity in essence displaced the judicial process, thereby
denying the defendant his constitutional right to a fair trial.” United States v.
McVeigh, 153 F.3d 1166, 1181 (10th Cir. 1998).
The Supreme Court has rejected presumed prejudice claims based upon
media coverage in several cases. For example, in Murphy, the Court rejected a
presumed prejudice claim because the largely factual publicity in the record
appeared several months before trial and the trial court excused for cause only
twenty of seventy-eight potential jurors due to opinions as to the defendant’s
guilt. Murphy, 421 U.S. at 802-03. As the Court reasoned, although “[t]his
may indeed be 20 more than would occur in the trial of a totally obscure
person, . . . it by no means suggests a community with sentiment so poisoned
against [the defendant] as to impeach the indifference of jurors who displayed
no animus of their own.” Id. at 803.
In Patton, the pretrial publicity revealed the defendant’s prior conviction
for murder and his confession, information that was inadmissible at trial.
Patton, 467 U.S. at 1029. Seventy-seven percent of potential jurors admitted
that they would carry an opinion as to the defendant’s guilt into the jury box
and eight of the fourteen jurors and alternates actually seated admitted that, at
some time, they had formed an opinion as to the defendant’s guilt. Id. at 1029-
30. Nevertheless, the Supreme Court rejected the defendant’s claims that
publicity had presumptively prejudiced the outcome of his case. Id. at 1031.
The Court concluded that the adverse publicity and community outrage had
peaked years before and that time had helped “sooth[e] and eras[e]” community
opinion. Id. at 1032-34. Thus, the relevant question was “not whether the
community remembered the case, but whether the jurors . . . had such fixed
opinions that they could not judge impartially the guilt of the defendant.” Id.
at 1035. The Court recognized that “[n]ot all members of the venire had put
aside earlier prejudice, as the voir dire disclosed. They retained their fixed
opinions, and were disqualified. But the testimony suggest[ed] that the voir
dire resulted in selecting those who had forgotten or would need to be
persuaded again.” Id. at 1034.
26
By contrast, in Irvin, an examination of the jury selection process
revealed that: (1) the trial court had excused 268 of 430 prospective jurors for
cause due to fixed opinions as to the guilt of the defendant; (2) ninety percent
of prospective jurors, when asked, “entertained some opinion as to guilt —
ranging in intensity from mere suspicion to absolute certainty”; and (3) eight of
twelve jurors actually seated “thought [the defendant] was guilty.” Irvin, 366
U.S. at 727. The Supreme Court vacated the trial court’s refusal to change the
trial’s venue, stating that the defendant was entitled to a jury “other than one
in which two-thirds of the members admit, before hearing any testimony, to
possessing a belief of his guilt.” Id. at 728.
While “adverse pretrial publicity can create such a presumption of
prejudice in a community that the jurors’ claims that they can be impartial
should not be believed,” Patton, 467 U.S. at 1031, “juror exposure to
information about a . . . defendant’s prior convictions or to news accounts of
the crime with which he is charged [do not] alone presumptively deprive[ ] the
defendant of due process.” Murphy, 421 U.S. at 799. “Prominence does not
necessarily produce prejudice, and juror impartiality . . . does not require
ignorance.” Skilling, 130 S. Ct. at 2914-15. Thus, “[t]he relevant question is
not whether the community remembered the case, but whether the jurors at
[the defendant’s] trial had such fixed opinions that they could not judge
impartially the guilt of the defendant.” Patton, 467 U.S. at 1035.
We have reviewed the extensive voir dire testimony of the prospective
jurors in this case and have found no evidence of what the defendant
characterizes as a community “demonstrably hostile toward [him].” While
many of the prospective jurors had prior knowledge about the case, most who
were questioned about their exposure to media coverage said that they knew
little about the case, had paid attention only when the crime occurred two
years earlier, or were too busy in their lives to pay attention to the news. We
note that the defendant agrees that the fact that most prospective jurors were
familiar with the case did not, in itself, mandate a change of venue.
Of the fifty-six prospective jurors dismissed for cause, most were
dismissed for hardship or for their views about the death penalty. See
Wainwright v. Witt, 469 U.S. 412, 424 (1985) (with respect to capital
punishment, a trial court is required to excuse a prospective juror for cause if
the juror’s views on the death penalty prevent or substantially impair the
performance of his or her duties in accordance with the instructions given by
the court and the oath given by the juror); see also Morgan v. Illinois, 504 U.S.
719, 721, 729 (1992). Others were dismissed because their responses revealed
that they lacked impartiality for reasons unrelated to the defendant. Indeed,
the record suggests that only ten of the 114 prospective jurors who participated
in the individual voir dire were dismissed because they had formed some
opinion concerning the defendant’s guilt. This rate of disqualification is too low
27
to presume prejudice in the community. See Misla-Aldarondo, 478 F.3d at 59
(thirteen out of eighty-four jurors excused for possible bias is too low to
presume prejudice); People v. Botham, 629 P.2d 589, 600 (Colo. 1981)
(prejudice presumed where fifty-seven of ninety jurors questioned about their
opinion of the defendant’s guilt admitted that they felt the defendant was
guilty). Further, “[t]he fact that several members of the venire who were not
seated admitted that they had already formed an opinion about [the crime]
charged demonstrates that the trial judge’s questions were sufficient to
uncover any bias or prejudice among the jurors.” State v. Addison, 160 N.H.
493, 499 (2010).
Of the eighteen jurors selected to sit on the case, only ten had even basic
knowledge about the crime. See Gribble, 165 N.H. at 26-28 (prejudice not
presumed even though all sixteen seated jurors reported knowing about the
crimes prior to jury selection). Most importantly, only one of the seated jurors
indicated that he had formed an opinion of the defendant’s guilt. See Hale v.
Gibson, 227 F.3d 1298, 1333 (10th Cir. 2000). The trial court questioned that
juror as follows:
Q. Okay. And can you — what is the basis of your opinion?
A. The basis would be from basic recollection of probably
newspaper accounts and hearing opinions of others from
when it had occurred a couple of years ago that I formed my
opinion from that information.
Q. Okay. Can you set aside anything you know about this
case or any opinions that you’ve heard expressed, . . . and
decide this case based only on the evidence here that you
hear here in the courtroom?
A. Yeah. I believe I could set aside opinion for, you know,
fact.
Q. All right. Do you — can you presume the defendant
innocent in this case? Do you understand that —
A. I understand.
Q. — you must presume him to be innocent?
A. I absolutely understand.
28
Q. And do you understand that he cannot be convicted of
this charge unless and until the State proves his guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt?
A. I understand.
Q. Okay. So if, as a juror, you found that the State proved,
you know, that the defendant probably killed Officer Briggs,
probably, but they didn’t prove — the State — the
Prosecutors didn’t prove it beyond a reasonable doubt, what
would your verdict be in that case?
A. I believe the verdict would have to be not guilty in that
particular charge.
During questioning by defense counsel, the juror agreed that he would
approach the trial “with a clean slate [and] with an open mind.” The defendant
did not challenge this juror for cause. See Casey v. Moore, 386 F.3d 896, 903,
909 n.8 (9th Cir. 2004) (where juror expressed opinion that the defendant was
guilty based upon extensive media reports but assured court on voir dire that
she could decide the case based upon evidence at trial, court dismissed
defendant’s claims of jury bias); State v. Manning, 885 So. 2d 1044, 1066 (La.
2004) (defendant did not identify a single juror the trial court should have
excused as a result of preconceived notions of his guilt resulting from pretrial
publicity about the case).
Further, each of the eighteen seated jurors answered, under oath, in the
negative when asked by the trial court whether there was any reason he or she
would not be a fair and impartial juror. See Laaman, 114 N.H. at 801. In
Smart, the defendant, “unable to point to any identifiable, actual prejudice on
the part of the jurors who decided her case, [sought] to characterize the pretrial
publicity surrounding her as equivalent to that in Irvin” and asked this court to
“disregard the jurors’ voir dire statements of impartiality.” Smart, 136 N.H. at
648. We declined, noting that no member of the defendant’s jury expressed an
opinion on voir dire that she was guilty, and, more importantly, none sat on
her jury over her objection. Id. Likewise, here, we agree with the State that
“[t]he defendant’s attempt to portray the vast majority of prospective jurors as
prejudiced against him and indicative of a hostile venue in which he [could not]
receive a fair trial simply is an unfair characterization and not supported by
the record.”
“In essence, the right to a jury trial guarantees to the criminally accused
a fair trial by a panel of impartial, ‘indifferent’ jurors.” Groppi v. Wisconsin,
400 U.S. 505, 509 (1971) (quotation omitted). In this case, the trial court,
obviously aware of the extensive pretrial publicity based upon the newspaper
29
articles and television reports relating to the murder, which were submitted by
the defendant in support of his initial motion for a change of venue, recognized
that juror voir dire would be of paramount importance in determining whether
a fair and impartial jury could be impaneled. See United States v. Sabhnani,
599 F.3d 215, 234 (2d Cir. 2010) (the key to determining the appropriateness
of a change of venue is a searching voir dire); Ritchie v. Rogers, 313 F.3d 948,
956 (6th Cir. 2002). Accordingly, the trial court “proceeded carefully and
cautiously, assessing the jurors’ credibility, demeanor, and potential for bias.”
Casey, 386 F.3d at 910.
As we have already noted, the trial court took many precautions designed
to assure the selection of an unbiased jury, including assembling a larger than
usual jury pool, requiring prospective jurors to complete a forty-one page
questionnaire, conducting individual, sequestered voir dire during which
counsel for the parties were each allowed time for questioning, and increasing
the number of peremptory challenges for each side. The extensive juror
qualification and selection process took approximately seventeen days, over
300 prospective jurors reported to the courthouse for jury selection, and the
voir dire generated approximately 2,800 pages of transcript testimony. See
Patton, 467 U.S. at 1027 (voir dire took ten days, seven jury panels, 292
prospective jurors, and 1,186 pages of testimony); United States v. Blom, 242
F.3d 799, 804 (8th Cir. 2001) (court assembled a jury pool three times the
normal size, mailed questionnaires to prospective jurors inquiring about
exposure to pretrial publicity, and increased the number of peremptory
strikes); cf. State v. Nelson, 103 N.H. 478, 484 (1961) (fact that it took several
weeks to select a jury indicates “the extreme care taken by the Trial Court to
insure that an impartial jury was selected”). “This face-to-face opportunity to
gauge demeanor and credibility, coupled with information from the
questionnaires regarding jurors’ backgrounds, opinions, and sources of news,
gave the court a sturdy foundation to assess fitness for jury service.” Skilling,
130 S. Ct. at 2923.
Although the defendant attempts to characterize his case as involving a
“heightened risk of prejudice in the community in which the trial occurred” due
to the “bond between the community and the highly decorated police officer
who protected it” such that “the government had a palpable advantage in trying
its case to jurors in that community,” the jury selection record does not
support this characterization. See Murphy, 421 U.S. at 800; Bell v. State, 938
S.W.2d 35, 46 (Tex. Crim. App. 1996). Here, “[t]he record gives us no basis to
second-guess the trial court’s better-positioned assessment.” Hayes, 632 F.3d
at 512.
Accordingly, we hold that there was no manifest error in the trial court’s
denial of the defendant’s motions for a change of venue based upon pretrial
publicity or upon the juror voir dire and that the defendant has not shown a
30
reasonable likelihood that he was denied a fair trial. Because the Federal
Constitution affords the defendant no greater protection than does the State
Constitution in these circumstances, we reach the same conclusion under the
Federal Constitution as we do under the State Constitution. See Skilling, 130
S. Ct. at 2912-15; Smart, 136 N.H. at 646.
B. Peremptory Challenges
1. Background
Before jury selection, the trial court informed counsel that it intended to
select eighteen jurors, including six alternates. By statute, the defendant was
entitled to twenty and the State was entitled to ten peremptory challenges. See
RSA 606:3, I, :4, I (2001). The parties jointly proposed that the court allot
thirty peremptory challenges to the defendant and fifteen to the State. On
September 23, 2008, during the second day of jury selection, the court
expressed reservations about the parties’ joint proposal, and the State took the
position that the number of additional peremptory challenges to be awarded to
account for alternate jurors was a matter for the court’s discretion. The
defendant argued, however, that RSA 606:3 and :4 entitled him to a “certain
proportion of peremptory challenges with respect to the number of jurors . . .
established by statute.” The trial court rejected the parties’ joint proposal and
ruled that granting the defendant twenty-four, and the State twelve,
peremptory challenges was reasonable.
2. Appellate Argument
The defendant argues that the trial court’s decision constituted error for
three reasons. First, he asserts that RSA 606:3, I, required the trial court to
“increase the number of each party’s peremptory challenges in proportion to
the increase in the total number of jurors selected.” He contends that when, as
in this case, the trial court selects six alternate jurors, a fifty percent increase
over the usual twelve jurors, the court must also increase the number of
peremptory challenges for each party by fifty percent. Second, he contends
that the trial court’s alleged violation of RSA 606:3 and :4 also violates his state
constitutional right to due process. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 15. Third, he
argues that, even if the trial court had the discretion to decide how many
additional peremptory challenges to grant, it unsustainably exercised that
discretion because it failed to explain why it allotted twenty-four peremptory
challenges to him and twelve to the State.
3. Discussion
Because we decide cases on constitutional grounds only when necessary,
we first address the defendant’s statutory argument. See State v. Wamala, 158
31
N.H. 583, 592 (2009). RSA 606:3 provides that criminal defendants “may, in
addition to challenges for cause . . . , peremptorily challenge” twenty jurors in a
capital murder case, fifteen jurors in a first-degree murder case, and three
jurors “in any other case.” See RSA 606:3, I-III (2001). RSA 606:4 provides
that the State “shall be entitled to the following number of peremptory
challenges, in addition to challenges for cause”: ten in a capital murder case;
fifteen in a first-degree murder case; and three in “any other case.” See RSA
606:4, I-III (2001).
The defendant argues that although neither statutory provision “specifies
a system for determining the number of additional peremptory challenges to be
granted when a trial court decides to empanel a given number of alternate
jurors,” such silence should not be interpreted “as prohibiting a court from
increasing the number of peremptory challenges above the specified twenty and
ten, when alternate jurors are selected.” Because the trial court did increase
the number of peremptory challenges “to some extent,” the defendant contends
that in doing so “the court had to choose between two possible interpretations
of the statutes.”
According to the defendant, under one interpretation, the “allocation of
twenty and ten peremptory challenges” in RSA 606:3, I, and :4, I, “bespeaks a
specific legislative intent in regards to the discretionary control the parties
respectively shall have in the selection of the jurors,” which requires the court
to “increase the number of each party’s peremptory challenges in proportion to
the increase in the total number of jurors selected.” Thus, he asserts that if
the court intends to select eighteen jurors, it must increase the number of his
peremptory challenges to thirty and the number of the State’s peremptory
challenges to fifteen.
Under the other interpretation, according to the defendant, the statutes’
“allocation of twenty and ten peremptory challenges sets a minimum number
each party shall have, but does not express a precise judgment about the
measure of discretionary control the parties should have over the selection of
jurors.” Under this interpretation, the trial court has the discretion to decide
whether and by how much to increase the number of peremptory challenges
allowed each party when the jury panel will include alternate jurors.
The defendant contends that because the statutes are subject to two
reasonable interpretations, we must review legislative history to determine the
number of peremptory challenges a trial court may grant when selecting
alternate jurors. See State v. Addison, 161 N.H. 300, 306 (2010) (“We will
review legislative history . . . to aid our analysis if the statutory language is
ambiguous or subject to more than one reasonable interpretation.”). This
history, he contends, reveals that the legislature set the number of peremptory
challenges in a capital case to twenty for the defendant and ten for the State in
32
the late nineteenth century, see GL 261:9, :10 (1878), long before the
legislature enacted a statute regarding the selection of alternate jurors, see
Laws 1941, 104:1. Thus, he argues, when the legislature set the number of
peremptory challenges for each party in a capital case, it must have
“contemplated that those peremptories would be exercised in the selection of a
jury numbering twelve persons, without alternates.” Accordingly, he asserts
that “[p]rinciples of statutory interpretation . . . require this Court to hold that,
when a court intends to select eighteen jurors for the trial of a capital case, it
must grant the defendant thirty peremptory challenges, and the State fifteen.”
The State, in addition to arguing that RSA 606:3 and :4 are plain and
unambiguous, argues that their legislative histories “cannot support the weight
that the defendant has placed upon them.” The State observes that although
the number of peremptory challenges allotted to each party in a capital case
has remained the same since 1878, the number of such challenges in other
types of criminal cases has varied significantly over the years. In 1878, for
instance, the defendant was allotted two peremptory challenges in all non-
capital cases, while the State was allotted none. See GL 261:9, :10. In the
early twentieth century, both the defendant and the State were allotted three
peremptory challenges in all non-capital cases. See Laws 1919, 40:1. In 1974,
the legislature allotted the defendant twenty, and the State ten, peremptory
challenges in a first-degree murder or capital case. See Laws 1974, 34:5, :6.
Finally, in 1993, the legislature enacted the versions of RSA 606:3 and :4 that
remain in place today. See Laws 1993, 143:1, :2. According to the State,
“there is simply no basis to conclude that the legislature plainly intended the
number of peremptory strikes to be increased in proportion to the number of
alternate jurors selected.”
We agree with the defendant that RSA 606:3 and :4 are subject to more
than one reasonable interpretation as to the number of peremptory challenges
allowed in a case with alternate jurors, and, therefore, that considering
legislative history is warranted. See Addison, 161 N.H. at 306. However, we
find the State’s interpretation of that history persuasive.
The defendant’s interpretation of RSA 606:3 and :4 as requiring an
increase in the number of peremptory challenges in proportion to the increase
in the number of seated jurors narrowly focuses upon the ratio of peremptory
challenges in capital cases set forth therein. However, as the State points out,
the legislature has made numerous changes to the number of peremptory
challenges allowed each party in criminal cases, including changes made after
1941, when the legislature first enacted a statute regarding alternate jurors.
See Laws 1941, 104:1. Therefore, we disagree with the defendant that the
legislative history of RSA 606:3 and :4 demonstrates legislative intent that the
33
number of peremptory challenges provided in RSA 606:3 and :4 would be
exercised only for a jury of twelve persons, without alternates.
Further, the statute concerning alternate jurors provides: “In the trial in
the superior court of any civil or criminal case, when it appears to the presiding
justice that there is reason for the selection of alternate jurors, the jurors shall,
at the direction of the presiding justice, be drawn, selected and empaneled in
the same manner as the regular jurors.” RSA 500-A:13, I (2010). This statute
expresses the legislature’s intent to vest the trial court with the discretion to
decide whether to select alternate jurors at all.
The defendant argues that the statutes do not suggest the number of
peremptory challenges to be awarded when alternates are chosen, and the
State does not contend otherwise. Accordingly, we will assume the statutes
provide no guidance on this matter, and look to legislative history as an
analytic aid. See Addison, 161 N.H. at 306. When RSA 500-A:13, I, was first
enacted, it entitled each party to “one peremptory challenge as to each
alternate juror.” Laws 1971, 456:10 (originally codified at RSA 500-A:23); see
Laws 1941, 104:1 (predecessor to RSA 500-A:13). In 1977, this language was
deleted from the statute. See Laws 1977, 473:2. We interpret the deletion of
this language to mean that the legislature intended the number of peremptory
challenges accorded each party to be a matter for the trial court’s discretion.
Thus, when we consider RSA 606:3 and :4 in conjunction with RSA 500-
A:13, I, as well as pertinent legislative history, we conclude that RSA 606:3 and
:4 set the minimum number of peremptory challenges allotted to each party. If
the trial court decides that the jury panel will include alternate jurors, it has
the discretion under RSA 500-A:13, I, to determine whether to increase each
party’s allotment of peremptory challenges, and, if so, by how many.
We, therefore, hold that the defendant was not statutorily entitled to a
proportional number of peremptory challenges based upon the trial court’s
decision to select six alternate jurors. In light of our conclusion that the trial
court’s decision did not violate any statutory command, we necessarily reject
the defendant’s due process argument, which is premised solely upon his
assertion that his statutory rights were violated.
We also reject the defendant’s contention that the trial court’s failure to
explain its rationale for rejecting the parties’ joint proposal that the court allot
thirty peremptory challenges to the defendant and fifteen to the State
constituted an unsustainable exercise of discretion. As the State correctly
observes, the defendant did not preserve this argument by raising it in the trial
court, but even if it had been preserved, we deem it unavailing. See State v.
Eaton, 162 N.H. 190, 195 (2011); State v. Winward, 161 N.H. 533, 542 (2011).
Contrary to the defendant’s assertion, the trial court had no obligation to
34
explain its reasoning on the record. See State v. Silva, 158 N.H. 96, 102 (2008)
(we assume trial court made all findings necessary to support its decision).
C. Challenges For Cause
1. Background
As outlined in some detail at the beginning of Part V (Venue and Jury
Selection Review) of this opinion, approximately 114 prospective jurors
participated in individual, sequestered voir dire. The trial court explained to
each the phases of a death penalty case and certain principles of law, and
questioned each prospective juror as to his or her understanding of these
phases and the applicable law. Following this questioning by the trial court,
counsel for both the defendant and the State were allowed equal time to
question each prospective juror.
During the voir dire, the defendant moved to dismiss two of the
prospective jurors on the ground that each held disqualifying views about the
death penalty: Jurors A-8 and B-15. The trial court denied both motions,
concluding that neither prospective juror held views that warranted dismissal.
In questioning prospective Juror A-8, defense counsel asked a series of
questions based upon a hypothetical case in which a defendant is found guilty
of capital murder and in which “he acted purposely, there was no self-defense,
there is no insanity defense, there’s no alibi, [and] there’s no accident.” For
example, defense counsel asked Juror A-8 under those circumstances what
“types of things” he would want to know in order to make a decision whether to
sentence the defendant to death or life imprisonment without possibility of
parole. In response, the prospective juror stated that “if the facts show that he
intentionally did it with no back up motive, then no. Then he should get the
death penalty.”
The trial court asked several questions to determine whether Juror A-8
understood the phases of a capital murder trial and understood that at the
sentence selection phase he would engage in a balancing of aggravating and
mitigating factors before determining the sentence. In response to the court’s
specific questions, Juror A-8 indicated that he understood and affirmed that he
would “keep an open mind” throughout the trial. The State then asked a series
of questions about whether the prospective juror would “fully consider” and
“give a fair evaluation” to mitigating evidence, to which he responded that he
would. To follow up, the court asked whether evidence of “mental health
issues” could be a reason that he might determine that the death penalty was
not warranted, and the prospective juror answered, “Yes.”
35
Defense counsel moved to dismiss Juror A-8 for cause on the basis that
his “feelings about the death penalty are so ingrained that they would
substantially interfere with his ability to consider mitigation.” The State
objected, contending that the prospective juror “clearly said that he would
consider and could consider the mitigating evidence in the case and he was
very firm on the fact that he would follow [the court’s] instructions in the case.”
The trial court denied the defendant’s motion, finding:
[T]his man is not an abstract thinker. I think he has a hard
time with . . . just conceptualizing, but . . . when he was
asked . . . more straightforwardly, I think that . . . his
answers were consistent with the law. I think he’s very
sincere in trying to set forth his views. I think the law is kind
of confusing and I think he had a hard time with it, but when
it was . . . set forth to him directly, I think that he answered
. . . . I wanted to be sure that he understood the law and I
think that he would follow the law in the case if he were
chosen as a juror. So I don’t find that his views substantially
impair . . . the performance of his duties as a juror.
Defense counsel exercised a peremptory challenge to strike Juror A-8.
During the voir dire of prospective Juror B-15, the prosecutor explained
to her that the State had to prove the aggravating factors beyond a reasonable
doubt, while the defense had a lower standard of proof for mitigating factors,
and asked the prospective juror whether she would be able to apply that law.
She responded that she would accept the law, but that in her mind she would
hold them both “to the same standard.” Upon further explanation by the State
of the relative burdens of proof, Juror B-15 affirmed that she would accept and
follow the law and would weigh the aggravating and mitigating factors at the
sentence selection phase of trial with an open mind.
Defense counsel asked her a series of questions based upon a
hypothetical case in which the defendant had been found guilty of committing
a wanton, purposeful murder and the defendant was not mentally
incapacitated. Asked whether she could envision a circumstance under which
a sentence of life imprisonment without parole, as opposed to death, would be
the appropriate sentence in such a case, the prospective juror stated that “if
you could present me something very convincing, I probably would. But I don’t
know what that would be.” The trial court followed up with additional
questioning, asking her whether she would give as great a consideration to the
mitigating factors the defense presented as she would the aggravating factors
that the State presented. The prospective juror stated affirmatively that she
could consider mitigating evidence of the “person’s background.”
36
Defense counsel challenged the juror for cause, questioning her “ability
to accept and follow the burden of proof on mitigating factors” and because
“she presented very strongly as a juror who is at a very high risk . . . to not be
able to follow this Court’s law in spite of her stated willingness to do so.” The
State objected, stating:
This juror made it very clear from the outset that the decision
to impose the death penalty was . . . a very weighty decision,
that . . . she had to be convinced that [the defendant] was
very deserving of the death penalty . . . . I think the
confusion here, and it’s clear that English isn’t her first
language, but she understood the difference between proof of
factors and weight of those factors . . . . [S]he said very
clearly that she would not hold the defense to a higher
burden of proof in proving the facts. But once the facts are
proven, how much weight she assigns to those in the
equation is completely in her discretion, and the law does not
control her. And I think that that’s where her . . . mindset is
that those may not weigh very heavily. But we can’t ask her
to commit to how much weight those are. She said she would
consider them if proven.
The trial court agreed with the State, and added:
She was clear that the State must prove to her that the
defendant is very deserving of the death penalty before she
would vote for it. The other thing is, I noticed that she got
. . . quite emotional when she talked about actually imposing
the death penalty. This is not going to be someone who
would lightly, in any way, impose the death penalty. And I
think she would be a very fair juror to both sides.
The defendant exercised a peremptory challenge to strike Juror B-15.
The defendant exhausted all twenty-four of his peremptory challenges,
using his last one after the seventeenth juror was selected.
2. Appellate Argument
The defendant argues that the trial court’s denial of his motions violated
his statutory right to excuse for cause any juror who is “not indifferent.” RSA
500-A:12, II (2010). He also argues that because he had to expend two of his
twenty-four peremptory challenges to correct the trial court’s errors, he was
“inequitably deprive[d] . . . of peremptory challenges [he] would otherwise have
had available.” Recognizing that “there is no constitutional right to a
37
peremptory challenge,” the defendant contends that the trial court violated his
statutory right to peremptory challenges, see RSA 606:3, I (2001), by requiring
him to use two of them curatively. Further, he asserts that the trial court’s
decision violated his state and federal constitutional rights to due process, trial
by an impartial jury, and freedom from cruel and/or unusual punishment. See
N.H. CONST. pt. I, arts. 15, 16, 18, 33, 35; U.S. CONST. amends. V, VI, VIII,
XIV.
3. Discussion
We first address the defendant’s argument that the trial court’s decisions
violated his statutory right to excuse for cause any juror who is “not
indifferent,” RSA 500-A:12, II. See State v. Wamala, 158 N.H. 583, 592 (2009).
“It is a fundamental precept of our system of justice that the defendant
has the right to be tried by a fair and impartial jury.” State v. Addison, 160
N.H. 493, 497 (2010) (quotation omitted); see N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 35. A
juror who is not indifferent must be excused from the trial of a case. RSA 500-
A:12, II. The question of indifference is determined by “whether the juror’s
views would prevent or substantially impair the performance of his duties as a
juror in accordance with his instructions and his oath.” Wainwright v. Witt,
469 U.S. 412, 424 (1985) (quotation omitted). “[T]he determination is
essentially one of credibility, and therefore largely one of demeanor.” Patton v.
Yount, 467 U.S. 1025, 1038 (1984); see Skilling v. United States, 130 S. Ct.
2896, 2917 (2010).
Demeanor plays a fundamental role not only in
determining juror credibility, but also in simply understanding
what a potential juror is saying. Any complicated voir dire
calls upon lay persons to think and express themselves in
unfamiliar terms, as a reading of any transcript of such a
proceeding will reveal. Demeanor, inflection, the flow of the
questions and answers can make confused and conflicting
utterances comprehensible.
Patton, 467 U.S. at 1038 n.14. The trial court’s determination of a juror’s
impartiality “is ordinarily influenced by a host of factors impossible to capture
fully in the record — among them, the prospective juror’s inflection, sincerity,
demeanor, candor, body language, and apprehension of duty.” Skilling, 130 S.
Ct. at 2918. For these reasons, “the trial court’s resolution of such questions is
entitled . . . to ‘special deference.’” Patton, 467 U.S. at 1038; see State v. Smart,
136 N.H. 639, 653 (1993). Accordingly, a trial court’s finding of juror
impartiality may be overturned only when it amounts to manifest error. Smart,
136 N.H. at 653; see Mu’Min v. Virginia, 500 U.S. 415, 428 (1991). “[T]he
38
question is whether there is fair support in the record for the [trial court’s]
conclusion that the jurors here would be impartial.” Patton, 467 U.S. at 1038.
The defendant contends that prospective Juror A-8 “was substantially
impaired in his ability to consider mitigating evidence.” He challenges
prospective Juror B-15 both because “her threshold for what evidence she
considered mitigating was so high as to effectively render her incapable of
considering mitigating evidence,” and because “she demonstrated an inability
to apply the differential burdens of proof with regard to aggravating and
mitigating factors.”
We conclude that the transcripts of the entire voir dire of prospective
Jurors A-8 and B-15 support the trial court’s findings that each of them would
be impartial. See Patton, 467 U.S. at 1038-40. Although prospective Juror
A-8’s testimony indicates some initial confusion as to whether he could
consider mitigating evidence at the sentence selection phase of trial, upon
further questioning he unequivocally stated that he would consider mitigating
evidence such as the defendant’s difficult upbringing and his mental health,
that he would consider all of the evidence presented to him, and that he would
take it into account when deciding the case. As to prospective Juror B-15,
although her testimony indicates some initial confusion about the burdens of
proof for aggravating and mitigating factors, upon further clarification by the
State and the court she unequivocally stated that the differing burdens made
sense, that she could accept them, and that she could follow the law.
It is not uncommon for jurors to express themselves in ambiguous and
seemingly contradictory ways. See id. at 1038-39. This is because lay persons
“may never have been subjected to the type of leading questions and cross-
examination tactics that frequently are employed” on voir dire examination and
because “[p]rospective jurors represent a cross section of the community, and
their education and experience vary widely.” Id. at 1039. “Every trial judge
understands this, and under our system it is that judge who is best situated to
determine competency to serve impartially. The trial judge properly may
choose to believe those statements that were the most fully articulated or that
appeared to have been least influenced by leading.” Id.
We are not persuaded that the cases cited by the defendant compel a
conclusion that either of these prospective jurors should have been dismissed
for cause. The cases present facts that are materially different from those here.
For example, in White v. Mitchell, 431 F.3d 517 (6th Cir. 2005), as the court
characterized the testimony, the juror stated that she had already determined
that death was an appropriate punishment and believed that the rest of the
jurors would feel similarly, that she “relished” taking part in the imposition of
the death penalty, and that she “believed that her anticipated outcome of the
case was the true and honest one.” White, 431 F.3d at 541. Despite the fact
39
that the juror eventually stated that she would consider all of the evidence and
follow the law, the court held that because “the line of questioning as a whole
reveal[ed] a series of highly troubling and contradictory statements . . . with
regard to [the juror’s] ability to be a fair and impartial juror,” the trial court’s
failure to excuse the juror resulted in a violation of the defendant’s right to a
fair trial. Id. at 541-42.
Similarly, in Pope v. State, 345 S.E.2d 831 (Ga. 1986), overruled on other
grounds by Nash v. State, 519 S.E.2d 893, 895 (Ga. 1999), the court concluded
that a prospective juror should have been excused for bias where he “testified
that if the defendant was ‘found guilty beyond a shadow of a doubt’ and the
trial court authorized him to consider the death penalty, he would impose it.
He would listen to the evidence, but it would not change his opinion.” Pope,
345 S.E.2d at 838. As the court stated, “A juror who has made up his mind
prior to trial that he will not weigh evidence in mitigation is not impartial.” Id.;
see also State v. Maxie, 653 So. 2d 526, 537-38 (La. 1995) (error not to dismiss
prospective juror for cause who stated that she was disposed to impose the
death penalty if the defendant was convicted of rape-murder, responded
negatively when asked whether her mind was open to both the death penalty
and life imprisonment, and indicated at the end of voir dire that the death
penalty should be imposed once the defendant’s guilt was established).
The record in this case supports the trial court’s findings that
prospective Jurors A-8 and B-15 each exhibited an ability to accept the law as
explained by the court and expressed a willingness to consider any mitigating
evidence. The record also supports the trial court’s determination that neither
juror held views that would “substantially impair the performance of his [or
her] duties as a juror in accordance with his [or her] instructions and his [or
her] oath.” Wainwright, 469 U.S. at 424; see Adams v. Texas, 448 U.S. 38, 45
(1980). We hold that the trial court’s denial of the defendant’s motions to
dismiss for cause did not constitute manifest error, see Smart, 136 N.H. at
653, and thus did not impair the defendant’s statutory right to excuse for
cause any juror who is “not indifferent.” RSA 500-A:12, II. In light of our
conclusion that the trial court’s decision did not violate RSA 500-A:12, II, we
necessarily reject the defendant’s constitutional argument, which is premised
solely upon his assertion that his statutory right was violated.
Moreover, because the defendant exercised a peremptory challenge
against each of these prospective jurors, neither individual sat on his jury. The
defendant does not argue that the jury that did sit on his case was not
impartial. “Accordingly, the right of trial by an impartial jury is not implicated
in this case.” State v. Goodale, 144 N.H. 224, 228 (1999); see State v. Rideout,
143 N.H. 363, 366 (1999) (“Generally, in a criminal case, a defendant alleging
juror bias bears the burden to demonstrate actual prejudice.”); see also Ross v.
40
Oklahoma, 487 U.S. 81, 86 (1988) (any claim that the jury was not impartial
must focus upon the jurors who ultimately sat).
Even if we accept the defendant’s premise that the trial court’s denial of
his challenges for cause amounted to manifest error, he is not entitled to the
relief he requests — reversal of his sentence. “[T]he [United States] Supreme
Court has made clear that a court’s failure to strike for cause a biased
veniremember violates neither the Sixth Amendment guarantee of an impartial
jury, . . . nor the Fifth Amendment right to due process, . . . when the biased
veniremember did not sit on the jury, even though the defendant must use a
peremptory challenge to strike him.” United States v. Mitchell, 502 F.3d 931,
954-55 (9th Cir. 2007); see Ross, 487 U.S. 81; United States v. Martinez-
Salazar, 528 U.S. 304 (2000); cf. People v. Hamilton, 200 P.3d 898, 925 (Cal.
2009) (to preserve an objection to the trial court’s failure to excuse a juror for
cause, a defendant must exercise a peremptory challenge against the juror,
exhaust all peremptory challenges, and object to the jury as it is finally
empaneled).
We acknowledge that in some jurisdictions, when a defendant exhausts
his peremptory challenges after having used a peremptory challenge curatively,
reversal of his conviction and sentence is required. See, e.g., State v. Magee,
103 So. 3d 285, 307 (La. 2012), cert. denied, 82 U.S.L.W. 3180 (U.S. Oct. 7,
2013) (No. 12-9070). In those jurisdictions, peremptory challenges are deemed
substantial rights such that when a defendant uses a peremptory challenge
curatively, it “so taints the equity of the proceeding that no jury selected from
that venire could result in a fair trial.” Shane v. Com., 243 S.W.3d 336, 340
(Ky. 2008); see State v. Ho, 279 P.3d 683, 694 (Haw. 2012). Reversal is
required, in part, because the “final jury . . . is not the jury a party was entitled
to select.” Shane, 243 S.W.3d at 340; see People v. Macrander, 828 P.2d 234,
243 (Colo. 1992) (en banc).
However, this is not the majority rule. “Presently, at least twenty-nine
states and the United States do not employ the remedy of automatic reversal”
under these circumstances, “but, instead, require a defendant to show
prejudice — namely, that a biased juror actually sat on the jury — in order to
gain appellate relief.” People v. Roldan, No. 08CA2487, 2011 WL 174248, at
*10 (Colo. Ct. App. Jan. 20, 2011) (Bernard, J., specially concurring). “[A]
majority of state courts” and the Supreme Court “hold that the curative use of
a peremptory challenge violates neither a constitutional right, nor a rule-based
or statute-based right.” State v. Hickman, 68 P.3d 418, 422 (Ariz. 2003); see
Ross, 487 U.S. at 88; Martinez-Salazar, 528 U.S. at 307. Accordingly, “[a]n
erroneous ruling that forces a defendant to use a peremptory challenge, and
thus leaves him unable to exclude a juror who actually sits on his case,
provides grounds for reversal only if the defendant can actually show that his
right to an impartial jury was affected.” People v. Yeoman, 72 P.3d 1166, 1185
41
(Cal. 2003) (quotation omitted). The majority of jurisdictions, therefore, reject
the notion that reversal is mandated merely because the jury panel is “different
from that which would otherwise have decided the case.” Ross, 487 U.S. at 87.
“So long as the jury that sits is impartial, the fact that the defendant had to
use a peremptory challenge to achieve that result” does not, alone, require
reversal. Id. at 88.
Citing Goodale, State v. Brodowski, and State v. Anaya, the defendant
argues that our “prior decisions imply that [we] concur[ ] with the view that the
erroneous denial of a challenge for cause requires reversal where the
complaining party has exhausted its peremptory challenges.” See Goodale, 144
N.H. 224; State v. Brodowski, 135 N.H. 197 (1991); State v. Anaya, 131 N.H.
330 (1988). We disagree. In the cases upon which the defendant relies, we
found that the jury selection errors did not require automatic reversal of the
defendant’s conviction and sentence. In Goodale and Anaya, we found that the
errors were not prejudicial. See Goodale, 144 N.H. at 230; Anaya, 131 N.H. at
331. In Brodowski, we ruled that the State failed to prove that the error was
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Brodowski, 135 N.H. at 201-02. In none
did we suggest that juror selection errors require automatic reversal.
In Goodale, the defendant argued that the trial court erroneously allowed
the State to use the criminal records of potential jurors during jury selection
while denying him equal access to the records. Goodale, 144 N.H. at 227. We
held that such a procedure violated the defendant’s state constitutional right to
due process because it was fundamentally unfair. Id. We reasoned that the
trial court’s ruling “conferred on the State a significant advantage in
determining whether to exercise its peremptory challenges” because it allowed
“the State access to information that was unavailable to the defendant.” Id. at
230. Despite finding constitutional error, however, we affirmed the defendant’s
conviction because he failed to demonstrate “that he was in fact prejudiced by
the trial court’s ruling.” Id. In reaching this conclusion, we observed that
“[t]he record [was] unclear as to whether the defendant exercised all of his
peremptory challenges.” Id. Because of this, we noted, he was unable to
“demonstrate . . . that in fact the lack of information affected his decision
whether to exercise his peremptory challenges.” Id.
The defendant here seizes upon our observation that the record in
Goodale was unclear to argue that, in New Hampshire, reversal is required
when a party has exhausted its peremptory challenges. To the contrary,
Goodale stands for the proposition that, generally, in order to prevail on a
claim that a jury selection procedure violates due process under the State
Constitution, a defendant must demonstrate prejudice; prejudice is not
presumed.
42
The defendant’s reliance upon Brodowski and Anaya is similarly
unavailing. The error in Brodowski was the trial court’s failure to record ex
parte discussions with eight prospective jurors. Brodowski, 135 N.H. at 200-
01. The State argued that this error was harmless, but we disagreed. Id. at
201. We ruled that under the circumstances of that case, the State had failed
to show that the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Id. at 201-02.
The facts of Anaya are closer to the facts of the instant case. There, as in
this case, the defendant argued that the trial court had unsustainably
exercised its discretion when it failed to excuse a prospective juror for cause,
“thereby improperly forcing him to exercise a peremptory challenge.” Anaya,
131 N.H. at 331. We ruled that the defendant’s right to challenge and exclude
the juror was not impaired because, in failing to exhaust his peremptory
challenges, he did not suffer harm from the court’s decision. Id. Contrary to
the defendant’s assertions, Anaya establishes only that when a defendant has
not exhausted his peremptory challenges, he cannot show that a jury selection
error has caused harm. Anaya does not establish that when a defendant
exhausts his peremptory challenges to cure putative error by the trial court, no
further showing of harm is required.
Our decisions in Goodale, Brodowski, and Anaya are consistent with our
case law distinguishing structural errors, which require automatic reversal of a
defendant’s conviction, and trial errors, which do not. Under New Hampshire
law, “only such constitutional errors as necessarily render a trial
fundamentally unfair . . . require reversal without regard to the evidence in the
particular case.” State v. Williams, 133 N.H. 631, 634 (1990) (per curiam)
(quotation omitted). We term these “structural” errors because they “affect[ ]
the very framework in which a trial proceeds.” State v. Etienne, 163 N.H. 57,
79 (2011) (quotation omitted). When such an error occurs, “a criminal trial
cannot reliably serve its function as a vehicle for the determination of guilt or
innocence, and no criminal punishment may be regarded as fundamentally
fair.” Id. (quotation omitted); see Rivera v. Illinois, 556 U.S. 148, 160 (2009).
The harmless error doctrine does not apply to structural errors. See Etienne,
163 N.H. at 80.
Although we have not previously held that errors in jury selection
constitute trial errors, we have held that, generally, “if a defendant had counsel
and was tried by an impartial adjudicator, there is a strong presumption that
any other errors that may have occurred are subject to harmless-error
analysis.” Id. (quotations omitted). To decide that the putative error in this
case is a “structural” error compelling reversal of the defendant’s sentence
would conflict with this precedent. See Rivera, 556 U.S. at 160-61 (mistaken
denial of peremptory challenge was not a structural error requiring reversal).
Thus, even if the trial court had erred in denying the defendant’s challenges for
43
cause, reversal would not be warranted because he has failed to demonstrate
that he was prejudiced by any such error.
VI. GUILT PHASE REVIEW
The defendant raises two challenges regarding the guilt phase of trial.
First, he argues that the trial court erred in allowing the State to introduce
extensive evidence of the crimes that he committed during the week preceding
the murder. Second, he argues that the trial court provided an erroneous
reasonable doubt instruction to the jury when it modified the standard
instruction set forth in State v. Wentworth, 118 N.H. 832, 838-39 (1978).
Before addressing these claims of error, we provide, for context, an overview of
the guilt phase of the trial, including a summary of the evidence.
The guilt phase of the trial occurred over the course of approximately
eighteen days. The State presented its case-in-chief through numerous
exhibits, including photographs and forensic evidence from the three non-
capital criminal episodes involving the defendant that occurred in the six days
preceding the capital murder, and the testimony of more than forty witnesses.
The defense presented five witnesses, as well as several exhibits.
During his opening statement, the defendant, through counsel, stated
that he shot Officer Briggs recklessly with extreme indifference to the value of
human life, but not with the intent to commit capital murder as charged.
Therefore, the single issue before the jury during the guilt phase of the trial
was the defendant’s mental state at the time he shot Officer Briggs.
The State presented evidence of the following facts. The defendant and
Antoine Bell-Rogers met in 2006 and soon became close friends. By October
2006, they were spending time with Angela Swist and Teresia Shipley at
Shipley’s apartment on Central Street in Manchester. Ruth Schulz, who also
resided at the Central Street apartment, testified to a conversation with the
defendant in which he stated that if the police ever tried to arrest him, “it was
them or him, . . . F them, . . . it was going to go his way or no way,” and that “it
would be a shootout.” Another resident of the apartment recalled a
conversation with the defendant and Bell-Rogers during which the defendant
said that “[a]nybody that tried to stop [them], they were going to get it,” and
that the men “would pop out, a badge or no badge” because “they weren’t going
back [to jail].”
On October 10, Bell-Rogers introduced the defendant to his friend, Jeff
Hayes. That afternoon, they made plans to rob the owner of the El Mexicano
Restaurant in Manchester. They drove to a parking lot near the restaurant and
prepared for the robbery; Bell-Rogers loaded his gun, a .38 semiautomatic
pistol, and the defendant, a convicted felon, armed himself with a knife. Hayes
44
waited in the car while the defendant and Bell-Rogers entered the restaurant.
After several minutes, they came running back with Bell-Rogers holding the
gun.
Inside the car, the men recounted the robbery: Bell-Rogers stated that
he “had to pop a couple shots,” and the defendant said that he had robbed
someone inside the restaurant at knifepoint. Shortly after they fled the area,
the police arrived at the restaurant and learned that the shooter had
discharged a gun twice, once into the ceiling and once into the floor. The police
found two empty shell casings on the floor and a bullet lodged in the ceiling.
Hayes drove to the Central Street apartment where they discussed how
to divide the stolen jewelry. Later that evening, while the defendant, Hayes,
and Bell-Rogers were talking in an alley, Hayes expressed concern about being
outside and visible to the police. According to Hayes, the defendant replied
that “if the cops pulled up he would pop shots. He’d pop a cop.”
On October 11, the defendant, Bell-Rogers, Swist, and Shipley made
plans to commit another robbery. The defendant and Bell-Rogers discussed
who would carry the gun, which was the weapon that Bell-Rogers used during
the El Mexicano Restaurant robbery, and the defendant said he “would do it.”
The group traveled to a 7-Eleven convenience store in Hudson. Swist parked
near the store, and the two men left the car.
A clerk was alone in the store when the defendant and Bell-Rogers
entered shortly after 5:00 a.m. When the clerk approached the counter, the
defendant pointed a gun at her and said, “give me all your money.” Bell-Rogers
jumped over the counter, and the clerk opened the cash register. The
defendant stayed on the opposite side of the counter, holding the handgun
about an arm’s length away from the clerk’s face. The men then left with the
cash drawer. A surveillance camera inside the store recorded the robbery.
The defendant and Bell-Rogers returned to the car, and drove to
Shipley’s apartment. There, the defendant put the gun on a table, and the two
men started counting the stolen money. Bell-Rogers examined the gun and
commented that the weapon would not have discharged because “there was
something blocking it or it was stuck.” The two men then laughed. At some
point, the men asked each other what each would do if ever approached by the
police. The defendant stated that he would “pop a cop,” and Bell-Rogers
remarked that they “weren’t afraid . . . no one could get in their way.” While at
the Central Street apartment, the defendant handled Bell-Rogers’s gun; he
picked it up and held it for a couple of minutes before Bell-Rogers took it.
A few days after the 7-Eleven convenience store robbery, the defendant
participated in a shooting at a residential apartment complex on Edward J. Roy
45
Drive in Manchester. On the evening of October 14, the defendant and Bell-
Rogers went to a local club, along with a mutual friend, Paul Birely. At the
club, the defendant and Bell-Rogers fought with Bruce Edwards. The men
returned to the Central Street apartment “fired up,” and several hostile phone
calls were exchanged. Swist told the defendant that her brother (Dale Swist)
and Edwards had threatened to shoot at her home. The defendant and Bell-
Rogers both responded, “That ain’t going to happen. We’ll fight fire with fire.”
The defendant said, “f*** that, let’s take it to them.” The two men then told
Birely to go to the apartment complex and see if anybody was outside or
around the building. As they were leaving, Birely saw the defendant holding
Bell-Rogers’s gun while the defendant was walking down the stairway.
In the early morning hours of October 15, the group traveled in two cars
to the Roy Drive apartment complex. The defendant and Bell-Rogers were in
Swist’s car, along with Shipley and Kyarra Davis, another resident of the
Central Street apartment. Swist recalled that the defendant and Bell-Rogers
stated that they were going to kill her brother and Edwards.
Once at the Roy Drive apartment complex, the defendant and Bell-Rogers
left the car together and within minutes the women heard a series of gunshots.
The two men soon ran back to the car; Bell-Rogers had the gun, and the
defendant said, “I had to pull a Matrix.” Shipley understood this statement as
referring to a movie in which an individual “dodges the bullet,” and she testified
that the men acted “excited” or “amped up.” Swist recalled the men saying that
“they thought they got them” and she described the men as acting “angry but
excited in a way.” On the way back to the Central Street apartment, the
foursome saw several police vehicles, with lights and sirens activated, heading
toward the shooting scene. At the apartment complex, the police found shell
casings, bullet fragments in a parked car, a bullet lodged in the bedroom wall
of Swist’s father’s apartment, and a bullet lodged in the living room floor of
another apartment.
When they returned to the Central Street apartment, the defendant and
Bell-Rogers described the shooting, explaining to the group that “we popped at
them and then they popped back.” One of the men estimated that seventeen
shots had been fired. The defendant and Bell-Rogers left and spent the night
at another friend’s apartment.
Throughout the day of October 15, the police continued to investigate the
shooting and interviewed Swist, Shipley, and Davis. At one point, police
officers were inside the Central Street apartment speaking with some residents
when the defendant and Bell-Rogers arrived at the back alley in Swist’s car, the
same vehicle used in both the 7-Eleven robbery and the Roy Drive shooting.
Shipley met them in the alley where she warned them that the police were
looking for them. The men said, “We don’t give a f***. We’re out for blood.”
46
She saw the gun in Bell-Rogers’s lap and urged them to leave immediately. At
Shipley’s repeated insistence, the men drove away.
The defendant and Bell-Rogers later learned that Shipley and Swist had
spoken to the police. Shipley told the men that she had lied to the police. The
defendant and Bell-Rogers knew that Swist intended to return to the police
station that evening and told her “not to say anything.” The foursome then
made plans to leave the state.
That night, the defendant and Bell-Rogers met Jennifer Roman, one of
Bell-Rogers’s girlfriends. They returned to her Lake Avenue apartment at
approximately midnight, where Roman’s mother warned the defendant and
Bell-Rogers that the police were in the area looking for them. The men
responded, “You think we don’t know that?” The defendant later spoke to
someone on the telephone, stating repeatedly, “I’m not going down . . . I’m not
going back to jail.”
At some point, an argument erupted between Roman and Bell-Rogers,
which escalated to physical violence. Bell-Rogers threatened to kill Roman and
pointed his gun at her. The defendant pushed Bell-Rogers into the hallway,
where a single shot was fired. Roman’s mother slammed the door and heard
one of the men yell, “[P]ick up the shell casings. That’s evidence.” The men
then left the apartment building.
Roman’s mother immediately called the police, who soon arrived and
began interviewing occupants of the apartment and investigating the scene.
Officers Briggs and Breckinridge also responded to the dispatch call and
assisted in the investigation at the Lake Avenue apartment. During this time,
the defendant called Roman, who informed him that the police were at the
apartment.
When the defendant and Bell-Rogers left Roman’s apartment, they went
to Kelly Ann Grady’s nearby apartment. Before leaving Grady’s apartment
around 2:45 a.m., the defendant placed the gun in the waistband of his pants
with the handle sticking out and put his sweatshirt over it. The two men were
seen walking near Roman’s Lake Avenue apartment, passing by a vehicle
marked “Manchester Police.” They then entered the Litchfield Lane alley.
Meanwhile, Officers Briggs and Breckinridge left the Lake Avenue
apartment. As they were riding their bicycles by Litchfield Lane, they caught
sight of the defendant and Bell-Rogers walking in the alley. Officer Briggs
commanded, “Stop, Police!” Bell-Rogers stopped, but the defendant, with his
hood up and his hands out of sight near his waist, continued walking away,
slowing his pace. Officer Briggs issued the same “Stop, Police!” command twice
more while closing the gap between them. When Officer Briggs was within an
47
arm’s length, the defendant suddenly turned, with Bell-Rogers’s gun in both
hands, and fired one shot at Officer Briggs, hitting him in the side of his head.
The defendant then fled as police fired at him and several officers gave chase.
The defendant ran to the nearby apartment of a girlfriend, Jennifer
Joseph, and, along the way, discarded his red sweatshirt and threw the gun
into a backyard. He explained to Joseph that he and Bell-Rogers were walking
in an alley when a police officer called out to him and he immediately started
running. He told her that the gun “went off in his pocket,” that he threw the
weapon away in an alley, and that “a cop was shot.” He then called Roman,
telling her that “I just shot a cop,” and that she would never see him again.
The defendant stayed at Joseph’s apartment for the remainder of the night. In
the morning, the defendant, Joseph, and her sister drove to Massachusetts,
where the defendant was arrested that evening.
Within a few days of the murder, the police found the red sweatshirt that
the defendant had been wearing when he shot Officer Briggs, his cellular
telephone, and the gun that he had discarded. When the gun was found, it
was loaded, its safety mechanism was off, it was in a firing position, and it was
jammed. Forensic testing later matched the gun that the defendant used to kill
Officer Briggs to the evidence collected at the El Mexicano Restaurant robbery
and Roy Drive shooting scenes.
A. Rule 404(b) Prior Crimes Evidence
1. Background
The parties filed numerous motions in limine to determine the
admissibility of prior crimes evidence in each phase of the capital murder trial.
Regarding the guilt phase of the trial, the parties disputed the admissibility of
evidence of the defendant’s participation in the October 10, 2006 armed
robbery of the El Mexicano Restaurant, the October 11, 2006 armed robbery of
the 7-Eleven convenience store, and the October 15, 2006 Roy Drive shooting.
The State sought to introduce this evidence to establish, among other things,
the defendant’s motive to commit capital murder and his intent to do so. The
trial court permitted the proffered evidence to be introduced at the guilt phase
of the trial pursuant to New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 404(b). Generally
stated, Rule 404(b) precludes the admission of evidence of other crimes or
wrongs to prove a person’s propensity to act in conformity with such prior
actions, while permitting use of such evidence for other purposes, such as
proof of motive or intent. See N.H. R. Ev. 404(b).
On appeal, the defendant challenges three evidentiary rulings made by
the trial court regarding the guilt phase prior crimes evidence: one ruling was
issued by written decision on October 10, 2008, and two rulings were issued
48
from the bench during the guilt phase of the trial. We set forth the pertinent
pretrial procedural facts as context for the court’s pretrial ruling and the trial
procedural facts as context for the court’s bench rulings.
In August 2008, approximately six weeks before the guilt phase of the
trial, the parties filed cross-motions concerning the admissibility of the prior
crimes evidence under Rule 404(b). The State sought to admit evidence of the
defendant’s convicted felon status, his participation in the three October 2006
prior crimes, and his familiarity with the murder weapon. It presented an offer
of proof, outlining evidence that it contended demonstrated, among other
things, the defendant’s deliberate participation in the three prior crimes, his
knowledge that the police were pursuing him as a suspect in those crimes, and
his knowledge that the gun he possessed at the time of the shooting was linked
to forensic evidence left behind at two of the crime scenes. According to the
State, evidence of the three prior crimes was highly probative for several
legitimate, non-propensity purposes, including: motive to commit capital
murder; intent to do so; knowledge that Officer Briggs was a police officer; lack
of accident; opportunity and identity; and context for incriminating statements
that the defendant made prior to the shooting of Officer Briggs.
The defendant countered that the State should be precluded from
presenting the prior crimes evidence during its case-in-chief because its
probative value was diminished by other evidence available to the State.
Alternatively, he asserted that the evidence should be limited to certain events
that occurred on October 15 and a minimal presentation of the Roy Drive
shooting, arguing that no incremental probative value would be gained by
admitting additional evidence of the two armed robberies. While agreeing with
the premise that “the more serious the crimes for which someone is a suspect,
the greater the motive they have to flee,” he disputed that “a suspect who is
wanted for several crimes necessarily has any more motive to kill [a police]
officer.” He also informed the court that he would not assert that the shooting
was an accident or that Bell-Rogers was the shooter.
The trial judge, who had presided over the defendant’s three non-capital
felony trials, conducted a hearing on the parties’ motions in September 2008.
The State represented that it did not intend to retry the three prior crimes and
would limit the witnesses to the primary participants in those crimes and the
clerk of the 7-Eleven convenience store.
In advance of trial, the court issued a written order dated October 10,
2008, ruling that the State’s proffered evidence was highly probative as to the
defendant’s motive for shooting Officer Briggs, his intent in doing so, his
knowledge that Officer Briggs was a police officer, and his identity as the
gunman. It determined that evidence of the defendant’s recent criminal
conduct would not be unfairly prejudicial because the evidence would be
49
circumscribed in scope, a limiting instruction would be provided to the jury,
and the nature of the criminal acts was not likely to cause the jury to rest its
decision upon an improper basis of bad character or propensity. The trial
court also granted the State’s request to present evidence of the defendant’s
handling of Bell-Rogers’s gun during the two weeks prior to the shooting to
show, among other things, “his ability to operate the murder weapon and his
opportunity to do so.”
The day before the trial began, the court conducted a second hearing
during which it directed the State to limit evidence of the details of the crimes
to the issues identified in the court’s written order. At the hearing, the State
summarized the prior crimes evidence it intended to present during the guilt
phase of the trial, including forensic evidence collected at the El Mexicano
Restaurant and Roy Drive crime scenes. It also advised the court that it might
seek to show the jury the surveillance video recording of the 7-Eleven robbery.
Although defense counsel questioned the quantity of prior crimes evidence to
be admitted, he observed that “we’ll just have to see how things play out”
during trial.
On the first day of trial, the defendant, through counsel, informed the
court that he was conceding the issues of identity and causation, adding to his
pretrial notification that he would not claim that the shooting was an accident
or that Bell-Rogers was the shooter. The parties then presented opening
statements to the jury, setting forth their respective theories of the case.
In its opening statement, the State alleged that the defendant
intentionally and purposely killed Officer Briggs to evade capture by the police
because of his participation in a crime spree during the six days prior to the
murder. Specifically, the prosecutor outlined evidence that the defendant,
along with Bell-Rogers, had participated in the October 10 armed robbery of
the El Mexicano Restaurant, followed by the armed robbery of a 7-Eleven
convenience store several hours later on October 11, and then the Roy Drive
shooting on October 15. The State previewed evidence that the defendant had
been warned several times that the police were closing in on him for these
crimes, and that he acted brazenly and, on several occasions, made statements
threatening to shoot the police if ever approached by them. According to the
State, its evidence would show that when he was approached by Officer Briggs,
the defendant knew that, as a convicted felon, he was unlawfully carrying a
gun and, further, that it was the same gun involved in his three recent crimes.
Finally, the State described the circumstances immediately surrounding the
murder, including the defendant’s flight, to establish that the shooting was not
an accident, a mistake, or a reckless act.
In his opening statement, the defendant, through counsel, admitted that
he shot Officer Briggs recklessly with extreme indifference to the value of
50
human life. He stated that because he did not intend to commit capital
murder, the State had not charged him with the “right crime.” The defendant
developed various themes to support his position, including his lack of
familiarity with Bell-Rogers’s gun, and his benign motivation for taking
possession of it. Defense counsel explained that just prior to the shooting,
there had been an intense, violent fight between Bell-Rogers and his girlfriend,
and that the defendant had intervened and taken the gun from Bell-Rogers
who had threatened to shoot her. Thus, the defense asserted that the
defendant was trying “to prevent harm that night and not to cause harm.”
Defense counsel stated:
The State will ask you to believe that because Michael
Addison was being wanted for such serious crimes he had
not only the motive to flee the officer, but he had a specific
motive to intentionally kill the police officer. This we
dispute.
Michael Addison had Antoine Bell-Rogers’ gun because
Antoine Bell-Rogers was out of control. He had it for at most
forty-five minutes that entire day. He never fired this gun
except for the single fatal shot that took Officer Briggs’ life.
The defendant acknowledged that he had a reason to flee the police, that
he had participated in the Roy Drive shooting, and that the same gun was used
in both armed robberies and in the Lake Avenue apartment domestic
disturbance. Still, he argued that these facts did not show that he had a
motive to kill when he shot Officer Briggs. The defendant contended that he
had committed reckless murder with extreme indifference to the value of the
life of Officer Briggs, not capital murder.
Thus, the opening statements made clear that the defendant’s mens rea
was the dispositive issue in the guilt phase.
Before the guilt phase trial testimony began, the court provided the jury
with a lengthy limiting instruction on the jury’s use of the anticipated prior
crimes evidence during its deliberations on the capital murder charge. The
trial court gave a substantively identical limiting instruction again mid-trial
and as part of its final instructions at the guilt phase of the trial.
During its case-in-chief, the State presented nine witnesses to testify
regarding the three prior criminal episodes. Consistent with its pretrial
representations to the trial court, only one witness was a victim — the 7-Eleven
store clerk. Five witnesses were participants in one or more of the three crimes
or were witnesses to the events surrounding them: Jeffrey Hayes, Teresia
Shipley, Angela Swist, Ruth Schulz, and Paul Birely. Their testimony
51
established that the defendant had participated in both the planning and the
commission of the crimes, all of which involved the gun he later used to shoot
Officer Briggs. Finally, three police officers who had investigated either the El
Mexicano Restaurant or the Roy Drive crime scenes testified about the forensic
evidence found at those sites and referred to numerous photographs of the
crime scenes that illustrated where shell casings, bullet holes, and bullets were
found. The officers also referred to forensic evidence consisting of shell
casings, bullets, and bullet fragments admitted as trial exhibits.
During trial, the court issued two evidentiary rulings that the defendant
challenges on appeal. The first permitted the State to show the jury the
7-Eleven surveillance video recording of the armed robbery. The second
allowed the State to elicit testimony from Paul Birely that the defendant
possessed Bell-Rogers’s gun immediately before leaving the Central Street
apartment to go to the Roy Drive apartment complex.
On October 28, the seventh day of the trial, the court conducted a
hearing to address whether the State could play the 7-Eleven convenience store
surveillance video. The defendant objected, arguing that the video was the
kind of detailed evidence that he understood the trial court’s pretrial order to
exclude. According to the defendant, because the video showed him
committing a crime with a handgun, it constituted improper propensity
evidence and went far beyond the evidence necessary to establish that he knew
he was wanted for this robbery and, thus, had a motive to evade capture. He
argued that the jury would hear evidence through Teresia Shipley that he had
handled the same gun on a prior occasion and offered to stipulate that he was
the person holding the handgun during the 7-Eleven robbery.
The State countered that the video was admissible to rebut the
defendant’s theory that he possessed the gun at the time of the murder for the
sole purpose of keeping it away from Bell-Rogers and that he was unfamiliar
with it. It argued that the defendant’s offer to stipulate that he was holding the
gun during the robbery was inadequate because he was not conceding that he
was comfortable handling the weapon, and the video recording showed his
confidence in so doing.
After viewing the video outside the jury’s presence, the trial court ruled
that the defendant’s theory rendered it highly probative as to whether he used
the gun recklessly or knowingly when he shot Officer Briggs because the video
recording illustrated his comfort with, and knowledge of, the gun. In so ruling,
the court cited the defense theory that the defendant possessed the gun that
night merely to protect Bell-Rogers from himself and to protect Jennifer
Roman, he normally would not have had the gun, and he was not otherwise
familiar with the gun. The court found that the probative value of the video
was not outweighed by its prejudicial effect because the jury would hear about
52
the robbery through other evidence and the court would provide a limiting
instruction.
The State played the video during Shipley’s testimony, and she identified
the defendant as the man holding the gun. The video shows the following: the
store clerk was standing near the cash register when two men approached the
counter; Bell-Rogers jumped over the counter, while the defendant leaned on
the counter pointing the gun at the store clerk; Bell-Rogers made physical
contact with the store clerk, and she quickly moved away from the cash
register; Bell-Rogers took the cash drawer, and both men then left the camera’s
field of view. The video is less than one minute long, and the time during
which the defendant and Bell-Rogers are present in the video is even shorter.
On November 4, the twelfth day of the trial, the court conducted another
hearing because the State requested a ruling in advance of Paul Birely’s
testimony. The State sought to elicit testimony that Birely had observed the
defendant with Bell-Rogers’s gun in his possession at the Central Street
apartment just before the Roy Drive shooting. Although in a prior trial the
defendant had been acquitted of the charge that he possessed the gun at the
Roy Drive crime scene, the State sought to introduce Birely’s observation to
show the defendant’s knowledge of and ability to use the murder weapon. It
also sought to rebut the defense theory that the defendant possessed the gun
at the time of the murder merely to keep it away from Bell-Rogers, that he was
a novice with this handgun, and that Bell-Rogers ordinarily controlled the gun.
The defendant objected, arguing that the proffered testimony fell outside the
scope of the pretrial order and lacked probative value because the jury was
expected to hear testimony from Birely regarding the defendant’s other
activities with the gun.
The trial court rejected the defendant’s argument, ruling that the
probative value of the proffered testimony was not outweighed by the danger of
unfair prejudice. In so ruling, the court noted that the testimony expected
from Birely was similar to the testimony of other witnesses concerning the
defendant’s familiarity with and handling of Bell-Rogers’s gun. Accordingly,
Birely was permitted to testify that when the defendant was leaving the Central
Street apartment he was carrying Bell-Rogers’s gun.
2. Appellate Argument
The defendant argues that the trial court erred in permitting the State to
introduce during its case-in-chief an “unprecedented” amount of detailed
evidence of his October 2006 non-capital crimes. According to the defendant,
“[g]iven the risk of prejudice inherent in other crimes evidence, the admission
of too much evidence can lead to reversal just as surely as the admission of
‘inadmissible’ evidence, [and] [t]he trial court’s Rule 404(b) ruling is an example
53
of the former.” The defendant urges that the erroneous admission of the prior
crimes evidence violated New Hampshire Rules of Evidence 401, 403, and
404(b), as well as his State and Federal Constitutional rights to due process
and a fair trial, see N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 15; U.S. CONST. amends. V, XIV.
3. Discussion
We first consider whether the trial court unsustainably exercised its
discretion in admitting the challenged evidence under Rule 404(b). See State v.
Wamala, 158 N.H. 583, 592 (2009).
Rule 404(b) provides:
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not
admissible to prove the character of a person in order to
show that the person acted in conformity therewith. It may,
however, be admissible for other purposes, such as proof of
motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge,
identity, or absence of mistake or accident.
N.H. R. Ev. 404(b). The purpose of the rule is to ensure that an accused is
tried on the merits of the crime charged and to prevent a conviction that is
based upon propensity and character inferences drawn from evidence of other
crimes or wrongs. State v. Davidson, 163 N.H. 462, 469 (2012); State v.
McGlew, 139 N.H. 505, 509 (1995). This evidentiary rule is grounded in “long-
established notions of fair play and due process, which forbid judging a person
on the basis of innuendos arising from conduct which is irrelevant to the
charges for which he or she is presently standing trial.” State v. Melcher, 140
N.H. 823, 827 (1996) (quotations omitted).
Before evidence of other bad acts may be admitted at trial, the State
must demonstrate that: (1) such evidence is relevant for a purpose other than
proving the defendant’s character or disposition; (2) clear proof establishes that
the defendant committed the other bad acts; and (3) the probative value of the
evidence is not substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to
the defendant. Davidson, 163 N.H. at 469; State v. Beltran, 153 N.H. 643, 647
(2006). The trial court’s evidentiary decision under this three-prong test lies
within its sound discretion, and we will disturb its judgment only if the
defendant shows that the decision was clearly untenable or unreasonable to
the prejudice of his case. Davidson, 163 N.H. at 467. The trial court is well
positioned to evaluate the particulars of a case, and we accord considerable
deference to its conclusion as to the balance between probative worth and
prejudicial impact. State v. Smalley, 151 N.H. 193, 198 (2004). Only the first
and third prongs of the Rule 404(b) analysis are at issue in this appeal.
54
As to the first prong, in order to be relevant, other bad acts evidence
must have some direct bearing on an issue actually in dispute and have a clear
connection to the evidentiary purpose for which it is offered. Davidson, 163
N.H. at 469; see Beltran, 153 N.H. at 647-48. When a defendant objects to
other bad acts evidence, the State must identify the purpose for which the
evidence is offered and articulate the precise chain of reasoning by which the
offered evidence will tend to prove or disprove an issue actually in dispute,
without relying upon forbidden inferences of bad character or criminal
propensity. Davidson, 163 N.H. at 469; McGlew, 139 N.H. at 510. Should the
trial court rule the evidence admissible, it must articulate for the record the
theory upon which the evidence is admitted, without invoking propensity, and
explain precisely how the evidence relates to the disputed issue. Davidson,
163 N.H. at 469.
The third prong of the test requires the trial court to consider both the
probative value of the relevant evidence and the risk that such evidence will
inject unfair prejudice against the defendant into the trial process. State v.
Ericson, 159 N.H. 379, 389 (2009); Smalley, 151 N.H. at 199; McGlew, 139
N.H. at 510-11. Even when other bad acts evidence is relevant for a proper
purpose, its probative worth may be minimal. State v. Costello, 159 N.H. 113,
123 (2009); State v. Kim, 153 N.H. 322, 330 (2006). On the other hand, the
risk of unfair prejudice may be diminished by providing limiting instructions to
the jury. See Costello, 159 N.H. at 123.
Although “[t]he proper balancing of prejudice and probative value cannot
be reduced to formulae,” State v. Lesnick, 141 N.H. 121, 127 (1996), we have
identified several factors for the trial court to consider, including: “whether the
evidence would have a great emotional impact upon a jury” or great “potential
for appealing to a juror’s sense of resentment or outrage”; “the extent to which
the issue upon which it is offered is established by other evidence, stipulation,
or inference”; and “whether the evidence is relevant to prove an issue that is
actually in serious dispute.” Smalley, 151 N.H. at 198; see State v. Russell,
159 N.H. 475, 485 (2009); Costello, 159 N.H. at 123; Lesnick, 141 N.H. at 127.
We have repeatedly emphasized that whether the evidence is relevant to prove
an issue that is actually in serious dispute is particularly important to the
calculus. See State v. Cassavaugh, 161 N.H. 90, 98 (2010); Russell, 159 N.H.
at 485; State v. Brewster, 147 N.H. 645, 650 (2002).
a. Pretrial Ruling
Turning first to relevance and probative value, the trial court ruled:
That the defendant had committed very serious crimes
in the days preceding Officer Briggs’ murder, was a convicted
felon, and possessed the same gun when confronted by the
55
police on October 16 as was used in these prior offenses,
provide an explanation as to why the defendant did not stop
when Officer Briggs told him to and a motive to shoot Officer
Briggs and flee. The defendant’s motive is even clearer in
light of the evidence that he had learned hours before the
shooting that the police were looking for him as a suspect in
the armed robberies and the Edward J. Roy Drive shooting.
Because the defendant knew he faced many years of
imprisonment if apprehended by the police, he had a
powerful incentive to elude their grasp by whatever means.
This is the State’s theory of the case and the State is entitled
to introduce evidence to support its theory. For the same
reasons this evidence is relevant to prove motive, it is also
highly probative of the defendant’s intent to kill a police
officer, his knowledge that he was doing so, and his identity
as the shooter.
The trial court ascribed “very high” probative value to the proffered prior crimes
evidence on the issues of intent, motive, and knowledge. We discern no error
in these pretrial rulings.
When a culpable mens rea is an element of the charged offense and the
defense has not conceded the element, the issue of intent is sufficiently
disputed as to require evidence at trial. Cassavaugh, 161 N.H. at 97; Brewster,
147 N.H. at 649; cf. State v. Glodgett, 144 N.H. 687, 691-92 (2000) (holding
that other bad acts evidence was not admissible to show intent because the
defendant had specifically conceded the mens rea element when he informed
the court that it could omit that element from the jury instructions). “Because
persons rarely explain to others the inner workings of their minds or mental
processes, one’s culpable mental state must, in most cases, . . . be proven by
circumstantial evidence,” and the fact finder may draw relevant inferences on
the issue of intent from an accused’s conduct. State v. Sharon, 136 N.H. 764,
765-66 (1993); see Smalley, 151 N.H. at 199. Evidence of an accused’s other
bad acts may be critical to establishing the actor’s state of mind on the charged
offense, even though it also implicates criminal propensity or bad character.
Smalley, 151 N.H. at 199; Brewster, 147 N.H. at 649. When intent is in serious
dispute, the trial court is justified in assigning a high probative value to other
bad acts evidence that tends to prove criminal mens rea with respect to the
charged act. See State v. Ayer, 154 N.H. 500, 513 (2006).
Further, evidence of other bad acts that evinces an accused’s motive to
commit the charged crime is particularly relevant to the issue of intent. Kim,
153 N.H. at 327-28. Motive supplies the reason that “nudges the will and
prods the mind” to indulge criminal intent. Costello, 159 N.H. at 119; see also
State v. Palmer, 65 N.H. 216, 218 (1890); State v. Dearborn, 59 N.H. 348, 349
56
(1879). Although the reason why an individual commits a criminal act is not
an element of the charged offense, presenting motive evidence can help explain
to the jury why the accused would commit an otherwise senseless criminal act.
Kim, 153 N.H. at 328-29; see Costello, 159 N.H. at 121. Indeed, we have long
recognized that “[t]he absence or presence of a motive renders the alleged fact
less or more probable,” such that the lack of motive evidence operates as a
distinct disadvantage to the State and a corresponding advantage to the
defense regarding the issue of whether the accused committed the charged
crime. Palmer, 65 N.H. at 218-19; see Dearborn, 59 N.H. at 349. Therefore,
evidence of a defendant’s commission of other bad acts at or near the time of
the alleged offense often carries high probative value, even when those acts
constitute a crime. State v. Avery, 126 N.H. 208, 213 (1985); see State v.
Martineau, 116 N.H. 797, 798-99 (1976) (“[I]t is well established that where the
motive for the crime charged is the concealment of a prior crime, evidence of
the prior crime is admissible for the limited purpose of showing motive.”).
Here, to establish that the defendant committed capital murder, the
State was required to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant
knowingly caused the death of a law enforcement officer who was acting in the
line of duty. RSA 630:1, I(a) (2007) (amended 2011). “A person acts knowingly
with respect to conduct or to a circumstance that is a material element of an
offense when he is aware that his conduct is of such nature or that such
circumstance exists.” RSA 626:2, II(b) (2007). Thus, the prosecution had to
establish that when the defendant shot Officer Briggs on October 16, he was
aware that his actions would cause the death of a police officer who was acting
in the line of duty. Convincing a jury of this mens rea beyond a reasonable
doubt was a heavy burden, and we have recognized that “[t]he unlikelihood of
developing direct testimony on the defendant’s state of mind calls for
consideration of all proper proof that can be proffered by the prosecution.”
State v. Dushame, 136 N.H. 309, 317-18 (1992).
Two critical aspects of the defendant’s mens rea at the time he shot
Officer Briggs were his state of mind concerning his possession of Bell-Rogers’s
gun and his state of mind concerning his potential capture by the police. As
part of its evidence of intent, the State sought to establish that the defendant’s
participation in the recent crimes supplied the motive for knowingly killing a
police officer in order to evade capture.
The State asserted that the evidence, including the prior crimes evidence,
would establish that when confronted by Officer Briggs, the defendant knew
that, because he was a convicted felon, his possession of any gun was
unlawful. He also was aware that the gun he possessed was the gun used
during the two recent armed robberies and the Roy Drive shooting. The
defendant knew that his connection to those crimes would likely be discovered
if he were apprehended because he was aware that forensic evidence had been
57
left behind at two of the crime scenes. He further knew that the police were
looking for him in connection with the Roy Drive shooting and that the police
had spoken with Shipley and Swist.
As the trial court recognized, the State sought to introduce the prior
crimes evidence to establish not only that the defendant had a motive and
intent to evade the police when he fired the gun, but also that he had a motive
and intent to take extreme measures to avoid capture, including using deadly
force on any police officer who tried to apprehend him. The State’s proffered
evidence created a strong inference that the three prior crimes figured
prominently in the defendant’s mind when Officer Briggs confronted him.
Therefore, we conclude that on this record the trial court acted well within its
discretion when it ruled that evidence of the defendant’s participation in the
October 2006 non-capital crimes was highly probative of the State’s theory that
when he shot Officer Briggs, the defendant was aware that his actions would
cause the death of a law enforcement officer who was acting in the line of duty.
We reject the defendant’s argument that the trial court failed to
appreciate what he characterizes as other “ample evidence” available to the
State to prove the disputed issues of motive and intent. The other evidence
cited by the defendant, such as the events of October 15, did provide the jury
with some insight into aspects of his state of mind at the time of the shooting.
Nonetheless, the availability of this evidence does not undermine the trial
court’s determination that the challenged evidence regarding the defendant’s
participation in the three non-capital crimes was highly probative on the
disputed mens rea issue. See Smalley, 151 N.H. at 199 (holding that the bad
acts evidence added significant incremental probative value on the central
issue of the accused’s state of mind at the time of the murder, despite the
existence of other state of mind evidence in the case); State v. Cantara, 123
N.H. 737, 739 (1983) (“Although probative value might be reduced by the
availability of other evidence, there is no requirement that a prior conviction be
excluded simply because other evidence may be available on the same issue.”);
see also United States v. Sampson, 486 F.3d 13, 43 (1st Cir. 2007) (concluding
that “other means” available to the government to prove salient issues did not
diminish the highly probative value of prior crimes evidence because “within
reasonable limits, the prosecution — even in a capital case — is entitled to
present its case through the evidence it deems most appropriate”).
We have held that even when a defendant concedes the admissibility of
certain evidence of other bad acts, further details of the factual circumstances
surrounding those acts may be admitted if that evidence is probative of the
state of mind of the accused as to the charged crime. See Kim, 153 N.H. at
329-32 (holding that the defendant’s acquiescence to the admission of evidence
showing his dire financial situation did not diminish the probative value of
evidence detailing his financial deterioration to show his state of mind at the
58
time of the murders); cf. Beltran, 153 N.H. at 648-49 (holding that the
defendant’s decision not to challenge evidence that he abused his girlfriend did
not diminish the probative value of evidence detailing the specific
circumstances of this past abuse to show his girlfriend’s state of mind). Such
is the case here.
Nonetheless, the defendant argues that the trial court failed to appreciate
fully the prejudicial impact of providing a detailed account of his prior crimes.
He identifies three aspects of the prior crimes evidence as giving rise to unfair
prejudice: its content; its volume; and the manner in which the State used it.
In its pretrial ruling, the trial court concluded that:
Although the prior crimes and the capital murder
charge are similar in that they are acts of violence involving
guns, they are not so similar as to cause unfair prejudice to
the defendant. The evidence at issue in this motion is not
being introduced to appeal to the jury’s sympathies or to
arouse any other emotional reaction. Rather, it is being
introduced for the proper purpose of proving motive, intent,
knowledge and identity. These acts are not likely to cause
the jury to base its decision on something other than the
established propositions in the case.
(Citations and quotation omitted.) The court further stated that any prejudicial
effect would be minimized by its providing limiting instructions and
circumscribing the scope of the details to “explain, for example, the defendant’s
actions at the time of the shooting of Officer Briggs, his relationship with the
witnesses in this case, and that the gun used in the prior crimes was the same
as that used in the Briggs murder.” Again, we discern no error in this ruling.
“Evidence is unfairly prejudicial if its primary purpose or effect is to
appeal to a jury’s sympathies, arouse its sense of horror, or provoke its instinct
to punish, or trigger other mainsprings of human action that may cause a jury
to base its decision upon something other than the established propositions in
the case.” State v. Belonga, 163 N.H. 343, 360 (2012) (quotation omitted).
Unfairly prejudicial evidence “is not, however, evidence that is merely
detrimental to the defendant because it tends to prove his guilt.” Beltran, 153
N.H. at 649.
Among the factors germane to the unfair prejudice inquiry is the degree
of similarity, if any, between the other bad acts and the charged offense.
Belonga, 163 N.H. at 360; Beltran, 153 N.H. at 649. Generally, the greater the
similarity, the greater the potential for unfair prejudice. Belonga, 163 N.H. at
360; Kim, 153 N.H. at 331. The trial court must examine the nature of the
59
other bad acts evidence to determine whether it is inflammatory in a manner
that would arouse the emotions of a jury and cause the jury to decide the case
based upon emotion rather than reason. See Russell, 159 N.H. at 485;
McGlew, 139 N.H. at 510. Even when the nature of prior crimes evidence gives
rise to a significant potential for prejudice, however, that potential “is
frequently outweighed by the relevance of the evidence when a defendant’s
knowledge or intent is a contested issue in the case.” Smalley, 151 N.H. at
200; see Russell, 159 N.H. at 485.
With respect to the content of the prior crimes evidence, the defendant
contends that because the recent crimes were violent and similar in nature, the
evidence carried a greater risk of inviting the jury to convict him based upon
inferences about his character. We agree with the trial court that all three
prior crimes are serious, and, like the charged capital murder, are acts of
violence involving guns. Yet, the record supports the trial court’s conclusion
that the recent crimes are not so similar to the charged capital murder that the
danger of unfair prejudice substantially outweighed their probative value.
The defendant possessed the gun during only one of the prior crimes,
and the crimes did not involve violence comparable to the conduct alleged in
the capital murder charge. During the El Mexicano Restaurant robbery, for
instance, the defendant used a utility knife, not a gun, to threaten a customer
and steal jewelry and cash. In the Roy Drive shooting, Bell-Rogers was the
gunman. Furthermore, even though the defendant pointed a loaded gun at the
clerk during the 7-Eleven convenience store robbery, in contrast to the charged
capital murder, no physical violence occurred. In short, each of the three
crimes differed in significant ways from the capital murder charge.
The defendant also contends that the volume of the detailed recent
crimes evidence gave rise to unfair prejudice. He identifies approximately 168
transcript pages of direct examination testimony, as well as forty exhibits
pertaining to his prior non-capital crimes.
The trial court’s pretrial order allowed the State to present “only those
details of the prior crimes that were necessary to explain, for example, the
defendant’s actions at the time of the shooting of Officer Briggs, his
relationship to the witnesses in this case, and that the gun used in the prior
crimes was the same as that used in the Briggs murder.” We conclude that the
volume of transcript testimony and related exhibits admitted pursuant to that
order was not excessive. The 168 pages of transcript and forty exhibits
represent the evidence admitted during the direct testimony of nine witnesses
concerning the three serious non-capital crimes that involved different
participants, different investigating officers, and different locations. Indeed,
168 pages constitutes less than one day of trial testimony in the guilt phase
60
trial that lasted approximately three weeks and included more than forty
witnesses and numerous exhibits.
Our unfair prejudice analysis under the balancing prong of Rule 404(b)
generally focuses upon the content of the evidence, not its volume. Assuming,
without deciding, however, that the volume of prior crimes evidence, in and of
itself, may give rise to unfair prejudice, we conclude that the defendant has
failed to demonstrate that the evidence allowed by the trial court’s ruling was
unduly voluminous. The scope of the prior crimes evidence was consistent
with the State’s pretrial proffer, and the trial court’s decision to allow this
volume of evidence, as confined by the boundaries it established in its order,
fell within its sound discretion.
The defendant next contends that the manner in which the State actually
presented the prior crimes evidence created an undue risk that it would have a
great emotional impact and appeal to a juror’s sense of resentment. He cites
testimony that the State elicited from witnesses “implying that he enjoyed
committing the other crimes,” as well as the State’s discussion of the prior
crimes during its closing argument.
With respect to the trial testimony, the defendant gives examples of
Shipley and Swist describing his demeanor: he appeared unconcerned that a
patron was scared when he robbed him at knifepoint during the El Mexicano
Restaurant crime; he laughed when learning that the gun he pointed at the
7-Eleven store clerk was jammed; and he was excited about dodging bullets
during the Roy Drive shooting. The defendant’s challenge to this particular
testimony, however, was not preserved for appellate review. The demeanor
testimony upon which the defendant now bases his challenge to the trial
court’s pretrial evidentiary ruling was not expressly identified by the State’s
detailed proffer upon which the trial court relied when deciding to admit prior
crimes evidence, and, as the State notes, the defendant did not object at trial to
the demeanor testimony. See State v. Eaton, 162 N.H. 190, 195 (2011); State
v. Winward, 161 N.H. 533, 542 (2011).
Nonetheless, even assuming this challenge was preserved, we find no
reversible error. The challenged testimony consists of brief descriptions of the
defendant’s conduct and statements. These relatively minor aspects of the
prior crimes evidence provided insight into the defendant’s state of mind and
were not unfairly prejudicial.
The defendant also points out that the State “addressed the extrinsic
offenses” during its closing argument. While he does not challenge the State’s
closing remarks “as independently-preserved error,” the defendant urges us to
consider them when assessing the prejudicial impact of the prior crimes
evidence. Even assuming that the State’s closing remarks regarding the
61
challenged prior crimes evidence are pertinent to the third prong of the Rule
404(b) analysis, the defendant merely cites isolated pages of the transcript of
the State’s closing without developing any argument concerning the particular
points presented to the jury. See State v. Chick, 141 N.H. 503, 504 (1996). In
any event, the cited transcript pages show that the State complied with the
trial court’s orders limiting the use of the prior crimes evidence to the proper
purposes of establishing motive, intent, or knowledge. We conclude that the
State’s closing statements were not inflammatory and did not invite a verdict
based upon criminal propensity.
We further observe that the trial court provided a clear limiting
instruction to the jury as to the relevance and proper use of the prior crimes
evidence. See Ayer, 154 N.H. at 513 (whether the trial court provided a limiting
instruction is part of the evaluation of the Rule 404(b) balancing calculus).
Indeed, it instructed the jury three times on both the proper and improper uses
of the evidence, stating:
[Y]ou may not consider the evidence as it might reflect on
Michael Addison’s character. This trial is about Michael[ ]
Addison’s conduct when Officer Briggs was shot and Michael
Addison’s state of mind at the time of that conduct. Michael
Addison’s character is not on trial. You may not consider any
evidence, which reflects badly on Michael Addison’s
character, as evidence that Addison is more likely to have
committed capital murder.
Thus, while you may consider the prior crimes as
evidence of motive, intent, or knowledge, you may not
consider it as evidence that Michael Addison is the type of
person who was more likely to have knowingly shot a police
officer.
The evidence may only be considered as it relates to
Michael Addison’s state of mind at the time of the shooting,
not as it relates to his character or personality in general.
In sum, we reject the defendant’s argument that the content, volume,
and manner in which the State used the evidence gave rise to a danger of
unfair prejudice that substantially outweighed its probative value. Accordingly,
we hold that the defendant has failed to demonstrate that the trial court’s
pretrial ruling to admit the prior crimes evidence was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. See Davidson, 163 N.H. at 467.
Our holding is in keeping with the rulings of numerous courts in other
jurisdictions that have addressed such evidentiary issues in similar contexts.
62
See, e.g., Lesko v. Owens, 881 F.2d 44, 53-54 (3d Cir. 1989) (“Where the motive
of a killing is interference with law enforcement — in this case the most
extreme example, killing a policeman — the severity and circumstances of the
crime being hidden is highly probative.”); State v. Pearson, 943 P.2d 1347,
1351 (Utah 1997) (affirming decision to admit evidence of defendant’s prior
drug activities to prove motive and intent to commit aggravated murder of a
police officer because, among other things, “[t]he more reasons [the defendant]
had to kill the officer and thus evade capture and future dealings with law
enforcement, the more plausible was the State’s theory that he did so
intentionally rather than recklessly”); State v. Mallett, 732 S.W.2d 527, 535
(Mo. 1987) (en banc) (affirming trial court’s admission of detailed account of
defendant’s participation in an armed robbery about one month before the
commission of the charged first-degree murder of a police officer, emphasizing
that “[w]ide latitude is generally allowed in the development of evidence of
motive”).
b. Trial Rulings
We next address the defendant’s challenge to two bench rulings that the
court made during the guilt phase of the trial: the first ruling allowed the jury
to view the 7-Eleven surveillance video recording; and the second allowed Paul
Birely to testify that he saw the defendant in possession of the gun at the
Central Street apartment before the Roy Drive shooting.
The defendant first argues that the State unfairly changed its tactic at
trial regarding the expected use of the video. The record, however, shows that
the defendant was informed before trial that the State might seek to show the
video to the jury. Moreover, it was the defendant’s strategy — as it became
apparent during the trial — that prompted the State to seek admission of the
surveillance video. The trial court ruled that the video was highly probative of
whether the defendant recklessly or knowingly shot Officer Briggs. In so
ruling, the court cited the defense theory that the defendant was unfamiliar
with Bell-Rogers’s gun and possessed it at the time of the murder only to keep
it away from Bell-Rogers. We also reject the defendant’s argument that Birely’s
testimony fell outside of the State’s pretrial proffer. Again, the record shows
otherwise. In its pretrial offer of proof, the State outlined the anticipated
evidence that “the defendant handled the gun before they left Shipley and
Swist’s apartment while he and Bell Rogers discussed going over to [Roy] Drive
to shoot at Dale Swist and Bruce Edwards.”
The defendant next argues that the probative value of the video and
Birely’s testimony of his possession of Bell-Rogers’s gun at the Central Street
apartment was diminished by other evidence available to the State that
adequately showed his familiarity with the gun. For instance, the defendant
points to Swist’s testimony that Bell-Rogers and the defendant discussed who
63
would carry the gun during the 7-Eleven robbery, as well as to the testimony of
another witness, Kelly Ann Grady, that the defendant possessed the gun at her
apartment just prior to the murder. We reject the defendant’s challenge.
The defendant placed his state of mind squarely at issue at the inception
of the trial when he stated to the jury in his opening statement that his
shooting of Officer Briggs was a reckless act rather than one committed
knowingly and that he possessed Bell-Rogers’s gun at the time of the shooting
merely to protect others, not to cause harm. Throughout the trial, the
defendant developed themes that he had little prior experience with the gun
and that it was Bell-Rogers who was knowledgeable about and controlled the
weapon. The trial court referred to these defense themes in making its
evidentiary rulings, and the defendant did not assert that the court
mischaracterized his defense. Indeed, during one colloquy with the trial court,
defense counsel candidly acknowledged that the defendant’s knowledge of Bell-
Rogers’s firearm was “the most important issue in this case.” See Russell, 159
N.H. at 485 (emphasizing the importance under Rule 404(b) that bad acts
evidence be relevant to an issue in serious dispute).
We conclude that the trial court exercised sound discretion when ruling
that evidence of the defendant’s handling of the gun as depicted in the
7-Eleven surveillance video and of Birely’s observation at the Central Street
apartment before the Roy Drive shooting was highly probative of disputed
issues in the case. See State v. Hennessey, 142 N.H. 149, 156 (1997)
(concluding that the victim’s testimony about a pornographic video did not
eliminate the probative value of playing the video for the jury in order to convey
its graphic nature).
Regarding unfair prejudice, the defendant argues that “[s]howing the jury
a video of [him] committing another crime with a gun risked inspiring the kind
of emotion and outrage that” Rule 404(b) is intended to prevent. The video
shown to the jury, however, was brief — it lasted less than one minute and the
defendant appears on the screen for only a portion of that time. Moreover, his
participation in the armed robbery itself was already in evidence through
testimony of the store clerk, as well as that of Shipley and Swist. See id.
(affirming decision to allow display of pornographic video, in part, because it
was brief and the jury had already heard the victim’s testimony about the
video). We note that the defendant does not argue that Birely’s testimony had
an unfairly prejudicial impact on the jury.
Accordingly, we hold that the defendant has failed to demonstrate that
the trial court’s bench rulings to admit the video recording and Birely’s
testimony were clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.
See Davidson, 163 N.H. at 467.
64
The defendant argues in passing that the trial court’s rulings violated not
only Rule 404(b), but also New Hampshire Rules of Evidence 401 and 403, as
well as his due process rights to a fair trial under the State and Federal
Constitutions, see N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 15; U.S. CONST. amends V, XIV.
Our analysis under Rule 404(b) necessarily incorporates an analysis of the
import of Rules 401 and 403 as to those rulings. See Ayer, 154 N.H. at 512.
The defendant presented his constitutional arguments in a similarly cursory
fashion to the trial court, which, we assume, the court rejected even though it
did not expressly address them. The defendant’s constitutional arguments on
appeal are presented without developed legal argument apart from his Rule
404(b) argument. Accordingly, we conclude that these claims do not warrant
independent constitutional analysis. See id. at 513; see also Chick, 141 N.H.
at 504.
B. Reasonable Doubt Instruction
1. Background
Toward the end of the guilt phase of the trial, the court reviewed the final
jury instructions with counsel. The reasonable doubt instruction included a
sentence that is not part of the model reasonable doubt instruction set forth in
State v. Wentworth, 118 N.H. 832, 838-39 (1978). Defense counsel objected
and asked the court to give only the Wentworth instruction. The State,
however, argued that the reasonable doubt instruction with the challenged
sentence accurately reflected the case law on the definition of reasonable
doubt. The trial court overruled the defendant’s objection and gave the jury
the following reasonable doubt instruction at the conclusion of the guilt phase:
Under our Constitutions, all Defendants in criminal cases are
presumed to be innocent until proven guilty beyond a
reasonable doubt. The burden of proving guilt is entirely on
the State. The Defendant, Michael Addison, does not have to
prove his innocence.
. . . . Remember that the Defendant enters this
courtroom as an innocent person, and you must consider
him to be an innocent person until the State convinces you —
beyond a reasonable doubt — that he is guilty of every
element of the alleged offense.
Beyond a reasonable doubt does not mean that the
State must prove its case beyond all doubt or to a
mathematical certainty or demonstrate the complete
impossibility of innocence. Rather, a reasonable doubt is just
what the words would ordinarily imply. The use of the word
65
reasonable means simply that the doubt must be reasonable
rather than unreasonable. It must be a doubt based on
reason. It is not a frivolous or fanciful doubt, nor is it one
that can be easily explained away.
Rather, it is such a doubt based on reason as remains
after consideration of all of the evidence that the State has
offered against it. The test you must use is this. If you have
a reasonable doubt as to whether the State has proved any
one or more of the elements of the crime charged, you must
find the Defendant not guilty.
However, if you find that the State has proved all of the
elements of the offense charged beyond a reasonable doubt,
you should find the Defendant guilty. Your verdict must be
unanimous.
(Emphasis added.) The defendant’s challenge relates only to the inclusion of
the emphasized sentence.
2. Appellate Argument
The defendant argues that the trial court’s reasonable doubt instruction
impermissibly lowered the State’s burden of proof and thereby violated his
state and federal due process rights, entitling him to a new trial. See N.H.
CONST. pt. I, art. 15; U.S. CONST. amend. XIV.
3. Discussion
As the State notes, the defendant did not object to the trial court’s
preliminary jury instructions, which included the identical reasonable doubt
instruction that he challenges on appeal. We, however, assume without
deciding that his appellate argument was preserved by his objection to the final
instructions. See State v. Eaton, 162 N.H. 190, 195 (2011); State v. Winward,
161 N.H. 533, 542 (2011). We first address the defendant’s claim under the
State Constitution and rely upon federal law only to aid our analysis. See State
v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
Both the State and Federal Constitutions require the State to prove each
element of the crime charged beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Saunders,
164 N.H. 342, 349 (2012); see In re Winship, 397 U.S. 358, 364 (1970).
Neither the State nor the Federal Constitution “prohibits trial courts from
defining reasonable doubt” or “requires them to do so as a matter of course.”
Victor v. Nebraska, 511 U.S. 1, 5 (1994); see State v. Belkner, 117 N.H. 462,
471 (1977); State v. Slade, 116 N.H. 436, 439 (1976). “[S]o long as the court
66
instructs the jury on the necessity that the defendant’s guilt be proved beyond
a reasonable doubt,” the State and Federal Constitutions “do[ ] not require that
any particular form of words be used in advising the jury of the government’s
burden of proof.” Victor, 511 U.S. at 5; see Belkner, 117 N.H. at 471; Slade,
116 N.H. at 439. Rather, both constitutions require that the instructions,
“taken as a whole, . . . correctly convey the concept of reasonable doubt to the
jury.” Victor, 511 U.S. at 5 (quotation and brackets omitted); see Slade, 116
N.H. at 439. This means that the instructions must impress upon the jury the
need for it to reach a “subjective state of near certitude” as to the accused’s
guilt. Victor, 511 U.S. at 15; State v. Aubert, 120 N.H. 634, 637 (1980) (citing
Jackson v. Virginia, 443 U.S. 307, 315 (1979)). Although in Wentworth, we
suggested a model charge on reasonable doubt and, under our supervisory
authority, instructed trial courts to use it, we have never held that the model
Wentworth charge is constitutionally required. See Wentworth, 118 N.H. at
838-39.
We review a challenged reasonable doubt instruction in the context of the
overall jury charge. Saunders, 164 N.H. at 350; see Cupp v. Naughten, 414
U.S. 141, 146-47 (1973). “The constitutional question is whether there is a
reasonable likelihood that the jury understood the instructions to allow
conviction based on proof insufficient to meet” the reasonable doubt standard.
Saunders, 164 N.H. at 353 (quotation and ellipsis omitted); Victor, 511 U.S. at
6. “[T]he proper inquiry is not whether the instruction could have been applied
in an unconstitutional manner, but whether there is a reasonable likelihood
that the jury did so apply it.” Victor, 511 U.S at 6; see Saunders, 164 N.H. at
352-53. If there is a reasonable likelihood that the jury understood the
instructions to allow conviction based upon less than that required by the
“beyond a reasonable doubt” standard, then we must reverse the defendant’s
conviction. See Sullivan v. Louisiana, 508 U.S. 275, 278-82 (1993); State v.
Hall, 148 N.H. 394, 400 (2002).
The defendant argues that because “the trial court emphasized that the
State need not prove guilt ‘beyond all doubt’ or ‘to a mathematical certainty’
and that [it] need not ‘demonstrate the complete impossibility of innocence,’”
there was a reasonable likelihood that the jury believed that it could convict
him upon a lesser standard of proof than “beyond a reasonable doubt.” He
likens the instruction in this case to the instruction we held unconstitutional
in Aubert, 120 N.H. at 637-38.
In Aubert, the trial court added the following language to the model
Wentworth charge:
Now, it is not an object of this rule of proof to impose
upon you the duty of looking . . . or examining this evidence
in any strange, peculiar or extraordinary way. Nor is it
67
intended by this rule to impose upon the State an impossible
burden in establishing its case. It is a matter of common
knowledge to all of us that absolute positive certainty can
almost never be attained. But bear in mind, Members of the
Jury, that the State is not required to establish guilt beyond
all doubt. That is not the State’s burden. The State is not
required to establish guilt to a mathematical certainty. That
is not the State’s burden. Neither is the State required to
establish guilt to a scientific certainty. The State’s burden is
fully met when it has established guilt beyond a reasonable
doubt.
Id. at 636 (quotation and emphases omitted). We held that this paragraph
“overly favored the prosecution.” Id. We observed that the United States
Supreme Court has indicated that a reasonable doubt instruction should
impress upon the jury “the need to reach a ‘subjective state of near certitude.’”
Id. at 637 (quoting Jackson, 443 U.S. at 315). We concluded that the trial
court’s “repeated emphasis that the State need not establish guilt to a
mathematical certainty, and need not establish guilt to a scientific certainty,
and need not establish guilt beyond all doubt violated the spirit of that
standard.” Id.
Because the instruction we ruled unconstitutional in Aubert is similar to
that in Blaine v. United States, 18 A.3d 766 (D.C. 2011), we find Blaine
instructive. In Blaine, the trial court initially gave the jury the “standard”
reasonable doubt instruction which the District of Columbia Court of Appeals
had approved in Smith v. United States, 709 A.2d 78, 81 (D.C. 1998) (en banc).
Blaine, 18 A.3d at 769. That instruction stated the following:
Reasonable doubt is the kind of doubt that would
cause a reasonable person, after careful and thoughtful
reflection, to hesitate to act in the graver or more important
matters in life. However, it is not an imaginary doubt, nor a
doubt based on speculation or guesswork; it is a doubt based
upon reason. The government is not required to prove guilt
beyond all doubt, or to a mathematical or scientific certainty.
Its burden is to prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
Id. (quotation omitted and emphasis added); see Smith, 709 A.2d at 82.
In response to a jury question, the trial court again instructed the jury
on reasonable doubt, revising the final sentence of the instruction to say: “The
government never has to prove guilt beyond all doubt, they do not have to
prove guilt beyond a shadow of a doubt, they do not have to prove guilt to a
mathematical certainty, and they do not have to prove guilt to a scientific
68
certainty; they have to prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.” Blaine, 18 A.3d
at 771 (quotation omitted). The District of Columbia Court of Appeals ruled
that there was a reasonable likelihood that the jury understood the
reinstruction to impose a burden of proof lower than beyond a reasonable
doubt. Id. at 771, 779. Specifically, the court explained that “the reinstruction
became unbalanced from added weight on the government’s side created by an
extended rat-a-tat explaining of what reasonable doubt is ‘not.’” Id. at 779.
Even if the new language was not “itself . . . inherently a violation of due
process,” the court reasoned, “there is a reasonable likelihood that [it] conveyed
to the jury a lower standard of reasonable doubt than due process requires,
and that the jury came to its verdict accordingly.” Id.
In both Aubert and Blaine, the challenged reasonable doubt instructions
included an extended explanation of what reasonable doubt is not. In Aubert,
the trial court did not merely instruct the jury that the State need not establish
guilt beyond all doubt or to either a mathematical or scientific certainty.
Instead, the court’s instruction repeatedly emphasized what the State’s burden
was “not”: “[T]he State is not required to establish guilt beyond all doubt. That
is not the State’s burden. The State is not required to establish guilt to a
mathematical certainty. That is not the State’s burden. Neither is the State
required to establish guilt to a scientific certainty.” Aubert, 120 N.H. at 636
(quotation and emphases omitted). Similarly, in Blaine, instead of the “short
sentence in Smith — ‘The government is not required to prove guilt beyond all
doubt, or to a mathematical or scientific certainty’” — the trial court used “new,
. . . ‘more graphic,’ emphatic, and repetitive language” to explain the level of
doubt “the jurors need not have.” Blaine, 18 A.3d at 772-73, 779.
The challenged sentence in this case is like the “short sentence” in Smith
rather than the extended, repetitive explanations in Aubert and Blaine. Here,
in addition to the model Wentworth charge, the trial court stated the following:
“Beyond a reasonable doubt does not mean that the State must prove its case
beyond all doubt or to a mathematical certainty, or demonstrate the complete
impossibility of innocence.” Unlike the instructions in Aubert and Blaine, the
trial court’s instruction neither repeated nor excessively emphasized what was
not the State’s burden. We also note that the challenged sentence in this case
is nearly identical to language approved in other jurisdictions. See, e.g., Com.
v. Gartner, 381 A.2d 114, 122 (Pa. 1977); Laird v. Horn, 159 F. Supp. 2d 58,
90-92 (E.D. Pa. 2001) (approving charge on habeas review in capital case),
aff’d, 414 F.3d 419 (3d Cir. 2005).
Moreover, throughout the jury charge, the trial court repeatedly
emphasized the State’s duty to prove the defendant’s guilt beyond a reasonable
doubt. It mentioned the State’s burden of proof more than ten times. See
United States v. Van Anh, 523 F.3d 43, 58 (1st Cir. 2008) (instruction adequate
when, among other things, district court referenced government’s burden ten
69
times). The court also repeatedly underscored the presumption of innocence
afforded to the defendant. In addition to the presumption of innocence
language in the model Wentworth charge, the trial court instructed the jury:
“The seriousness of this crime has no bearing on the presumption of innocence
. . . . [W]hether a Defendant is charged with a very serious crime — or a minor
offense — he is presumed innocent.” The court further instructed the jury:
“[S]imply because you were asked questions about the death penalty does not
affect your obligation to presume the Defendant innocent of capital murder.”
See id.; see also United States v. O’Shea, 426 F.3d 475, 483 (1st Cir. 2005)
(instruction adequate when district court “gave a careful and cogent discussion
of the presumption of innocence”).
Viewing the charge as a whole, we hold that there is no reasonable
likelihood that the jury understood the challenged instruction as allowing it to
convict the defendant based upon proof less than that required by the “beyond
a reasonable doubt” standard. Saunders, 164 N.H. at 353. Because the
Federal Constitution affords the defendant no greater protection than does the
State Constitution in these circumstances, we reach the same conclusion
under the Federal Constitution as we do under the State Constitution. See
Victor, 511 U.S. at 5.
“We emphasize that courts must exercise the utmost care when
instructing a jury as to reasonable doubt.” Van Anh, 523 F.3d at 59. We
reiterate our view that there are few circumstances that would justify adding to
the model Wentworth charge. See Aubert, 120 N.H. at 637-38.
VII. SENTENCING PHASE REVIEW
The defendant raises several arguments relating to the eligibility and
sentence selection phases of the capital murder trial. His assignments of error
involve: (1) the exclusion of his custodial statement; (2) the admission of victim
impact evidence; (3) the admission of evidence on conditions of confinement
and rejection of evidence of and jury instruction on mode of execution; (4) the
admission of prior crimes evidence; and (5) the scope of the State’s closing
argument. As background, we provide an overview of the defendant’s
sentencing, identifying the alleged aggravating factors, certain proposed
mitigating factors, and the jury’s findings.
The State’s amended death penalty notice identified four statutory
aggravating factors and fourteen non-statutory aggravating factors in support
of the requested sentence of death. See RSA 630:5, I(b) (2007). The first three
statutory aggravating factors focused upon the mens rea of “purposely”
required for death eligibility, see RSA 630:5, IV, VII(a) (2007), alleging:
70
A. Michael K. Addison, purposely killed Manchester Police
Officer Michael L. Briggs; and/or
B. Michael K. Addison purposely inflicted serious bodily injury
which resulted in the death of Manchester Police Officer
Michael L. Briggs; and/or
C. Michael K. Addison purposely engaged in conduct which:
i. the defendant knew would create a grave risk of death
to a person, other than one of the participants in the
offense; and
ii. resulted in the death of Manchester Police Officer
Michael L. Briggs.
See RSA 630:5, VII(a). Proof of only one of these alternative statutory
aggravating factors was necessary to establish the “purposely” mens rea
required for death eligibility. See RSA 630:5, IV. The fourth statutory
aggravating factor relating to death eligibility focused upon the defendant’s
purpose for committing the crime, alleging that:
Michael K. Addison murdered Manchester Police Officer
Michael L. Briggs for the purpose of avoiding or preventing a
lawful arrest or effecting an escape from lawful custody.
See RSA 630:5, VII(j) (2007). These statutory aggravating factors alleging the
defendant’s eligibility to receive a death sentence were included in the grand
jury indictment.
The fourteen non-statutory aggravating factors pertained to the
defendant’s prior serious acts of violence, other prior serious criminal behavior,
and potential future dangerousness, as well as aspects of the capital murder
and the impact of the murder on Officer Briggs’s family. The first five alleged
non-statutory aggravating factors related to the defendant’s criminal conduct
from 1996 to 2003:
1. Other Serious Acts of Violence: Assault and Battery and
Threatening to Commit a Crime. On or about August 10,
1996, in South Boston, Massachusetts, the defendant,
Michael K. Addison, did assault and beat Cheryl Kiser
and threaten to commit a crime against her by saying he
would kill her. The defendant, Michael K. Addison, pled
delinquent to these two offenses on January 5, 1999.
71
2. Other Serious Acts of Violence: Assault with Intent to
Kill, Assault and Battery and Possession of a Firearm
without a Permit. On or about December 6, 1996, in
Dorchester, Massachusetts, the defendant, Michael K.
Addison, struck a male victim (M.A.) in the head and
then pointed an unlicensed loaded revolver at the victim
and pulled the trigger twice. The gun did not fire. The
defendant, Michael K. Addison pled guilty and was
convicted of these three offenses on July 21, 1997.
3. Other Serious Acts of Violence: Armed Robbery and
Two Counts of Assault and Battery with a Dangerous
Weapon (knife and shod foot). On or about March 20,
1997, in Roxbury, Massachusetts, the defendant,
Michael K. Addison, was armed with a dangerous
weapon (a knife) and assaulted Tredaine Purdy with
intent to rob him, and did rob and steal from the person
of Tredaine Purdy a hat, which was the property of
Tredaine Purdy. The defendant, Michael K. Addison,
also committed two counts of assault and battery upon
Tredaine Purdy by means of dangerous weapons, by
stabbing Purdy in the back with a knife and kicking
Purdy while he was on the ground with his shod foot.
The defendant, Michael K. Addison pled guilty and was
convicted of these three offenses on December 3, 1997.
4. Other Serious Criminal Behavior: False Imprisonment.
On or about October 27, 2003, in Londonderry, New
Hampshire, the defendant, Michael K. Addison, acting
in concert with Mathys Morgan, knowingly confined
Brian St. Peter unlawfully as to interfere substantially
with his physical movements, by keeping him inside a
locked vehicle. The defendant, Michael K. Addison, pled
guilty and was convicted of this offense on November 4,
2003.
5. Other Serious Criminal Behavior: Probation Violation.
On or about October 27, 2003, in Londonderry, New
Hampshire, the defendant, Michael K. Addison, violated
the terms of his probation by committing the crime of
false imprisonment. On August 6, 2004, the defendant,
Michael K. Addison, stipulated to the violation of
probation and was found in violation by the Court.
72
The next five alleged non-statutory aggravating factors related to the
three October 2006 non-capital criminal incidents:
6. Other Serious Criminal Behavior: Armed Robbery. The
defendant, Michael K. Addison, committed armed
robbery when he and his accomplices/co-conspirators,
including Antoine Bell Rogers, robbed customers of the
El Mexicano Restaurant in Manchester, New Hampshire
on or about October 10, 2006. A jury convicted Michael
K. Addison of this offense on February 27, 2008.
7. Other Serious Criminal Behavior: Felon in Possession.
The defendant, Michael K. Addison, was a felon in
possession of a deadly weapon when he committed the
armed robbery of the El Mexicano Restaurant in
Manchester, New Hampshire with his accomplices/co-
conspirators, including Antoine Bell Rogers, on or about
October 10, 2006. A jury convicted Michael K. Addison
of this offense on February 27, 2008.
8. Other Serious Criminal Behavior: Armed Robbery and
Conspiracy to Commit Robbery. The defendant,
Michael K. Addison, agreed to rob a store and then
committed armed robbery with a firearm when he and
his accomplices/co-conspirators, including Antoine Bell
Rogers, robbed the 7-Eleven Store in Hudson, New
Hampshire on or about October 11, 2006. A jury
convicted Michael K. Addison of these offenses on
December 19, 2007.
9. Other Serious Criminal Behavior: Felon in Possession.
The defendant, Michael K. Addison, was a felon in
possession of a firearm when he committed the armed
robbery of the 7-Eleven Store with his accomplices/co-
conspirators, including Antoine Bell Rogers, on or about
October 11, 2006, in Hudson, New Hampshire. A jury
convicted Michael K. Addison of this offense on
December 19, 2007.
10. Other Serious Criminal Behavior: Accomplice to
Reckless Conduct With a Firearm and Conspiracy to
Commit Criminal Threatening. The defendant, Michael
K. Addison, was involved in an incident on or about
October 15, 2006, where he and his accomplice/co-
conspirator Antoine Bell-Rogers agreed to threaten
73
people in a residence and Bell-Rogers, acting in concert
with and aided by the defendant, Michael K. Addison,
discharged a firearm outside a residence located at 345
Edward J. Roy Drive in Manchester, New Hampshire. A
jury convicted Michael K. Addison of these two offenses
on November 29, 2007.
We refer to these ten alleged non-statutory aggravating factors relating to the
defendant’s prior criminal history as the “prior crimes non-statutory
aggravating factors.”
Non-statutory aggravating factors eleven and twelve related to aspects of
the defendant’s conduct with respect to the murder:
11. Other Serious Criminal Behavior: Felon in Possession.
The defendant, Michael K. Addison, was a felon in
possession of a firearm, when he committed the murder
of Manchester Police Officer Michael L. Briggs in
Manchester, New Hampshire on or about October 16,
2006.
12. Other Serious Criminal Behavior: Reckless Conduct.
On or about October 16, 2006, the defendant, Michael
K. Addison, placed or may have placed another in
danger of serious bodily injury by disposing of the
firearm he used to murder Manchester Police Officer
Michael L. Briggs by leaving it outside in a
neighborhood in Manchester, New Hampshire.
The last two alleged non-statutory aggravating factors pertained to the
defendant’s potential future dangerousness and the impact of the murder upon
the family of Officer Briggs:
13. Future Dangerousness of the Defendant: The
defendant, Michael K. Addison, is likely to commit
criminal acts of violence in the future which would be a
continuing and serious threat to others in prison. In
addition to the charged offense of capital murder and
the statutory and non-statutory aggravating factors
alleged in this Notice, the defendant, Michael K.
Addison, has engaged in a continuing pattern of
criminal and violent conduct, has threatened others
with violence and has demonstrated low rehabilitative
potential.
74
14. Victim Impact Evidence: The defendant caused injury,
harm, and loss to the family of Manchester Police
Officer Michael L. Briggs because of the victim’s
personal characteristics as an individual human being
and the impact of the death upon the victim’s family.
The murder of Officer Michael L. Briggs has caused the
Briggs family extreme emotional suffering, and the
victim’s family has suffered severe and irreparable
harm.
The defendant identified twenty-eight mitigating factors, including the
circumstances of the crime and his background and character. The only
submitted mitigating factors that relate to the issues on appeal were:
(1) If the defendant is not sentenced to death, he will be
automatically, as a matter of law, sentenced to life in
prison without the possibility of release.
(2) The defendant attempted to plead guilty to Capital
Murder but his offer was rejected by the State.
(4) The circumstances of the homicide did not involve torture
or protracted cruelty.
(8) During his two years of pre-trial confinement, the
defendant has committed no crimes and his behavior has
demonstrated his potential to adjust well in a secure
prison setting.
At the eligibility phase of trial, the jury considered whether the State had
proven the existence of the charged statutory aggravating factors. See RSA
630:5, III, IV (2007). At the sentence selection phase of trial, the jury
considered, among other things, whether the State had proven the noticed non-
statutory aggravating factors, and whether the defendant had proven mitigating
factors. See RSA 630:5, IV (outlining the parties’ respective burdens of proof).
Ultimately, the jury unanimously found that the State had proven beyond a
reasonable doubt all but two of the eighteen aggravating factors alleged by the
State. The two factors that the State failed to prove were: (1) the statutory
aggravating factor charging that the defendant “purposely killed” Officer Briggs;
and (2) the non-statutory aggravating factor alleging the future dangerousness
of the defendant. Regarding the mitigating factors submitted by the defendant,
the Special Verdict Form shows that he proved by a preponderance of the
evidence sixteen of the twenty-eight factors to the satisfaction of at least one
juror. With respect to the mitigating factors set forth above, factor one (life
75
without parole) was found proven, but factors two (plea offer), four (lack of
torture or protracted cruelty), and eight (prison adjustment) were not.
The trial court required the State to choose between the two proven mens
rea statutory aggravating factors for the jury to consider when deciding
whether to impose a sentence of death at the close of the sentence selection
phase. The State selected the proven factor that the defendant purposely
inflicted serious bodily injury which resulted in Officer Briggs’s death, and the
court instructed the jury accordingly. Thus, jurors considered fifteen proven
aggravating factors and sixteen proven mitigating factors, along with the rest of
the evidence, when determining the defendant’s sentence. The jury’s findings
and verdict are recorded on a Special Verdict Form included in Appendix B.
Before addressing the appellate issues, we set forth the evidentiary
standard applicable to capital sentencing hearings. RSA 630:5, III provides, in
pertinent part:
When a defendant is found guilty of or pleads guilty to
the offense of capital murder, no presentence report shall be
prepared. In the sentencing hearing, information may be
presented as to matters relating to any of the aggravating or
mitigating factors set forth in paragraphs VI and VII, or any
other mitigating factor or any other aggravating factor for
which notice has been provided under subparagraph I(b).
Where information is presented relating to any of the
aggravating factors set forth in paragraph VII, information
may be presented relating to any other aggravating factor for
which notice has been provided under subparagraph I(b).
Information presented may include the trial transcript and
exhibits if the hearing is held before a jury or judge not
present during the trial, or at the trial judge’s discretion. Any
other information relevant to such mitigating or aggravating
factors may be presented by either the state or the defendant,
regardless of its admissibility under the rules governing
admission of evidence at criminal trials, except that
information may be excluded if its probative value is
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice,
confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury. The state and
the defendant shall be permitted to rebut any information
received at the hearing and shall be given fair opportunity to
present argument as to the adequacy of the information to
establish the existence of any of the aggravating or mitigating
factors and as to appropriateness in that case of imposing a
sentence of death.
76
RSA 630:5, III. Although RSA 630:5 refers to “information” presented at
sentencing rather than “evidence,” we use these terms interchangeably.
Under the statute, the threshold for admissibility of evidence is whether
the information “relat[es] to” or is “relevant to” an aggravating or mitigating
factor. Although the New Hampshire Rules of Evidence do not control the
admission of evidence in capital sentencing hearings, we conclude that
relevance under RSA 630:5, III is determined by the standard set forth in New
Hampshire Rule of Evidence 401. See United States v. Lujan, 603 F.3d 850,
854 (10th Cir. 2010) (relevance under Federal Death Penalty Act, 18 U.S.C.
§§ 3591 et seq. (2006) (FDPA), is the same standard as used by federal courts
under Federal Rule of Evidence 401); United States v. Basham, 561 F.3d 302,
331-32 (4th Cir. 2009) (same). Thus, under RSA 630:5, III, proffered
information is admissible in a capital sentencing hearing if it has “any
tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the
determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be
without the evidence.” N.H. R. Ev. 401. Notably, the statute presumes that
guilt phase evidence constitutes relevant sentencing information because such
evidence involves the circumstances of the capital murder itself. See RSA
630:5, III; see also RSA 630:5, II (2007) (“The [sentencing] hearing shall be
conducted . . . [b]efore the jury which determined the defendant’s guilt,” unless
circumstances warrant a separate jury being impaneled.).
If the relevance threshold is met, the trial court retains the discretion
under RSA 630:5, III to exclude proffered information “if its probative value is
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the
issues, or misleading the jury.” This standard is similar to New Hampshire
Rule of Evidence 403 in that both RSA 630:5, III and Rule 403 allow for the
exclusion of relevant evidence only when the probative value is “substantially
outweighed” by the identified dangers. See N.H. R. Ev. 403; cf. United States v.
Sampson, 486 F.3d 13, 42 (1st Cir. 2007) (under the FDPA, information may
be excluded if its probative value is “outweighed,” rather than “substantially
outweighed”).
The standard in RSA 630:5, III differs from the standard in Rule 403,
however, in that the Rule allows for the exclusion of evidence if “its probative
value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion
of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by considerations of undue delay,
waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence.” N.H. R. Ev.
403. By contrast, RSA 630:5, III identifies only “the danger of unfair prejudice,
confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury.” We interpret the legislature’s
decision to not include within RSA 630:5, III considerations such as undue
delay, waste of time, or cumulative evidence, as permitting the admission of
more relevant capital sentencing information, rather than less. This
construction is in keeping with established capital sentencing jurisprudence.
77
See Jurek v. Texas, 428 U.S. 262, 276 (1976) (“What is essential is that the
jury have before it all possible relevant information about the individual
defendant whose fate it must determine.”); Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153, 204
(1976) (In a capital sentencing hearing, “it [is] desirable for the jury to have as
much information before it as possible when it makes the sentencing
decision.”); see also Lockett v. Ohio, 438 U.S. 586, 601-03 (1978) (plurality
opinion). As we have previously determined, “in enacting the current death
penalty statutory scheme, the legislature intended to incorporate the then-
existing jurisprudential background of the United States Supreme Court, and
we will interpret the statutory scheme accordingly.” State v. Addison, 160 N.H.
732, 755 (2010).
We consider the factors bearing upon admission of information under
RSA 630:5, III, including relevance, unfair prejudice, and pertinent statutory
language, in the context of each of the evidentiary challenges raised by the
defendant. In so doing, we are mindful that the sentencing phase of a capital
trial fundamentally differs from the guilt phase of a capital trial during which a
defendant is presumed innocent until and unless the State proves guilt of the
charged capital murder beyond a reasonable doubt. Thus, evidence that would
be inadmissible at the guilt phase of a capital trial as irrelevant or unfairly
prejudicial may be properly admitted during capital sentencing, at which the
jury must evaluate aggravating and mitigating factors bearing upon the
defendant’s character and the circumstances of the capital murder. See RSA
630:5; see also Tuilaepa v. California, 512 U.S. 967, 972 (1994); Payne v.
Tennessee, 501 U.S. 808, 820-21 (1991); United States v. Fell, 360 F.3d 135,
143 (2d Cir. 2004); State v. Johns, 34 S.W.3d 93, 113 (Mo. 2000).
We review the trial court’s evidentiary decisions in a capital sentencing
proceeding under our unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. See State
v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001); see also Sampson, 486 F.3d at 42 (when
considering a defendant’s challenges to an evidentiary ruling rendered in a
capital sentencing proceeding under the FDPA, appellate court “review[s]
adequately preserved objections to rulings admitting or excluding evidence for
abuse of discretion”). Accordingly, the defendant bears the burden on appeal
to establish that the trial court’s evidentiary decision was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Lambert, 147 N.H. at 296.
A. Eligibility Phase Trial
The defendant raises a single claim of error regarding the eligibility phase
of sentencing. Specifically, he contends that the trial court erred in denying
his motion to admit his previously suppressed custodial statement. We provide
an overview of the eligibility phase and then address this appellate argument.
78
During the eligibility phase of trial, the jury considered only whether the
State had proven beyond a reasonable doubt the existence of the statutory
aggravating factors necessary to establish that the defendant was eligible to
receive the death penalty. See RSA 630:5, III, IV. This phase lasted one day
and largely rested upon the evidence presented during the capital murder trial.
See RSA 630:5, II, III (2007).
Detective Stacy Howe was the only witness to testify at the eligibility
phase. He explained that on the night of October 15, 2006, he was
investigating the Roy Drive shooting and obtained arrest warrants for the
defendant and Bell-Rogers at approximately 12:40 a.m. on October 16. He
testified that if Officer Briggs had succeeded in stopping the defendant, he
could have been arrested on the outstanding warrant, as well as on charges of
having an unlicensed firearm and of being a felon in possession of a firearm.
In addition, the parties stipulated that the defendant previously had served
prison sentences totaling four years, three months, and twenty-four days.
The court instructed the jury that its task at the eligibility phase was to
determine whether the State had proven each of the charged statutory
aggravating factors beyond a reasonable doubt and not to decide the sentence.
The court identified the four charged statutory aggravating factors at issue in
the case, and explained the legal parameters for the jury’s determination of
these factors. It also informed the jury that “[a]lmost all of the evidence
relevant to the four eligibility factors was presented at trial,” and, thus, the
jurors “may consider any of that evidence in deciding whether the State has
proven that the defendant is eligible for the death penalty.” The court provided
the jury with a Special Findings Form on which to record its findings.
After the parties presented closing arguments, the jury deliberated for
approximately four hours and returned findings that the State had proven
three of the four charged statutory aggravating factors. Specifically, it found
that the defendant: (1) purposely inflicted serious bodily injury that resulted in
the death of Officer Briggs; (2) purposely engaged in conduct that he knew
would create a grave risk of death to another and that resulted in the death of
Officer Briggs; and (3) murdered Officer Briggs for the purpose of avoiding or
preventing a lawful arrest or effecting an escape from lawful custody. The
completed Special Findings Form is included in Appendix A. The jury’s
findings rendered the defendant eligible for the death penalty, see RSA 630:5,
IV, and the trial proceeded to the sentence selection phase.
79
1. Addison’s Statement
a. Background
Soon after the defendant’s arrest on October 16, 2006, he provided a
three-hour audio-recorded statement to two Manchester detectives. Neither
party introduced any portion of his statement at the guilt phase of the trial
because the trial court had granted the defendant’s pretrial motion to
suppress. The court ruled that the interrogation was conducted in violation of
the defendant’s rights under Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966), “because
he invoked his right to counsel and his request . . . was not scrupulously
honored.” This ruling related only to the guilt phase of the trial, and the
defendant, in anticipation of sentencing, subsequently moved to admit the
statement. Following a hearing, the trial court denied the defendant’s motion
by written order dated November 14, 2008. The procedural context for the
ruling, challenged on appeal, is as follows.
Prior to trial, in April 2008, the defendant moved to bifurcate the
sentencing hearing. He proposed that the initial phase of sentencing address
“only whether the State [was] able to establish ‘death eligibility’ by proving
statutory aggravating factors beyond a reasonable doubt.” If the jury found
him “death eligible,” the defendant proposed “a second hearing in which the
jury [would] consider all other aggravating and mitigating evidence before
deciding whether to impose a sentence of life in prison without parole or
death.”
This request for bifurcation was based upon the defendant’s concern
“that evidence which might be generally relevant to prove non-statutory
aggravating factors,” such as evidence of character and propensity, was
“irrelevant and inadmissible to prove statutory aggravating factors, such as the
‘element’ of ‘purposeful’ conduct.” He argued that his “constitutional rights
[would] be violated if the issue of death eligibility [was] merged with the
ultimate decision of whether to impose a life sentence or the death penalty”
because “[i]n a non-bifurcated sentencing hearing, victim impact evidence,
character evidence, and other irrelevant factors [would] taint the jury’s
consideration of whether [he] acted ‘purposely’ and whether he [was] death
eligible.” (Quotation omitted.)
The defendant contended that support for a bifurcated hearing was
found in RSA 630:5, III (2007), which authorizes the trial court to exclude
evidence at sentencing if its “probative value is substantially outweighed by the
danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury.”
RSA 630:5, III. According to the defendant, at the sentence selection phase the
State would “attempt to demonstrate that prior crimes, prior acts of violence
and future dangerousness constitute[d] evidence of a character so bad, and
80
propensity so great, that life without parole [was] not a sufficient punishment.”
Because “[s]uch evidence ha[d] no bearing on the statutory aggravating factors
which address mental state at the time of the crime,” the defendant argued
that “with regard to the statutory aggravating factors, such evidence must be
disregarded by the jury because its probative value is substantially outweighed
by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues or misleading the
jury.” (Quotation omitted.)
The defendant further argued that evidence of prior bad acts lacked
probative value on the question of his intent, was “inherently prejudicial and
increase[d] the likelihood that a jury [would] decide the case on an improper
basis,” and would “tend to improperly influence a jury to believe that the
homicide was committed purposely.” (Quotation omitted.) In addition, he
argued that allowing evidence of prior crimes at the eligibility phase would
mislead the jury in that it would “appear appropriate for the jury to make its
determination regarding ‘purposely’ by considering evidence of propensity,” and
cause confusion because “[h]aving heard evidence of prior bad acts, . . . jurors
[would] be unable to disregard that evidence when deciding whether the crime
was committed ‘purposely.’”
The State objected and, following a hearing, the trial court granted the
defendant’s motion by written order dated July 1, 2008. The court found
persuasive that federal courts interpreting the FDPA, “upon which RSA 630:5
is largely modeled, have found that it allows bifurcation and have uniformly
granted requests to bifurcate.” The trial court expressed its concern “that if all
eligibility and [sentence] selection evidence [was] presented together, the jury
[would] consider information relating to the non-statutory aggravating factors
in deciding whether the statutory aggravators exist, even though such
information might not be relevant to eligibility.”
During the following month, the parties litigated several evidentiary
matters relating to the guilt and the eligibility phases of trial. For instance, the
parties sought rulings upon the admissibility of evidence of the October 2006
non-capital crimes the defendant committed in the week preceding the murder,
other crimes he had committed during his juvenile and young adult years from
1996-2003, and other uncharged misconduct or conduct purportedly related to
his character. In some of his pleadings, the defendant took the position that
admitting the challenged evidence in the eligibility phase of trial would run
counter to the purpose of bifurcation. For instance, he argued that bifurcation
was granted to address the “concern that if the eligibility and sentence
selection phases were consolidated, the sentence selection evidence would
make it difficult for the jury to rationally and dispassionately make findings on
the precisely framed statutory aggravating factors, where much of the
supporting evidence surrounds the circumstances of the offense.”
81
Similarly, in objecting to the admission of evidence of the October 2006
non-capital crimes, the defendant asserted in relation to the eligibility phase,
that “it [was] not necessary to convey to the jury a broader scope of criminal
activity than the Roy Drive charge, and that evidence of the 7-Eleven and El
Mexicano robberies need not be admitted.” In support, the defendant referred
to the hearing on his motion to bifurcate the sentencing phase at which “the
Court expressed its concern that if too much of this detail came into evidence
during the first phase of sentencing, [it] would frustrate the primary purpose of
bifurcation, which was to insure reasoned and dispassionate consideration of
the statutory aggravators.”
From mid-October through early November, 2008, the trial court issued
several orders ruling that some of the challenged evidence was admissible and
excluding other evidence. For example, the court granted the State’s request to
introduce at the guilt phase evidence of the October 2006 non-capital crimes,
with limitations. The court, however, precluded the State from introducing at
the eligibility phase evidence of the defendant’s 1996-2003 criminal conduct,
ruling that under RSA 630:5, III, such evidence was “not relevant to the
statutory aggravating factors,” had “minimal probative value,” and gave rise to
“the high danger of unfair prejudice or confusion of the issues.” The trial court
observed that “[a]dmitting this evidence would also undermine the purpose of
bifurcating the sentencing hearing into eligibility and sentencing phases.”
With respect to some of its orders on the evidentiary scope of the
eligibility phase, the court noted that the State did not intend to introduce
certain challenged evidence unless the admission of such evidence became
necessary for rebuttal, impeachment, or cross-examination, or unless the
defense otherwise opened the door to its admissibility. The court also issued a
written order dated November 7, concerning closing arguments in the eligibility
phase of sentencing. In that order, the trial court reiterated that it had
“bifurcated the sentencing hearing to minimize the risk that the jury would
consider any information relating to the non-statutory aggravating factors in
deciding whether the statutory aggravators exist.” The court explained that it
“agreed with the defendant’s argument that evidence of character, background,
prior crimes or acts of violence, and the impact of the homicide on victims
[would] be so unfairly prejudicial and misleading that bifurcation of the
sentencing process [was the] only way to insure the proper consideration of
such evidence.” (Quotation and brackets omitted.)
Shortly thereafter, on November 12, the defendant moved to admit his
previously suppressed statement as evidence at the eligibility and sentence
selection phases of trial. The defendant argued that, at sentencing, the rules of
evidence do not apply and, thus, “[t]he only limiting principles are overriding
constitutional considerations (e.g., due process and confrontation), and a
balancing test similar to that contemplated under [New Hampshire] Rule [of
82
Evidence] 403.” See RSA 630:5, III. The defendant, however, noted that
although “RSA 630:5 erects no barrier to the presentation of hearsay evidence
otherwise barred by the rules of evidence[,] . . . [o]ne prerequisite to admission
of what may otherwise be hearsay is reliability.”
According to the defendant, his statement was “highly probative of [his]
mental state at the time he shot Officer Briggs, which [was] the chief inquiry in
[the eligibility] phase of the proceeding.” Although the defendant conceded that
if he chose to play part of the audio-tape of his statement, “the State [could]
play any of the rest of it,” he disagreed that by introducing his statement “he
open[ed] the door to any and all conceivable, extrinsic evidence.”
In its response, the State did not object to the defendant offering his
statement, but argued that its admission was subject to: “reasonable
measures by the Court to prevent prejudice to the State from the defendant’s
tactical decision”; “any information to which the evidentiary door is opened by
that choice”; and “the State’s statutory right of rebuttal.” The State asserted
that “if the defendant offer[ed] his self[-]serving statement, the evidence the
State [would seek] to admit would specifically contradict the claims he makes
. . . about his good character, his knowledge and use of firearms, his . . .
remorse, and his account of how the murder happened.” According to the
State,
[t]hroughout the confession the defendant insisted that he
did not “purposely” shoot Officer Briggs. The interview is
replete [with] examples where the defendant specifically tried
to convince the detectives that he did not “purposely” shoot
[Officer] Briggs and that he did not even know that the police
were behind him when he pulled the trigger of the gun. He
offered various stories about why he was not the type of
person who would “purposely” shoot a police officer. The
defense wants the jury to believe the defendant’s assertions
that he did not act “purposely.” It is essential for the jury to
understand the full scope of the defendant’s lies to the police
in which he tried to convince them that he was not the type of
person who was a “stone cold killer” or a “cop killer” in order
for them to properly evaluate his claim that he would not
“purposely” murder a police officer because he was not that
type of person.
The State offered numerous examples to “highlight how admitting the
suppressed statement would completely undermine the goals of [bifurcation] by
opening the door to virtually all of the defendant’s past criminal conduct and
character.” The State argued that it would seek to admit evidence rebutting
each of the defendant’s claims in his recorded statement, including his
83
assertions that: he was not the type of person who would shoot a police officer;
he did not “purposely” murder Officer Briggs because he did not believe in
violence; he was not violent; he was inexperienced with guns; and if he pulled
the trigger it must have been an accident.
At a hearing on the defendant’s motion, the trial court expressed its
concern, having listened to the audio-tape, that the statement was not reliable.
The court stated, “Even though the rules of evidence don’t apply, evidence has
got to meet a threshold level of reliability. And . . . you’re focusing in on one
statement in there — or one aspect of [the defendant’s] statement — that he
didn’t do it on purpose.” The court further observed: “But obviously, . . . his
confession to the police has so many . . . statements that are contradicted by
your own . . . positions that you took at trial or — or what you admit
happened. That on their face they’re lies.” Defense counsel agreed that
“[t]here’s no question that . . . a great number of statements that [the
defendant] made to the police were lies,” and that “obviously, the Court as
gatekeeper, has to make sure that any evidence — regardless of whom it’s
introduced by — has a threshold level of reliability.” However, defense counsel
argued, “In the end, there is some truth to what [the defendant is] saying. He
is admitting to being the person who killed Officer Briggs on that day. It is
relevant. It is reliable to enough of a degree . . . to meet the threshold of . . .
reliability that should attach to this phase.”
The trial court denied the defendant’s motion with regard to the eligibility
phase of sentencing by written order dated November 14, 2008. The court
reasoned that the balancing test set forth in RSA 630:5, III authorized it to
“‘control the evidence and make assurances that the evidence sought to be
presented [was] reliable and fair,’” quoting United States v. Rodriguez, 380
F. Supp. 2d 1041, 1054 (D.N.D. 2005), aff’d, 581 F.3d 775 (8th Cir. 2009). The
court reasoned that “[i]f evidence is not relevant and reliable, it is not
probative.” The court explained: “‘To determine the probative value or risk of
unfair prejudice associated with any information, this court must consider its
reliability. Hearsay evidence which is determined to be highly unreliable
cannot provide particularly probative support for an aggravating factor and
may present a significantly increased risk of unfair prejudice due to its
superficial credibility,’” quoting United States v. Pretlow, 779 F. Supp. 758, 771
n.7 (D.N.J. 1991) (brackets and ellipsis omitted). The court stated that the
defendant’s statement contained proven lies:
[T]he defendant first denied that he was involved in any way in
the shooting of Officer Briggs. He blamed Antoine Bell-Rogers.
He then told the detectives that he had loaned his red
sweatshirt to a friend of Antoine Bell-Rogers, implying that
this other person was the shooter. Later, he admitted
shooting someone, although he denied knowing this person
84
was a police officer, but told the detectives that it was an
accident because the safety was not engaged and the gun
went off when he grabbed it as it fell out of his pocket.
Finding that the defendant’s statements to the detectives that he did not
act “purposely” were “inadmissible because they [did] not meet even a
threshold level of reliability,” the trial court concluded that his custodial
statement had “minimal probative value of his state of mind when he shot
Officer Briggs” and that the “low probative value of these statements [was]
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfairly prejudicing the State,
confusing the issues and misleading the jury in the eligibility phase.” As the
trial court stated: “These concerns [were] heightened here because, although
the defendant’s statements [were] hearsay, he [sought] to introduce them for
their truth.” The court further stated: “Their admission would also entitle[ ]
the State to introduce relevant evidence to rebut the defendant’s statements
which would result in an undue waste of time.”
b. Appellate Argument
The defendant argues that the trial court erred “in reading RSA 630:5, III
as empowering it to make a ‘reliability’ determination” and “in finding not
credible the aspects of the statement the defense sought to introduce.” He
argues that “if the court correctly interpreted the statute to empower it to
exclude evidence on the basis claimed here,” the statute would violate his
rights under the State and Federal Constitutions. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, arts.
15, 18, 33; U.S. CONST. amends. V, VI, VIII, XIV.
c. Discussion
We note at the outset that the trial court limited its ruling to the
eligibility phase of the sentencing trial, stating that “[i]f the parties wish to
admit this evidence in the sentencing phase, they must file separate motions.”
Despite acknowledging in his brief that the trial court “limited the effect of its
ruling to the eligibility phase,” the defendant argues that “[t]he logic of the
court’s ruling . . . would apply equally to the sentence selection phase.”
However, at oral argument before us, the defendant conceded that he did not
seek admission of his statement at the sentence selection phase and, thus,
limited his argument to the eligibility phase. Accordingly, we review this issue
only as to the eligibility phase of sentencing. Because we decide cases on
constitutional grounds only when necessary, we first address the defendant’s
statutory argument. See State v. Wamala, 158 N.H. 583, 592 (2009).
The defendant argues that the trial court exceeded its authority under
RSA 630:5, III when it found that his statement was unreliable, because the
statute “does not use the word ‘reliability’ in describing the trial court’s
85
evidentiary gate-keeping function.” As the State correctly observes, the
defendant did not preserve this argument by raising it in the trial court. See
State v. Eaton, 162 N.H. 190, 195 (2011); State v. Winward, 161 N.H. 533, 542
(2011). Nonetheless, even assuming that it was preserved, we conclude that
the argument is unavailing.
Under the plain language of RSA 630:5, III, information must have
probative value to be admissible. Further the statute expressly authorizes the
trial court to exclude information that does not satisfy a balancing test:
Information “may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed
by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the
jury.” Because the reliability of sentencing information affects its probative
value, see Pretlow, 779 F. Supp. at 771 n.7, assessing its reliability is a
necessary part of the trial court’s function under RSA 630:5, III.
We find persuasive the numerous federal cases interpreting analogous
language in the Federal Death Penalty Act, 18 U.S.C. §§ 3591 et seq. (2006)
(FDPA). Section 3593(c) of the FDPA sets forth the evidentiary standard that
applies during the sentencing phase of a capital trial, providing in part:
PROOF OF MITIGATING AND AGGRAVATING FACTORS. —
. . . . The defendant may present any information relevant to
a mitigating factor. The government may present any
information relevant to an aggravating factor for which notice
has been provided . . . . Information is admissible regardless
of its admissibility under the rules governing admission of
evidence at criminal trials except that information may be
excluded if its probative value is outweighed by the danger of
creating unfair prejudice, confusing the issues, or misleading
the jury.
18 U.S.C. § 3593(c) (2006) (emphasis added). Federal courts interpreting this
provision have held that it “does not eliminate [the] function of the judge as
gatekeeper of constitutionally permissible evidence; nor does it alter or
eliminate the constitutional baseline for the admissibility of evidence in a
criminal trial.” United States v. Fell, 360 F.3d 135, 145 (2d Cir. 2004)
(quotation omitted). “To the contrary, . . . judges continue their role as
evidentiary gatekeepers and, pursuant to the balancing test set forth in [the
statute], retain the discretion to exclude any type of unreliable or prejudicial
evidence that might render a trial fundamentally unfair.” Id. (quotation and
brackets omitted); see United States v. Davis, 609 F.3d 663, 678 (5th Cir.
2010); see also Oregon v. Guzek, 546 U.S. 517, 526 (2006) (“The Eighth
Amendment does not deprive the State of its authority to set reasonable limits
86
upon the evidence a defendant can submit, and to control the manner in which
it is submitted.”).
The defendant argues that mitigating evidence is not subject to exclusion
based upon threshold reliability because, in a capital case, the defendant
should be allowed to “introduce any relevant mitigating evidence.” See
California v. Brown, 479 U.S. 538, 541 (1987). The plain language of RSA
630:5, III, however, authorizes the trial court to perform its traditional
evidentiary gatekeeping function with respect to both relevant aggravating and
mitigating evidence. See RSA 630:5, III (“[a]ny . . . information relevant to . . .
mitigating or aggravating factors . . . may be excluded if its probative value is
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the
issues, or misleading the jury” (emphasis added)); cf. United States v. Fell, 531
F.3d 197, 219 (2d Cir. 2008) (affirming trial court’s exclusion of proffered
mitigation evidence, noting that “the FDPA’s evidentiary standards do not mean
that the defense has carte blanche to introduce any and all evidence that it
wishes” (quotation omitted)). Accordingly, we conclude that, under RSA 630:5,
III, trial courts have discretion to exclude proffered evidence that is
demonstrably unreliable. See State v. Sullivan, 142 N.H. 399, 402 (1997)
(sentencing court properly rejected as unreliable evidence “unsubstantiated,
unverified statements” made in a probation report (quotation omitted)); State v.
Taylor, 139 N.H. 96, 102 (1994) (trial court properly found evidence satisfied
requisite level of reliability); State v. Rodrigue, 127 N.H. 496, 500 (1985) (“A
judge exercises wide discretion in choosing the sources and types of evidence
on which to rely in imposing sentence.”).
The defendant contends, however, that even if the statute allows the trial
court to exclude unreliable evidence, the court “erred in making that finding
with regard to the parts of [his] statement[ ] proffered by the defense,” arguing:
In the eligibility phase, the defense sought to introduce
[the defendant’s] statements denying that, in shooting the
gun, he had a purpose to kill or injure anyone. It is true that,
in his custodial statement, [he] initially made other denials —
of being present and of firing the fatal shot — that later he
effectively recanted by admitting to holding the gun at the
time of the shooting. However, the defense sought to admit
only [the defendant’s] final, not-recanted statement denying
that he had purposely shot Briggs. Insofar as [he] did not
recant that statement, the court had no sufficient basis to
find it so incredible as to be unreliable.
(Citation omitted.)
87
In excluding the defendant’s statement, the trial court found that it was
replete with proven lies, that his statements that he did not act “purposely” did
not meet even a threshold level of reliability and had minimal probative value of
his state of mind when he shot Officer Briggs, and that these concerns were
heightened because the defendant’s statements were hearsay offered for their
truth. “Hearsay is an out-of-court statement offered in evidence to prove the
truth of the matter asserted. In general, such extrajudicial statements, which
are not made under oath or subject to cross-examination, are less trustworthy
than those made in court.” State v. Cole, 139 N.H. 246, 249 (1994) (citation
omitted); see N.H. R. Ev. 801(c).
The value of hearsay evidence rests upon the credibility of the
out-of-court asserter. . . . [S]elf-serving statements or
conversations between a defendant and third parties
subsequent to the commission of the crime are not competent
evidence. The rationale underlying this exclusion is that the
credibility of the defendant is suspect and his statements are
not reliable in light of the defendant’s motive to fabricate
testimony favorable to his innocence.
People v. Edwards, 579 N.E.2d 336, 357-58 (Ill. 1991) (quotation and citations
omitted); see State v. Johnson, 145 N.H. 647, 649 (2000) (holding that trial
court erred by admitting videotaped statement when evidence of declarant’s
motive to lie was strong).
“[T]he sentencing court has broad discretion to accept even hearsay
evidence at sentencing as long as the court concludes, with proper support,
that the information has sufficient indicia of trustworthiness to warrant a
finding of [its] probable accuracy.” United States v. Riccio, 529 F.3d 40, 47 (1st
Cir. 2008), modified on other grounds by United States v. Riccio, 567 F.3d 39
(1st Cir. 2009). “[W]hen hearsay evidence does not bear the indicia of reliability
. . . it may properly be excluded even when offered in mitigation.” Lawlor v.
Com., 738 S.E.2d 847, 878 (Va. 2013), cert. denied, 82 U.S.L.W. 3214 (U.S.
Oct. 15, 2013) (No. 13-167).
As defense counsel conceded, “[t]here’s no question that there are a great
number of statements that [the defendant made] to the police [that] were lies,”
and that during the defendant’s three-hour custodial interview he “sa[id] a lot
of things [to the police] that [were] absolutely, positively untrue.” In addition,
the trial court found that many of the defendant’s statements during his
custodial interview by the police were contradicted by positions he later took at
trial and his subsequent admissions about the murder. Cf. Green v. Georgia,
442 U.S. 95, 97 (1979). We have reviewed the record and conclude that it
supports the trial court’s determination that, in its entirety, the defendant’s
out-of-court statement lacked threshold reliability such that its probative value
88
was minimal and substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice,
confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury at the eligibility phase. See RSA
630:5, III.
Accordingly, we hold that the defendant has not established that the trial
court’s exclusion of his custodial statement at the eligibility phase of
sentencing constituted an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
The defendant also raises a number of constitutional challenges to the
trial court’s ruling in a cursory fashion. He asserts that, to the extent that RSA
630:5, III “allows a trial court to exclude mitigating evidence proffered by a
capital defendant in the sentencing phase on the ground that the court finds
the evidence not credible,” the statute violates his state and federal
constitutional rights to: (1) due process; (2) trial by jury; (3) present all proofs
favorable; and (4) freedom from cruel and/or unusual punishments. See N.H.
CONST. pt. I, arts. 15, 18, 33; U.S. CONST. amends. V, VI, VIII, XIV. The
defendant presented these constitutional arguments to the trial court in a
similarly cursory fashion, which we assume the court rejected even though it
did not expressly address them. The defendant’s constitutional arguments are
presented without adequately developed legal argument apart from his
argument under RSA 630:5, III. Accordingly, we conclude that these
perfunctory claims do not warrant independent constitutional analysis. See
State v. Ayer, 154 N.H. 500, 513 (2006); State v. Chick, 141 N.H. 503, 504
(1996).
B. Sentence Selection Phase Trial
The defendant asserts several claims of error regarding the sentence
selection phase of the trial. Specifically, he challenges: (1) the admission of
victim impact evidence; (2) the admission of evidence of conditions of
confinement and rejection of his proposed evidence of and jury instruction on
mode of execution; (3) the admission of prior crimes evidence; and (4) the scope
of the State’s closing argument. We provide an overview of the sentence
selection phase and then address his appellate arguments.
At the final phase of trial, the jury’s tasks included: first, determining
whether the State had proven the noticed non-statutory aggravating factors;
second, determining whether the defendant had proven mitigating factors,
including those he submitted; and third, determining, based upon
consideration of all of the evidence, “whether the aggravating factors found to
exist sufficiently outweigh[ed] any mitigating factor or factors found to exist, or
in the absence of mitigating factors, whether the aggravating factors [were]
themselves sufficient to justify a sentence of death.” RSA 630:5, IV (2007).
The sentence selection phase, beginning with preliminary jury instructions,
lasted approximately thirteen trial days. More than fifty witnesses testified,
89
including Officer Briggs’s widow and other family members, police officers,
witnesses to the defendant’s prior criminal conduct, experts, and the
defendant’s family members. Also, numerous exhibits were admitted,
including photographs, the defendant’s criminal and juvenile history records,
and the surveillance video from the 7-Eleven robbery.
After closing arguments, the trial court gave the jury final instructions,
explaining the law regarding aggravating and mitigating factors and the
imposition of a sentence of death or life imprisonment without possibility of
parole. “[D]etermining the existence of an aggravating or mitigating factor,” the
court instructed, required the jurors “to decide whether the facts and
circumstances alleged [were] true, and if so, whether those facts or
circumstances [had] aggravating or mitigating value.” It instructed the jury
that “aggravating or mitigating value” meant that “those facts or circumstances
tend to show that the defendant was deserving of a death sentence or a
sentence of life without the possibility of parole.” The court also instructed
that “[a] mitigating factor is a fact about the defendant’s life or character or
about the circumstances surrounding the murder of Officer Briggs that would
suggest in fairness and justice that a sentence of life in prison without
possibility of parole is a more appropriate punishment than death.”
The court explained the parties’ respective burdens of proof, including
that the State had the burden of proving beyond a reasonable doubt the
existence of the noticed non-statutory aggravating factors and that the
defendant had the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence the
existence of mitigating factors. The court outlined the statutory aggravating
factors that the jury had previously found to be proven at the eligibility phase,
the noticed non-statutory aggravating factors, and the mitigating factors
submitted by the defendant, explaining that the defendant was “not required to
assert any mitigating factors, but [had] elected to do so.” The court informed
the jury that it could rely upon any evidence presented during each of the three
phases of the trial when deciding the existence of non-statutory aggravating
factors and mitigating factors.
The court also explained that the existence of aggravating factors
required a unanimous finding beyond a reasonable doubt, but that “all twelve
jurors [did] not have to agree as to the existence of a mitigating factor in order
to consider it [during] deliberations.” It instructed the jury that any juror who
individually found a mitigating factor to exist by a preponderance of the
evidence must consider that mitigating factor in deciding the sentence,
regardless of whether other jurors agreed that the particular mitigating factor
had been proven, or whether the defense had relied upon that factor during
trial. The court further instructed the jury that, of the two alternative mens rea
statutory aggravating factors found proven at the eligibility phase, it was
permitted to consider only one in determining the sentence — that “the
90
defendant purposely inflicted serious bodily injury that resulted in the death of
Officer Briggs.”
The court next instructed the jury that after determining the existence of
both aggravating and mitigating factors, each juror was “required to weigh in
[his or her] own mind the proven factors to decide the appropriate sentence.” It
explained, among other things, that the weighing process consisted of deciding
“whether the proven aggravating factors sufficiently outweigh[ed] any proven
mitigating factors, or if no mitigating factors [were] found, whether the proven
aggravating factors [were] sufficient in themselves to justify a sentence of
death.” The court explained: “The weighing process you will undertake is not
a mechanical process and is more than a numerical counting or tabulation of
factors on each side. Rather, you must consider the aggravators and
mitigators qualitatively. The difference in the burdens of proof between
aggravators and mitigators does not indicate what weight you should give it.
Each juror must weigh in value each factor for him or herself.” Finally, the
court instructed the jurors regarding leniency, including that any individual
juror “may decline to impose the death penalty without giving any reason for
that decision.” After approximately two and one-half days of deliberations, the
jury returned a verdict recommending the imposition of the sentence of death.
1. Victim Impact Evidence
a. Background
Prior to the sentence selection phase of trial, the defendant filed two
motions challenging the admission of the victim impact evidence that the State
intended to present. In his first motion, the defendant requested that the trial
court enter an order “recognizing that ‘victim impact evidence’ is inadmissible
in a New Hampshire capital sentencing hearing before a jury” and striking the
State’s victim impact non-statutory aggravating factor. The State objected,
arguing that the defendant’s motion was untimely and his statutory claims
were “baseless.” Following a hearing, the trial court denied the motion by
written order dated November 18, 2008, finding that victim impact evidence is
“relevant and admissible under RSA 630:5.”
The defendant then moved to limit the State’s victim impact witnesses to
“immediate family of Officer Briggs” and to limit the scope of the evidence “to
the injury, harm and loss to [his] family.” The motion was “grounded in RSA
630:5” as well as the defendant’s “rights to due process, full and fair notice of
the evidence the State intends to present, a fair trial, and to be protected
against punishments that are cruel, unusual, or disproportionate,” see N.H.
CONST. pt. I, arts. 15, 18, 33. He requested that the trial court “exercise [its]
gate keeping function and hold a hearing, out of the presence of the jury, to
91
limit the victim impact evidence.” Specifically, the defendant argued that the
following evidence was inadmissible:
[T]estimony about Officer Briggs as a child, [his] prior
employment as a correctional officer, opinions about the
appropriate punishment in this case, including those
expressed by Officer Briggs to family members regarding the
death penalty, the effect of the trial on the family, Officer
Briggs’ prior contact with [the defendant], and Officer Briggs’
comments regarding the crimes committed the week prior to
his murder.
In response to the defendant’s motion, the State proposed to limit the
victim impact evidence to testimony from Officer Briggs’s widow, one of his
sons, his parents, and one of his sisters. In addition, the State agreed that it
would “conduct its inquiry in standard question-and-answer format, in order to
control the subject matter covered and to provide the defendant with an
opportunity to make objections and the Court to make rulings thereon.” As to
the scope of the evidence, the State proposed to limit the areas of inquiry and
to introduce through the witnesses “photographs and extremely brief,
unnarrated, and unscripted video clips of various aspects of Michael Briggs’s
life pertinent to the testimony given.”
At a hearing on the motion, defense counsel noted that the State had
responded to the defendant’s objections and that many of his earlier concerns
had been resolved. Defense counsel identified the remaining issues as
testimony regarding “Officer Briggs as a child; the box of photographs, as well
as the videos that the State may introduce; the amount that can be gone into
as far as badges and certifications or awards that Officer Briggs has received,”
and the possibility that one of Officer Briggs’s sons might testify.
The trial court reviewed the photographs, video recordings, and pertinent
case law and informed counsel that it was going to admit the evidence. In its
subsequent written order dated November 26, 2008, the trial court ruled that
the evidence the State sought to introduce fell within the parameters of United
States Supreme Court precedent and was admissible under RSA 630:5, III
(2007). The court found that the evidence “shows Officer Briggs’ uniqueness as
an individual human being and informs the jury of the specific harm caused by
his murder,” reasoning that
[t]he devastating effects that Officer Briggs’ death had on his
family [are] certainly part and parcel of the circumstances of
the crime properly presented to the jury at the penalty phase
of the trial. Moreover, this evidence provides a quick glimpse
of the life which the defendant chose to extinguish. This
92
evidence is highly probative of the harm, injury and loss that
Officer Briggs’ family feels as a result of his murder and his
characteristics as an individual human being. Moreover, it is
not so unduly prejudicial that it would render the trial
fundamentally unfair in violation of the defendant’s due
process rights.
(Quotations, citations, and brackets omitted.)
The trial court found that evidence about Officer Briggs’s childhood was
admissible because “[i]t is probative of the loss and harm that Officer Briggs’
parents and siblings have suffered as a result of the murder of their son and
brother,” disagreeing with the defendant’s argument that the probative value of
this evidence was diminished because Officer Briggs was an adult when his
family experienced his loss. The court reasoned that “[i]t would be difficult for
[Officer Briggs’s] parents and sibling to convey the magnitude of their loss
without giving the jury some background of his childhood.” As to evidence that
Officer Briggs worked extra shifts as a correctional officer in order to support
his family and enable his wife to stay home with their children, and that he
received certain awards and recognition of accomplishments, the trial court
found that such evidence was admissible “because it shed[ ] light on Officer
Briggs’ personality and his uniqueness as a human being and the magnitude of
his family’s loss.” (Quotation omitted.)
Regarding the family photographs and video clips, the trial court
explained:
Both the photographs and video clips are relevant and
probative of Officer Briggs’ relationships with his family and
illuminate the testimony of his family members about their
relationship with Officer Briggs. The video clips show Officer
Briggs interacting with his sons and shed light on their
relationship; similarly, the photographs depict Officer Briggs’
relationship with his family and provide a chronology of his
life and therefore provide a quick glimpse of the life which the
defendant chose to extinguish. The probative value of the
videos and pictures is not substantially outweighed by the
danger of unfair prejudice or confusing and/or misleading the
jury.
(Quotations and citations omitted.)
The State’s case-in-chief at the sentence selection phase of trial lasted six
days. Four witnesses offered victim impact evidence: Officer Briggs’s widow,
Laura Briggs; his sister, Melissa Briggs; and his parents, Mary Ann and Leland
93
Briggs. Laura Briggs described the last day of her husband’s life, his memorial
service, how she met her husband and their early years together, their two
young sons, his work as a corrections officer and as a police officer, and his
role as a husband, father, son, and brother. During her testimony she
identified twenty family photographs, including one photograph of her sons at
the age they were when their father was murdered, and several of her husband
with their sons engaged in a variety of activities, including playing at home,
hiking, enjoying the beach, visiting a museum, and playing sports. In addition,
during her testimony the State showed three video recordings of her husband
with their children, one lasting approximately thirty-four seconds, one lasting
approximately ninety-three seconds, and one lasting approximately eighteen
seconds.
Melissa Briggs described her brother’s personal qualities and his close
relationship with his siblings. In addition, she testified about her brother as a
member of the United States Marine Corps, a father, and an uncle, the annual
family vacation at the beach, the events of the day he was shot, and what life is
like without him. During the course of her testimony she identified three
photographs of herself and her adult siblings and their families together during
their summer beach vacations.
Mary Ann Briggs testified about her memories of her son as a child, his
close relationship with his sisters, his qualities as a father, and what she
misses about him. During the course of her testimony she identified seven
photographs, including one of her son as an infant, one of him as a six- or
seven-year-old, two of him with his sons at the beach, one of him with his
children in her living room, one of him eating at her home on a break from
work, and one of him at his sister’s wedding.
Leland Briggs testified about his relationship with his son and about the
activities they enjoyed as he was growing up. He described his son as a
Marine, a police officer, and a father. He testified to what he misses about his
son and the effect his son’s murder has had on his health. During the course
of his testimony he identified six photographs, including one of his son on a
tractor on the family farm, two of himself and his son in uniform marching
together in parades, one of his son in his Marine uniform, and two of his son in
his police uniform.
b. Appellate Argument
The defendant raises two issues. First, he argues that the trial court
erred “in ruling that New Hampshire law authorizes victim impact evidence” at
a capital sentencing hearing before a jury. Second, he argues that “even if
victim impact evidence is admissible absent statutory authority, the evidence
that the State introduced was unfairly prejudicial in a manner that violated not
94
only RSA 630:5, III, but [his] due process rights under Part I, Article 15 of the
New Hampshire Constitution and the Fourteenth Amendment to the Federal
Constitution.”
c. Discussion
We first consider the defendant’s statutory argument and his assertion
that the trial court’s evidentiary decision under RSA 630:5, III was an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. See State v. Wamala, 158 N.H. 583, 592
(2009).
The defendant argues that the trial court erred because victim impact
evidence is inadmissible absent explicit statutory authority and RSA 630:5, III
“is silent on the subject.” Pursuant to RSA 630:5 (2007), “[w]henever the state
intends to seek the sentence of death for the offense of capital murder, the
attorney for the state . . . shall . . . serve upon the defendant, a notice . . .
[s]etting forth the aggravating factors enumerated in paragraph VII . . . and any
other aggravating factors which the state will seek to prove as the basis for the
death penalty.” RSA 630:5, I(b) (emphasis added). A separate sentencing
hearing must be held. RSA 630:5, II. “In the sentencing hearing, information
may be presented as to matters relating to any of the aggravating or mitigating
factors set forth in paragraphs VI and VII, or any other mitigating factor or any
other aggravating factor for which notice has been provided under
subparagraph I(b).” RSA 630:5, III (emphasis added). Paragraph VII
enumerates ten aggravating factors that “are the only aggravating factors that
shall be considered, unless notice of additional aggravating factors is provided
under subparagraph I(b).” RSA 630:5, VII (emphasis added). Further, the
statute provides:
Any other information relevant to such mitigating or
aggravating factors may be presented by either the state or
the defendant, regardless of its admissibility under the rules
governing admission of evidence at criminal trials, except that
information may be excluded if its probative value is
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice,
confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury.
RSA 630:5, III (emphasis added).
Thus, the statute enumerates aggravating factors that the State may
prove and allows the State to present information regarding duly-noticed non-
statutory aggravating factors that are not expressly identified in the statute.
According to the plain language of the statute, evidence pertaining to “any
other” non-statutory aggravating factor is admissible if the State has provided
proper notice, the information is relevant to the factors, and the danger of
95
unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury does not
substantially outweigh its probative value.
The defendant correctly observes that “[w]here the capital murder statute
is silent with regard to the admission of victim impact evidence, courts have
disagreed on whether the evidence is admissible.” However, the cases relied
upon by the defendant are based upon statutory language that materially
differs from the language in RSA 630:5, III. For example, in State v. Guzek,
906 P.2d 272 (Or. 1995), superseded by statute as stated in State v. Moore,
927 P.2d 1073 (Or. 1996), the state sought to admit victim impact evidence
under a statute that required the jury, in considering whether a sentence of
death should be imposed, to determine “the extent to which the defendant’s
character and background and the circumstances of the offense may reduce
the defendant’s moral culpability or blameworthiness for the crime.” Guzek,
906 P.2d at 278 (quotation omitted). The court, in precluding victim impact
evidence, concluded that the statute allowed only evidence of mitigating
circumstances. Id.
In Commonwealth v. Fisher, 681 A.2d 130 (Pa. 1996), superseded by
statute as stated in Commonwealth v. Tedford, 960 A.2d 1 (Pa. 2008), the
applicable statute also explicitly restricted what evidence could be offered,
providing that “[e]vidence of aggravating circumstances shall be limited to
those circumstances specified in” the statute. Fisher, 681 A.2d at 146.
Because victim impact evidence was not enumerated in the statute as an
aggravating factor, the court concluded that the statutory scheme precluded
the admission of such testimony. Id. Likewise, in Olsen v. State, 67 P.3d 536
(Wyo. 2003), the court precluded victim impact evidence because the pertinent
statute provided that the jury “shall hear evidence as to any matter that the
court deems relevant to a determination of the sentence, and shall include
matters relating to any of the aggravating or mitigating circumstances
enumerated in [the statute],” and victim impact was not included as an
aggravating circumstance enumerated in the statute. Olsen, 67 P.3d at 595
(emphasis omitted). The court declined to read the general language of the
statute as controlling the more specific language contained in the enumerated
aggravating circumstances. Id. at 598.
As the defendant acknowledges, several jurisdictions have concluded
that, if the applicable statutory scheme does not expressly preclude victim
impact evidence, such evidence is admissible. For example, in State v.
Bernard, 608 So. 2d 966 (La. 1992), the applicable statute provided that “[t]he
sentencing hearing shall focus on the circumstances of the offense and the
character and propensities of the offender.” Bernard, 608 So. 2d at 967 n.2
(emphasis omitted). In holding that the statute need not explicitly authorize
the admission of victim impact evidence, the court stated:
96
Since a specific intent murderer either knew or reasonably
should have foreseen some of the consequences of his
victim’s death, this general knowledge at the time of the crime
is a fact bearing on the murderer’s moral culpability and to
that extent is relevant both to the circumstances of the crime
and to the murderer’s character and propensities.
Id. at 971. Thus, the State could introduce “a limited amount of general
evidence providing identity to the victim and a limited amount of general
evidence demonstrating harm to the victim’s survivors.” Id.
Likewise, in State v. Nesbit, 978 S.W.2d 872 (Tenn. 1998), the pertinent
statute provided that evidence may be presented in the sentencing proceeding
“as to any matter the court deems relevant to the punishment and may
include, but not be limited to, the nature and circumstances of the crime.”
Nesbit, 978 S.W.2d at 889. Despite case law that limited evidence regarding
aggravating circumstances to those enumerated in the statute, the court
concluded that “the impact of the crime on the victim’s immediate family is one
of those myriad factors encompassed within the statutory language nature and
circumstances of the crime.” Id. at 890. Therefore, victim impact evidence
may be introduced provided it is not “so unduly prejudicial that it renders the
trial fundamentally unfair.” Id. at 891 (quotation omitted); see also Miller v.
State, 913 So. 2d 1148, 1165 (Ala. Crim. App. 2004); Parrish v.
Commonwealth, 121 S.W.3d 198, 206 (Ky. 2003), overruled on other grounds
by Brown v. Commonwealth, 313 S.W.3d 577 (Ky. 2010). But see State v.
Carter, 888 P.2d 629, 651-53 (Utah 1995) (victim impact evidence as a matter
of evidentiary law was neither relevant nor probative in a capital sentencing
hearing), superseded by statute as stated in Taylor v. State, 156 P.3d 739
(Utah 2007).
We disagree with the defendant’s argument that, absent language in RSA
630:5 expressly identifying victim impact evidence as an aggravating factor,
such evidence is not permitted. Under such a construction, no aggravating
evidence beyond the specific aggravating factors enumerated in the statute
would be admissible, thereby rendering superfluous the language allowing “any
other aggravating factor for which notice has been provided.” RSA 630:5, III;
see State v. Bakunczyk, 164 N.H. 77, 79 (2012) (it is a well-recognized principle
of statutory construction that “the legislature is presumed not to use words
that are superfluous”). Accordingly, we hold that pursuant to the plain
language of RSA 630:5, which permits the State to present information relating
to any other aggravating factors for which notice has been provided, victim
impact evidence is admissible at the sentencing phase of a capital murder trial.
See RSA 630:5, I(b), III, VII. We affirm the trial court’s denial of the defendant’s
motion to strike the State’s victim impact non-statutory aggravating factor.
97
The defendant next argues that “[t]he victim impact evidence exceeded
the scope of what was necessary to afford the jury a ‘quick glimpse’ of [Officer]
Briggs’s life and the harm to his family” that resulted from his murder. He
asserts that the evidence was “unfairly prejudicial” such that the trial court
erred “in admitting this evidence under RSA 630:5, III.”
Because Payne v. Tennessee, 501 U.S. 808 (1991), often serves as a
touchstone for establishing the contours of victim impact evidence at capital
sentencing, we begin by examining that decision. In Payne, the United States
Supreme Court overruled its prior decisions in Booth v. Maryland, 482 U.S.
496 (1987), and South Carolina v. Gathers, 490 U.S. 805 (1989), to the extent
that those decisions held that the Eighth Amendment precludes admission of
victim impact evidence and prosecutorial argument on such evidence. Payne,
501 U.S. at 827. The Court explained that “it was never held or even suggested
in any of our cases preceding Booth that the defendant, entitled as he was to
individualized consideration, was to receive that consideration wholly apart
from the crime which he had committed.” Id. at 822.
According to the Court, its misreading of precedent in Booth “unfairly
weighted the scales in a capital trial” by placing virtually no limits on the
relevant mitigating evidence a capital defendant may introduce, while barring
the State from “either offering a quick glimpse of the life which a defendant
chose to extinguish or demonstrating the loss to the victim’s family and to
society which has resulted from the defendant’s homicide.” Id. (citation and
quotation omitted). As the Court stated, “Justice, though due to the accused,
is due to the accuser also. The concept of fairness must not be strained till it
is narrowed to a filament. We are to keep the balance true.” Id. at 827
(quotation omitted).
We are now of the view that a State may properly
conclude that for the jury to assess meaningfully the
defendant’s moral culpability and blameworthiness, it should
have before it at the sentencing phase evidence of the specific
harm caused by the defendant. The State has a legitimate
interest in counteracting the mitigating evidence which the
defendant is entitled to put in, by reminding the sentencer
that just as the murderer should be considered as an
individual, so too the victim is an individual whose death
represents a unique loss to society and in particular to his
family. By turning the victim into a faceless stranger at the
penalty phase of a capital trial, Booth deprives the State of the
full moral force of its evidence and may prevent the jury from
having before it all the information necessary to determine the
proper punishment for a first-degree murder.
98
Id. at 825 (citations, quotations, and brackets omitted). Thus, the Court held
that “if the State chooses to permit the admission of victim impact evidence
and prosecutorial argument on that subject, the Eighth Amendment erects no
per se bar.” Id. at 827. “A State may legitimately conclude that evidence about
the victim and about the impact of the murder on the victim’s family is relevant
to the jury’s decision as to whether or not the death penalty should be
imposed. There is no reason to treat such evidence differently than other
relevant evidence is treated.” Id.
Although the Court concluded that “the Booth Court was wrong in
stating that this kind of evidence leads to the arbitrary imposition of the death
penalty,” it noted that in the event victim impact evidence is introduced “that is
so unduly prejudicial that it renders the trial fundamentally unfair, the Due
Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment provides a mechanism for relief.”
Id. at 825. Also, Payne left undisturbed the portion of Booth that held that “the
admission of a victim’s family members’ characterizations and opinions about
the crime, the defendant, and the appropriate sentence violates the Eighth
Amendment” because no such evidence was presented in Payne. Id. at 830
n.2.
Pursuant to Payne, therefore, there is no federal constitutional
impediment to the State introducing victim impact evidence during the penalty
phase of a capital trial to demonstrate that “the victim is an individual whose
death represents a unique loss to society and in particular to his family.”
Payne, 501 U.S. at 825 (quotation omitted). Constitutional concerns arise only
when victim impact evidence is “so unduly prejudicial that it renders the trial
fundamentally unfair.” Id. Over the two decades since the Supreme Court’s
decision, federal and state courts have fleshed out the broad contours of
permissible victim impact evidence set forth in Payne.
For example, some courts have allowed testimony from a greater number
of witnesses than the four immediate family members who testified in this case,
and some have allowed testimony from individuals other than family members.
See, e.g., United States v. Nelson, 347 F.3d 701, 712-13 (8th Cir. 2003)
(testimony allowed from three family members, two neighbors, and a teacher);
State v. Knese, 985 S.W.2d 759, 771-72 (Mo. 1999) (testimony allowed from
seven friends and family members); Deparvine v. State, 995 So. 2d 351, 378
(Fla. 2008) (testimony admitted from five victim impact witnesses); United
States v. Bolden, 545 F.3d 609, 626-27 (8th Cir. 2008) (testimony from sixteen
victim impact witnesses, taking up eighty percent of the government’s penalty
phase case-in-chief, was relevant to establishing the non-statutory victim
impact aggravating factor).
Some courts have allowed more photographs than the thirty-six admitted
in this case as part of the victim impact evidence. See, e.g., People v. Zamudio,
99
181 P.3d 105, 134 (Cal. 2008) (118 photographs allowed for two victims);
Wheeler v. State, 4 So. 3d 599, 608 (Fla. 2009) (fifty-four photographs allowed).
In addition, some courts have found no error in showing video recordings
longer than the three short video recordings shown in this case. See, e.g.,
United States v. Wilson, 493 F. Supp. 2d 491, 505 (E.D.N.Y. 2007) (twenty-
minute video); People v. Kelly, 171 P.3d 548, 570 (Cal. 2007) (twenty-minute
video); Hicks v. State, 940 S.W.2d 855, 857 (Ark. 1997) (video almost fourteen
minutes long).
Here, in allowing the victim impact evidence proffered by the State, the
trial court, citing Payne, reasoned that “victim impact evidence is simply
another form or method of informing the sentencing authority about the
specific harm caused by the crime in question, evidence of a general type long
considered by sentencing authorities.” (Quotation omitted.) The court noted
that “[i]n the wake of Payne, ‘the vast majority of jurisdictions that have
considered the admissibility of victim impact evidence have . . . concluded that
such evidence is relevant to determining the appropriate sentence.’” (Quoting
State v. Muhammad, 678 A.2d 164, 177 (N.J. 1996) (collecting cases)). The
trial court concluded that the State’s victim impact testimony was admissible
within “the parameters of Payne . . . and . . . under RSA 630:5, III” because it
“shows Officer Briggs’ uniqueness as an individual human being and informs
the jury of the specific harm caused by his murder,” is “highly probative of the
harm, injury and loss that Officer Briggs’ family feels as a result of his murder
and his characteristics as an individual human being,” and “is not so unduly
prejudicial that it would render the trial fundamentally unfair.” (Quotations
and brackets omitted.) Further, we note that none of the witnesses offered
their opinions about the crime, the defendant, or the sentence. See Payne, 501
U.S. at 830 n.2. On this record, we do not conclude that the trial court’s ruling
was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of the defendant’s case.
The defendant nonetheless argues that “the content of the evidence
rendered it inadmissible.” Specifically, he argues that evidence of Officer
Briggs as a child, as well as photographs of Officer Briggs’s children, including
video clips, “contributed to the emotional nature of the presentation,” thus
“creat[ing] the risk of a death verdict based on emotion rather than a reasoned
moral response.” (Quotation omitted.) The circumstances presented in the
cases cited by the defendant, however, differ significantly from the scope of
victim impact evidence allowed by the trial court in this case.
For example, in Salazar v. State, 90 S.W.3d 330 (Tex. Crim. App. 2002),
as part of its victim impact evidence the State showed a video recording
consisting of
approximately 140 still photographs, arranged in a
chronological montage. Music accompanie[d] the entire
100
seventeen-minute video and include[d] such selections as
“Storms in Africa” and “River” by Enya, and conclude[d] with
Celine Dion singing, “My Heart Will Go On,” from the movie
Titanic.
Almost half of the approximately 140 photographs
depict[ed] the victim’s infancy and early childhood. The
pictures show[ed] an angelic baby, surrounded by loving
parents, grandparents, unidentified relatives, and other small
children. Later photographs show[ed] [the victim] as a
toddler, playing the piano, frolicking at the beach with other
friends, happily riding on a carousel, laughing in a field of
bluebonnets, and cuddling with a puppy. The video also
include[d] numerous annual school pictures showing [the
victim’s] progression from a cheerful child to an equally
cheerful young man. It catalog[ued] his evident and early
prowess as a young soccer player and eventually as a football
player. There [was] a picture of him and his date,
presumably going to their prom, and more candid shots of
the victim and his teen-age buddies.
Salazar, 90 S.W.3d at 333. The court concluded that the probative value of
much of the video montage was low and the potential for unfair prejudice high,
stating:
Nearly half of the photographs showed [the victim] as an
infant, toddler, or small child, but [the defendant] murdered
an adult, not a child. He extinguished [the victim’s] future,
not his past. The probative value of the vast majority of these
“infant-growing-into-youth” photographs is de minimus.
However, their prejudicial effect is enormous because the
implicit suggestion is that [the defendant] murdered this
angelic infant; he killed this laughing, light-hearted child; he
snuffed out the life of . . . the young boy hugging his blond
puppy dog.
Id. at 337. Although the court noted that “[w]hile the probative value of one or
two photographs of an adult murder victim’s childhood might not be
substantially outweighed by the risk of unfair prejudice,” it concluded that
“[the video montage] is very prejudicial both because of its sheer volume, and
because of its undue emphasis upon the adult victim’s halcyon childhood.” Id.;
see Conover v. State, 933 P.2d 904, 921 (Okla. Crim. App. 1997) (“Comments
about the victim as a baby, his growing up and his parents’ hopes for his
future in no way provid[ed] insight into the contemporaneous and prospective
circumstances surrounding his death; nor [did] they show how the
101
circumstances surrounding his death have financially, emotionally,
psychologically, and physically impacted a member of the victim’s immediate
family.”).
By contrast, in Wilson v. Sirmons, 536 F.3d 1064 (10th Cir. 2008), the
victim’s widow testified that “the victim was especially fond of Christmas
holidays because he was raised in a family that did not celebrate Christmas.”
Sirmons, 536 F.3d at 1113. The victim’s mother testified that “as a child, a
young adult, [the victim] didn’t give me any problems. He was maturing into a
responsible adult, and an asset to our family and the community. He had
long-range plans of being better educated. He had . . . gotten his real estate
license, just set plans, hopes and dreams of taking care of his family.” Id. at
1112 (brackets and quotation omitted). Noting that it had found that “far more
inflammatory statements did not render the proceeding fundamentally unfair,”
the court concluded that “[t]he victim impact statements here contained only a
few short references to the victim’s childhood. Overall, the statements were
very brief, and while a person sitting in the courtroom broke down into tears,
there [was] no evidence that either witness exhibited such an emotionally
charged display as might be unduly prejudicial.” Id. at 1113-14 (quotation
omitted).
Numerous courts have allowed testimony and photographs of the victim
as a child. See, e.g., United States v. Barnette, 211 F.3d 803, 818-19 (4th Cir.
2000) (seven members of the victims’ families testified about the impact the
crime had on their lives, including stories of the victims’ childhoods and family
experiences), vacated on other grounds by Barnette v. United States, 546 U.S.
803 (2005); Hicks, 940 S.W.2d at 857 (allowing a fourteen-minute videotape
containing approximately 160 photographs, including photographs of the
victim as a toddler and various school pictures); People v. Nelson, 246 P.3d
301, 317 (Cal. 2011) (five photographs of the victim as a child humanized the
victim “as victim impact evidence is designed to do” and did not invite a purely
irrational response from the jury or render the trial fundamentally unfair), cert.
denied, Nelson v. California, 132 S. Ct. 183 (2011); Cannon v. State, 961 P.2d
838, 851 (Okla. Crim. App. 1998) (victim’s stepfather testified about victim as a
three-year-old).
Here, the trial court found that “limited evidence of Officer Briggs’
childhood [was] admissible victim impact evidence” because it was “probative of
the loss and harm that Officer Briggs’ parents and siblings have suffered as a
result of the murder of their son and brother.” As the court explained, “[i]t
would be difficult for [Officer Briggs’s] parents and sibling to convey the
magnitude of their loss without giving the jury some background of his
childhood.” Following Laura Briggs’s testimony, the trial court indicated to
counsel that it “found the pictures were relevant to show [Officer Briggs’s]
uniqueness as an individual and the harm done to the family by his absence.”
102
Regarding the video recordings, the trial court stated that “it would be very
hard to understand the nature of the relationship . . . between the father and
the sons without those videos. They’re very short, but they certainly showed —
were very relevant to the harm done to these boys by not having their father
any longer.”
Both before and during the sentence selection phase of trial, the court
took precautions to ensure that the victim impact evidence was not unduly
prejudicial to the defendant. As noted above, prior to the jury receiving any
victim impact evidence, the court held a hearing and considered the
defendant’s objections to specific items of proffered evidence. Also, prior to
allowing the State to introduce the photographs and video recordings during
the witnesses’ testimony, the trial court reviewed them and determined that
they were admissible. As the evidence was presented at trial, the court
observed the jurors, paying attention to their reaction. After the conclusion of
the State’s victim impact evidence, the court stated to counsel:
I do want to just comment on the victim impact
evidence . . . . [D]efense counsel referenced emotional
reactions or tears by the jury. I must say, one of the
alternates did cry during Laura Briggs’ testimony. I don’t
think I saw any jurors shed tears except for that during the
[victim impact] testimony. . . . Anyway, if they did, it must
have been awfully subtle or something because I do watch the
jurors for their reactions, and I did not — I didn’t really see
that. Obviously, from their facial expressions, they were
moved by the testimony.
“The trial court is in the best position to gauge the prejudicial impact of
particular testimony.” Wamala, 158 N.H. at 590. Here, the record establishes
that the court carefully assessed the impact of the testimony and, thus,
ensured that it was not unduly prejudicial to the defendant.
Furthermore, as requested by the defendant, in its final charge the trial
court instructed the jury as follows regarding the State’s victim impact non-
statutory aggravating factor: “You may consider the financial, emotional, and
psychological [e]ffects of Officer Briggs’ death on his family. You may give this
evidence what weight you wish in determining an appropriate punishment, but
your consideration is limited to a rational analysis of the evidence rather than
simply an emotional response to it.” Jurors are presumed to follow the court’s
instructions. State v. Yates, 152 N.H. 245, 252 (2005).
We have reviewed the record and conclude that the glimpse into Officer
Briggs’s life was not improperly presented to the jury through brief testimony
from four immediate family members, a limited number of photographs of the
103
victim and his family members, and three short video recordings, in total under
three minutes in duration, of the victim interacting with his sons. We are not
persuaded that the probative value of this evidence was substantially
outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice and hold that the trial court did
not unsustainably exercise its discretion in admitting the State’s victim impact
evidence.
The defendant advances a constitutional argument, asserting that the
admission of the victim impact evidence in this case amounted to a violation of
his due process rights under Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution and the
Fourteenth Amendment to the Federal Constitution. However, we agree with
the trial court that the defendant has failed to explain how admission of the
State’s evidence “amount[ed] to a constitutional violation given [the court’s]
finding that the testimony . . . [was] consistent with the State’s Notice of Intent
and admissible under RSA 630:5, III and Supreme Court precedent.” See
Payne, 501 U.S. at 825 (victim impact evidence is constitutionally acceptable so
long as it is not “so unduly prejudicial that it renders the trial fundamentally
unfair”).
2. Conditions of Confinement and Mode of Execution
a. Background
In August 2008, the State filed a motion to preclude at both phases of
sentencing any information regarding the manner in which a sentence of death
is carried out in New Hampshire. It argued that such information was
irrelevant to the sentencing issues and potentially misleading given that the
legislature could change the method in the future. In his responsive pleading,
the defendant stated that he did not intend “to introduce evidence regarding
death penalty protocols or the means of execution,” but requested that the trial
court provide a jury instruction on the mode of execution based upon the
capital sentencing statute. See RSA 630:5, XIII, XIV (2007). Specifically, he
asked the court to inform the jury that “the punishment of death is inflicted by
lethal injection, or, if lethal injection is impractical, hanging” (mode of
execution instruction).
By written order dated November 12, 2008, the court ruled that “neither
side may elicit evidence or comment on the method of execution.” It also
denied the defendant’s request for a jury instruction regarding the method of
execution, ruling that such an instruction “is unnecessary and potentially
inaccurate.”
Subsequently, the defendant filed a motion to preclude at sentencing
evidence of “any specific future conditions of incarceration regarding a
sentence of life in prison without the possibility of parole.” He argued that “the
104
manner of imposing a sentence of life in prison without release on parole”
would be speculative, irrelevant, and create a substantial risk of confusing or
misleading the jury and, thus, its admission would violate his “rights to due
process and would invite an unconstitutional risk of arbitrary or capricious
imposition of the death penalty in violation of state and federal constitutional
limitations.” According to the defendant, “perhaps most importantly, the court
should bar evidence of the means by which the sentence of life in prison
without parole will be carried out because the court has barred evidence of the
means of carrying out a sentence of death.”
The State objected, arguing that evidence of the future conditions of
incarceration was not speculative, was probative of the non-statutory
aggravating factor alleging future dangerousness, and constituted rebuttal to
two mitigating factors pertaining to the defendant’s confinement. The State
sought to introduce information on “[t]he nature and conditions of the
defendant’s post-sentencing confinement” to inform the jury on “the issue of
whether and to what extent he poses a danger to others.” It asserted that it
expected to introduce “testimony . . . as to the defendant’s exposure to and
interactions with other inmates, his access to instruments with which he
possibly could harm others, and the presence or absence of behavior
modification measures.” With respect to the defendant’s prison adjustment
mitigating factor, the State argued that because “the defendant will affirmatively
place before the jury his behavior while incarcerated to date as a factor that
jurors should consider in mitigation,” it was entitled to rebut this factor with
information related to his conditions of confinement at the State Prison in the
past, present, and future. The State pointed out that “at his attorneys’ request
[the defendant] was placed in a special tier without access to other inmates, and
to date he has remained in that unique housing arrangement,” and that his
“present conditions of incarceration will change upon his sentencing in this
case.” The State sought to present information explaining “how the
environment in which the defendant has conducted himself to date is artificial,
how that environment is an inaccurate representation of his future
incarceration, and how the circumstances of such will change upon
sentencing.”
The State also argued that information on future conditions of
confinement was not speculative because it “will be based upon established
prison rules and guidelines, and will be presented by professional prison
administrators and personnel who are well familiar with those protocols.”
Additionally, the State argued that information on the manner of execution, in
the form of the defendant’s proposed jury instruction, remained irrelevant as
previously found by the trial court.
The trial court denied the defendant’s motion by written order dated
December 2, 2008. It ruled that information on prison conditions was “highly
105
probative” of whether the defendant will present a future danger within the
prison environment and also was relevant to rebut the prison adjustment
mitigating factor submitted by the defendant. The court ruled that the
information was not speculative because the defendant’s expected conditions of
confinement were “governed by long-established and predictable rules and
procedures that apply to every inmate.” The court further explained that its
rejection of the defendant’s proposed mode of execution instruction did not
require it to reject the conditions of confinement evidence because the latter
information was relevant while the former was not.
Subsequently, during the sentence selection phase of trial, the State
presented information about the custody classification system of the New
Hampshire State Prison for men in Concord through the testimony of Richard
Gerry, the prison warden. Warden Gerry described the prison’s housing
alternatives and outlined the classification process under which inmates are
placed in variously restrictive environments. He explained that the prison’s
classification system “drives the correctional system” and that inmate
classification “determine[s] where they are housed, [and] what programming
and activities . . . they [may] be involved in.”
Although the prison maintains five levels of classification, C-1 through
C-5, the warden described the three classification levels available to an inmate
who is sentenced to life in prison without possibility of parole. Specifically, he
testified that an individual convicted of capital murder and sentenced to life
imprisonment without possibility of parole could be classified as C-5, C-4, or
C-3. C-5 is the maximum custody level and, at the time, more than one
hundred C-5 inmates were housed in the Special Housing Unit or “Max Custody
Unit” apart from the rest of the prison population. He identified C-4 as the next
custody level, in which inmates are housed in the Close Custody Unit; at the
time, more than one hundred inmates resided in that unit. The warden
described C-3 as the general prison population custody level; of the 1,400
inmates at the prison at that time, approximately 1,000 had C-3 status.
Warden Gerry described the living conditions for C-5, C-4, and C-3
inmates, including some of the privileges available to them. He testified that a
C-5 inmate does not share his cell with other inmates and that the items
allowed in the inmate’s cell are “very restricted.” For instance, C-5 inmates are
allowed prison issued clothing, their legal materials, recreational paperback
books, writing materials, and personal letters. After a period of time of good
behavior and a minimum of six months, C-5 inmates may request approval to
purchase a “security grade” television with a thirteen-inch screen. While they
are in their cells, C-5 inmates are not secured or handcuffed, and they are
allowed out of their cells for an hour each day. Whenever a C-5 inmate leaves
his cell, his hands are handcuffed behind his back and he is escorted by a
prison guard. C-5 inmates take all of their meals inside their individual cells.
106
The warden also explained how an inmate sentenced to life imprisonment
without possibility of parole can achieve a lower security status. He testified
that after “at least a year” as a C-5 inmate, an inmate could be reclassified as a
C-4 inmate. Unlike C-5 inmates, C-4 inmates share their cells with other
inmates and are allowed out of their cells for several hours a day. Also unlike
C-5 inmates, C-4 inmates are not handcuffed and escorted when they are
allowed outside their cells, and C-4 inmates take their meals at the dining hall.
The warden testified that after a “[m]inimum of six months but probably
closer to a year,” a C-4 inmate could be reclassified to C-3 status, which he
described as medium security. C-3 inmates live in either two-person cells or
eight-person “dorm” rooms. Unlike C-5 and C-4 inmates, C-3 inmates are
allowed a wider variety of personal property in their cells, such as “warming
pots” to heat food, recreational games, radios, and televisions. The warden
testified that it is possible for C-3 inmates to spend most of their time outside of
their cells: “the only time they would be confined in their cells would be during
institutional count times where all inmates are counted at that point in time
and then secured for the night . . . .” Like C-4 inmates, C-3 inmates take their
meals at the dining hall. Further, Warden Gerry testified about the educational,
vocational, and recreational opportunities available to inmates. For instance,
while in prison, inmates may obtain a high school equivalency diploma, learn a
trade, and play sports, such as basketball.
Finally, the warden explained the defendant’s unique housing
arrangement. He testified that rather than being housed in the regular section
of the Special Housing Unit, the defendant was the only inmate housed on
“N Tier.” Warden Gerry described N Tier as four individual cells that are
separated from the rest of the Special Housing Unit by a “series of two solid
doors.” The defendant had resided on N Tier since November 2006, where he
had been “completely isolated from the other inmates and staff” and monitored
twenty-four hours a day by video camera. The warden explained that the
defendant’s attorneys requested that he be kept separated from the rest of the
prison population. Warden Gerry testified that if the defendant were to be
sentenced to life imprisonment without possibility of parole, he would be moved
out of N Tier and into the Special Housing Unit with C-5 security status, where
he would no longer be monitored by video camera twenty-four hours a day. The
warden testified that he was unable to predict whether the defendant would
present problematic behavior in the future because he had not been interacting
with other people during his confinement on N Tier. He testified that C-5
inmates typically do not present problematic behavior until they interact more
with other people in the living conditions of a lower classification status, such
as C-4.
In its preliminary and final jury instructions at the sentence selection
phase, the trial court instructed the jury that, when considering whether the
107
State had proven the future dangerousness aggravating factor beyond a
reasonable doubt, it could consider “any current, past, or future custody
classification while the defendant is incarcerated.” When the jury returned its
findings and sentencing verdict, future dangerousness was the only non-
statutory aggravating factor that it found the State failed to prove. The jury also
determined that the defendant failed to prove the prison adjustment mitigating
factor.
b. Appellate Argument
The defendant challenges the trial court’s December 2 order allowing the
State to present, during the sentence selection phase of the trial, testimony
regarding the conditions of confinement for inmates sentenced to life
imprisonment without possibility of parole. He contends that such evidence
was speculative, irrelevant, and “manifestly prejudicial,” violating RSA 630:5,
III (2007) and his “rights to due process, a fair trial, and a capital sentencing
proceeding free of the influence of arbitrary factors, passion, or emotion”
protected by the State and Federal Constitutions, see N.H. CONST. pt. I, arts.
15, 18, 33; U.S. CONST. amends. V, VIII, XIV.
The defendant also challenges the trial court’s rejection of his proposed
mode of execution jury instruction. He contends that “[b]y admitting evidence
of the general prison conditions experienced by a hypothetical life without
parole inmate, but not evidence of the method of execution, the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion,” thereby violating RSA 630:5, III and his
rights under the Due Process Clauses and the Cruel and/or Unusual
Punishment Clauses of the State and Federal Constitutions, see N.H. CONST.
pt. I, arts. 15, 18, 33; U.S. CONST. amends. V, VIII, XIV.
c. Discussion
We first consider whether the trial court’s decisions under RSA 630:5, III
constituted unsustainable exercises of discretion. See State v. Wamala, 158
N.H. 583, 592 (2009).
1. Conditions of Confinement
The defendant contends that the information about conditions of
confinement is irrelevant because it has “nothing to do with the crime” and has
“no bearing on [his] character.” He does not argue, however, that the future
dangerousness non-statutory aggravating factor fails to comport with the
individualized sentencing command of the Eighth Amendment and its state
constitutional analog. See Simmons v. South Carolina, 512 U.S. 154, 162
(1994) (plurality opinion) (“This Court has approved the jury’s consideration of
future dangerousness during the penalty phase of a capital trial, recognizing
108
that a defendant’s future dangerousness bears on all sentencing
determinations made in our criminal justice system.”). Thus, information that
relates to future dangerousness as a legitimate aggravating factor is relevant
and admissible at capital sentencing. See RSA 630:5, III.
We agree with the trial court that information on conditions of
confinement is relevant to the future dangerousness inquiry. “The danger any
individual presents is a function not only of that individual, but also of his
environment. A person who is dangerous in a halfway house may be
significantly less dangerous in a medium security prison, even less dangerous
in a maximum security prison, and less dangerous still in a more secure
environment.” United States v. Sampson, 335 F. Supp. 2d 166, 227 (D. Mass.
2004), aff’d, 486 F.3d 13 (1st Cir. 2007). Courts have recognized that
information about the expected conditions of a defendant’s future confinement
can be critical to the determination of whether a defendant poses a realistic
threat while serving the rest of his natural life in a high security environment.
See, e.g., id. at 226-27 (evidence regarding federal prison administration and
safety and the future assignment and classification of the defendant by the
Federal Bureau of Prisons “is valuable to a jury asked to consider whether a
defendant is likely to present a danger in a prison setting if incarcerated for
life”); Coble v. State, 330 S.W.3d 253, 268-69 (Tex. Crim. App. 2010) (the
“probability that the defendant would commit criminal acts of violence that
would constitute a continuing threat to society” focuses upon “the character for
violence of the particular individual” as well as “the quantity or quality of the
institutional restraints put on that person”); Lucero v. State, 246 S.W.3d 86, 97
(Tex. Crim. App. 2008) (allowing testimony “that inmate violence can occur
under current prison conditions” was not an abuse of discretion because it
“had some relevance to, and would have aided the jury in determining,
appellant’s future dangerousness, such as considering whether a life-sentenced
appellant, with his history of assaultive behavior, would have opportunities to
commit violent acts in prison”).
Here, the trial court allowed information about the prison classification
system and conditions of confinement to show, among other things, the extent
of the defendant’s future exposure to, and interactions with, other inmates and
access to instruments that could be used to harm others. In so ruling, the
court properly determined that evidence of the defendant’s potential exposure
to and interactions with other inmates, as well as his opportunity to access
potential weapons, bears upon whether he would pose a future danger in a
prison setting. Accordingly, we hold that the trial court did not err in finding
the evidence of conditions of confinement relevant to future dangerousness.
The trial court also found that evidence of the circumstances of the
defendant’s N Tier restrictive confinement, and how those circumstances would
change if he were sentenced to life imprisonment without possibility of parole,
109
was relevant to rebut the defendant’s mitigating factor that “[d]uring his two
years of pre-trial confinement, [he] has committed no crimes and his behavior
has demonstrated his potential to adjust well in a secure prison setting.” See
Skipper v. South Carolina, 476 U.S. 1, 4-5 (1986) (approving the admission of
adjustment to prison evidence as relevant in mitigation of punishment). The
defendant fails to explain why evidence of the expected changes to his unique
housing arrangement if he were sentenced to life imprisonment without
possibility of parole did not constitute fair rebuttal to his prison adjustment
mitigating factor. See RSA 630:5, III (“[t]he state and the defendant shall be
permitted to rebut any information received at the hearing”). His submitted
mitigating factor specifically called upon the jury to consider his behavior
during his two years of pretrial confinement as evidence of his future ability to
adjust safely to the prison environment.
The defendant argues, however, that conditions of confinement evidence
lacked probative value or was unfairly prejudicial because it was speculative.
He contends that none of the information was specific to him, but instead
addressed “the conditions a typical inmate might experience if housed long-
term at the New Hampshire State Prison.” However, the State presented
testimony on the conditions of confinement of inmates sentenced to life
imprisonment without possibility of parole, the same sentence the defendant
would receive if the jury determined not to impose a sentence of death.
Moreover, the trial court ruled that the evidence was not improperly speculative
because “[t]he conditions of incarceration are governed by long-established and
predictable rules and procedures that apply to every inmate.” The defendant
does not challenge this finding. We, therefore, uphold the trial court’s
determination that evidence of the conditions of confinement was not
impermissibly speculative. As the trial court noted, the defendant was free to
“cross-examine the State’s witnesses or rebut the State’s evidence to make his
point that the present conditions of incarceration may change if the Legislature
amends the statute or prison officials amend the rules.”
To the extent that the defendant argues that the conditions of
confinement evidence invited the jury to speculate impermissibly about his
future conduct, this argument is foreclosed by United States Supreme Court
precedent. In Jurek v. Texas, 428 U.S. 262 (1976), “seven Justices rejected the
claim that it was impossible to predict future behavior and that dangerousness
was therefore an invalid consideration in imposing the death penalty.”
Barefoot v. Estelle, 463 U.S. 880, 897 (1983). “It is, of course, not easy to
predict future behavior. The fact that such a determination is difficult,
however, does not mean that it cannot be made. Indeed, prediction of future
criminal conduct is an essential element in many of the decisions rendered
throughout our criminal justice system.” Jurek, 428 U.S. at 274-75.
110
The defendant also challenges the warden’s testimony describing the
privileges afforded at the inmate classification levels. He argues that “an
inmate’s access to cable television, work and educational opportunities, music,
and games had no legitimate bearing on [his] character, capacity for future
danger, or ability to adjust to prison life.” According to the defendant,
“[t]hrough the Warden, the State left no doubt that C-3 inmates are afforded
numerous comforts and access to varied social and vocational activities.”
As the State correctly notes, during trial the defendant did not object to
the warden’s testimony about the privileges accorded C-5, C-4, and C-3
inmates, and thus “the specific appellate argument that [he] now makes is
unpreserved.” See State v. Eaton, 162 N.H. 190, 195 (2011); State v. Winward,
161 N.H. 533, 542 (2011). However, even assuming that this issue was
preserved for appeal, we conclude that it lacks merit. Evidence about the
privileges afforded to inmates at the various classification levels was relevant to
the defendant’s future exposure to and interaction with other inmates. The
evidence showed the extent to which the defendant would be free from restraint
and from direct monitoring by prison staff and revealed the opportunities he
might have to access objects he could use to harm others. This information
bore upon the issue of his future dangerousness.
Moreover, the testimony put into context what the State characterized as
the “artificially restrictive” N Tier housing environment where the defendant
had resided since his confinement at the State Prison. The State was entitled
to rebut the mitigating factor submitted by the defendant, which alleged that
“[d]uring his two years of pre-trial confinement, [he] has committed no crimes
and his behavior has demonstrated his potential to adjust well in a secure
prison setting.” The warden’s testimony regarding privileges extended to
inmates in the less restrictive custody levels showed that the defendant’s
confinement in the N Tier kept him from the usual conditions of prison life
during his pretrial confinement.
The defendant also asserts that the warden’s testimony about conditions
of confinement was unfairly prejudicial because it “portrayed the life of a
medium custody inmate at the New Hampshire State Prison as carefree and
relaxed.” Based upon this characterization of the warden’s testimony, the
defendant argues that the jury would conclude that imprisonment for life was
not “a harsh punishment.” We agree with the State, however, that the
defendant’s characterization of the testimony regarding privileges afforded to
inmates is not borne out by the record.
The defendant further relies upon the State’s closing argument to
illustrate the alleged unfairly prejudicial nature of the warden’s prison
privileges testimony. The defendant contends that in its closing, the State
“invoked [his] ability to watch Alabama football games and play pool with
111
friends if sentenced to life without parole.” The defendant does not point to any
trial objection to the State’s closing remarks. Rather, he asks us to consider
the remarks when assessing the prejudicial impact of the prison privileges
evidence. Even assuming that the State’s closing remarks are pertinent to the
admissibility of the challenged conditions of confinement evidence, we conclude
that the record does not support the defendant’s characterization of them.
In its closing, the State argued:
Some of you told us in jury selection that a life
sentence could be worse than a death sentence. But that’s
only true if someone feels remorse for what they had done.
You saw his behavior. He doesn’t — he didn’t show any
remorse for what he did to Mike Briggs and for the pain that
they are going to have to bear for the rest of their lives. He
only expressed excitement when Dr. Barr talked to him about
his violent criminal history just a few days before we started
this trial.
The cold reality is in this case that if you sentence him
to life in prison, he is not going to spend one moment in that
prison feeling bad for what he has done here. You know that
if he can’t express any emotion when he sees the raw emotion
of the pain that he has caused in this courtroom, there’s no
way he’s going to spend one moment thinking about the pain
and devastation that he had caused here if you sentence him
to life.
He will spend more time in that prison thinking about
the next Alabama football game on his cable television or
bragging to his criminal buddies about how he popped a cop
while they’re playing pool or playing cards than he will ever
spend thinking about the pain and the trauma, the real pain
that he has caused here. A life sentence doesn’t do justice in
this case. It just doesn’t do justice.
In context, the State’s closing statements regarding the privileges the defendant
may have in prison, such as watching a football game, was not an argument
that a sentence of life in prison without parole would be unjust because his
prison life would be “carefree and relaxed.” Rather, the prosecutor was
directing the jury’s attention to evidence of the defendant’s lack of remorse. In
particular, the prosecutor pointed to the casual attitude he expressed during an
interview with Dr. William Barr, a neuropsychologist who conducted an
examination of the defendant. Dr. Barr testified that the defendant told him
112
that their interview “better be done by middle of the afternoon because he was
interested in a particular football game involving the Alabama Crimson Tide.”
In short, the defendant’s unfair prejudice argument is unavailing. Unfair
prejudice does not exist simply because the contested evidence may increase
the likelihood that a defendant will receive a sentence of death. See Barefoot,
463 U.S. at 905-06 (recognizing that the fact that psychiatric testimony
“increased the likelihood that petitioner would be sentenced to death” did not
render that “evidence inadmissible, any more than it would with respect to
other relevant evidence against any defendant in a criminal case”); see also
United States v. Pinillos-Prieto, 419 F.3d 61, 72 (1st Cir. 2005) (“Virtually all
evidence is prejudicial — if the truth be told, that is almost always why the
proponent seeks to introduce it — but it is only unfair prejudice against which
the law protects.” (quotation omitted)). Rather, unfair prejudice must have “an
undue tendency to induce a decision against the defendant on some improper
basis, commonly one that is emotionally charged.” State v. Town, 163 N.H. 790,
796 (2012) (quotation omitted).
Accordingly, we hold that the defendant has failed to demonstrate that
the trial court’s decision under RSA 630:5, III to admit evidence of conditions of
confinement as probative of the future dangerousness aggravating factor and
the prison adjustment mitigating factor was clearly untenable or unreasonable
to the prejudice of his case. To the extent the defendant argues that the State
presented the conditions of confinement testimony in an impermissible
manner, his argument was not preserved for appellate review. As the State
points out, he did not make any such contemporaneous objection to the
warden’s testimony during the sentence selection phase of trial. See Eaton,
162 N.H. at 195; Winward, 161 N.H. at 542.
The defendant does, however, present an appellate argument resting
upon a contemporaneous trial objection that he made regarding the testimony
of Officer Briggs’s mother. Thus, we review this preserved argument. The
defendant argues that the mother’s victim impact testimony improperly
emphasized aspects of the conditions of confinement that the warden
explained. He characterizes a portion of her testimony as “lament[ing] that her
son would not enjoy the privileges available to a C-3 inmate such as Addison.”
According to the defendant, the evidence was admitted without any limitation
of its use because the trial court erroneously rejected his proposed limiting
instruction to the jury.
Officer Briggs’s mother presented victim impact testimony later on the
same day that the warden testified. During the course of her testimony, the
prosecutor asked her, “How has Mike’s death impacted you and your family?” to
which she responded:
113
I just think about all the things that Mike can’t do. He can’t
play baseball. He can’t play basketball. He can’t play pool.
He can’t watch TV on a big screen. He can’t listen to his
music. He has two little boys. Those little boys he’ll never
watch grow up. He’ll never see his children graduate from
college or go on with their life, get married, or see their
children and Mike wanted to see this so much in his life. He
loved his family, just as I love my family.
Defense counsel subsequently objected to this portion of her testimony, arguing
that it exceeded the permissible scope of victim impact evidence. Defense
counsel contended that the mother’s testimony regarding the activities that her
son could no longer do, such as read, watch a “big screen” television, and play
basketball, improperly compared “the privileges that the warden had testified to
that [the defendant] would be able to earn in prison.” Thus, defense counsel
argued, her testimony improperly provided information on her “opinion” as a
victim “on the punishment of the defendant.”
The trial court disagreed with the defendant’s characterization of the
mother’s victim impact testimony as somehow “listing . . . things that the
defendant would be allowed to do in prison.” While ruling that the challenged
testimony did not “cross any line,” the trial court asked what relief the
defendant was seeking. The defendant requested that the court provide the jury
with a limiting instruction and did not ask for any testimony to be stricken.
The defendant subsequently submitted the following limiting instruction for the
court to consider as part of the final jury charge:
You have heard testimony about the possible conditions of the
defendant’s future confinement should you sentence him to
serve life in prison without the possibility of parole. The
purpose of this testimony was to educate you, in general,
about what the prison is like, how inmates may advance
through the system, and what inmates at each level of
confinement are permitted to do. You may only consider this
testimony insofar as it may relate to the defendant’s potential
future dangerousness in prison. The testimony was not
offered for any other reason and you cannot consider it for any
other reason. Specifically, you cannot base your conclusion
on the appropriateness of a life without parole sentence or a
death sentence, in any part, on whether the defendant may
personally be afforded educational, recreational or vocational
opportunities in the future.
The court declined to provide this instruction to the jury.
114
We are not persuaded by the defendant’s challenge to the court’s
rejection of his proposed instruction. “Whether or not a particular jury
instruction is necessary, the scope and wording of jury instructions, and the
response to a question from the jury are all within the sound discretion of the
trial court, and we review the trial court’s decisions on these matters for an
unsustainable exercise of discretion.” State v. Littlefield, 152 N.H. 331, 334
(2005) (citations omitted).
The record supports the trial court’s conclusion that the mother was not
comparing the privileges that her son could no longer enjoy to the privileges
available to a C-3 inmate as described by the warden. Moreover, the
defendant’s proposed instruction conflicts with the permissible scope of the
conditions of confinement evidence set forth in the court’s December 2 order;
the proposed instruction would have limited the jury’s consideration of the
evidence to only the future dangerousness aggravating factor, rather than
permitting the jury to also consider it when evaluating the prison adjustment
mitigating factor. Accordingly, we reject the defendant’s arguments regarding
the victim impact testimony of Officer Briggs’s mother and the proposed
limiting instruction.
2. Mode of Execution
The defendant next contends that the trial court erroneously excluded
evidence of, and denied his proposed jury instruction regarding, the mode by
which he would be executed if sentenced to death. He argues that their
relevance is directly tied to the relevance of conditions of confinement evidence:
“If mode of execution evidence is not relevant, neither is evidence of an inmate’s
future conditions of confinement,” such as “the number of cable channels a life
without parole inmate may watch.”
As a preliminary matter, we agree with the State that any appellate claim
of evidentiary error was not preserved. The record demonstrates that when
responding to the State’s motion to preclude evidence on the manner of
execution, the defendant expressly agreed not to seek “to introduce evidence
regarding death penalty protocols or the means of execution.” Instead, the
defendant requested a mode of execution instruction pursuant to the statutory
language of RSA 630:5, XIII and XIV. Thereafter, the court issued an order
that precluded both the State and the defendant from introducing mode of
execution evidence and that rejected the defendant’s proposed mode of
execution instruction. In a subsequent motion, the defendant referred to this
order but did not seek to introduce evidence on mode of execution. Therefore,
any appellate claim of evidentiary error was waived. See Eaton, 162 N.H. at
195; Winward, 161 N.H. at 542.
115
We also agree with the State that the trial court did not err in refusing to
provide the requested mode of execution instruction. In its December 2 order,
the court ruled that “[t]he method of execution prescribed by statute is not
relevant to any aggravating or mitigating factor while evidence of future
conditions of incarceration is highly probative of [the State’s alleged future
dangerousness non-statutory aggravating factor] and to rebut the defendant’s
proposed [mitigating factor] concerning his behavior in prison to this point.”
On appeal, the defendant does not present any persuasive argument
establishing that the mode of execution instruction was related to matters
raised by the aggravating factors and/or mitigating factors of the case. See
RSA 630:5, III; see also Fuller v. Dretke, 161 Fed. Appx. 413, 416 (5th Cir.
2006) (“The method used in executing prisoners, though it may turn some
jurors against the death penalty, does not have any relevance as to whether
[the defendant] would be dangerous in the future, whether he acted
deliberately, or to any mitigating circumstance of the crime or [his] character.”);
Jackson v. State, 684 So. 2d 1213, 1238 (Miss. 1996) (“the method of execution
is of no concern to the jury”). Although capital defendants are constitutionally
entitled to offer wide-ranging information in mitigation at the sentence
selection phase of trial, the trial court properly recognized that this right is not
unfettered. See McCleskey v. Kemp, 481 U.S. 279, 304 (1987); Lockett v. Ohio,
438 U.S. 586, 604 (1978) (plurality opinion); see also United States v. Fell, 531
F.3d 197, 219 (2d Cir. 2008).
Finally, regarding his constitutional arguments, the defendant avers that
the trial court’s decision to admit the conditions of confinement information
and reject the proposed mode of execution instruction: (1) violated his rights to
due process under Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution and the
Fourteenth Amendment to the Federal Constitution; (2) implicated his right to
be free from punishments that are cruel and/or unusual; and (3) violated his
rights to more enhanced protection under the Due Process and Cruel or
Unusual Punishment Clauses of the State Constitution. See N.H. CONST. pt. I,
arts. 15, 18, 33; U.S. CONST. amends. V, VIII, XIV.
The trial court rejected the defendant’s constitutional arguments
regarding the conditions of confinement information because he “failed to
explain how, if this evidence is admissible under RSA 630:5, III, the admission
of this evidence would amount to a constitutional violation.” See State v.
Chick, 141 N.H. 503, 504 (1996). The record supports the trial court’s ruling.
Additionally, we note that the defendant did not argue in his pertinent
pleadings in the trial court that the State Constitution affords him greater
protection than does the Federal Constitution. See State v. Matton, 163 N.H.
411, 415 (2012) (because the defendant did not raise the constitutional
argument before the trial court, it was not preserved for appellate review). In
any event, the defendant’s constitutional arguments on appeal are presented
116
without adequately developed legal argument apart from his argument under
RSA 630:5, III. Accordingly, we conclude that these perfunctory claims do not
warrant independent constitutional analysis. See State v. Ayer, 154 N.H. 500,
513 (2006); Chick, 141 N.H. at 504.
3. Prior Crimes
a. Background
In November 2008, before the sentence selection phase of trial, the
defendant filed a motion in limine requesting that the trial court limit the
State’s evidence about the ten prior crimes non-statutory aggravating factors to
the certified records of the convictions. The first five prior crimes non-statutory
aggravating factors relate to the crimes that the defendant committed between
1996 and 2003: (1) his assaulting his mother and his threatening to kill her in
August 1996; (2) his pointing a loaded gun at a fellow high school student and
twice pulling the trigger in December 1996; (3) his stabbing and kicking a
person in March 1997; (4) his participating in the false imprisonment of a
person in October 2003; and (5) his probation violation arising out of the false
imprisonment conviction.1 The remaining five relate to the crimes that the
defendant committed in the week preceding the capital murder in October
2006: (6) the El Mexicano Restaurant armed robbery on October 10; (7) the
defendant’s unlawful possession of a deadly weapon during that robbery; (8)
the 7-Eleven convenience store armed robbery on October 11; (9) the
defendant’s unlawful possession of a firearm during that robbery; and (10) the
Roy Drive shooting on October 15.
In his motion in limine, the defendant argued that his proposed
limitation would prevent “unfair prejudice” that would arise from witness
testimony. He also sought to exclude the testimony of victims of the prior
crimes, arguing that such victim impact testimony would fall outside the scope
of the aggravating factors identified in the death penalty the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania explained:
Sentencing has long been regarded as having at its core a
function of character analysis, and the central idea of the
present sentencing statute is to allow a jury to take into
account such relevant information, bearing upon a
defendant’s character and record, as is applicable to the task
of considering the enumerated aggravating circumstances.
Consideration of prior “convictions” was not intended to be a
meaningless and abstract ritual, but rather a process
126
through which a jury would gain considerable insight into a
defendant’s character. The nature of an offense, as
ascertained through examination of the circumstances
concomitant to its commission, has much bearing upon the
character of a defendant, and, indeed, without reference to
those facts and circumstances, consideration of “convictions”
would be a hollow process, yielding far less information about
a defendant’s character than is relevant.
Com. v. Flor, 998 A.2d 606, 622-23 (Pa. 2010) (quotation omitted), cert. denied,
131 S. Ct. 2102 (2011); see, e.g., Sampson, 486 F.3d at 44; People v. Karis,
758 P.2d 1189, 1204-05 (Cal. 1988); People v. Dunlap, 975 P.2d 723, 745
(Colo. 1999); Cox v. State, 819 So. 2d 705, 716-17 (Fla. 2002); People v.
Ballard, 794 N.E.2d 788, 815 (Ill. 2002); State v. Kleypas, 40 P.3d 139, 264
(Kan. 2001), overruled on other grounds by Kansas v. Marsh, 548 U.S. 163
(2006); State v. Allen, 913 So. 2d 788, 803 (La. 2005); Parker, 886 S.W.2d at
924; Emil v. State, 784 P.2d 956, 961 (Nev. 1989); State v. Valentine, 591
S.E.2d 846, 858 (N.C. 2003); State v. Bennett, 632 S.E.2d 281, 287 (S.C.
2006).
The defendant relies upon five cases to support his argument that the
State’s presentation of prior crimes evidence should have been limited to
certified copies of the previous convictions. See State v. Pandeli, 161 P.3d 557,
565 (Ariz. 2007); State v. Lee, 559 P.2d 657, 661 (Ariz. 1976); Brewer v. State,
650 P.2d 54, 63 (Okla. Crim. App. 1982); State v. Odom, 137 S.W.3d 572, 580-
83 (Tenn. 2004); State v. Clark, 24 P.3d 1006, 1031-32 (Wash. 2001).
However, these cases either were decided in the context of a capital sentencing
statute that is materially different from RSA 630:5, or do not set forth
reasoning that we find persuasive.
The defendant nonetheless argues that the prior crimes evidence created
an unacceptable risk that the jury would be unduly influenced by his criminal
history. He identifies three aspects of the prior crimes evidence as giving rise
to unfair prejudice: its volume; its content; and the manner in which the State
used it.
The trial court limited the amount and content of the prior crimes
evidence. In its initial written order, the court approved the State’s
representation that: “The testimony will be given by four or fewer witnesses for
each offense, who will be victims of the crimes, investigating officers, and/or
witnesses who can testify about physical evidence related to the crime.” The
court precluded the State from presenting evidence of “impact statements by
victims of prior crimes,” while allowing the State to elicit testimony from the
prior victims concerning “how they felt when the crime was occurring.” During
the December 1 hearing, the State identified the witnesses whom it intended to
127
call relating to the October 2006 non-capital prior crimes, including five
witnesses regarding the Roy Drive shooting. The court approved the State’s
use of these witnesses.
The defendant first argues that the sheer volume of the challenged
evidence made his prior crimes a “central feature” at sentencing and “thus
increas[ed] the risk of a verdict based on considerations aside from the capital
murder [he] committed.” To illustrate the volume of evidence that the trial
court’s ruling permitted, the defendant focuses upon 349 pages of transcript
during the sentence selection phase of trial, which comprise the testimony of
eighteen witnesses, and related exhibits that were introduced by the State.
Several courts have expressed concerns about the volume of prior crimes
evidence admitted during a capital sentencing proceeding. The Supreme Court
of South Carolina recognized that the trial court’s decision as to the extent of
prior crimes evidence should “prevent a capital sentencing proceeding from
transmuting into a sentencing referendum on all of the defendant’s prior
crimes.” Bennett, 632 S.E.2d at 287. The Supreme Court of Louisiana
observed that “there can be a point when the sheer magnitude and detail of the
[prior crimes] evidence, although highly probative, impermissibly shifts the
jury’s focus away from its primary function of determining the appropriate
sentence for this offense and this offender” to “the defendant’s involvement in
another unrelated crime.” State v. Smith, 793 So. 2d 1199, 1209, 1210 (La.
2001). Similarly, the Supreme Court of Missouri cautioned against the penalty
phase in a capital proceeding “result[ing] in a ‘mini-trial’ of prior offenses.”
Johns, 34 S.W.3d at 113. The Supreme Court of Florida examined whether the
details of prior crimes evidence had been emphasized “to the level of rendering
the prior offenses a central feature of the penalty phase.” Cox, 819 So. 2d at
716-17.
Here, the trial court permitted the State to introduce one exhibit for the
7-Eleven crime, the testimony of five witnesses for the Roy Drive crime, and no
more than four witnesses for each of the other crimes. This evidence, including
related exhibits, covered seven distinct criminal episodes involving different
locations, different victims, different eyewitnesses, and different investigating
officers. Taking into account the challenged 349 pages of transcript during the
sentence selection phase of trial — together with the challenged 168 pages of
direct testimony on the October 2006 prior crimes presented during the guilt
phase of the trial — the totality of the prior crimes evidence presented by the
State for consideration at sentencing comprised approximately 500 pages of an
estimated 5,400 pages of testimony transcript covering all three phases of the
trial.
The defendant has not demonstrated that this evidence was excessive.
The trial court focused upon providing the jury with sufficient information to
128
evaluate the existence and qualitative weight of each of the prior crimes non-
statutory aggravating factors. Further, the sum total of evidence identified by
the defendant constituted approximately two days of testimony in a three-
phase trial that lasted approximately two months. On this record, we cannot
conclude that the extent of the prior crimes evidence created an undue risk of
diverting the jury’s focus from its primary function of determining the sentence
based upon the character of the defendant and the circumstances of the capital
murder. See Johns, 34 S.W.3d at 113 (rejecting defendant’s claim that twenty-
one witnesses in the penalty phase “was over the top,” reasoning that there
were eight prior crimes and the “quantity of evidence was directly related to the
seriousness of [the defendant’s] actions after the [capital murder]”). Neither did
the admitted evidence transform the sentencing phase into a referendum on all
of the defendant’s prior crimes. See Bennett, 632 S.E.2d at 287.
With respect to the content of the prior crimes evidence, the defendant
identifies several instances when witnesses testified about their emotional
reactions to the prior crimes. The defendant does not argue that such
testimony was irrelevant or lacked probative value concerning the relative
seriousness of his prior criminal conduct as reflective of his character. Rather,
he complains that the testimony allowed the jury to consider “the impact of
those crimes on their victims” as a “potential sentencing factor in the capital
case.”
The trial court ruled in its November 25 written order that the State could
not present victim impact testimony on prior crimes, but that it could elicit
testimony from the witnesses about how they felt as the crimes were occurring.
Thus, the court determined that such testimony had probative value as tending
to show the gravity of the crimes committed by the defendant. The testimony
that the defendant challenges on appeal is fully consistent with this order.
In several instances, the witness briefly responded to a single question
about how that witness felt while the crime was occurring. For example, at the
conclusion of direct examination, the State asked Alexander Paz “how did you
feel” when the defendant was robbing him at knifepoint, to which the witness
responded, “I was afraid.” Other witnesses also briefly related the feelings that
they experienced at the time the crime was occurring. Gerald Briles, for instance,
testified that when the defendant or his friend showed Briles a gun during their
confrontation, Briles was scared and his “heart [was] racing.” Although Henry
Aliberti was not present in his apartment during the Roy Drive shooting, he
described how he felt when he first returned to his apartment and saw evidence
of the shooting. Consistent with the trial court’s order, none of the witnesses
testified about any harm that they sustained as a result of the crimes. Cf. Payne,
501 U.S at 825-26 (referring to victim impact evidence as “evidence of the specific
harm caused by the defendant”).
129
We conclude that the trial court did not err in determining that the
witnesses’ emotional reaction testimony was probative of the severity of the prior
crimes. The court sustainably exercised its discretion under RSA 630:5, III when
it ruled that the probative value of such testimony was not substantially
outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice. Accordingly, we reject the
defendant’s argument that the content of the prior crimes evidence gave rise to
unfair prejudice because witness testimony somehow interjected into the case a
“potential sentencing factor” distinct from the prior crimes non-statutory
aggravating factors.
The defendant nevertheless faults the trial court for allowing the State to
“choose from any category of acceptable witnesses.” He relies upon decisions
in other jurisdictions that he claims limit such testimonial evidence to one or
two witnesses consisting of a law enforcement officer, a victim, or an
eyewitness. See, e.g., Rodriguez v. State, 753 So. 2d 29, 44-45 (Fla. 2000);
Finney v. State, 660 So. 2d 674, 683 (Fla. 1995); Allen, 913 So. 2d at 807-08;
Smith, 793 So. 2d at 1209-10. The Supreme Court of Florida cautioned
against the danger of unfair prejudice associated with live testimony of victims
of prior violent crimes, such as the risk of overly emotional testimony or of
unduly focusing the jury’s attention upon prior convictions, see Finney, 660
So. 2d at 683-84; the Supreme Court of Louisiana limited evidence of prior
convictions to documents certifying the fact of conviction and to the testimony
of the victim or of any eyewitness to the crime, see Smith, 793 So. 2d at 1209-
10. Both courts were concerned that the prior crimes evidence would become a
feature of the sentencing phase and shift the jury’s focus away from its task of
determining the sentence for the capital offense. While we agree that this is a
legitimate concern for the trial court to consider, we decline to impose a specific
limit upon the number and type of witnesses who may testify about a
defendant’s prior crimes at capital sentencing.
Our statutory scheme does not impose such a restriction. We can
neither ignore the plain language of the legislation nor add words that the
legislature did not see fit to include. State v. Addison, 160 N.H. 732, 754
(2010). The trial court retains the discretion to admit various sources and
types of relevant prior crimes evidence at sentencing within the boundaries set
forth under RSA 630:5, III. Cf. Williams v. New York, 337 U.S. 241, 246
(1949); State v. Breest, 116 N.H. 734, 755 (1976). The record in this case
shows that the trial court considered the risks of unfair prejudice regarding the
number and type of prior crimes witnesses and, as discussed above,
sustainably exercised its discretion in establishing limits on the prior crimes
evidence.
The defendant also contends that the manner in which the State
referenced the prior crimes evidence during its closing argument in the sentence
selection phase of trial “increased the potential abuse of the other crimes
130
evidence.” The defendant argues that the State “in closing, specifically invoked
the harm Addison wrought on each victim.” The State’s remarks, however, were
fully consistent with the court’s November 25 written order allowing the State to
present testimony from the witnesses about how they felt as the crimes were
occurring, evidence that we have determined was probative of the prior crimes
non-statutory aggravating factors. Accordingly, we reject the defendant’s
argument that the manner in which the State used the prior crimes evidence
supports a conclusion that the court unsustainably exercised its discretion in
permitting the testimonial and exhibit evidence.
In sum, we hold that the defendant has failed to demonstrate that the
trial court’s decision under RSA 630:5, III to admit the prior crimes evidence
was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.
We note that on appeal the defendant asserts a number of constitutional
challenges in a cursory fashion including: (1) the prior crimes evidence as
presented and argued was so prejudicial that it violated his rights to due
process under Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution and the Fourteenth
Amendment to the Federal Constitution; (2) the prior crimes evidence
implicated his rights to be free from punishments that are cruel and/or
unusual; and (3) the State Constitution provides him with enhanced protection
under the Due Process and Cruel or Unusual Punishment Clauses. See N.H.
CONST. pt. I, arts. 15, 18, 33; U.S. CONST. amends. V, VIII, XIV. The
defendant presented his constitutional arguments in a similarly cursory
fashion to the trial court, which, we assume, the court rejected even though it
did not expressly address them. Further, the defendant did not argue to the
trial court that the State Constitution affords him greater protection than the
Federal Constitution in the context of evaluating the admissibility of the prior
crimes evidence during the sentence selection phase of trial. Thus, this
argument was not preserved for appellate review. See State v. Matton, 163
N.H. 411, 415 (2012) (because the defendant did not raise the constitutional
argument before the trial court, it was not preserved for appellate review). In
any event, the defendant’s constitutional arguments on appeal are presented
without adequately developed legal argument apart from his argument under
RSA 630:5, III. Accordingly, we conclude that these claims do not warrant
independent constitutional analysis. See State v. Ayer, 154 N.H. 500, 513
(2006); State v. Chick, 141 N.H. 503, 504 (1996).
2. Gun Possession Testimony
Next, the defendant challenges the admission of testimony by Laura
Hussey and Kyarra Davis that he possessed a gun at the Central Street
apartment before the Roy Drive shooting. He contends that “[t]he admission of
this evidence violated RSA 630:5, III, in that it constituted evidence that was
131
prejudicial and not relevant to prove an enumerated aggravating factor.”
Before addressing his argument, we set forth the procedural context.
At the December 1 hearing, the defendant objected to Davis testifying
that, while at the Central Street apartment, the defendant told her that he
intended to kill Edwards and that she saw him there with a gun. He also
objected to Hussey testifying that she saw the defendant in possession of a gun
at the Central Street apartment on the evening of the shooting. He argued to
the trial court that Davis’s expected testimony would comprise “evidence about
the Roy Drive incident that goes beyond the incident and that goes beyond the
aggravators . . . in the State’s The Supreme Court of North Carolina concluded
that this statement, viewed in context, did not constitute a general deterrence
argument, but properly “focused the jury’s attention on the seriousness of the
crime and the importance of the jury’s duty.” Id. In a subsequent case, that
court also concluded that the following advocacy regarding the gravity of
murdering a police officer did not amount to a general deterrence argument:
These two defendants deserve the death penalty for what
they did, for their motives, for their actions. Someone has
got to tell people like these two defendants, “We absolutely
will not tolerate this any longer.” If you don’t tell that to
these two defendants, nobody else will. We can’t rely on the
next bad case. We can’t rely on the next jury to send that
message to people who have no regard for your way of life,
for your state, for your law enforcement officers.
Golphin, 533 S.E.2d at 237.
142
We likewise conclude that the prosecutor’s remarks, viewed in context,
sought to persuade the jury of the gravity of the defendant’s murder of a police
officer acting in the line of duty and did not advance a general deterrence
argument. Accordingly, we hold that the defendant has failed to demonstrate
that the trial court’s decision to allow the State’s closing argument was clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.
2. Exercise of Defendant’s Constitutional Rights
The defendant next argues that the State impermissibly commented
upon his constitutional rights by “ask[ing] the jury to measure his culpability
by reference to the extent of his procedural rights.” According to the
defendant, the prosecutor’s remarks communicated the message that “the
greater the procedural rights the law grants to a criminal defendant, the more
egregious the defendant’s crime and thus the more severe the appropriate
punishment.” He contends that the trial court erred in denying his motion for
a mistrial and that the “curative” instruction given by the court was inadequate
to remove the taint from the sentencing hearing.
During its closing argument, the State referred to certain constitutional
rights and protections afforded to the defendant during the capital trial:
Now some of you may think, I don’t want to be like him,
or two wrongs don’t make a right. But you cannot even
compare what he did to Officer Briggs to the process that
has gone on in this courtroom. What has gone on in this
courtroom has been about the fair administration of justice
and the rule of law. Applying the laws of our[ ] state in this
courtroom; that’s what your duty is as a juror.
Throughout this process, his constitutional rights have
been honored. He has been represented by three very
competent and able attorneys. He has had the chance to
question every witness. He has had the opportunity to put
forth any relevant mitigating evidence that he wants you to
hear. And he was even involved in the process of selecting
each of you to fairly sit and consider this case on this jury.
In contrast, on October 16th the defendant put a
bullet into Mike Briggs’ head when Mike didn’t even see it
coming. If the defendant had given Mike Briggs even a
fraction of the due process that he has rightly received in
this trial —
143
At this point the defendant objected to the State’s remarks as improperly
arguing to the jury that he is more deserving of the death penalty because he
exercised his constitutional rights and because he was advised by counsel to
do so. He moved for a mistrial or, in the alternative, for the court to provide an
immediate instruction to the jury foreclosing it from considering his exercise of
his constitutional rights. The trial court disagreed with the defendant’s
characterization of the State’s argument and denied his motion for a mistrial.
In so doing, it ruled that the prosecutor was making the point that while the
jury’s sentencing task was a difficult one, the imposition of a sentence of death
pursuant to the legal process was not comparable to the defendant’s actions in
taking the life of Officer Briggs. It agreed, however, to provide an instruction to
the jury, which the defendant accepted. The court instructed the jury as
follows:
Members of the jury, the defendant, as you know, has certain
constitutional rights. Among them is the right to a jury trial.
And because the defendant has exercised his right to a jury
trial has no bearing on your decision as to the appropriate
sentence of this defendant . . . .
The State then continued its closing argument as follows:
Mike Briggs should be — should have been given a chance in
that alley. Mike Briggs, how he was treated, was completely
unfair. You know that. Even though he had different choices
that he could have made in that alley, Mike Briggs was not
given any due process in that alley.
Considering the challenged remarks in context, we see no basis for
disturbing the trial court’s judgment regarding the substance of the
prosecutor’s argument. Immediately prior to her challenged remarks, the
prosecutor called upon the jurors to remember the assurances that each had
given during jury selection to keep an open mind, to be fair to both parties, and
to uphold and apply the law fairly. She also reminded the jurors that each had
stated that if the aggravating evidence outweighed the mitigating evidence, he
or she could impose the death penalty. It was at that point that the prosecutor
addressed the hesitancy that some jurors may have to impose a death sentence
based upon the notion that “two wrongs don’t make a right.” Thus, the
prosecutor referred to the defendant’s constitutional rights to explain that a
death sentence imposed upon him would be based upon the fair administration
of justice and the rule of law. The prosecutor neither denigrated the
defendant’s decision to exercise his constitutional rights nor otherwise
conveyed to the jury that the defendant deserved the death penalty because he
exercised those rights. We, therefore, reject the defendant’s argument that the
144
prosecutor invited the jury to determine the penalty by assessing the extent to
which the defendant had exercised his constitutional rights.
Several courts have concluded that similar prosecutorial remarks did not
constitute improper commentary about a defendant’s constitutional rights. For
example, in Burgess v. State, a prosecutor argued: “No matter what happened
. . . [the defendant has] had the opportunity to have lawyers represent him in
this case. We have been in an orderly process.” Burgess v. State, 827 So. 2d
134, 167 (Ala. Crim. App. 1998). The court concluded that these remarks
constituted a permissible comment on the fact that the defendant had
exercised his right to counsel as a reminder that, unlike the victim, “[the
defendant’s] fate was to be determined by the rule of law and the judicial
system.” Id. Also, in People v. Ervine, a prosecutor commented that the
defendant was “his own Judge, jury, and executioner” and that the victim
neither received “due process” nor had the benefit of “two lawyers comin[g] into
this courtroom with a Judge to make sure everything’s right, give you
appropriate instructions, have a jury decide it.” People v. Ervine, 220 P.3d
820, 869 (Cal. 2009). The court held that the prosecutor’s remarks were
permissible “since the argument did not urge the jury to return a death verdict
because defendant exercised his constitutional rights and did not suggest that
defendant should be given a greater penalty because he had a trial.” Id.
(quotation omitted).
Similarly, in State v. Garcell, a prosecutor commented: “[T]his man did
not care about [the victim’s] rights. He violated her rights. He is big on rights
now. He wants his right to a trial, his right to two very good lawyers, his right
to due process, to the presumption of innocence, to reasonable doubt.” State v.
Garcell, 678 S.E.2d 618, 650 (N.C. 2009). The court concluded that the
prosecutor permissibly encouraged the jury to consider that the victim had
rights as a human being that the defendant had disregarded and that the
defendant was concerned about his own rights instead. Id. Also, in
Commonwealth v. Carson, a prosecutor argued: “But when you do think about
this case and think about the circumstances under which [the victim] was shot
you may consider the fact that [the victim did] not have 12 people sitting in
judgment that night in a nice orderly courtroom, with a record being taken and
a fair-minded, impartial Judge and the representation of a very, very competent
defense attorney and the fact of the United States and Pennsylvania
constitutions. [The victim] didn’t have that when he was gunned down.” Com.
v. Carson, 913 A.2d 220, 269-70 (Pa. 2006). The court concluded that the
prosecutor’s remarks were permissible because the State “reminded the jury
that, thanks to procedural safeguards, imposing the death penalty was not the
same as killing someone on a street corner and that life in prison is not
comparable to death.” Id. at 270.
145
The defendant relies upon two decisions of the Supreme Court of
Mississippi to support his argument that the prosecutor’s remarks in this case
were improper. See Walker v. State, 913 So. 2d 198, 241 (Miss. 2005); Shell v.
State, 554 So. 2d 887, 900 (Miss. 1989), rev’d on other grounds sub nom. Shell
v. Mississippi, 498 U.S. 1 (1990). In Walker, the prosecutor’s comments during
closing argument at capital sentencing compared the legal process afforded the
defendant with the defendant’s conduct in illegally taking the life of the victim.
Walker, 913 So. 2d at 241. The court concluded that the content of the
remarks did not taint the sentencing proceeding in part because they did not
include any specific reference to due process or to constitutional rights. Id. at
242. As the defendant here points out, the State in this case did refer to
specific constitutional rights and to “due process.” Nonetheless, we review the
prosecutor’s remarks in context when evaluating whether the remarks
improperly called upon the jury to draw a negative inference from the
defendant’s exercise of his constitutional rights and to base its penalty decision
upon that inference. Here, we conclude that the trial court sustainably
exercised its discretion in ruling that the prosecutor did not do so. Cf.
Robinson, 485 U.S. at 31 (holding that the prosecutor’s statement during
closing at a criminal trial that the defendant could have taken the stand to
explain himself “did not in the light of the comments by defense counsel
infringe upon [the defendant’s] Fifth Amendment rights”). To the extent that
Walker can be read as prohibiting any reference by the State in closing to due
process or other specific constitutional rights of the defendant, we do not find
the case persuasive and decline to follow it.
In Shell, the defendant challenged the prosecutor’s comment made
during closing argument at the guilt phase that the defendant was “clothed in
the full protection of the Constitution of the United States and he has got what
[the murder victim] never got. And that is a jury of twelve good people to
decide his fate.” Shell, 554 So. 2d at 900. The court expressed its disapproval
of any prosecutorial comments regarding “a defendant’s exercise of specific
constitutional rights” and noted its state precedent “condemn[ing] attempts by
the prosecution to penalize a defendant for the exercise of a constitutional
right.” Id. It stated: “The use of these various improper arguments creates an
unfair inference of guilt.” Id. (emphasis added). The comment in Shell was
made during closing argument at the guilt phase of the trial when the
defendant was presumed innocent under the law. At that stage of a capital
proceeding, reference to a defendant’s exercise of constitutional rights may well
invite an unfair inference of guilt. Cf. Ellsworth, 151 N.H. at 155 (“Comment
either by a prosecutor or the court which may be construed as an unfavorable
reference to the failure of a defendant to testify is a violation of the defendant's
constitutional right against self-incrimination.”). In contrast, the remarks in
this case were made after the jury had found the defendant both guilty of
capital murder and eligible for the death penalty and did not invite any
146
improper negative inference from the defendant’s exercise of his constitutional
rights.
Accordingly, we conclude that the defendant has failed to establish that
the denial of his motion for mistrial was clearly untenable or unreasonable to
the prejudice of his case.
3. Victim Impact
The defendant argues that the State misused the victim impact evidence
when refuting his mitigating factor relating to lack of torture or protracted
cruelty. He characterizes the prosecutor’s argument as asking the jury to find
him to be a “worse person” based upon the “torture” he inflicted on Officer
Briggs’s survivors. According to the defendant, the prosecutor misused victim
impact evidence in contravention of constitutional principles outlined in Payne
v. Tennessee, 501 U.S. 808 (1991). He asks us to review the prosecutor’s
remarks for plain error.
Under the plain error rule, we may consider errors not raised before the
trial court. State v. Guay, 164 N.H. 696, 703 (2013); see United States v.
Davis, 609 F.3d 663, 677 (5th Cir. 2010). “A plain error that affects
substantial rights may be considered even though it was not brought to the
attention of the trial court or the supreme court.” Sup. Ct. R. 16-A. The rule
should be used sparingly, its use limited to those circumstances in which a
miscarriage of justice would otherwise result. Guay, 164 N.H. at 704. Our
plain error rule sets forth four requirements: (1) there must be an error; (2) the
error must be plain; (3) the error must affect substantial rights; and (4) the
error must seriously affect the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of the
judicial proceedings. Id. The State argues that the defendant’s challenge fails
under the first prong of the plain error analysis, and we agree.
In responding to the defendant’s mitigating factor that “[t]he
circumstances of the homicide did not involve torture or protracted cruelty,”
the prosecutor stated:
The defendant may have dropped Officer Briggs to the
ground immediately when he put a bullet in his head, but it
doesn’t ring true that the circumstances and the impact of
this crime don’t involve protracted cruelty.
John Breckinridge still patrolled the streets of that
alley when he watched his partner take a bullet to his head.
Laura Briggs has to raise her family now, her sons, as a
single parent. And Brian and Mitchell, there will never be
another holiday that passes where they don’t think of their
147
father. And you saw Lee Briggs. You don’t think that he is
tortured every day when he thinks about his son?
Relying solely upon Payne, the defendant contends that these statements
comprise plain error. According to the defendant, “[W]hile the admission of
powerful victim impact evidence may heighten the chance of a death sentence
by increasing the jury’s estimation of the harm done by the crime, such
evidence should not heighten the chance of a death sentence by making the
defendant seem a worse person.”
The defendant’s proposed mitigating factor asked the jury to consider
that his crime could have been more egregious had he caused Officer Briggs’s
death by acts of torture or protracted cruelty. The prosecutor’s argument
disputed that such a proposed mitigating factor warranted any mitigating value
by redirecting the jurors to the circumstances of the crime that the defendant
actually committed. The prosecutor expressly focused upon “the
circumstances and the impact of this crime,” by highlighting the testimony of
Officer Breckinridge and Officer Briggs’s family. We disagree with the
defendant’s characterization of the prosecutor’s remarks as asking the jury to
rely upon victim impact evidence to find him to be a “worse person” due to the
extent and quality of the suffering of Officer Briggs’s survivors.
The defendant points to no case in the country other than Payne to
support his argument. As noted in Part VII.B.1 (Sentence Selection Phase
Trial-Victim Impact Evidence) of this opinion, the United States Supreme Court
has held:
We are now of the view that a State may properly
conclude that for the jury to assess meaningfully the
defendant’s moral culpability and blameworthiness, it should
have before it at the sentencing phase evidence of the specific
harm caused by the defendant. The State has a legitimate
interest in counteracting the mitigating evidence which the
defendant is entitled to put in, by reminding the sentencer
that just as the murderer should be considered as an
individual, so too the victim is an individual whose death
represents a unique loss to society and in particular to his
family.
Payne, 501 U.S. at 825 (quotation and brackets omitted); see RSA 630:5, III;
Ball v. State, 699 A.2d 1170, 1193-94 (Md. 1997) (noting that Payne “suggests
that victim impact evidence may be used both to assess the harm caused by
the defendant’s actions . . . and to counteract mitigating evidence”). We are not
persuaded that the prosecutor’s argument contravened the precepts of Payne.
148
Accordingly, we hold that the defendant has failed to establish that the
prosecutor’s remarks fell outside the bounds of permissible closing argument,
and, thus, his challenge fails under the first prong of plain error analysis. See
Guay, 164 N.H. at 703-04.
4. Minimizing a Sentence of Life Without Possibility of Parole
The defendant argues that the State improperly minimized the severity of
a sentence of life imprisonment without possibility of parole. Specifically, he
identifies two portions of the State’s closing argument in which the prosecutor
made statements to the effect that if the jury imposed a life sentence, it would
be granting the defendant “a pass” for the murder of Officer Briggs. He
characterizes the prosecutor’s remarks as advancing an impermissible “free
pass” argument calculated to appeal to the passion and emotion of the jury
because the remarks communicated that choosing a sentence of life
imprisonment without possibility of parole would constitute a personal affront
to Officer Briggs and his survivors. Again, the defendant asks us to review the
prosecutor’s remarks for plain error. See id. The State argues that the
defendant’s challenge fails under the first prong of plain error analysis, and,
again, we agree.
Early in her closing, the prosecutor made the following statements:
And you now know that he was facing almost a life sentence
when he murdered Officer Mike Briggs. He was and is facing
thirty-one-and-a-half to sixty-three years in prison just for
the crimes that he committed before he murdered Officer
Mike Briggs. And with his criminal history, there is little
doubt that the judge is going to give him this time,
regardless of what happens in this trial. If the defendant is
facing essentially what amounts to a life sentence before he
is punished for the murder of Officer Mike Briggs facing this
time, how is life without parole adequate here? That’s
another reason why this case is deserving of the death
penalty.
He made the choice to take Officer Briggs from us to
avoid being held fully accountable for the crimes he
committed before this murder. And now he wants you to give
him practically the very same sentence that he was facing
just on the crimes he committed before the murder. If you
sentence him to life without parole he essentially gets a pass
on killing Mike Briggs because he is basically going to do
close to life anyway for the crimes that he committed before
this murder. How can that be fair? How can that be just?
149
This cold-blooded murder cannot be an afterthought. The life
that Mike Briggs lived and had snatched from him and his
loved ones is worth more than a few tacked on years.
Let’s just be blunt about this. In light of the sentences
he is facing for the crimes he committed before the murder,
what are the consequences for the murder if he does not
receive the death penalty? A career criminal like the
defendant cannot be given a pass for murdering a police
officer. That would be a grave injustice; a very grave
injustice.
Later in her closing, the prosecutor remarked as follows:
That so-called [plea] offer is an insult to Officer Briggs
and to the other police officers who every day put their lives on
the line to protect us against dangerous felons who have
nothing to lose. That plea offer was hollow because he was
already facing essentially a life sentence. That’s before he will
be punished for the murder of Officer Briggs, and in this case,
to treat Mike Briggs’ life as an add-on is to trivialize his life
and to trivialize the cold-hearted murder that the defendant
committed when he put a bullet in Mike Briggs’ head. Don’t
accept that. Mike Briggs’ life — his life is worth more than
that.
Viewed in context, the prosecutor’s statements center on whether a
sentence of life imprisonment without possibility of parole would be just and on
whether the defendant’s plea offer for the capital murder had any mitigating
value. The prosecutor argued that because the court likely would impose a
lengthy prison term for the three non-capital crimes, a life imprisonment
sentence for the capital murder would amount to “an afterthought,” “a few
tacked on years,” “a pass” for the murder of Officer Briggs, and an “add-on” to
the punishment for other prior crimes, which would “trivialize” the life of
Officer Briggs. These remarks were based upon the evidence presented during
the sentence selection phase of trial as to the maximum sentences the
defendant could receive for the three non-capital crimes he committed in
October 2006. Specifically, Karen Gorham, one of the prosecutors in the prior
felony trials, testified that the defendant had not yet been sentenced for the
three non-capital crimes because he requested that the trial court postpone
sentencing until the capital proceedings were complete. She then testified as to
the sentencing range for each of the convictions and stated that “[t]he
maximum for the total would be thirty-one-and-a-half to sixty-three years [in
prison] plus the one year in jail on the misdemeanor.” Based upon this
evidence, the prosecutor argued in closing that the defendant likely would
150
receive the equivalent of a life imprisonment sentence for the non-capital
crimes, and, therefore, the jury should impose a sentence of death as an
additional sentence for the additional crime of capital murder.
The challenged remarks also offered rebuttal to certain of the defendant’s
submitted mitigating factors. For example, as outlined in Part VII (Sentencing
Phase Review) of this opinion, the defendant asked the jury to consider that he
“attempted to plead guilty to Capital Murder but his offer was rejected by the
State,” as facts “tend[ing] to show that a life sentence is appropriate or
sufficient to do justice in this case.” To negate the proffered mitigating value of
these facts, the prosecutor focused the jury’s attention upon the potential
sentences for the defendant’s convictions on the three non-capital crimes.
The prosecutor’s argument is similar to arguments found to have been
permissible by the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit. In
Rodden v. Delo, the defendant murdered a man and a woman during the same
criminal episode and was convicted of the murders in separate proceedings.
Rodden v. Delo, 143 F.3d 441, 444 (8th Cir. 1998). For the murder of the man,
he received a sentence of life in prison without probation or parole for fifty
years. Id. During the sentencing phase for the murder of the woman, the
prosecutor argued, among other things: “Now, if [the defendant] killed two
people and he got fifty years in prison without parole for killing one person,
does he get the murder of the second person free? Another fifty years without
parole means nothing . . . . Should he not be punished for the murder of [the
woman]?” Id. at 446. Ultimately, the defendant was sentenced to death for
that murder, and the federal court rejected his challenge to the prosecutor’s
closing argument. Id. at 445. It concluded:
In context, the prosecutor’s statements about the second
murder being free urged the jury to impose additional
punishment for the additional crime. And in commenting
that another jury had convicted [the defendant] of killing [the
man], the prosecutor did not suggest the outcome of the [first]
murder trial should control the jury’s decision in the [second]
murder case. Rather, the prosecutor merely pointed out that
[the defendant] was a multiple killer. The jury could properly
consider [the defendant’s] earlier crimes in deciding whether
to sentence him to death.
Id. at 447.
As in Rodden, the prosecutor’s argument here rested upon the evidence
and did not invite a sentencing verdict based upon emotion. Rather, the State
urged the jury to consider the likely sentence that the defendant would serve
151
for the non-capital crimes and to impose a sentence of death to hold him
accountable for the capital murder.
The defendant relies upon People v. Kuntu to argue that the prosecutor’s
remarks constitute reversible error. See People v. Kuntu, 752 N.E.2d 380 (Ill.
2001). We are not persuaded. In Kuntu, the defendant intentionally set fire to
a residential apartment building, killing seven people, and was convicted of
capital murder for all seven deaths in a single proceeding. Id. at 386, 390. The
prosecutor argued to the sentencing jury, among other things: “The law in
Illinois is that if you kill two people you go to jail for life without parole. He
killed seven people. If you do not sentence him to death that will be giving him
five freebies.” Id. at 403 (emphasis omitted).
The Supreme Court of Illinois characterized the prosecutor’s argument as
communicating the message that “because two murders result in a minimum
sentence of life imprisonment, a defendant who commits more than two must
be sentenced to death or be deemed to have received one or more ‘freebies,’
‘free dead people,’ or ‘murders for free.’” Id. It concluded that such argument
constitutes “an inflammatory statement with no basis in either law or fact [and]
it is tantamount to the conclusion that, as a matter of law, a person who kills
more than two persons should be sentenced to death.” Id.
Unlike Kuntu, the prosecutor here did not convey to the jurors that they
were legally bound to impose the death penalty given the maximum sentences
that the defendant could receive for the non-capital crimes. Nor did the
prosecutor convey to the jurors that they were prohibited from considering the
submitted mitigating factors. Accordingly, we hold that the defendant has
failed to establish that the prosecutor’s remarks fell outside the bounds of
permissible closing argument. Because the defendant has failed to establish
trial court error, his challenge fails under the first prong of plain error analysis.
See Guay, 164 N.H. at 703-04.
In sum, we conclude that the defendant has failed to establish that any
of the challenged remarks made by the prosecutor during closing argument at
the sentence selection phase of trial amounted to improper advocacy in
violation of his due process rights under the State Constitution. See N.H.
CONST. pt. I, art. 15. The defendant makes identical arguments under the
Federal Due Process Clause, without engaging in a separate analysis. See U.S.
CONST. amends. V, XIV. Nor does he argue that the due process protections
under the State and Federal Constitutions differ in this context. We conclude
that the Federal Constitution affords the defendant no greater protection than
does the State Constitution under these circumstances, and, accordingly, we
reach the same conclusion under the Federal Constitution. See State v. Hill,
146 N.H. 568, 576 (2001); Stowe, 162 N.H. at 470.
152
VIII. CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY REVIEW
Well in advance of trial, the defendant filed numerous motions
challenging the constitutionality of New Hampshire’s death penalty statute or
otherwise seeking to preclude the imposition of the death penalty. The trial
court denied all of his motions. On appeal, the defendant asserts the following
constitutional and statutory claims: (1) the capital sentencing statute both
facially and as applied violates our State Constitution; (2) the statutory
aggravating factors fail to perform the constitutionally required narrowing
function for the class of murderers who are eligible for the death penalty; (3)
the burdens of proof in the capital sentencing statute violate due process; (4)
the inapplicability of the rules of evidence at capital sentencing under the
statute violates separation of powers and due process; (5) the risk of racial
discrimination renders the death penalty unconstitutional; (6) “death
qualifying” the jury prior to the guilt phase of trial violates his right to a fair
and impartial jury and to due process; and (7) the non-statutory aggravating
factors violate provisions of the State and Federal Constitutions regarding
separation of powers, grand jury indictments, and duplicative factors. The
defendant also asserts that the trial court erroneously denied his post-verdict
request for discovery which he sought during the pendency of this appeal.
A. Death Penalty Challenge Under State Constitution
The defendant argues that the death penalty statute on its face, and as
applied in this case, violates the New Hampshire Constitution. See RSA 630:1
(2007) (amended 2011); RSA 630:5 (2007). We address each argument in turn.
1. Facial Challenge
a. Background
Approximately one year prior to trial, the defendant sought an order from
the trial court barring the death penalty, arguing that the capital sentencing
statute facially violates the State Constitution’s “cruel or unusual
punishments” clause of Part I, Article 33 and the “true design of all
punishments” clause of Part I, Article 18. He argued that the decision of the
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts in District Attorney for the Suffolk
District v. Watson, 411 N.E.2d 1274 (Mass. 1980), which held that capital
punishment violated the “cruel or unusual punishments” clause of that
commonwealth’s constitution, was “persuasive” because it interpreted language
identical to that in the New Hampshire Constitution. The defendant contended
that “the reasoning behind the Massachusetts opinion — that the death
penalty offends contemporary standards of decency — holds even more true
today than in 1980.” He further argued that “New Hampshire has a long-
standing tradition of affording greater protection to individual liberties under
153
its state constitution, and capital punishment is inconsistent with that
tradition.” Finally, the defendant argued that the “true design of all
punishments” clause “commands that punishments ‘reform’ instead of
‘exterminate,’” and, thus, “bars the death penalty as a punishment in
contemporary society.”
The State objected and, by written order dated September 18, 2007, the
trial court denied the defendant’s motion, ruling that RSA 630:1 and :5 are not
facially unconstitutional. The court concluded that “the framers did not
consider the death penalty to be cruel or unusual punishment,” as evidenced
by the text of the State Constitution and “by then existing societal norms.” The
court rejected the defendant’s argument that Part I, Article 18 and/or Part I,
Article 33 provide more protection than the Eighth Amendment to the Federal
Constitution, as well as his argument that capital punishment offends general
community standards of decency in this state. Finally, the court declined to
follow Watson because: (1) the Watson court “did not employ general principles
of construction when determining whether a statute is unconstitutional”; (2)
the Watson court “did not apply objective criteria in its standard of decency
analysis”; and (3) “the reaction of the Massachusetts citizens and legislature to
the [Watson] ruling was swift and resounding, demonstrating that the [court’s]
opinion did not represent that of the electorate.”
Following his conviction for capital murder and the imposition of a
sentence of death, the defendant renewed his motion, contending that “based
on regional and international developments,” the death penalty constitutes
“cruel, unusual and disproportionate punishment under the state and federal
constitutions.” In support, the defendant pointed to several “additional events
[that had] transpired,” including that “New Hampshire considered forming a
commission to study the death penalty.” By written order dated March 19,
2009, the trial court denied his motion because it could not find “sufficient
objective evidence, either by way of national legislative trends or
scientific/sociological studies, to overcome the presumption that New
Hampshire’s capital murder sentencing scheme is constitutional.”
b. Appellate Argument
The defendant argues that the State Constitution affords greater
protection than does the Eighth Amendment to the Federal Constitution,
requiring us to invalidate the death penalty in this state. The defendant does
not challenge the death penalty under the Eighth Amendment. See Gregg v.
Georgia, 428 U.S. 153 (1976) (death penalty is not per se cruel and unusual
punishment).
154
c. Discussion
Part I, Article 33 of the State Constitution provides that “no magistrate,
or court of law, shall demand excessive bail or sureties, impose excessive fines,
or inflict cruel or unusual punishments.” N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 33. The
defendant argues that because Article 33 prohibits punishments that are “cruel
or unusual,” we ought to interpret it as affording greater protection than the
Eighth Amendment’s prohibition against punishments that are “cruel and
unusual.” In support, the defendant points to jurisdictions that have
attributed significance to the use of the disjunctive. See People v. Carmony,
127 Cal. App. 4th 1066, 1085 (Ct. App. 2005); Armstrong v. Harris, 773 So. 2d
7, 17 (Fla. 2000); State v. Mitchell, 577 N.W.2d 481, 488, 490 (Minn. 1998);
People v. Bullock, 485 N.W.2d 866, 872 n.11. (Mich. 1992). Other
jurisdictions, however, find that the use of the disjunctive has no substantive
significance. See State v. Kido, 654 P.2d 1351, 1353 n.3 (Haw. Ct. App. 1982);
State v. Kleypas, 40 P.3d 139, 240-41 (Kan. 2001), overruled on other grounds
by Kansas v. Marsh, 548 U.S. 163 (2006); Thomas v. State, 634 A.2d 1, 10 n.5
(Md. 1993). We need not decide this issue because, even assuming Part I,
Article 33 affords greater protection than does the Eighth Amendment,
application of settled principles for construing our State Constitution leads us
to reject the defendant’s facial challenge under Part I, Article 33.
“Reviewing the history of the constitution and its amendments is often
instructive, and in so doing, it is the court’s duty to place itself as nearly as
possible in the situation of the parties at the time the instrument was made,
that it may gather their intention from the language used, viewed in light of the
surrounding circumstances.” Petition of Below, 151 N.H. 135, 139 (2004)
(quotation and ellipsis omitted). “[T]he language used . . . by the people in the
great paramount law which controls the legislature as well as the people, is to
be always understood and explained in that sense in which it was used at the
time when the constitution and the laws were adopted.” Id. (quotation
omitted).
The trial court’s order denying the defendant’s facial challenge explains
that “[w]hen the State Constitution was adopted in 1784, the death penalty was
mandated for the crimes of treason, murder, rape, carnal knowledge between
men, bestiality, burglary, arson of a dwelling and robbery.” See An Act for the
punishment of certain Crimes, Laws 1792, reprinted in 5 Laws of New
Hampshire 596-99 (Henry Metcalf ed. 1916). Thus, at the time Article 33 was
adopted, the death penalty was accepted by the framers as a suitable
punishment for certain crimes. This is reflected in the text of the New
Hampshire Constitution, as adopted in 1784 and continuing in effect to this
day, which includes specific references to capital punishment. Part I, Article
16 provides, “No subject shall be liable to be tried, after an acquittal, for the
same crime or offense. Nor shall the legislature make any law that shall
155
subject any person to a capital punishment . . . without trial by jury.” N.H.
CONST. pt. I, art. 16 (emphasis added). Part II, Article 4 authorizes the
legislature to establish courts for trying cases “whether the same be criminal or
civil, or whether the crimes be capital, or not capital.” N.H. CONST. pt. II, art.
4 (emphasis added). Also, Part I, Article 15 provides that “[n]o subject shall be
. . . deprived of his life, liberty, or estate, but by the judgment of his peers, or
the law of the land.” N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 15 (emphasis added).
Given that, at the time the State Constitution was adopted, capital
punishment was a sanctioned penalty for specified crimes and that the plain
language of the constitution anticipates its use, the framers could not have
considered capital punishment to be “cruel or unusual.” We agree with the
trial court that “[l]ooking at the language of the New Hampshire Constitution
and the circumstances of its adoption, the framers undoubtedly anticipated
that the death penalty would be imposed for many crimes.”
The defendant next argues that “Part I, Article 18’s ‘true design’ clause,
which has no analog in the Federal Constitution, supports the conclusion that
the death penalty violates the New Hampshire Constitution.” Part I, Article 18
provides:
All penalties ought to be proportioned to the nature of the
offense. No wise legislature will affix the same punishment to
the crimes of theft, forgery, and the like, which they do to
those of murder and treason. Where the same
undistinguishing severity is exerted against all offenses, the
people are led to forget the real distinction in the crimes
themselves, and to commit the most flagrant with as little
compunction as they do the lightest offenses. For the same
reason a multitude of sanguinary laws is both impolitic and
unjust. The true design of all punishments being to reform,
not to exterminate mankind.
N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 18. According to the defendant, “[i]n declaring that the
‘true design of all punishments [is] to reform, not to exterminate mankind,’ that
clause reveals at a minimum a tension between the death penalty and the
constitutional value therein expressed.” The defendant observes that, “the
design of the death penalty, of course, is to exterminate, not reform, the person
subjected to it.”
We have “never held that article 18 invalidates a capital punishment
statute.” State v. Farrow, 118 N.H. 296, 305 (1978). Rather, “[a]ssuming the
article’s concern extends beyond the improper application of capital
punishment, it forbids only gross disproportionality between offense and
penalty.” State v. Elbert, 125 N.H. 1, 15 (1984) (citation omitted). Regardless
156
of whether Article 18 provides greater protection in a capital murder case than
does the Eighth Amendment, its protection does not render RSA 630:1 and :5
facially unconstitutional.
The defendant concedes that if he “had to demonstrate that the death
penalty was cruel or unusual in the late eighteenth century, he could not
prevail.” He contends, however, that “a punishment not regarded as cruel or
unusual at one time could, with the passage of more than two hundred years,
become cruel or unusual,” and that “the inquiry into the current state of the
‘evolving standards of decency that mark the progress of a maturing society’
supports the conclusion that the death penalty violates the New Hampshire
Constitution.” (Citation omitted.) The “evolving standards of decency” inquiry
is employed in Eighth Amendment analysis, see Trop v. Dulles, 356 U.S. 86,
101 (1958) (plurality opinion), and we have never determined whether this
inquiry is applicable to our State Constitution. See State v. Evans, 127 N.H.
501, 504 (1985) (Eighth Amendment decisions provide a “useful backdrop for
analysis of the defendant’s rights under New Hampshire law”). However, even
assuming, without deciding, that an inquiry into “evolving standards of
decency” should inform our consideration of whether the death penalty is
prohibited by our State Constitution, we are not persuaded by the defendant’s
arguments.
The defendant points to the fact that “since 1869 New Hampshire has
sentenced sixteen men to die and executed twelve[,] . . . with the last execution
occurring a little more than seventy years ago, in 1939.” (Quotation omitted.)
He argues that “[s]o long a period of disuse has removed the death penalty from
the list of constitutionally-acceptable punishments.” The fact that the death
penalty is “infrequently sought and even more infrequently carried out,”
however, does not render the death penalty statute facially unconstitutional.
United States v. Sampson, 486 F.3d 13, 23 (1st Cir. 2007).
“[T]he proper body to set the parameters of punishment for a given crime
is the body that defines the crime — the legislature.” Farrow, 118 N.H. at 305;
see Atkins v. Virginia, 536 U.S. 304, 312 (2002) (“the clearest and most reliable
objective evidence of contemporary values is the legislation enacted by the
country’s legislatures” (quotation omitted)). “[I]n assessing a punishment
selected by a democratically elected legislature against the constitutional
measure, we presume its validity.” State v. Deflorio, 128 N.H. 309, 316 (1986)
(quotation omitted). “[A] heavy burden rests on those who would attack the
judgment of the representatives of the people.” Id. (quotation omitted).
Following the United States Supreme Court’s 1976 decision in Gregg v.
Georgia, the New Hampshire legislature enacted a new statutory scheme
establishing the procedure to be followed in capital murder cases. See Laws
1977, 440:2. The legislature has subsequently amended these statutes several
157
times. In 1986, the method of execution was changed to lethal injection. See
Laws 1986, 82:1. The amendment’s legislative history suggests that the reason
for this change was to make capital punishment more likely to be imposed in
this state: “If we are going to have a death penalty we should be prepared to
use it and this bill provides for the most humane and effective means of
accomplishing what is unfortunately a necessary part of our state law.” See
N.H.S. Jour. 599 (1986).
In 1988, the legislature extended capital punishment to the crimes of the
murder of a probation or parole officer, and murder by a defendant who is
already serving a sentence of life without parole. See Laws 1988, 69:1. In
1990, the legislature extended capital punishment to the crimes of murder in
connection with aggravated felonious sexual assault, and murder committed
during certain drug offenses. See Laws 1990, 199:1. In 1994, the legislature
further extended it to include the murder of a judicial officer. See Laws 1994,
128:1, :2.
The legislature has narrowed the application of the death penalty only
once. In 2005, the legislature prohibited capital punishment for defendants
younger than eighteen at the time of the offense. See Laws 2005, 35:1. This
change followed the Supreme Court’s decision that the execution of a
defendant who was under the age of eighteen when the crime was committed
violated the Federal Constitution. See Roper v. Simmons, 543 U.S. 551 (2005).
Legislative history indicates that this amendment was designed to make New
Hampshire law consistent with federal constitutional requirements. See N.H.S.
Jour. 724 (2005).
In 2000, a bill to repeal the death penalty passed both houses of the
legislature, but the Governor vetoed it. See N.H.H.R. Jour. 948-49 (2000). In
her veto message, the Governor described the protections afforded under the
statute as “designed to make the carrying out of the death penalty
extraordinarily difficult” and concluded that it was “in the best interests of the
people of this state . . . [that] our capital murder statute should remain the law
in New Hampshire.” Id. Subsequent attempts to repeal the death penalty
failed to gain a majority vote in both houses of the legislature. See N.H.H.R.
Jour. 455 (2007) (bill seeking to repeal the death penalty voted inexpedient to
legislate); N.H.S. Jour. 524-27 (2009) (bill amended by senate judiciary
committee to remove repeal provisions and tabled in senate).
In 2009, a Commission to Study the Death Penalty in New Hampshire
(commission) was created to assess the practical implications of the death
penalty and make recommendations to the legislature. See Laws 2009, ch.
284; Final Report of the Commission to Study the Death Penalty in New
Hampshire (December 1, 2010) (Final Report). The commission was comprised
of twenty-two members appointed variously by the Speaker of the House, the
158
President of the Senate, the Governor, the public defender, the bar association,
the association of counties, the association of criminal defense lawyers, the
association of chiefs of police, the attorney general, and police associations.
Final Report at 7-8. The commission’s duties included studying “[w]hether the
death penalty in New Hampshire is consistent with evolving societal standards
of decency.” Id. at 7. In 2010, the majority report concluded:
New Hampshire’s capital murder statutes are consistent with
evolving standards of decency because, in this state, the death
penalty has consistently been accepted by the democratic
process, the statutes are written to cover only a narrow
category of murders, the procedures are designed to provide
the defendant the most protection from a wrongful conviction
or death sentence, and the penalty is applied sparingly to only
the most clear cases where the defendant is eligible for the
death penalty.
Id. at 23. Most recently, in 2011, the legislature extended the death penalty to
those who, during the commission of a burglary, murder a person “licensed or
privileged to be within an occupied structure.” RSA 630:1, I(g) (Supp. 2012).
As the trial court found, “[g]iven how frequently the death penalty has
been debated, and how consistently the representative branches of government
have upheld it, . . . capital punishment does not offend general community
standards of decency in this State.” We agree with the trial court that “[t]he
legislative history of capital punishment in this State demonstrates that a
consensus has not been reached that capital punishment is cruel or unusual.”
We presume the validity of “a punishment selected by a democratically elected
legislature” and conclude that the defendant has not met the “heavy burden
[that] rests on those who would attack the judgment of the representatives of
the people.” Deflorio, 128 N.H. at 316 (quotation omitted). Accordingly, we
hold that the defendant has not established that the death penalty statute
facially violates Part I, Article 18 or Part I, Article 33 of the State Constitution.
2. As Applied Challenge
a. Background
After the eligibility phase of sentencing, the defendant moved to bar the
imposition of the death penalty based upon the jury’s finding that the State
failed to prove the statutory aggravating factor charging that he “purposely
killed” Officer Briggs. He argued that the imposition of a sentence of death for
committing a “non-purposeful murder” violates his “rights to due process,
fundamental fairness, and to be protected against punishments that are cruel,
unusual or disproportionate” under the State and Federal Constitutions. See
159
N.H. CONST. pt. I, arts. 15, 18, 33; U.S. CONST. amends. V, VIII, XIV.
Although he acknowledged that United States Supreme Court precedent
establishes that the Eighth Amendment does not preclude a death sentence for
a defendant who did not have a specific intent to kill, see Tison v. Arizona, 481
U.S. 137 (1987), the defendant sought to preserve his federal constitutional
argument “for later review, or in the event federal law changes to his benefit.”
He argued that under the State Constitution, “the fundamental fairness clause
of part I, article 15; the proportionality clause of part I, article 18; and the cruel
or unusual punishments clause of part I, article 33” provide him with greater
protections than the Federal Constitution. The defendant also argued that the
“mental state aggravators” found by the jury pursuant to RSA 630:5, VII(a)(2)
and (3) failed to “meaningfully narrow the class of murder[er]s who should be
sentenced to death.”
The State objected and, by written order dated December 29, 2008, the
trial court denied the defendant’s motion. In so doing, it ruled that: (1) in the
event that the defendant believes that federal law has changed in a way that
affects its prior orders, he “may file an appropriate motion” for the court’s
consideration; (2) he failed to develop his argument under Part I, Article 15 of
the State Constitution; (3) he failed to present new evidence or argument
warranting reconsideration of its earlier rulings rejecting his arguments under
Part I, Articles 18 and 33 of the State Constitution; and (4) the challenged
aggravating factors adequately narrowed the class of defendants eligible for the
death penalty.
Following the jury’s recommendation of a sentence of death, the
defendant moved to set aside that verdict based upon the jury’s findings that
the State failed to prove both that he had a purpose to kill Officer Briggs and
that he posed a threat of future dangerousness. He argued that given these
jury findings, the death sentence as applied in this case violates the State
Constitution. The State objected and, by written order dated March 19, 2009,
the trial court denied the defendant’s motion, rejecting his argument that the
imposition of the death penalty in this case was inconsistent with sentencing
objectives under the New Hampshire Constitution.
b. Appellate Argument
The defendant’s argument consists of three parts. First, he contends
that the imposition of the death penalty in this case contravenes the State
Constitution because the State failed to prove the statutory aggravating factor
charging that he had a specific intent to kill Officer Briggs. Second, he argues
that because the State also failed to prove the future dangerousness non-
statutory aggravating factor, the penalty of death in this case serves only a
retributive purpose, which he alleges is an impermissible sentencing goal
under our State Constitution. Third, he asserts that the two eligibility
160
statutory aggravating factors found by the jury regarding his mental state did
not “perform the constitutionally-essential function” of distinguishing capital
murderers who are death eligible from those who are not. See RSA 630:5,
VII(a)(2), (3). This last point, regarding the statute’s narrowing function,
encompasses a separate appellate argument that we address and reject in Part
VIII.B (Constitutional and Statutory Review-Statutory Aggravating Factors
(Narrowing Function)) of this opinion.
c. Discussion
The defendant does not raise any argument under the Federal
Constitution and acknowledges that the Supreme Court: (1) “has held that the
Eighth Amendment is not violated by the imposition of the death penalty on
defendants who lacked a purpose to kill,” see Tison, 481 U.S. at 157; and (2)
“recognizes retribution as a legitimate goal of punishment,” see Gregg, 428 U.S.
at 183-84. Instead, he asserts that his right to due process under Part I,
Article 15, the “true design” clause of Part I, Article 18, and the “cruel or
unusual punishments” clause of Part I, Article 33 of the State Constitution are
more protective than the Federal Constitution. The defendant’s legal analysis,
however, is based only upon our Article 18 precedent, and so we limit our
analysis accordingly. We conclude that regardless of whether Part I, Article 18
provides greater protection than does the Eighth Amendment, its protections
do not render the death penalty statute unconstitutional as applied to the
defendant.
The defendant contends that a person should not be subject to the death
penalty under the State Constitution when the State has failed to prove that
the actor had a purpose to kill, the most culpable mental state under New
Hampshire law. Citing RSA 630:1-a (2007), which defines first-degree murder,
he argues: “[T]he difference between acting purposely and acting knowingly is
so large that only with the addition of an element to the knowing murder will
the law treat that murder as equal in culpability of a purposeful murder
unaccompanied by any additional crime. [Thus,] New Hampshire law must
regard a defendant’s lack of a purpose to kill as indicative of substantially
lower culpability than would be the case if the defendant had had a purpose to
kill,” thereby precluding the imposition of a sentence of death under our State
Constitution. We are not persuaded.
The legislature has established that the mens rea necessary to render a
capital murderer eligible for the death penalty may be satisfied by proof that
the defendant:
(1) purposely killed the victim; [or]
161
(2) purposely inflicted serious bodily injury which resulted in
the death of the victim; [or]
(3) purposely engaged in conduct which . . . the defendant
knew would create a grave risk of death to a person, other
than one of the participants in the offense; and . . . resulted
in the death of the victim.
RSA 630:5, VII(a). Thus, under the plain language of the statute, defendants
who commit capital murder with any one of the three “purposely” mental states
identified in RSA 630:5, VII(a) are equally culpable under the law. Accordingly,
a defendant who knowingly kills a police officer acting in the line of duty, who
does so for the purpose of avoiding or preventing a lawful arrest, and who acts
with a specific intent either to inflict serious bodily injury or to engage in
conduct knowing it created a grave risk of death, is subject to the death
penalty even if the defendant did not have the specific intent to kill the officer.
See RSA 630:1, I(a); RSA 630:5, IV, VII(a), (j); see also RSA 626:2, II(a), (b)
(2007) (defining “purposely” and “knowingly”); State v. Holmes, 154 N.H. 723,
725 (2007) (“the Criminal Code generally uses the term ‘purposely’ in place of
specific intent”).
Our capital sentencing scheme reflects the legislature’s judgment that
the most egregious murderers who warrant the most severe sentence under our
law are not restricted to those who harbor a specific intent to kill. The
Supreme Court has endorsed the constitutionality of this legislative approach:
A narrow focus on the question of whether or not a given
defendant “intended to kill” . . . is a highly unsatisfactory
means of definitively distinguishing the most culpable and
dangerous of murderers. Many who intend to, and do, kill
are not criminally liable at all — those who act in self-defense
or with other justification or excuse. Other intentional
homicides, though criminal, are often felt undeserving of the
death penalty — those that are the result of provocation. On
the other hand, some nonintentional murderers may be
among the most dangerous and inhumane of all — the person
who tortures another not caring whether the victim lives or
dies, or the robber who shoots someone in the course of the
robbery, utterly indifferent to the fact that the desire to rob
may have the unintended consequence of killing the victim as
well as taking the victim’s property. This reckless
indifference to the value of human life may be every bit as
shocking to the moral sense as an “intent to kill.”
162
Tison, 481 U.S. at 157. Moreover, our legislature’s decision to classify the type
of murder committed by the defendant as one warranting a death sentence
reflects its judgment that
[t]he murder of a law enforcement officer engaged in the
performance of his official duties differs in kind and not
merely in degree from other murders. When in the
performance of his duties, a law enforcement officer is the
representative of the public and a symbol of the rule of law.
The murder of a law enforcement officer engaged in the
performance of his duties in the truest sense strikes a blow at
the entire public — the body politic — and is a direct attack
upon the rule of law which must prevail if our society as we
know it is to survive.
State v. Polke, 638 S.E.2d 189, 196 (N.C. 2006) (quotation and emphasis
omitted).
The legislature has determined that the magnitude of the crime
committed by the defendant warrants the most severe penalty under our law,
and the defendant has failed to present any convincing legal authority to
establish that this legislative judgment is prohibited under our State
Constitution. See Duquette v. Warden, N.H. State Prison, 154 N.H. 737, 745
(2007) (court will not declare legislative act unconstitutional “except upon
inescapable grounds”); Deflorio, 128 N.H. at 316 (court presumes the validity of
the sentence selected by the legislature, and the challenging party bears a
heavy burden to establish that the legislation is unconstitutional).
The defendant next points to “the jury’s failure to find that [he] posed a
threat of future danger in prison” as showing that his sentence of death was
based upon retribution. According to the defendant, “in the absence of a
statement that retribution constitutes a constitutionally permissible purpose of
punishment under the New Hampshire Constitution, [his] execution would
serve no sanctioned purpose.” Regardless of whether retribution is a
recognized goal of sentencing, we conclude that the defendant fails to establish
that the jury’s sentencing verdict, rendered pursuant to the capital sentencing
scheme, does not meet legitimate goals of sentencing.
Although our precedent expresses the goals of sentencing in a variety of
ways, under our State Constitution both punishment and deterrence are
legitimate goals of sentencing. See State v. Henderson, 154 N.H. 95, 97 (2006);
Evans, 127 N.H. at 505; State v. Wentworth, 118 N.H. 832, 842 (1978); State v.
Burroughs, 113 N.H. 21, 24 (1973). We have stated:
163
The real purpose of all sentencing is to reduce crime.
This theoretically can be done by rehabilitating the individual
defendant so he will not offend again. Another way is to
punish the individual defendant in the hope that he will be
deterred from repeating his crime. Moreover, by punishing the
individual defendant others may be deterred from committing
crimes. Whichever sentence is thought to be likely to reduce
the most crime is the proper sentence to impose.
. . . [Part I, Article 18] recognizes deterrence as a valid
purpose of sentencing; the implication is that reform will
result from the deterrent effect of punishment. General
deterrence is also recognized in other language in the article
when it states that if the same “severity is exerted against all
offenses, the people are led . . . to commit the most flagrant
with as little compunction as they do the lightest offenses.”
Rehabilitation, which in the modern sense of the word
includes counseling and training, is not a constitutional
requirement.
Wentworth, 118 N.H. at 842; see also State v. Darcy, 121 N.H. 220, 225-26
(1981).
The legislature has authorized the imposition of a death sentence for the
commission of capital murder without proof of a defendant’s potential future
dangerousness. See RSA 630:5, IV, VII. Here, the State identified as a non-
statutory aggravating factor the defendant’s potential future dangerousness,
which the jury determined was not proved. Nevertheless, in the legislature’s
judgment, the commission of capital murder, along with two requisite statutory
aggravating factors, which do not require an evaluation of a defendant’s future
dangerousness, warrants a sentence of death. See RSA 630:5, I, IV. Imposing
the most severe sentence under the circumstances of this case comports, in
part, with the goal of reducing crime by deterring others from such conduct.
See Wentworth, 118 N.H. at 842. It also accords with fostering “public
confidence in the system of justice” by ensuring that “the seriousness of the
crime [will not] be unduly depreciated.” Darcy, 121 N.H. at 225-26.
We note that, pursuant to the capital sentencing scheme, the sentencing
jury also assessed the individual characteristics of the defendant and the
particular circumstances of the crime. See State v. Fraser, 120 N.H. 117, 122
(1980) (not all persons convicted of a particular crime must receive the same
sentence — even if crimes were identical, defendants may not be). As the trial
court observed, in addition to the guilt phase verdict and eligibility phase
findings, the jury’s findings regarding the non-statutory aggravating factors
show that it determined that the murder of Officer Briggs represented “the
164
culmination of consistent violent conduct” committed by the defendant. We
agree with the trial court that the jury’s sentencing verdict met the
constitutional objectives of “punish[ing] the defendant for his conduct” and
“deter[ring] others from similar conduct.”
Accordingly, we hold that the defendant has not demonstrated that the
death penalty statute, as applied in his case, violates Part I, Article 18 of the
State Constitution. As the defendant presents no independent analysis under
either Part I, Article 15 or Part I, Article 33, none is warranted. See State v.
Chick, 141 N.H. 503, 504 (1996). In any event, to the extent that the
defendant asserts Article 15 and Article 33 arguments, we reject them for the
same reasons set forth in our Article 18 analysis. See Wentworth, 118 N.H. at
843. Finally, we agree with the State that the defendant failed to preserve an
independent due process argument under Part I, Article 15. See Chick, 141
N.H. at 504.
B. Statutory Aggravating Factors (Narrowing Function)
1. Background
In August 2007, the defendant moved to strike a statutory aggravating
factor identified in the death penalty notice that charged: “Michael K. Addison
purposely inflicted serious bodily injury which resulted in the death of
Manchester Police Officer Michael L. Briggs.” See RSA 630:5, VII(a)(2) (2007)
(hereinafter “serious bodily injury factor”). He argued that this factor required
proof of only “first degree assault . . . with the additional circumstance that
death resulted,” and, thus, was “less egregious than” capital murder conduct.
Therefore, he argued, the serious bodily injury factor failed to narrow the class
of capital murderers eligible for the death penalty, and a death sentence based
upon that factor would violate his rights under the State and Federal
Constitutions. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, arts. 15, 18, 33; U.S. CONST. amends.
V, VIII, XIV.
The State objected, arguing that the capital sentencing scheme satisfies
the constitutional mandate of narrowing the class of death-eligible murders
because RSA 630:1 enumerates six types of capital murder that all require
“knowing” conduct. RSA 630:1 (2007); see RSA 630:1, I(g) (Supp. 2012)
(statute amended in 2011 to add seventh type of capital murder). The State
also argued that the serious bodily injury factor under RSA 630:5, VII(a)(2)
further narrows the death-eligible class by requiring proof that the defendant
acted “purposely,” the most stringent mental state. After a hearing, the trial
court denied the defendant’s motion by written order dated January 11, 2008.
Relying upon Tuilaepa v. California, 512 U.S. 967, 971-72 (1994), and
Lowenfield v. Phelps, 484 U.S. 231, 244-45 (1988), the court ruled that the
definition of capital murder under RSA 630:1 itself performs the narrowing
165
function required by the Federal Constitution. In addition, the court agreed
with the State that the serious bodily injury aggravating factor further narrows
the class of death-eligible defendants who “knowingly” kill a police officer acting
in the line of duty. The trial court reasoned that “not every defendant who
knowingly kills a police officer will have done so with the heightened intent to
inflict serious bodily injury.”
The defendant subsequently moved to strike another statutory
aggravating factor identified in the death penalty The Supreme Court has underscored that the use of
aggravating factors “is not an end in itself, but a means of genuinely narrowing
the class of death-eligible persons and thereby channeling the jury’s
discretion.” Lowenfield, 484 U.S. at 244. The aggravating circumstance that
narrows the class of death-eligible murderers “may be contained in the
definition of the crime or in a separate sentencing factor (or in both).”
Tuilaepa, 512 U.S. at 972. Thus, “the narrowing function required for a regime
of capital punishment may be provided” either by the legislature narrowing the
definition of capital offenses “so that the jury finding of guilt responds to this
concern,” or by the legislature “more broadly defin[ing] capital offenses and
provid[ing] for narrowing by jury findings of aggravating circumstances at the
penalty phase.” Lowenfield, 484 U.S. at 246; see, e.g., Jurek v. Texas, 428 U.S.
262, 276 (1976) (“By narrowing its definition of capital murder, Texas has
essentially said that there must be at least one statutory aggravating
circumstance in a first-degree murder case before a death sentence may even
be considered.”); Brecheen v. Reynolds, 41 F.3d 1343, 1359 (10th Cir. 1994)
(reviewing differing functions of aggravating circumstances under various state
statutes). Moreover, to perform the required narrowing function, the death-
eligible aggravating circumstance identified by state statute “may not apply to
every defendant convicted of a murder [but] . . . must apply only to a subclass
of defendants convicted of murder”; it also “may not be unconstitutionally
vague.” Tuilaepa, 512 U.S. at 972.
States have latitude in enacting capital sentencing schemes that satisfy
these constitutional requirements, and the Supreme Court has affirmed the
169
constitutionality of various state capital sentencing schemes. See Tuilaepa,
512 U.S. at 974-75 (reviewing cases); Lowenfield, 484 U.S. at 244-45 (same);
Addison, 160 N.H. at 742-46 (same). In New Hampshire, the commission of
capital murder, see RSA 630:1, in conjunction with the existence of two
statutory aggravating factors, see RSA 630:5, I, IV, VII (2007), renders a
defendant eligible to receive a sentence of death. See Addison, 160 N.H. at
768-69.
First, the State must prove beyond a reasonable doubt to a unanimous
jury that the defendant committed “the offense of capital murder” as defined in
RSA 630:1. RSA 630:5, I; see RSA 630:1, III. That statute limits “capital
murder” to several specific types of murder, including one that is distinguished
by the victim’s status as a law enforcement officer acting in the line of duty.
RSA 630:1, I(a). Second, the State must prove beyond a reasonable doubt to a
unanimous jury the existence of two statutory aggravating factors. RSA 630:5,
IV; see Addison, 160 N.H. at 768-69. One factor must be among those listed in
RSA 630:5, VII(a), while the second must be among those listed in RSA 630:5,
VII(b)-(j). RSA 630:5, IV. The factors in the first category comprise three
variants of purposeful conduct. RSA 630:5, VII(a). The factors identified in the
second category generally pertain to the circumstances of the crime, the
background of the defendant, or the victim’s status. RSA 630:5, VII(b)-(j). If
the jury makes findings that render the defendant eligible to receive a sentence
of death, the jurors then determine whether to impose that sentence by
considering all of the sentencing evidence, including proven aggravating factors
and proven mitigating factors. See RSA 630:5, III, IV (2007); Addison, 160 N.H.
at 763; see also RSA 630:5, IV (“The jury, regardless of its findings with respect
to aggravating and mitigating factors, is never required to impose a death
sentence and the jury shall be so instructed.”).
The defendant argues that his death sentence is constitutionally infirm
because the legislature intended that the aggravating factors under RSA 630:5,
VII(a) perform a further narrowing of the class of capital murderers, but that
such narrowing did not occur in this case. He does not argue, however, that
either the serious bodily injury factor or the grave risk of death factor is facially
vague or overbroad. Rather, he contends that it is the application of the
challenged factors to the facts and circumstances of this case that
demonstrates that they fail to perform the required narrowing function. In so
arguing, he focuses upon the particular manner in which he murdered Officer
Briggs: by shooting him in the head at close range. The defendant contends
that “[w]here the jury has convicted [him] of a knowing murder based on a
gunshot wound to the head, its additional finding that [he], by the same
conduct, had a purpose to inflict serious bodily injury, is superfluous.”
Additionally, he contends that “where the jury has found [him] guilty of
knowingly killing the victim, a finding that he created a ‘grave risk of death’ to
the same victim, by virtue of the same conduct, served no legitimate narrowing
170
function.” For the eligibility phase findings to be meaningfully distinct from the
capital murder conviction in this case, the defendant argues, they must have
been based upon conduct distinct from that which underlies the capital
murder conviction.
The defendant’s argument, however, runs counter to the trial court’s
ruling that RSA 630:1, I(a) by itself accomplished the constitutionally required
narrowing function in this case. Furman and its progeny demonstrate that the
constitutionally required narrowing function can be satisfied by a state statute
that contains objective criteria distinguishing between those murderers who
are death eligible and those who are not. If a state statute satisfies the
constitutional requirement of distinguishing death-eligible murderers as more
culpable than other murderers, the sentencing body’s findings in a specific
case — as guided by that constitutional statute — necessarily perform the
requisite narrowing function. See Tuilaepa, 512 U.S. at 972-73 (the
aggravating circumstance which narrows the class of death-eligible murderers
“may be contained in the definition of the crime or in a separate sentencing
factor (or in both),” and the jury’s “eligibility decision fits the crime within a
defined classification”); Lowenfield, 484 U.S. at 246 (“Here, the ‘narrowing
function’ was performed by the jury at the guilt phase when it found defendant
guilty of three counts of murder under the [statutory] provision that ‘the
offender has a specific intent to kill or to inflict great bodily harm upon more
than one person.’”); Zant, 462 U.S. at 878 (“statutory aggravating
circumstances play a constitutionally necessary function at the stage of
legislative definition: they circumscribe the class of persons eligible for the
death penalty”).
The narrowing function analysis does not, as the defendant suggests,
extend beyond an assessment of the language of the state statute when the
challenged statutory provisions are not vague or overbroad. See, e.g., Arave,
507 U.S. at 471 (court first examines the statutory language to determine
whether the aggravating circumstance is vague and thus fails to provide any
guidance to the sentencer); Lewis, 497 U.S. at 777-78 (noting appellate court’s
decision that the statutory aggravating circumstance effectively channeled
sentencer’s discretion by clear and objective standards and thus was not
facially vague, and holding, alternatively, that the state court construed the
provision in a constitutionally narrow fashion); Walton v. Arizona, 497 U.S.
639, 654 (1990), overruled in part on other grounds by Ring v. Arizona, 536
U.S. 584 (2002) (“When a federal court is asked to review a state court’s
application of an individual statutory aggravating or mitigating circumstance in
a particular case, it must first determine whether the statutory language
defining the circumstance is itself too vague to provide any guidance to the
sentencer.”); cf. Maynard v. Cartwright, 486 U.S. 356, 363-64 (1988) (holding
that aggravating circumstance of “especially heinous” murder did not perform
the constitutionally required narrowing function because an ordinary person
171
could believe that it described every unjustified, intentional murder and no
limiting construction was provided by the court); Godfrey v. Georgia, 446 U.S.
420, 432-33 (1980) (plurality opinion) (death sentence was constitutionally
infirm because the statutory aggravating factor was vague in that it could be
construed to incorporate all murderers and the record did not show that the
state had adopted and applied an adequate limiting construction).
Here, the trial court determined that the definition of capital murder
under RSA 630:1, I(a) performed the constitutionally required narrowing
function. This conclusion is supported by Supreme Court precedent. See
Tuilaepa, 512 U.S. at 971-72; Lowenfield, 484 U.S. at 246. Indeed, once the
defendant was found guilty of capital murder under RSA 630:1, I(a) for
knowingly killing a law enforcement officer acting in the line of duty, he was set
apart from the general class of defendants convicted of murder, and placed into
a subset of murderers who may be punished by death. See RSA 630:1, III.
Thus, we conclude that the defendant’s capital murder conviction under RSA
630:1, I(a) achieved the narrowing function required by both the State and
Federal Constitutions. See Tuilaepa, 512 U.S. at 972; Lowenfield, 484 U.S. at
246; Jurek, 428 U.S. at 276.
Nevertheless, the defendant argues that the imposition of the death
sentence is constitutionally prohibited in this case. He contends that where
“narrowing is required by statute, but in a given case does not occur . . . the
resulting death sentence violate[s] the statute, as well as the State and Federal
Due Process Clauses and prohibitions against cruel and unusual
punishments.” According to the defendant, “If a state statute requires
additional narrowing, but the narrowing does not serve its intended function
under the facts of a specific case, the scheme sanctions death sentences that
are arbitrary and unfair, in the sense that some defendants are death-eligible
even where the required narrowing has failed.” Assuming, without deciding,
that the legal premise of the defendant’s claim is sound, we reject his
argument. We conclude that the proven serious bodily injury statutory
aggravating factor considered by the jury in its sentence selection deliberations
performed the additional narrowing function set forth in the statute.
Accordingly, we need not consider whether the grave risk of death statutory
aggravating factor, which was found by the jury but was not part of the
sentence selection deliberations, also performed a narrowing function in this
case.
As the trial court concluded, the plain language of RSA 630:5, VII(a)(2)
distinguishes capital murderers who cause the death of another with the
purpose to inflict serious bodily injury from those who cause death only
knowingly — that is, without specific intent. “Purposely” is a heightened
mental state as compared to “knowingly,” see RSA 626:2, II, III (2007), and is
defined as follows: “A person acts purposely with respect to a material element
172
of an offense when his conscious object is to cause the result or engage in the
conduct that comprises the element.” RSA 626:2, II(a); see State v. Holmes,
154 N.H. 723, 725 (2007) (“the Criminal Code generally uses the term
‘purposely’ in place of specific intent”); State v. Ayer, 136 N.H. 191, 194 (1992)
(“specific intent commonly refers to a special mental element above and beyond
that required with respect to the criminal act itself”). “Knowingly” is defined as
follows: “A person acts knowingly with respect to conduct or to a circumstance
that is a material element of an offense when he is aware that his conduct is of
such nature or that such circumstances exist.” RSA 626:2, II(b); see State v.
Glenn, 160 N.H. 480, 486 (2010) (“A person acts knowingly when he is aware
that it is practically certain that his conduct will cause a prohibited result.”
(quotation omitted)). Therefore, it is the heightened mental state required by
the serious bodily injury statutory aggravating factor that serves to additionally
narrow the class of capital murderers who knowingly kill a police officer acting
in the line of duty. See Arave, 507 U.S. at 475-76, 477-78 (under the statutory
scheme, the statutory aggravating circumstance narrowed the entire class of
first-degree murderers to “the subclass of defendants who kill without feeling
or sympathy as more deserving of death,” by focusing upon a defendant’s state
of mind).
Under our statutory scheme, when the jury convicted the defendant of
capital murder, it determined that he shot Officer Briggs with the awareness
that it was practically certain his death would result. In rendering its verdict,
the jury was not required to determine whether the defendant harbored a
conscious object or specific intent to inflict serious bodily injury. Only at the
eligibility phase was the jury required to determine whether the defendant
acted purposely when he shot Officer Briggs. Accordingly, once the jury
determined that the defendant acted with the purpose to cause serious bodily
injury, the defendant was further set apart from those defendants who commit
capital murder knowingly.
The defendant contends that “[c]ourts addressing the distinction between
intent to kill and intent to seriously injure, based on the same conduct toward
the same victim, have discerned no meaningful difference.” See, e.g., State v.
Murray, 757 A.2d 578, 584 (Conn. 2000); State v. Young, 159 N.H. 332, 343
(2009); State v. Ramsey, 1 A.3d 796, 804 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 2010);
State v. Warren, 5 P.3d 1115, 1117 (Or. Ct. App. 2000); Com. v. Anderson, 650
A.2d 20, 24 (Pa. 1994). However, these cases, at most, illustrate that the
specific intent to kill a person subsumes the specific intent to cause serious
bodily injury to the same victim with the same conduct. They do not establish
the proposition that a defendant’s conviction for killing a person with the lesser
mental state of “knowingly” necessarily subsumes the specific intent to cause
serious bodily injury. Here, the guilty verdict under RSA 630:1, I(a) did not
require the jury to find that the defendant had a specific intent to kill or
seriously injure Officer Briggs.
173
Because the serious bodily injury factor performed a further narrowing
function under our sentencing scheme, we hold that the defendant has failed
to establish that the trial court erred in denying his motion to strike that
factor.3 To the extent that the defendant’s “as applied” argument challenges
the comparative proportionality of his sentence, see Arave, 507 U.S. at 476-77;
Walton, 497 U.S. at 655-56, he may raise it in the context of the next phase of
this appeal. See RSA 630:5, XI(c) (2007); Addison, 160 N.H. at 780.
The defendant also argues that the trial court erred in declining to adopt
his proposed jury instructions. We review the trial court’s decision to deny
proposed jury instructions under the unsustainable exercise of discretion
standard. See State v. Davidson, 163 N.H. 462, 472 (2012). Again, we limit
our review to the proposed instruction relating to the serious bodily injury
factor; the grave risk of death factor was not submitted to the jury for its
consideration during its sentence selection deliberations.
With respect to the serious bodily injury factor, the trial court instructed
the jury at the eligibility phase that, to find the defendant eligible for a
sentence of death it had to find that “the defendant purposely inflicted serious
bodily injury that resulted in the death of Officer Briggs. ‘Serious bodily injury’
means any harm to the body that causes severe, permanent, or protracted loss
of, or impairment to the health or of the function of any part of the body.” The
defendant’s proposed instruction, however, stated, in part: “It is not enough
that the defendant knew the injury he inflicted was practically certain to cause
death. You must find he specifically intended to cause a fatal injury.”
The defendant argues that his proposed instruction would have required
the jury to distinguish the conduct supporting the aggravating factor from that
which established the capital murder conviction. As previously explained,
however, the serious bodily injury factor required the jury to evaluate whether
the defendant had a conscious object or specific intent to seriously injure
Officer Briggs; the jury was not required to render findings based upon conduct
that is distinct from the capital murder conduct. In short, the defendant has
failed to establish that such an instruction was required under our statutory
scheme, or that the trial court’s failure to adopt the defendant’s proposed
instruction was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.
See id. Accordingly, we hold that the defendant has not demonstrated that the
imposition of a death sentence based upon the eligibility finding under RSA
3 Even if we assume the grave risk of death factor did not perform any narrowing
function, its submission to the jury at the eligibility phase was not reversible error. As
discussed in the text of this opinion, no constitutional violation would have resulted in
light of the jury’s findings under RSA 630:1, I(a) and RSA 630:5, VII(a)(2).
174
630:5, VII(a)(2) violates the State Constitution. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, arts. 15,
18, 33.
With respect to his motion to strike the serious bodily injury statutory
aggravating factor and his proposed jury instruction, the defendant makes
identical arguments under both the State and the Federal Constitutions. He
does not argue that in this context the protections under the State and Federal
Constitutions differ. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, arts. 15, 18, 33; U.S. CONST.
amends. V, VIII, XIV. Because the Federal Constitution affords the defendant
no greater protection than does the State Constitution in these circumstances,
we reach the same conclusion under the Federal Constitution as we do under
the State Constitution. See Tuilaepa, 512 U.S. at 972; Lowenfield, 484 U.S. at
246. With respect to his motion to bar the imposition of the death penalty, we
conclude that to the extent that the defendant argues that the State
Constitution provides greater protection than the Federal Constitution
regarding the narrowing function analysis, his argument is cursory, and, thus,
does not warrant appellate review. See State v. Ayer, 154 N.H. 500, 513
(2006).
C. Statutory Burdens of Proof
1. Background
In June 2007, the defendant filed two motions challenging the
constitutionality of RSA 630:5, III (2007) and RSA 630:5, IV (2007) regarding
burdens of proof for components of the capital sentencing process. RSA 630:5,
III provides in pertinent part: “The burden of establishing the existence of any
mitigating factor is on the defendant, and is not satisfied unless established by
a preponderance of the evidence.” RSA 630:5, IV provides, in pertinent part,
that if the State has proven at least two statutory aggravating factors required
for death eligibility,
the jury shall then consider whether the aggravating factors
found to exist sufficiently outweigh any mitigating factor or
factors found to exist, or in the absence of mitigating factors,
whether the aggravating factors are themselves sufficient to
justify a sentence of death. Based upon this consideration, if
the jury concludes that the aggravating factors outweigh the
mitigating factors or that the aggravating factors, in the
absence of any mitigating factors, are themselves sufficient to
justify a death sentence, the jury, by unanimous vote only,
may recommend that a sentence of death be imposed rather
than a sentence of life imprisonment without possibility of
parole.
175
RSA 630:5, IV.
In his first motion, the defendant asserted a facial challenge to RSA
630:5, III based upon its requirement that a capital defendant prove mitigating
factors by a preponderance of the evidence, instead of by a lower burden of
proof. He claimed that the statute violated several provisions of the New
Hampshire Constitution, including his right to due process as protected by
Part I, Article 15. The State objected and, following a hearing, the trial court
denied the defendant’s motion by written order dated October 1, 2007.
The trial court rejected the defendant’s due process argument,
concluding that the death penalty statute contains many procedural
safeguards, the probable value of additional safeguards is low, and mitigating
factors proven by a preponderance of the evidence ensure that death penalty
decisions are based upon accurate and non-speculative information.
In his second motion, the defendant asserted a facial challenge to RSA
630:5, IV under the State Constitution based upon the fact that the statute
does not require the jury to find that aggravating factors outweigh mitigating
factors beyond a reasonable doubt. He claimed that the statute fails to provide
adequate guidance to the jurors as to the weighing process and thus violates,
among other things, his right to due process as protected by Part I, Article 15.
The State objected and, following a hearing, the trial court denied the
defendant’s motion by written order dated October 1, 2007.
In rejecting the defendant’s state constitutional claim that procedural
due process requires imposing the reasonable doubt standard upon the
weighing process, the trial court determined that the defendant was “already
protected in numerous ways from an erroneous sentence.” It identified various
protections afforded capital defendants under RSA 630:5 (2007), concluding
that “it is unlikely that applying the reasonable doubt standard would provide
more protection to the defendant against an erroneous weighing of the crime
and the defendant’s background and character than what is already provided
by the statute.” The court concluded that “imposing the reasonable doubt
standard upon the weighing process may confuse the jury, as [that] standard is
ill equipped to describe the jury’s moral task.”
2. Appellate Argument
The defendant argues that the death penalty statute violates his right to
due process under the State Constitution by imposing too high a burden of
proof on a defendant’s constitutional right to have jurors consider mitigating
evidence, thereby precluding the jury from considering mitigating factors that it
finds are present by “an equal probability.” See RSA 630:5, III. He also argues
that the death penalty statute violates due process under the State and Federal
176
Constitutions by permitting the jury to impose death if aggravating factors
“sufficiently outweigh” mitigating factors, without requiring that jurors be
convinced beyond a reasonable doubt. See RSA 630:5, IV. According to the
defendant, “[t]he combined effect of these two flaws is that the statute imposes
too high a burden on the defendant regarding mitigation and too low a burden
on the State with regard to the weighing process,” and requires jurors to ignore
important evidence that failed to reach the preponderance standard and to
ignore their own reasonable doubts in deciding whether a defendant should be
put to death.
3. Discussion
a. Standard for Proving Mitigating Factors Under RSA 630:5, III
The defendant first argues that the Due Process Clause of the State
Constitution requires that a capital defendant be permitted to prove mitigating
factors by a lower burden of proof than preponderance of the evidence, such as
by demonstrating “a 50/50 chance” or presenting “some evidence.” Because
the defendant’s argument rests solely upon the State Constitution, we base our
decision upon it alone and refer to federal law only to aid our analysis. See
State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
The defendant acknowledges that the United States Supreme Court has
held that the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments to the Federal Constitution
are not violated by requiring a defendant to prove mitigating circumstances by
a preponderance of the evidence. See Walton v. Arizona, 497 U.S. 639, 649-51
(1990), overruled on other grounds by Ring v. Arizona, 536 U.S. 584 (2002).
The Supreme Court noted in Walton that it had previously “refused to
countenance state-imposed restrictions on what mitigating circumstances may
be considered in deciding whether to impose the death penalty.” Id. at 649; see
Lockett v. Ohio, 438 U.S. 586, 604 (1978) (plurality opinion). The Court stated,
however, that “it does not follow . . . that a State is precluded from specifying
how mitigating circumstances are to be proved.” Walton, 497 U.S. at 649. The
Court explained that due process is not offended by requiring a defendant to
prove an affirmative defense by a preponderance of the evidence or even beyond
a reasonable doubt, so long as the State retains the ultimate burden to prove
the elements of the crime. Id. at 650. Similarly, at the sentence selection
phase of a capital trial, the Court held that “[s]o long as a State’s method of
allocating the burdens of proof does not lessen the State’s burden . . . to prove
the existence of aggravating circumstances, a defendant’s constitutional rights
are not violated by placing on him the burden of proving mitigating
circumstances sufficiently substantial to call for leniency.” Id. Here, as the
trial court observed in denying the defendant’s motion on this issue, “[a]ll state
court decisions both following and preceding Walton have come to the same
177
conclusion, based on both the federal constitution and their own state
constitutions.”
The defendant does not argue that imposing any burden of proof on him
at the sentence selection phase of his capital trial is unconstitutional. Rather,
he argues that RSA 630:5, III “imposes an unconstitutionally high burden on
[him] to prove mitigating factors.” The defendant observes that “[w]hen
determining whether a statutory burden of proof satisfies the due process
requirement [we] first ask[ ] whether the challenged procedure concerns a
constitutionally protected interest, and if so, whether the procedure at issue
affords the requisite safeguards.” (Quotations omitted.) The defendant asserts
that because “the capital sentencing process directly affects [his]
constitutionally protected interest in his life,” the first part of the due process
test is met. He then turns to the “larger inquiry” of “whether the burden
imposed on [him] to prove mitigating factors by a preponderance of the
evidence is consistent with the safeguards required by due process in a capital
sentence selection proceeding.”
Our due process analysis balances the following three factors:
First, the private interest that will be affected by the official action;
second, the risk of an erroneous deprivation of such interest
through the procedures used, and the probable value, if any, of
additional or substitute procedural safeguards; and finally, the
Government’s interest, including the function involved and the
fiscal and administrative burdens that the additional or substitute
procedural requirement would entail.
State v. Lavoie, 155 N.H. 477, 483 (2007) (quotation omitted).
We agree with the defendant that under the first factor, the significant
private interest at stake in this case is indisputable — the potential deprivation
of life. However, that the private interest is “critical” is not, by itself,
dispositive. In re Eduardo L., 136 N.H. 678, 687 (1993).
Thus, we turn to the second factor, the risk of an erroneous deprivation
of the defendant’s interest through the procedures that apply to the jury’s
determination whether to recommend a sentence of death. Our death penalty
statute contains several procedural safeguards designed to protect a defendant
against an erroneous deprivation of his or her life. For example, at the guilt
phase of a capital trial, the jury must find, unanimously and beyond a
reasonable doubt, that the State has proven all of the elements of the crime of
capital murder as narrowly defined in the statute. See RSA 630:1 (2007)
(amended 2011). Once a defendant’s guilt has been established, the jury must
then address whether the defendant is eligible for the death penalty. The jury
178
must find, unanimously and beyond a reasonable doubt, that the State has
proven at least two statutory aggravating factors. RSA 630:5, III, IV, VII (2007).
In addition, the jury is required to return special findings identifying any
statutory aggravating factors the existence of which it unanimously finds
beyond a reasonable doubt. RSA 630:5, IV. If the jury finds that the State has
met its burden and that a defendant is eligible for a death sentence, the jury
then considers whether any non-statutory aggravating factors set forth in the
State’s notice of intent to seek the death penalty exist. Id. The State must
prove any non-statutory aggravating factors beyond a reasonable doubt to a
unanimous jury. RSA 630:5, III, IV.
The range of mitigating evidence that the jury may consider is broad.
See RSA 630:5, III, IV, VI(i) (2007) (the defendant may introduce “[o]ther factors
in [his] background or character [that] mitigate against imposition of the death
sentence”). The defendant may present any information relevant to mitigating
factors and such information may only be excluded “if its probative value is
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the
issues, or misleading the jury.” RSA 630:5, III. Although the defendant must
establish the existence of mitigating factors by a preponderance of the
evidence, only one juror need find that the defendant has met his burden
before that juror may consider the mitigating evidence. RSA 630:5, III, IV. The
jury must consider all of the sentencing evidence presented. RSA 630:5, IV.
The jury is specifically instructed that, regardless of its findings during
sentencing and regardless of the outcome of the process of weighing the
aggravating factors and mitigating factors, it is never required to impose the
death penalty. RSA 630:5, IV. Even if a defendant presents no mitigating
evidence, a jury may decline to recommend a death sentence because it finds
that the aggravating factors have not been proven beyond a reasonable doubt
or that the proven aggravating factors are not sufficient to justify death. If the
jury fails to reach a unanimous decision within a “reasonable time,” a sentence
of life imprisonment without possibility of parole is automatically imposed.
RSA 630:5, IX (2007).
Given these procedural safeguards, the value of “additional or substitute
procedural safeguards” asserted by the defendant, such as allowing the jury to
weigh mitigating factors he has proved by “a 50/50 chance” or “some
evidence,” is minimal. Since the preponderance of the evidence standard
“simply requires the trier of fact to believe that the existence of a fact is more
probable than its nonexistence,” In re Winship, 397 U.S. 358, 371 (1970)
(Harlan, J. concurring), evidence that fails to meet this standard is at least as
likely to be false as it is true. See 2 G. Dix et al., McCormick on Evidence
§ 339, at 484 (6th ed. 2006) (proof by preponderance of the evidence is “proof
which leads the jury to find that the existence of the contested fact is more
probable than its nonexistence”). As the trial court explained, “[t]his standard
does not prevent the defendant from submitting all relevant mitigating evidence
179
to the jury, but merely requires the jury to weigh only that evidence which it
finds more likely true than not.” See People v. Tenneson, 788 P.2d 786, 799
(Colo. 1990) (“It is for the jury to decide whether the ‘facts’ that the defendant
asserts in mitigation are true and, if so, whether they are to be regarded as
mitigating factors.”); see also State v. Watson, 586 P.2d 1253, 1259 (Ariz. 1978)
(“When the issue of guilt is settled and only the question of punishment
remains, due process is not offended by requiring the already guilty defendant
to carry the burden of showing why he should receive leniency.”).
We balance the minimal benefit of the additional procedural safeguards
asserted by the defendant against the governmental interest at stake. We agree
with the trial court’s reasoning that “[t]he State has an interest in ensuring
that death penalty decisions are based upon accurate and non-speculative
information, which produce a reasoned moral response to the defendant’s
background, character, and crime.” (Quotation omitted.) See Tuilaepa v.
California, 512 U.S. 967, 973 (1994) (“The State must ensure that the process
is neutral and principled so as to guard against bias or caprice in the
sentencing decision.”); Zant v. Stephens, 462 U.S. 862, 879 (1983) (“What is
important at the sentence selection stage is an individualized determination on
the basis of the character of the individual and the circumstances of the
crime.”).
On balance, weighing the risk of an erroneous deprivation of the
defendant’s life through the procedures used against the government’s interest
in a sentencing decision based upon “accurate and non-speculative
information,” we hold that the defendant’s right to due process under Part I,
Article 15 of the State Constitution is not violated by requiring him to prove
mitigating factors by a preponderance of the evidence.
The defendant argues, however, that “even if Walton represents a valid
interpretation of the Federal Constitution, the Walton Court’s explanation of
the minimal federal constitutional standard reveals that the New Hampshire
Legislature codified a federal capital sentencing procedure without considering
the more protective features of the New Hampshire Constitution.” The
defendant cites cases in which we have found greater due process protections
under our State Constitution than under the Federal Constitution. See, e.g.,
State v. Veale, 158 N.H. 632, 638-39 (2009) (holding that reputation alone is a
sufficient interest to require state due process protection and rejecting the
federal “stigma-plus” approach); State v. Laurie, 139 N.H. 325, 330 (1995)
(requiring State to demonstrate, beyond a reasonable doubt, that undisclosed
exculpatory evidence would not have affected the verdict); State v. Phinney, 117
N.H. 145, 147 (1977) (adopting beyond a reasonable doubt standard in
determining the voluntariness of confessions). The State responds by citing
other cases in which we have found equivalent due process protections under
both the State and Federal Constitutions. See, e.g., State v. Lopez, 156 N.H.
180
193, 199 (2007) (appointment of counsel for defendants mounting collateral
attacks on their plea-based convictions); State v. Cook, 125 N.H. 452, 457,
459-60 (1984) (use of uncounseled prior convictions for purposes of habitual
offender law and right to counsel at a hearing to determine habitual offender
status).
These cases illuminate our interpretation of our State Constitution’s
protections; however, they do not control our analysis of what process is due in
this case. See Ball, 124 N.H. at 233 (“when this court cites federal or other
State court opinions in construing provisions of the New Hampshire
Constitution or statutes, we rely on those precedents merely for guidance and
do not consider our results bound by those decisions”). Rather, we look to our
jurisprudence concerning the burdens properly allocated to criminal
defendants. We have held that statutes that require defendants to prove
affirmative defenses do not violate the State Constitution. For example, in
State v. Little, 121 N.H. 765 (1981), we held that the legislature could properly
require a defendant to establish the defense of entrapment by a preponderance
of the evidence without violating any constitutional guarantee, “[b]ecause the
burden of proving all the elements of the crime charged beyond a reasonable
doubt remain[ed] with the State.” Little, 121 N.H. at 772. Also, in State v.
Blair, 143 N.H. 669 (1999), we held that placing upon the defendant the
burden to prove an insanity defense by clear and convincing evidence did not
violate Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution. Blair, 143 N.H. at 674.
The legislature’s allocation of the burdens of proof in RSA 630:5, III does
not lessen the State’s burden to convict the defendant of capital murder, or to
prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, at least two aggravating factors required to
establish the defendant’s eligibility for a death sentence, or to prove any
properly noticed non-statutory aggravating circumstances at the sentence
selection phase of trial. Thus, to place upon the defendant the burden of
proving mitigating factors by a preponderance of the evidence in support of his
appeal for leniency — that is, to limit jurors’ weighing to those mitigating
factors that the defendant has shown to be more likely true than not —
“violates no constitutional guarantee.” Little, 121 N.H. at 772. Accordingly,
the New Hampshire Constitution affords the defendant no greater protection in
these circumstances than does the Federal Constitution. See Walton, 497 U.S.
at 649-51.
b. Standard for Weighing Proven Factors Under RSA 630:5, IV
The defendant next argues that RSA 630:5, IV violates due process under
the State and Federal Constitutions because “it does not require, as a
prerequisite to the imposition of death, that aggravating factors outweigh the
mitigating factors beyond a reasonable doubt.” See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 15;
U.S. CONST. amend. XIV. We first address the defendant’s claim under the
181
State Constitution and rely upon federal law only to aid our analysis. See Ball,
124 N.H. at 231-33.
Pursuant to RSA 630:5, IV, if the jury unanimously determines that the
State has proven two of the required aggravating factors beyond a reasonable
doubt, thereby making the defendant eligible for the death penalty, it must
consider and make special findings as to properly noticed non-statutory
aggravating factors and any mitigating factors presented by the defendant. The
jury
shall then consider whether the aggravating factors found to
exist sufficiently outweigh any mitigating factor or factors
found to exist, or in the absence of mitigating factors,
whether the aggravating factors are themselves sufficient to
justify a sentence of death. Based upon this consideration, if
the jury concludes that the aggravating factors outweigh the
mitigating factors or that the aggravating factors, in the
absence of any mitigating factors, are themselves sufficient
to justify a death sentence, the jury, by unanimous vote
only, may recommend that a sentence of death be imposed
rather than a sentence of life imprisonment without
possibility of parole.
RSA 630:5, IV.
The defendant argues: “Although the jury is never required to impose a
death sentence, it must reach a sentencing decision by weighing aggravating
factors against mitigating factors. Thus, what it means for the aggravating
factors to ‘sufficiently outweigh’ the mitigating factors effectively determines
when a defendant will be sentenced to die.” He asserts that “[w]hen this Court
considers the burden of proof required by due process and fundamental
fairness, it evaluates the importance of the decision, the interests of the
litigants and society, and the risks of an error” and that “[e]xamination of these
issues, along with the standard due process analysis, . . . demonstrates that a
death sentence should only be upheld where jurors have found beyond a
reasonable doubt that the aggravating factors outweighed the mitigating
factors, and that death is the appropriate sentence.”
Because the State does not argue otherwise, we assume, without
deciding, that the statutory weighing process implicates procedural due
process protections. Accordingly, we apply our traditional three-pronged
analysis which requires balancing: (1) the private interest that will be affected
by the official action; (2) the risk of an erroneous deprivation of such interest
through the procedures used, and the probable value, if any, of additional or
substitute procedural safeguards; and (3) the government’s interest, including
182
the function involved and the fiscal and administrative burdens that the
additional or substitute procedural requirement would entail. Lavoie, 155 N.H.
at 483. Also as set forth above, under the first factor the significant private
interest at stake in this case is indisputable — the potential deprivation of life.
However, that the private interest is “critical” is not, by itself, dispositive.
Eduardo L., 136 N.H. at 687.
As to the second factor — the risk of an erroneous death sentence
through the procedures that apply to a determination of that sentence — the
defendant argues that in the absence of the beyond a reasonable doubt
standard, “jurors are left to decide whether aggravating factors ‘sufficiently
outweigh’ mitigating factors” and that “[a]ny interpretation of that phrase leads
to an unacceptable risk of error and unfairness” because such standard is
“inadequate” and “undefined.” The Supreme Court has expressly rejected this
argument, concluding that “a State enjoys a range of discretion in imposing the
death penalty, including the manner in which aggravating and mitigating
circumstances are to be weighed.” Kansas v. Marsh, 548 U.S. 163, 174 (2006).
“Indeed, the sentencer may be given unbridled discretion in determining
whether the death penalty should be imposed after it has found that the
defendant is a member of the class made eligible for that penalty.” Tuilaepa,
512 U.S. at 979-80 (quotation omitted).
The defendant acknowledges that the Supreme Court has held that
under the Federal Constitution “specific standards for balancing aggravating
against mitigating circumstances are not constitutionally required.” Zant, 462
U.S. at 875-76 n.13; see Marsh, 548 U.S. at 175. As the trial court stated in
its order denying the defendant’s motion on this issue, “Most state courts have
rejected arguments that the reasonable doubt burden of proof should apply to
weighing aggravating and mitigating factors.” In support of his argument, the
defendant relies upon State v. Biegenwald, 524 A.2d 130 (N.J. 1987), and
Tenneson, 788 P.2d 786. Both decisions, however, were based upon state
statutes, not the state constitution. See Biegenwald, 524 A.2d at 151, 155-56;
Tenneson, 788 P.2d at 792 n.9, 795.
The defendant cites United States v. Gabrion, 648 F.3d 307 (6th Cir.
2011), as the sole federal decision supporting his argument. However, after the
defendant filed his brief, the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth
Circuit vacated its decision in Gabrion and reheard the case. In its en banc
decision, the Sixth Circuit now agrees with all other federal courts of appeals
that have considered the issue that the weighing process is not a factual issue
that the jury must decide beyond a reasonable doubt, but a moral judgment
involving a process of assigning weight to competing interests or factors in
order to determine the sentence itself, within a range for which the defendant is
already eligible. United States v. Gabrion, 719 F.3d 511, 532-33 (6th Cir.
2013) (en banc); see, e.g., United States v. Runyon, 707 F.3d 475, 516 (4th Cir.
183
2013); United States v. Fields, 516 F.3d 923, 950 (10th Cir. 2008); United
States v. Mitchell, 502 F.3d 931, 993-94 (9th Cir. 2007); United States v.
Sampson, 486 F.3d 13, 31-32 (1st Cir. 2007); United States v. Fields, 483 F.3d
313, 345-46 (5th Cir. 2007); United States v. Purkey, 428 F.3d 738, 749-50
(8th Cir. 2005).
These federal courts of appeals have decided uniformly that the weighing
process is neither a “fact” nor an element of the charged offense. See, e.g.,
Sampson, 486 F.3d at 32; Ford v. Strickland, 696 F.2d 804, 818 (11th Cir.
1983) (en banc) (“The aggravating and mitigating circumstances are not facts or
elements of the crime. Rather, they channel and restrict the sentencer’s
discretion in a structured way after guilt has been fixed.”). Instead, federal
courts have held that the weighing process is a “highly subjective, largely moral
judgment regarding the punishment that a particular person deserves.” United
States v. Barrett, 496 F.3d 1079, 1107 (10th Cir. 2007) (quotations omitted).
As the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit explained: “[I]t
makes no sense to speak of the weighing process . . . as an elemental fact . . . .
[I]t is . . . the lens through which the jury must focus the facts that it has
found to produce an individualized determination regarding whether the
defendant should be sentenced to death, to life imprisonment without the
possibility of release or some other lesser sentence.” Purkey, 428 F.3d at 750
(citation and quotation omitted).
As the trial court found, “Weighing aggravating and mitigating
circumstances is an evaluative process different from determining whether a
fact, such as an element of a crime or an aggravating factor, exists with a
defined degree of certitude.” “Unlike the determination of guilt or innocence,
which turns largely on an evaluation of objective facts, the question whether
death is the appropriate sentence requires a profoundly moral evaluation of the
defendant’s character and crime.” Satterwhite v. Texas, 486 U.S. 249, 261
(1988) (Marshall, J., concurring).
We agree that the weighing process is a means to an end, not an end in
itself. See Marsh, 548 U.S. at 179. It is the “measured, normative process in
which a jury is constitutionally tasked to engage when deciding the appropriate
sentence for a capital defendant.” Id. at 180. The decision regarding whether a
capital defendant lives or dies is a moral judgment. See Gabrion, 719 F.3d at
533. Thus, “[w]hile the existence of an aggravating or mitigating circumstance
is a fact susceptible to proof under a reasonable doubt or preponderance
standard, the relative weight is not.” Ford, 696 F.2d at 818 (citations omitted);
see Sampson, 486 F.3d at 32 (“The outcome of the weighing process is not an
objective truth that is susceptible to (further) proof by either party.”); see also
Lavoie, 155 N.H. at 482 (the concept of the burden of proof embodied in the
State Constitution’s Due Process Clause applies to factual determinations).
184
We agree with the defendant that the need to avoid error in a decision to
sentence a capital defendant to death is paramount. We conclude that the
statutory standard for the weighing process, along with the other statutory
protections, accomplishes this. Accordingly, we hold that the requirement in
RSA 630:5, IV that the jury find that aggravating factors “sufficiently outweigh”
mitigating factors does not violate Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution.
As the State correctly observes, the defendant did not preserve his due
process argument under the Federal Constitution by raising it in the trial
court. See State v. Eaton, 162 N.H. 190, 195 (2011); State v. Winward, 161
N.H. 533, 542 (2011). Even assuming that his federal due process claim was
preserved for appellate review, it is unavailing. The Supreme Court has held
under the Federal Constitution that specific standards for balancing
aggravating against mitigating circumstances are not constitutionally required.
See Marsh, 548 U.S. at 171-75; Tuilaepa, 512 U.S. at 979-80; Zant, 462 U.S.
at 875-76 n.13; see also Medina v. California, 505 U.S. 437, 445 (1992) (in
federal due process analysis of a state criminal procedure, the state procedure
will stand unless it “offends some principle of justice so rooted in the traditions
and conscience of our people as to be ranked as fundamental” (quotation
omitted)).
D. Inapplicability of Rules of Evidence
1. Background
In 2007, the defendant filed two motions challenging the facial
constitutionality of RSA 630:5, III (2007). In his first motion the defendant
argued that because the statute provides that the rules of evidence do not
apply at capital sentencing, the legislature has “strip[ped] from the judiciary its
inherent authority to control proceedings uniquely within the realm of the
judiciary,” thereby violating the Separation of Powers Clause of the State
Constitution. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 37, pt. II, art. 73-a. The State
objected, and, following a hearing, the trial court denied the defendant’s motion
by written order dated October 10, 2007. The trial court viewed RSA 630:5, III
as consistent with New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 1101(d)(3), which deems
the rules of evidence inapplicable to “sentencing” generally. In addition, the
court found that “[l]oosening the rules of evidence is consistent with the nature
of the sentencing hearing and facilitates its goals, whether in a death penalty
case or otherwise,” and that under RSA 630:5, III, “the judge, as gatekeeper,
still has the authority to control the evidence and make assurances that the
evidence sought to be presented is reliable and fair.” (Quotations and brackets
omitted.)
In his second motion, the defendant argued that the inapplicability of the
rules of evidence at capital sentencing allows the admission of unreliable
185
evidence, which violates “his state constitutional rights to due process and a
fair trial, and against cruel, unusual, or disproportionate punishments.” See
N.H. CONST. pt. I, arts. 15, 18, 33. The State objected, and, following a
hearing, the trial court denied his motion by written order dated October 10,
2007. Following established federal and state precedent, the trial court ruled
that “[t]he rules of evidence are generally ill-suited to the purposes of
sentencing,” and that “[i]n capital sentencing proceedings, [the] relaxed
evidentiary standard promotes constitutional procedural safeguards which
benefit the defendant.” It concluded: “[S]uspending the rules of evidence
during the sentencing hearing benefits the defendant by placing minimal
restraints on the mitigating or rebuttal evidence he might seek to introduce.
Moreover, the judge’s inherent authority to exclude irrelevant and unreliable
information, combined with evidentiary safeguards contained in RSA 630:5, III,
protects the defendant against speculative, prejudicial and otherwise
unconstitutional evidence.”
2. Appellate Argument
The defendant argues that the provision in RSA 630:5, III that makes the
rules of evidence for criminal trials inapplicable at capital sentencing facially
violates the Separation of Powers and Due Process Clauses of the State
Constitution. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, arts. 15, 37, pt. II, art. 73-a. He first
contends that the trial court erred in relying upon Rule 1101(d)(3), which
provides that the rules of evidence do not apply to “sentencing,” to reject his
separation of powers claim. The defendant asserts that because Rule
1101(d)(3) does not mention capital murder and the term “sentencing” as used
in the Rule refers to “sentences imposed by judges,” “statutory construction
principles do not support extending its reach to jury trials.” Regarding due
process, the defendant argues that because the rules of evidence “play a critical
role in insuring fairness and reliability,” the inapplicability of the rules to
capital sentencing, “the most significant criminal proceeding a court can
conduct,” leads to the introduction of unreliable evidence.
3. Discussion
Because the defendant’s arguments rest solely upon the State
Constitution, we base our decision upon it alone and refer to federal law only to
aid our analysis. See State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
The statutory provision at issue provides that at sentencing: “Any other
information relevant to . . . mitigating or aggravating factors may be presented
by either the state or the defendant, regardless of its admissibility under the
rules governing admission of evidence at criminal trials, except that
information may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed
by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the
186
jury.” RSA 630:5, III. This provision applies to new evidence presented by the
parties during sentencing, not to the evidence already admitted during the guilt
phase of the capital trial that also is considered by the sentencing jury. See
RSA 630:5, II, III (2007).
a. Separation of Powers
The defendant first argues that “the Legislature’s decision to suspend the
rules of evidence” in the sentencing phase of a capital trial violates the
Separation of Powers Clause of the State Constitution. Part I, Article 37
provides:
In the government of this state, the three essential
powers thereof, to wit, the legislative, executive, and judicial,
ought to be kept as separate from, and independent of, each
other, as the nature of a free government will admit, or as is
consistent with that chain of connection that binds the whole
fabric of the constitution in one indissoluble bond of union
and amity.
N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 37. This provision “contemplates no absolute fixation
and rigidity of powers between the three great departments of government.”
Petition of S. N.H. Med. Ctr., 164 N.H. 319, 327 (2012) (quotation omitted).
“Instead, it expressly recognizes that, as a practical matter, there must be some
overlapping among the three branches of government and that the erection of
impenetrable barriers among them is not required.” Id. (quotations omitted).
“Accordingly, the doctrine of separation of powers is violated only when one
branch usurps an essential power of another.” State v. Martin, 164 N.H. 687,
691 (2013) (quotation and brackets omitted). “When the actions of one branch
of government defeat or materially impair the inherent functions of another
branch, such actions are unconstitutional.” Id. (quotation omitted).
The defendant’s argument assumes that it is the exclusive province of
the judiciary to adopt or modify a rule of evidence. See N.H. CONST. pt. II, art.
73-a (“The chief justice of the supreme court . . . shall, with the concurrence of
a majority of the supreme court justices, make rules governing the
administration of all courts in the state and the practice and procedure to be
followed in all such courts.”). However, we have recognized that “our authority
to make evidentiary rules [is] coextensive with the legislature’s.” Petition of
S. N.H. Med. Ctr., 164 N.H. at 329. Indeed, the New Hampshire Rules of
Evidence expressly provide that the legislature can limit the application of the
Rules. Rule of Evidence 1101(b) provides: “These rules apply generally to all
civil and criminal proceedings unless otherwise provided by the constitution or
statutes of the State of New Hampshire or these rules.” RSA 630:5, III, in turn,
states, in part, that relevant evidence may be presented at capital sentencing
187
“regardless of its admissibility under the rules governing admission of evidence
at criminal trials.” The statute, thus, “simply creates an exception for a
particular type of proceeding from the general principle that the rules of
evidence apply, an action that the legislature is expressly allowed to take”
under Rule 1101(b). State v. Ploof, 162 N.H. 609, 625 (2011).
To the extent that the defendant argues that making the rules of
evidence inapplicable to the sentencing phase of a capital trial defeats or
materially impairs one of the judiciary’s inherent functions, we disagree. See
Petition of S. N.H. Med. Ctr., 164 N.H. at 327. The defendant contends that by
rendering the rules of evidence inapplicable to capital sentencing, the
legislature “has eliminated the most important tool in controlling the flow of
information” in such proceedings. Assuming that “controlling the flow of
information” in a capital sentencing is an inherent judicial function, it is not
impaired by RSA 630:5, III.
Although the rules of evidence do not apply to capital sentencing, RSA
630:5, III expressly provides that evidence must be relevant to aggravating or
mitigating factors and provides that the trial court may exclude such evidence
“if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair
prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury.” Under this plain
language, the trial court retains its traditional role as gatekeeper of the
evidence to be considered by the fact finder. See United States v. Fell, 360
F.3d 135, 145 (2d Cir. 2004); see also State v. Rodrigue, 127 N.H. 496, 500
(1985) (judge exercises wide discretion in choosing sources and types of
evidence upon which to rely in imposing sentence). Thus, the legislature has
not “impaire[d] the inherent functions” of the judicial branch. Petition of
S. N.H. Med. Ctr., 164 N.H. at 327.
We also reject the defendant’s argument that the term “sentencing”
within Rule 1101(d)(3) refers only to sentencing imposed by judges, not juries.
Rule 1101(d) states: “The rules (other than with respect to privileges) do not
apply in the following situations: . . . sentencing, or granting or revoking
probation . . . .” N.H. R. Ev. 1101(d)(3). The plain meaning of the term
“sentencing” refers to a judicial proceeding in which the penalty is determined
and does not specify whether a judge or a jury must make the determination.
See, e.g., Black’s Law Dictionary 1486 (9th ed. 2009) (various definitions of
“sentencing”); id. 1223 (5th ed. 1979) (“sentencing” includes “[t]he
postconviction stage of the criminal justice process in which the defendant is
brought before the court for imposition of sentence. Usually a trial judge
imposes sentence, but in some jurisdictions sentencing is performed by jury or
by sentencing councils.”). The hearing conducted under RSA 630:5 (2007)
following a finding of guilt for the offense of capital murder is “a separate
sentencing hearing to determine the punishment to be imposed.” RSA 630:5,
188
II. We conclude that the term “sentencing” in Rule 1101(d)(3) includes the
penalty phase of a capital trial.
Accordingly, we hold that the inapplicability of the rules of evidence at
capital sentencing pursuant to RSA 630:5, III does not violate the Separation of
Powers Clause of Part I, Article 37 of the State Constitution. As the defendant
presents no independent argument under Part II, Article 73-a, no analysis is
warranted. See State v. Chick, 141 N.H. 503, 504 (1996).
b. Due Process
The defendant next asserts that the inapplicability of the rules of
evidence at capital sentencing violates due process under the State
Constitution. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 15. According to the defendant,
“[w]hile this Court has not addressed the precise issue presented here, it has
afforded defendants enhanced Due Process protection under Part I, Article 15.”
Our due process analysis balances the following three factors: (1) the
private interest that will be affected by the official action; (2) the risk of an
erroneous deprivation of such interest through the procedures used, and the
probable value, if any, of additional or substitute procedural safeguards; and
(3) the government's interest. See State v. Lavoie, 155 N.H. 477, 483 (2007).
The significant private interest at stake in this case is indisputable — the
potential deprivation of life. The State agrees with the defendant that this
interest is obviously substantial. However, that the private interest is “critical”
is not, by itself, dispositive. In re Eduardo L., 136 N.H. 678, 687 (1993). Thus,
we turn to the second factor, the risk of an erroneous deprivation of the
defendant’s interest through the procedures that apply.
With regard to the second factor, the defendant argues that “[b]ecause
the rules of evidence play a critical role in insuring fairness and reliability, the
elimination of those rules in a capital sentencing trial threatens the ‘private
interest’ by leading to the introduction of more unreliable evidence.” We reject
this premise, just as the United States Courts of Appeals for the Second,
Fourth, Fifth, Eighth, and Ninth Circuits have rejected similar arguments when
addressing challenges to the Federal Death Penalty Act, 18 U.S.C. §§ 3591 et
seq. (2006) (FDPA). See United States v. Mitchell, 502 F.3d 931, 979-80 (9th
Cir. 2007); United States v. Fulks, 454 F.3d 410, 438 (4th Cir. 2006); United
States v. Lee, 374 F.3d 637, 648 (8th Cir. 2004); Fell, 360 F.3d at 143-46;
United States v. Jones, 132 F.3d 232, 242 (5th Cir. 1998). We agree with these
courts that “the admission of more rather than less evidence during the penalty
phase [of a capital case] increases reliability by providing full and complete
information about the defendant and allowing for an individualized inquiry into
the appropriate sentence for the offense.” Lee, 374 F.3d at 648.
189
Moreover, under RSA 630:5, III, the trial court must exclude evidence
that is not relevant to an aggravating or mitigating factor, and may exclude
otherwise relevant evidence “if its probative value is substantially outweighed
by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the
jury.” As we have explained, by its express terms, RSA 630:5, III retains the
traditional discretionary function of the judge as gatekeeper of the evidence.
Accordingly, “judges continue their role as evidentiary gatekeepers and,
pursuant to the balancing test set forth in [the statute], retain the discretion to
exclude any type of unreliable or prejudicial evidence that might render a trial
fundamentally unfair”; at the same time the relaxation of the rules of evidence
“helps to accomplish the individualized sentencing required by the
constitution.” Fell, 360 F.3d at 145-46.
Finally, we weigh the risk of erroneous deprivation of the defendant’s life
against the government’s interest in the procedures used. Here, RSA 630:5, III
serves the State’s significant interest in ensuring that “the sentencing body
[has] full and complete information about the defendant.” Fell, 360 F.3d at
143; see Jurek v. Texas, 428 U.S. 262, 276 (1976) (it is “essential . . . that the
jury have before it all possible relevant information about the individual
defendant whose fate it must determine”); Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153, 204
(1976) (“We think it desirable for the jury to have as much information before it
as possible when it makes the sentencing decision.”). In light of this significant
state interest, we weigh this factor heavily. See Ploof, 162 N.H. at 624.
Accordingly, we hold that the inapplicability of the rules of evidence at
capital sentencing pursuant to RSA 630:5, III does not violate due process
under Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution.
E. Impact of Race in Capital Sentencing
1. Background
In January 2008, nine months before trial, the defendant moved to bar
the imposition of the death penalty because, among other things, “[e]xtensive
research has demonstrated that in cases of an alleged murder of a white victim
by a black defendant,” as in this case, “it is impossible to guarantee that race
will not play a role in the decision of whether or not the defendant is sentenced
to die.” He argued that the statistical evidence demonstrated that race would
inevitably play a role in the jury’s decision in his case, and that such statistical
evidence of racial bias “is sufficient evidence of inequality to prove a
constitutional violation” of Part I, Article 2 of the New Hampshire Constitution.
Although the defendant acknowledged that the United States Supreme Court
rejected such an argument under the Federal Equal Protection Clause in
McCleskey v. Kemp, 481 U.S. 279 (1987), he argued nonetheless that “current
data” demonstrates that McCleskey is “flawed and should not be applied to this
190
case.” He further argued that McCleskey is inapplicable to his state equal
protection claim because “[t]he standard of review used in McCleskey is not
consistent with the language and original intent” of Part I, Article 2 of the State
Constitution.
The State objected, and, in April 2008, the trial court heard six days of
expert testimony on this motion and several other defense challenges to the
death penalty, including a motion regarding the “death qualification” process
during jury selection, which we address in Part VIII.F (Constitutional and
Statutory Review-Death-Qualified Jury) of this opinion. Four defense experts
and two experts for the State testified. The defendant’s experts were: William
Bowers, Ph.D., Wanda Foglia, Ph.D., Mahzarin Banaji, Ph.D., and Samuel
Sommers, Ph.D. Drs. Bowers and Foglia testified about the findings of the
Capital Jury Project (CJP) and other research examining the impact of race and
death qualification on the capital decision-making process. Dr. Banaji testified
about the Implicit Association Test (IAT) and other studies regarding implicit
racial bias. Dr. Sommers rebutted the State’s witnesses and discussed his own
mock jury research. Two experts testified for the State: Ebbe Ebbesen, Ph.D.
and Rogers Elliott, Ph.D. Dr. Ebbesen criticized all of the expert evidence
presented by the defendant; Dr. Elliott specifically criticized the CJP and mock
jury studies.
The trial court denied the defendant’s motion by written order dated
June 5, 2008. The court ruled that the research the defendant presented had
fundamental shortcomings that undermined the reliability of the research
results. It found that it was “very difficult” to replicate in a laboratory setting
“the unique nature of a capital murder trial, during which a jury decides
whether the defendant committed the charged murder and, if so, whether he
should live or die.” Additionally, the court found that “[b]ecause of the
particularized nature of the sentencing decision and the innumerable factors
the jury may consider, it is also very difficult to isolate the ultimate bases for a
capital jury’s decision.” The trial court found it particularly troublesome that
none of the studies upon which the defendant relied “concerned New
Hampshire jurors, trials or capital procedures.”
Ultimately, the trial court concluded — as had been acknowledged by the
defendant’s rebuttal expert — that, at most, the defendant’s evidence proved
only that “there is a risk that racial bias affects capital [jury] decision making,”
including the decision-making in his case. (Emphasis added.) The trial court
determined that the defendant’s evidence did not conclusively prove that racial
bias, in fact, has such an effect upon capital jury decision-making. The court
concluded that while “[u]ndoubtedly racism, both implicit and explicit, exists,
as [do] . . . many other types of prejudices,” this “does not mean that persons
who may be the subject of a particular bias should not be held accountable for
their actions in the same way that others are.” Observing that “courts
191
implement safeguards to ensure that each defendant is tried by a fair and
impartial jury which renders its decision based on evidence presented without
bias, fear or sympathy,” the court identified some of the procedural safeguards
it intended to implement: it would “extensively voir dire potential jurors about
racial biases, instruct the jurors not to let race influence their decisions, and
have the jurors certify that their decisions are not based on race, but on
permissible, relevant considerations.”
We summarize the social science research presented by the defendant
and the trial court’s specific findings, and provide citation to the studies
addressed by the trial court.
a. Capital Jury Project (CJP)
The CJP is a study consisting of in-depth interviews of 1,198 jurors from
fourteen states who served on 353 capital cases. The CJP chose between eight
and fourteen capital trials in each state and then interviewed randomly-chosen
jurors from each trial. The interviews were conducted between 1991 and 1998
and concerned capital trials that took place between 1986 and 1995. The CJP
included only trials that went to the penalty phase; 43% of the trials resulted in
a sentence of life imprisonment, and 57% of the trials resulted in a death
sentence.
The CJP asked the jurors both structured and open-ended questions and
made findings based upon their responses. The structured questions
designated responses for the jurors to select, such as “yes/no” or
“agree/disagree.” The open-ended questions asked jurors for narrative
answers.
The CJP found that the race of jurors influenced their decision during
the penalty phase of a capital case. Specifically, in cases in which the
defendant was black, the victim was white, and five or more white males were
on the jury, 63% of juries voted for the death penalty. See Bowers & a., Death
Sentencing in Black and White: An Empirical Analysis of the Role of Jurors’
Race and Jury Racial Composition, 3 U. Pa. J. Const. L. 171, 191-96 (2001).
By contrast, in cases where the defendant was black, the victim was white, and
one black male was on the jury, only 37% of juries voted for the death penalty.
See id. According to Dr. Foglia, having one black male on the jury
“substantially decreased the chances of the death penalty. When there . . .
were no black males on a jury seventy-two percent of the cases resulted in a
death penalty, when [there was] just one black male it went down to thirty-
seven and-a-half percent.” The CJP also found that black male jurors were
more likely to believe that a defendant was remorseful and were less likely to
believe that the defendant would be dangerous in the future. Bowers & Foglia,
192
Still Singularly Agonizing: Law’s Failure to Purge Arbitrariness from Capital
Sentencing, 39 Crim. L. Bull. 51, 77-80 (2003).
Based upon the jurors’ responses, the study contained seven conclusions
about the decision-making processes of capital juries: (1) jurors make
premature sentencing decisions; (2) jury selection fails to remove those jurors
who automatically vote for the death penalty and thereby creates jury bias; (3)
jurors fail to understand jury instructions; (4) jurors erroneously believe that
the death penalty is mandatory; (5) jurors fail to understand the jury’s primary
responsibility for the defendant’s sentence; (6) jurors underestimate
alternatives to a death sentence; and (7) race improperly influences jurors’
decisions during the penalty phase. See generally Bowers, The Capital Jury
Project: Rationale, Design, and Preview of Early Findings, 70 Ind. L. J. 1043,
1085-1101 (1995). The CJP determined that these conclusions reflected
constitutional problems inherent in capital punishment occurring in each of
the fourteen states in the study. See Bowers & Foglia, supra at 55.
The trial court found that the CJP’s results were “weakened by
methodological flaws.” Specifically, the court observed that “most jurors were
interviewed approximately two years after the capital trials in which they had
served, and some interviews took place up to five years later, calling into
question the reliability of their information.” Additionally, the court observed
that because the CJP primarily relies upon self-reporting by jurors of their
thoughts and mental states, the CJP’s results depended upon the honesty and
self-awareness of the interviewees. The trial court also found that the CJP
“suffers from sampling problems,” and the court questioned whether the CJP
samples were representative. The trial court observed that the CJP data is at
least ten years old and that the CJP did not use or analyze data (if any exists)
from New Hampshire. The court noted as well that because the defendant’s
experts refused to disclose the raw data upon which the CJP results were
based, the data was not subject to scrutiny and cross-examination, which led
the court to conclude that it could not give the data “the weight the defense
argues it deserves.”
The trial court was particularly critical of the CJP’s conclusion that the
race of jurors affects the outcome of capital cases:
First, the CJP based this conclusion on interviews with jurors
from only 72 trials. Of these, only 19 had juries with five or
more white male jurors, and only 21 had juries with only one
black male juror. One cannot draw statistically significant
conclusions from such small sample sizes. . . . Further, the
CJP made no effort to examine the underlying evidence from
those trials and thereby determine whether the strength of
193
the evidence, not the race of the jurors, caused the outcome
of the trials.
(Citations omitted.) Based upon these flaws, the court did not credit the CJP’s
conclusions concerning the effect of the racial composition of jurors upon the
outcome of a capital case.
b. Implicit Association Test (IAT)
The IAT is a computer program developed by Dr. Banaji to measure the
time that it takes for a person to make associations. The general theory of the
IAT is that the speed with which a person makes an association reveals that
person’s implicit preferences or biases. Implicit bias refers to the unconscious
prejudices that a person may not report or of which he or she may not be
aware. The data before the trial court specifically concerned the IAT that
purports to measure racial bias (Race IAT), in which Race IAT participants
access the Race IAT on a website for “Project Implicit” and categorize words and
images.
Dr. Banaji testified about results drawn from a Race IAT database of
approximately “six million tests,” including 1,000 people from New Hampshire.
Dr. Banaji testified that, nationally, 88% of white participants and 50% of black
participants prefer white individuals over black individuals. According to Dr.
Banaji, New Hampshire participants have a slightly higher preference for white
individuals than the national average. One unpublished dissertation has
linked Race IAT scores with the sentences imposed by mock jurors on black
and white defendants. Other studies show that the IAT predicts behavior in
the fields of employment, medical and mental health treatment, and voting.
Dr. Sommers testified that he was not aware of any published studies linking
the IAT to jury decisions in capital jury trials. Dr. Banaji opined that because
of the studies showing that the IAT may predict future behavior and the large
percentage of New Hampshire participants in the Race IAT demonstrating an
implicit bias against black individuals, it would be “extremely hard” for a black
defendant to be tried by a fair and impartial jury in New Hampshire.
The trial court concluded that the IAT “has not been shown to be an
effective measure of implicit bias that would necessarily affect capital decision
making.” The court observed that only one unpublished dissertation has
linked Race IAT scores with the individual decisions of mock jurors, and that
“no studies have examined the IAT in jury deliberations in real trials.” The
court found that few studies have examined implicit bias and “its effect on
group decisionmaking in any context.” The court noted that “a meta-analysis
of 103 IAT studies on behavioral outcomes showed an average correlation of
.27, meaning that the IAT has only a ‘moderate’ predictive validity,” and that
one of the State’s experts had testified that the Race IAT showed a predictive
194
validity of only between .1 and .2. The trial court observed that the IAT does
not account for either “the impact of the deliberative process” on decision-
making or the use of “procedural safeguards to counter implicit racial bias.”
c. Mock Jury Studies
A mock jury study is a controlled experiment in which researchers use
subjects to test a hypothesis about jury behavior. By controlling for all
variables aside from the hypothesized cause, researchers seek to determine
what causes a particular outcome in jury trials.
In one study, researchers showed four groups of mock jurors a video
recording of a capital murder trial; the video recording shown to each group
differed with regard to the race of the defendant and the victim. Lynch,
Stereotypes, prejudice, and life and death decision-making: Lessons from
laypersons in an experimental setting, in From Lynch Mobs to the Killing
States: Race and the Death Penalty 191-95 (C. Ogletree & A. Sarat, eds.,
2006). The researchers found that mock jurors, faced with the same facts,
were more likely to sentence a black defendant to death than they were to
sentence a white defendant to death. Id. at 194. The researchers found that
mock jurors were most likely to impose the death penalty on a black defendant
who killed a white victim. Id.
Another study concluded that white mock jurors are more likely to
convict a black defendant when race is not “salient” in the trial. Sommers &
Ellsworth, White Juror Bias: An Investigation of Prejudice Against Black
Defendants in the American Courtroom, 7 Psychol. Pub. Pol’y & L. 201, 220-22
(2001). “Salience” in this context means that the facts of the crime raise racial
issues. Id. at 216. For instance, in the study, mock jurors were presented
with a written trial summary of an interracial battery case. Id. at 214. The
summary for half of the jurors concerned a white defendant and a black victim;
the summary for the other half concerned a black defendant and a white
victim. Id. The defendant was a high school basketball player charged with
attacking a teammate in the locker room. Id. at 216. “The racial content of the
trial was also varied so that half of the mock jurors read a race-salient version
and half read a non-race-salient version . . . . Race was made salient in the
trial summary through the testimony of a defense witness about the
defendant’s minority status on his high school basketball team.” Id. at 214-15.
The researchers found that the white jurors were more likely to discriminate
against the black defendant in cases without salient racial issues than in cases
when race was made salient. Id. at 220. They theorized that this was so
because the racial content of the trial activated a motivation to appear
nonprejudiced. Id.
195
The trial court found that mock jury studies “suffer from flaws that
weaken their reliability.” The court observed that their “major disadvantage” is
that they study mock juries rather than real juries. The court found that mock
jurors are usually college students and are usually not as representative of the
overall population as are real juries. The court noted that it was “virtually
impossible to simulate a real criminal trial, especially a capital trial, for study
in a laboratory setting.” In a real trial, jurors are subject to voir dire and
repeated jury instructions, and they observe opening and closing arguments
and direct and cross-examinations. By contrast, in a mock trial, jurors read a
summary of the facts of a trial or watch an abbreviated video recording. Mock
jurors rarely deliberate together as real jurors do. The trial court found it
significant that mock jurors know that, unlike real jurors, they are not
responsible for an actual person’s fate. The court stated: “This is especially
troubling in a capital case, where the stakes of the trial, and the responsibility
of the jurors, are enormous.” The court found that because mock juries do not
deliberate collectively, “many mock jury studies are flawed because they test
individual decisions prior to group deliberation, and assume that an individual,
pre-deliberation vote is predictive of a final vote.”
The court concluded that “[s]everal of these general weaknesses have
particular application to mock jury studies concerning the impact of race.” The
court also found that most mock jury studies “did not include or measure
procedures that are taken in death penalty cases to prevent juror bias from
affecting decision making.” The trial court observed that studies that included
such procedures found them to be effective in reducing racial bias.
d. Archival Studies
Defense experts also testified about the findings of archival studies,
which examined the records of numerous death penalty cases for racial bias.
This method is often associated with Dr. David Baldus, who authored a well-
known study of Georgia’s capital punishment system. See McCleskey, 481
U.S. at 296. The trial court noted that from 1972 until 2001, at least seventy
archival studies have been conducted, studying capital punishment in the
federal system as well as in twenty-seven states, citing Baldus & a., Racial
Discrimination and the Death Penalty in the Post-Furman Era: An Empirical
and Legal Overview, with Recent Findings from Philadelphia, 83 Cornell L. Rev.
1638, 1742-45 (1997-1998), and Baldus & Woodworth, Race Discrimination in
the Administration of the Death Penalty: An Overview of the Empirical
Evidence with Special Emphasis on the Post-1990 Research, 39 Crim. L. Bull.
194, 215-24 (2003). A majority of these studies conclude that the race of the
defendant has no effect upon the outcome of capital cases, but that the race of
the victim is statistically significant. Most of these studies also conclude that a
black defendant accused of killing a white victim is most at risk of being
charged with capital murder and of being sentenced to death.
196
The trial court found that archival studies “suffer from a fundamental
problem that an unrecorded variable may have caused or contributed to the
racial disparities.” The court observed that “[m]any unrecorded variables affect
a jury’s verdict,” such as the demeanor of the defendant, the credibility of
witnesses, and the presence in the courtroom of members of the victim’s
family. The court concluded that although archival studies may show that
there is a correlation between race and a jury’s verdict, they do not show that
the two (race and jury decision) are causally related.
In addition to its findings on the defendant’s statistical evidence, the trial
court followed McCleskey as established Supreme Court precedent in rejecting
the defendant’s state constitutional equal protection claim. In doing so, the
trial court also rejected the defendant’s argument that Part I, Article 2 generally
provides more protection than the Federal Equal Protection Clause. The court
declined to find that “a race-based equal protection claim under the State
Constitution can be proven merely [upon] a showing of a discriminatory
impact, rather than discriminatory purpose.”
2. Appellate Argument
The defendant argues that because there exists “an unacceptably high
risk of racial discrimination in the administration of the death penalty,” its
imposition violates his equal protection rights under the State and Federal
Constitutions. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 2; U.S. CONST. amend XIV. He
contends that the trial court erred in denying his motion to bar the imposition
of the death penalty because “social science research in the almost twenty-five
years since McCleskey has undermined its holding.” With regard to his state
constitutional claim, he argues that “Part I, Article 2 . . . may afford greater
protection than its federal counterpart,” by prohibiting “discrimination which
can be proven only statistically.” In addition, the defendant challenges certain
of the trial court’s findings regarding his social science research evidence. He
argues, for instance, that the trial court “overstated the significance of a
number of the methodological limitations, and thus unduly discounted the
probative weight of the conclusions reached through the use of those
methodologies.”
3. Discussion
The trial court rejected the defendant’s social science research evidence
as fundamentally flawed for several carefully explained reasons. Even if we
assume for purposes of this appeal, that the research presented statistically
valid findings, and that these findings demonstrate “a risk that the factor of
race entered into some capital sentencing decisions,” McCleskey, 481 U.S. at
291 n.7 (emphasis omitted), the defendant’s argument nonetheless fails on the
merits. Putting aside the trial court’s specific factual findings concerning the
197
social science research upon which the defendant relied, we conclude that the
general statistics that the defendant presented were insufficient to establish a
violation of either the State or Federal Equal Protection Clause in this case.
Because McCleskey is central to our analysis of the defendant’s
arguments, we begin by examining that decision. The petitioner in McCleskey,
a black man, was convicted of two counts of armed robbery and one count of
murder; the murder victim was a white police officer. McCleskey, 481 U.S. at
283. The jury recommended the death penalty on the murder charge, which
the trial court imposed. Id. at 285. In a petition for a writ of habeas corpus,
the petitioner argued that the Georgia capital sentencing process was
administered in a racially discriminatory manner in violation of the Eighth and
Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution. Id. at 286.
To support his claim, he proffered a statistical study performed by
Professor David Baldus and others (the Baldus study). The Baldus study
examined more than 2,000 murder cases in Georgia in the 1970s and
purported “to show a disparity in the imposition of the death sentence in
Georgia based on the race of the murder victim and, to a lesser extent, the race
of the defendant.” McCleskey, 481 U.S. at 286. “The raw numbers collected by
Professor Baldus indicate[d] that defendants charged with killing white persons
received the death penalty in 11% of the cases, but defendants charged with
killing blacks received the death penalty in only 1% of the cases.” Id. When
Professor Baldus divided the cases according to the combination of the race of
the defendant and the race of the victim, he found that “the death penalty was
assessed in 22% of the cases involving black defendants and white victims; 8%
of the cases involving white defendants and white victims; 1% of the cases
involving black defendants and black victims; and 3% of the cases involving
white defendants and black victims.” Id. After accounting for numerous
variables that could have explained these disparities on non-racial grounds,
the Baldus study found that defendants charged with killing white victims were
4.3 times as likely to receive a death sentence as defendants charged with
killing black victims; black defendants were 1.1 times as likely to receive a
death sentence as other defendants. Id. at 287.
After an extensive evidentiary hearing, the federal district court
concluded that the statistics offered by the petitioner failed to prove a prima
facie case of racial discrimination, in part because it found the Baldus study to
be flawed in several respects. Id. at 288-89.
On appeal, the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit
assumed the validity of the Baldus study — i.e., that it “showed that systematic
and substantial disparities existed in the penalties imposed upon homicide
defendants in Georgia based on [the] race of the homicide victim, that the
disparities existed at a less substantial rate in death sentencing based on [the]
198
race of defendants, and that the factors of race of the victim and defendant were
at work in [the Georgia county in which the defendant was convicted].” Id. at
289 (quotation omitted). “Even assuming the study’s validity,” the Eleventh
Circuit found, however, that the Baldus study was insufficient to demonstrate
discriminatory intent in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment. Id.
The Supreme Court agreed with the Eleventh Circuit. Id. at 292. Like
the Eleventh Circuit, the Supreme Court assumed that the Baldus study was
statistically valid. Id. at 291 n.7. However, the Court stated that it did not
assume that the study showed “that racial considerations actually enter into
any sentencing decisions in Georgia.” Id. The Court reasoned that “[e]ven a
sophisticated multiple-regression analysis such as the Baldus study can only
demonstrate a risk that the factor of race entered into some capital sentencing
decisions and a necessarily lesser risk that race entered into any particular
sentencing decision.” Id. The Court noted that to prove an equal protection
violation, the petitioner had to show “the existence of purposeful discrimination”
— “that the decisionmakers in his case acted with discriminatory purpose.” Id.
at 292 (quotation omitted). The Court held that the petitioner’s proof, which
consisted solely of the Baldus study, was insufficient to do so. Id. at 293-97.
The Court specifically rejected the petitioner’s claim that the Baldus
study compelled an inference that his sentence rested upon purposeful
discrimination. Id. The Court held that although general statistics may prove
intent to discriminate in other contexts, such as in cases brought under Title
VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, they do not suffice in the context of a capital
sentencing decision. Id. at 294-95. The Court stated that “the nature of the
capital sentencing decision, and the relationship of the statistics to that
decision, are fundamentally different from the corresponding elements in . . .
Title VII cases.” Id. at 294. The Court explained that it would be improper to
apply to a capital sentencing decision an inference drawn from general statistics
because each capital jury is “unique in its composition” and reaches its verdict
by considering “innumerable factors that vary according to the characteristics of
the individual defendant and the facts of the particular capital offense.” Id. The
Court reasoned that “[b]ecause discretion is essential to the criminal justice
process, the Court would demand exceptionally clear proof before [it] would
infer that the discretion has been abused,” and held that the Baldus study did
not constitute such “exceptionally clear proof.” Id. at 297.
Nonetheless, the defendant contends that McCleskey is no longer sound
law because “social science research in the almost twenty-five years since
McCleskey has undermined its holding.” He contends that “[t]he results of that
research reveal that racial bias continues to prejudice the administration of
capital punishment.” Specifically, he argues that: “(1) the evidence shows that
the outcome of a capital sentencing trial is greatly dependent on the race of the
jurors, the defendant, and the victim; (2) the procedural protections, such as
199
voir dire, on which the McCleskey Court relied to eliminate racial bias in capital
sentencing have failed to do so; and (3) the McCleskey opinion fails to account
for conscious and unconscious racial bias on the part of jurors.” In short,
although acknowledging that McCleskey is the controlling Supreme Court case
interpreting the Federal Equal Protection Clause under these circumstances, he
argues that we should not apply it here because social science research has
“undermined” its holding. He further contends that McCleskey should not
dispose of his state claim because neither the text of Part I, Article 2 of the State
Constitution, as amended in 1974, nor the statements accompanying the 1974
amendments, reflect an intent to deny relief to claimants whose only proof of
discrimination is statistical.
We first address the defendant’s arguments under the State Constitution
and rely upon federal law only to aid our analysis. See State v. Ball, 124 N.H.
226, 231-33 (1983). Part I, Article 2 states:
All men have certain natural, essential, and inherent rights —
among which are, the enjoying and defending life and liberty;
acquiring, possessing, and protecting, property; and, in a
word, of seeking and obtaining happiness. Equality of rights
under the law shall not be denied or abridged by this state on
account of race, creed, color, sex or national origin.
N.H. CONST. pt. I, art 2.
The defendant argues, in effect, that to prevail upon his equal protection
claim under the State Constitution, he need not meet the burden of proof set
forth in McCleskey. As we have noted, in McCleskey, the Supreme Court held
that, to prevail upon his federal equal protection claim, the petitioner had to
prove “purposeful discrimination” — i.e., that the decision-makers in his case
acted with discriminatory intent. McCleskey, 481 U.S. at 292. Under
McCleskey, “systemic statistics,” such as those proffered by the defendant, are
insufficient, by themselves, to prove racially discriminatory intent. United
States v. Bin Laden, 126 F. Supp. 2d 256, 260 (S.D.N.Y. 2000); see United
States v. Sampson, 275 F. Supp. 2d 49, 93-94 (D. Mass. 2003), aff’d, 486 F.3d
13 (1st Cir. 2007). The logical corollary to the defendant’s argument is that to
prevail upon his state equal protection claim, either: (1) he is not required to
prove discriminatory intent; or (2) if he is required to prove discriminatory
intent, he may do so by relying upon the type of general statistical evidence the
McCleskey Court found insufficient.
To the extent that the defendant asserts that a claimant need not prove
discriminatory intent in order to prevail upon a discrimination claim under the
State Equal Protection Clause, his assertion is contrary to our prior cases in the
selective enforcement context. Although the defendant has not alleged selective
200
enforcement, the legal underpinnings of such claims are analogous to his
discrimination claim here.
“We have held, in accordance with the United States Supreme Court,
that the equal protection guarantee” in the State Constitution “is ‘essentially a
direction that all persons similarly situated should be treated alike.’” In re
Sandra H., 150 N.H. 634, 637 (2004) (quoting Cleburne v. Cleburne Living
Center, Inc., 473 U.S. 432, 439 (1985)). When an equal protection challenge
alleges that a law is discriminatorily enforced, we have consistently held that
proof of “conscious intentional discrimination” is required to establish a
violation of equal protection under the State Constitution. State v. Hofland, 151
N.H. 322, 325 (2004) (quotation omitted); see Anderson v. Motorsports
Holdings, 155 N.H. 491, 499 (2007); Bacon v. Town of Enfield, 150 N.H. 468,
473-74 (2004); Pope v. Little Boar’s Head Dist., 145 N.H. 531, 535 (2000);
Alexander v. Town of Hampstead, 129 N.H. 278, 283 (1987); State v. Monahan,
125 N.H. 17, 26 (1984); State v. Pinsince, 105 N.H. 38, 41 (1963). Accordingly,
in cases in which a litigant claims an equal protection violation arising out of
discrimination, we, like the Supreme Court, require a defendant to prove “the
existence of purposeful discrimination” by showing that “the decisionmakers in
his case acted with discriminatory purpose.” McCleskey, 481 U.S. at 292
(quotation omitted). Thus, the defendant must show “discriminatory intent” to
prove discrimination.
With regard to his assertion that under the State Constitution general
statistics suffice as a matter of law to prove discriminatory intent, the defendant
offers no developed legal argument. Rather, he merely observes that in the trial
court he “reviewed at some length statements of the framers of Part I, Article 2,
as ratified in 1974,” and that the trial court rejected his analysis. He does not
set forth the statements upon which he relied in the trial court. Nor does he
explain why any such statements support his argument that the New
Hampshire Constitution allows general statistical evidence in discrimination
claims, or why the trial court’s rejection of his analysis was incorrect. Under
these circumstances, the defendant’s argument is not adequately developed for
our review. See State v. Chick, 141 N.H. 503, 504 (1996).
The defendant also contends that we have previously indicated that the
State Equal Protection Clause “may afford greater protection than its federal
counterpart.” In support of this assertion, he relies solely upon the following
excerpt from In re Certain Scholarship Funds, 133 N.H. 227, 229-30 (1990):
To the extent that we look to the United States Supreme Court
for guidance in approaching these difficult issues, we borrow
only the analytical framework of the Court’s decisions in our
interpretation of part I, article 2 of the New Hampshire
201
Constitution, and as such, we are not tied to present or future
federal pronouncements on the issue.
(Quotation omitted.) The defendant’s reliance upon this passage is misplaced.
This statement was not a pronouncement that the State Equal Protection
Clause affords greater protection than does its federal counterpart in every case.
Rather, it was a general explanation regarding the limited extent of our reliance
upon federal cases when interpreting state constitutional provisions.
Having rejected the defendant’s assertion that he need not meet the
burden of proof identified in McCleskey to prevail upon his state constitutional
claim, we next analyze whether, as he contends, the premise of McCleskey is
no longer sound. We consider this argument only insofar as it bears upon
whether McCleskey ought to inform our state constitutional analysis. See
Rodriguez de Quijas v. Shearson/Am. Exp., 490 U.S. 477, 484 (1989) (when
the Supreme Court has decided an issue of federal law, lower courts must
follow the case that directly controls, leaving to the Supreme Court the
prerogative of overruling its own decisions); State v. Melvin, 150 N.H. 134, 140
(2003) (“When interpreting federal law, . . . we are bound by the United States
Supreme Court’s current explication of it.”).
The defendant contends that the holding of McCleskey has been
“undermined” by social science research, yet he does not cite any case that has
adopted this position. Indeed, “[s]ince McCleskey, no court has allowed a claim”
of the kind alleged by the defendant here. Evans v. State, 914 A.2d 25, 66 (Md.
2006). Courts in capital cases uniformly “accept the reasoning in McCleskey
concerning the failure of general statistics to establish a statewide Equal
Protection . . . violation and instead require a defendant to assert some specific
discriminatory intent in [his] case.” Id. (citing cases); see, e.g., Com. v. Rios,
920 A.2d 790, 822 (Pa. 2007) (“[N]either this Court nor the United States
Supreme Court will permit generalized allegations of discrimination or statistics
showing a disproportionate application of the death penalty to members of
certain groups to invalidate such sentences on constitutional grounds.”); Bell v.
State, 938 S.W.2d 35, 51 (Tex. Crim. App. 1996) (en banc) (“Like McCleskey,
appellant relies solely on studies suggesting disparities in sentencing due to the
race of the victim and defendant and only adds references to Texas studies
allegedly showing results similar to those from the Georgia study [in
McCleskey]. . . . Appellant’s reliance on these studies is insufficient to support
any inference that any of the decision makers in his case acted with
discriminatory intent.”).
We find Evans instructive. The defendant in Evans was convicted of
first-degree murder and sentenced to death. Evans, 914 A.2d at 33. He
challenged the trial court’s decision to deny his motion to re-open a 1995 post-
conviction proceeding to present the claim that “systemic statewide racial and
202
geographic discrimination rendered his sentence unconstitutional.” Id.
(quotation omitted). To support his assertion, the defendant relied upon a
2003 study of capital sentencing in Maryland, which he argued showed “that
the death penalty is implemented throughout [Maryland] in a racially and
geographically biased and arbitrary manner, in violation of the Federal and
State Constitutional guarantees of equal protection of the law.” Id. at 47-48.
The Court of Appeals of Maryland stated that “[t]his type of attack is directly
addressed by McCleskey.” Id. at 65. Observing that “no court has allowed a
claim of this kind,” the court decided that “[t]he result in Maryland should be
no different than the consensus around the country” and that the defendant’s
general statistics did not entitle him to the re-opening of the 1995 post-
conviction case. Id. at 66, 67.
We also find Sampson informative. In that case, the defendant moved to
dismiss death penalty charges against him on the ground that the Federal
Death Penalty Act, 18 U.S.C. §§ 3591 et seq. (2006) (FDPA) operates in an
unconstitutional manner. Sampson, 275 F. Supp. 2d at 87. The defendant
argued that the death penalty was “sought on the invidious basis of race and
on the irrational basis of geography.” Id. at 87. To support this argument, he
relied upon statistical studies conducted by the United States Department of
Justice and upon Professor Baldus’s interpretation of these studies. Id. at 89-
90. Professor Baldus opined that the studies showed that “there is a
significant risk of racial unfairness and geographic arbitrariness in the
administration of the federal death penalty,” and that “the U.S. Attorney
charging and Department of Justice authorization rates are much higher in
white-victim cases than they are in minority-victim cases.” Id. at 90.
Citing McCleskey, the court in Sampson ruled that this evidence was
“not adequate to prove purposeful discrimination.” Id. at 93. The court
rejected the defendant’s attempts to distinguish McCleskey on the ground that,
unlike the statistical study in McCleskey, the studies upon which he relied
were “individualized statistical stud[ies].” Id. (quotation omitted). The court
observed that “the difficulty of using a systemic study to establish purposeful
discrimination by various individuals was only one reason that the Supreme
Court rejected the use of statistics to demonstrate discriminatory intent.” Id.
at 94. Other reasons included the numerous factors that enter into decisions
in death penalty cases, “the impropriety of . . . requiring prosecutors to defend
their decisions to seek death penalties,” and “the need for discretion in the
criminal justice process.” Id. (quotation omitted). In light of these
considerations, the court concluded that “the statistics proffered by the
defendant [were] insufficient to establish purposeful discrimination by the
Attorney General.” Id.
Notably, since McCleskey was decided, federal courts have rejected the
use of the CJP data and studies to establish that the FDPA is “unconstitutional
203
because its penalty phase scheme . . . [cannot] be applied appropriately by
jurors.” Riel v. Ayers, No. CIV S-01-0507 LKK KJM, 2008 WL 1734786, at *15
(E.D. Cal. Apr. 14, 2008) (collecting cases); see United States v. Green, No.
5:06CR-19-R, 2008 WL 4000901, at *1 (W.D. Ky. Aug. 26, 2008) (observing
that no court has adopted CJP’s findings as its own); United States v. Cheever,
423 F. Supp. 2d 1181, 1214 (D. Kan. 2006) (rejecting CJP data and studies).
In fact, “[t]he few decisions crediting statistical studies to overturn the FDPA or
state capital sentencing laws were overturned on appeal.” Riel, 2008 WL
17347386, at *15.
Accordingly, the federal and state cases decided after McCleskey do not
support the defendant’s assertion that the premise of McCleskey is no longer
sound. Having determined that the defendant must meet the same burden of
proof under McCleskey to prevail on his state equal protection claim, we next
consider whether he has done so. A defendant “who alleges an equal
protection violation has the burden of proving the existence of purposeful
discrimination.” McCleskey, 481 U.S. at 292 (quotation omitted). “A corollary
to this principle is that a criminal defendant must prove that the purposeful
discrimination had a discriminatory effect on him.” Id. (quotation omitted).
Thus, the defendant “must prove that the decisionmakers in his case acted
with discriminatory purpose.” Id. The defendant has not offered any “evidence
specific to his own case that would support an inference that racial
considerations played a part in his sentence.” Id. at 292-93. Nor does the
record support such an inference.
Furthermore, we note that the trial court found in its June 5, 2008 order
that the mock jury studies presented by the defendant’s experts were flawed in
part because most of these studies “did not include or measure procedures
that are taken in death penalty cases to prevent juror bias from affecting
decision making. Those that did, showed them effective.” For example, in one
study, “some white mock jurors were given a voir dire questionnaire that
included questions concerning racial bias, and others received a questionnaire
without such questions. Those jurors who were voir dired about racial bias
were less likely to vote to convict a black defendant than those who were not.”
Sommers & Ellsworth, How Much Do We Really Know About Race and Juries?
A Review of Social Science Theory and Research, 78 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 997,
1026-27 (2003).
The trial court indicated in its order that it would implement several
procedural safeguards to ensure that the defendant would be tried by a fair
and impartial jury including, specifically, “extensive voir dire of potential jurors
about racial biases.” As set forth in Part V (Venue and Jury Selection Review)
of this opinion, the jury selection process in this case included lengthy voir dire
of prospective jurors based upon information each individual provided, under
oath, on a forty-one page questionnaire. The questionnaire, modeled largely
204
after the defendant’s proposed form, contained numerous questions concerning
the potential effects of racial discrimination including: “Do you think the race
of defendants or victims affects the outcomes of cases in the criminal justice
system?”; “Have you, a member of your family or a close friend, ever been
subjected to . . . labels or stereotypes based on racial or ethnic heritage?”; “Has
anyone ever acted in a way that you thought showed prejudice of any sort at all
against you?”; “Have you ever seen or witnessed behavior that seemed to you to
be an example of racial prejudice?”; “If you are white: please describe the
contact you have had with people who are African American in your
neighborhood, at work, or socially”; “What is your opinion about inter-racial
marriage or relationships?”; “The defendant, Michael Addison, is African-
American. Does this fact in any way affect your ability to be impartial in this
case? Please examine your conscience carefully”; “You may hear testimony
from African American or Hispanic witnesses. Would you tend to find their
testimony less credible than a Caucasian witness?”; “The victim in this case is
Caucasian. Does the fact that he is Caucasian and the defendant is African
American in any way affect your ability to be fair and impartial?”
Prospective jurors provided various answers and explanatory responses
to these questions, and the record shows that the trial court and counsel used
the completed forms during the jury selection process. The defendant did not
raise any objection to the seated jury; thus, he did not object based upon
potential racial bias or lack of impartiality. Having reviewed the completed
questionnaires of the deliberating jurors, we observe that the individual
responses do not suggest that racial considerations might play a role in the
deliberating process. Further, the record shows that the jury selected its own
foreperson, and, as the State points out, the record establishes that the
foreperson selected was male and was black.
As an additional safeguard, the court’s charge to the jury at the
conclusion of the sentence selection phase included the following instruction:
In considering whether the death sentence is appropriate,
you must not consider the race, color, religio[us] beliefs, or
national origin of either the defendant or the victim. You are
not to return a sentence of death unless you would return a
sentence of death for the crime in question without regard to
race, color, religious beliefs, or national origin of either the
defendant or the victim.
To emphasize the importance of this consideration,
section six of the special verdict form contains a certification
statement. Each juror should carefully read the statement
and sign your name in the appropriate place if the statement
205
accurately reflects the manner in which each of you reach
your individual decision.
The record reflects that each juror signed his or her name to the certification
section of the Special Verdict Form.
Moreover, the social science research upon which the defendant relies in
this case suffers from the same flaws as the Baldus study considered in
McCleskey. Like the Baldus study, the defendant’s evidence does not constitute
“exceptionally clear proof” of discrimination that would compel an inference that
any of the decision-makers in this case acted with discriminatory purpose.
McCleskey, 481 U.S. at 297.
In sum, consistent with McCleskey, we hold that the defendant’s social
science research is insufficient to establish his claim of purposeful racial
discrimination under the State Equal Protection Clause. We note that the
defendant’s motion to bar the imposition of the death penalty was grounded
upon Part I, Article 2 of the State Constitution. Thus, to the extent that the
defendant raises a federal equal protection claim on appeal, it is waived. See
State v. Eaton, 162 N.H. 190, 195 (2011); State v. Winward, 161 N.H. 533, 542
(2011). In any event, because the Federal Constitution affords the defendant
no greater protection than does the State Constitution in these circumstances,
we reach the same conclusion under the Federal Constitution as we do under
the State Constitution. See McCleskey, 481 U.S. at 297; see also Rodriguez de
Quijas, 490 U.S. at 484; Melvin, 150 N.H. at 140.
F. Death-Qualified Jury
1. Background
In January 2008, nine months before trial, the defendant filed two
motions to bar the death penalty, arguing that “death qualifying” the jury
before the guilt phase of the trial violated his rights under the State
Constitution. The first motion was grounded in his right to a fair and impartial
jury under Part I, Article 35 of the State Constitution, and the second was
based upon his rights to, among other things, procedural due process under
Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution. A “death-qualified” jury refers to the
result of a jury selection process during which “prospective jurors have been
excluded for cause in light of their inability to set aside their views about the
death penalty that would prevent or substantially impair the performance of
their duties as jurors in accordance with their instructions and their oath.”
Buchanan v. Kentucky, 483 U.S. 402, 407 n.6 (1987) (quotation and brackets
omitted) (citing Wainwright v. Witt, 469 U.S. 412, 424 (1985)).
206
In his first motion, the defendant argued that RSA 630:5 (2007) violates
Part I, Article 35 of the New Hampshire Constitution because it requires a
capital defendant to stand trial before a “death-qualified” jury that is “biased
toward finding [him] guilty of capital murder,” rather than allowing for death
qualification after conviction and before sentencing. Although he
acknowledged that the United States Supreme Court in Lockhart v. McCree,
476 U.S. 162, 165 (1986), rejected such a claim under the Sixth and
Fourteenth Amendments to the Federal Constitution, the defendant contended
that Part I, Article 35 is more protective of his right to be tried by an impartial
jury than is the Federal Constitution.
The State objected, and, as discussed in Part VIII.E (Constitutional and
Statutory Review-Impact of Race in Capital Sentencing) of this opinion, the trial
court conducted a hearing in April 2008 during which it heard six days of
expert testimony on several of the defendant’s motions seeking to bar the death
penalty. As earlier described, several experts for the defense and for the State
testified, and regarding death qualification, the defendant presented evidence
on the Capital Jury Project (CJP) and Mock Jury Studies. Drs. William Bowers
and Wanda Foglia, among other experts, testified about the findings of the CJP
and other research methods concerning the impact of death qualification on
the capital decision-making process; the State’s expert, Dr. Rogers Elliott,
criticized the CJP and Mock Jury Studies. We will not repeat the social science
summary discussed in Part VIII.E, but generally provide here some of the
conclusions reached by Mock Jury Studies and the CJP, as explained by the
trial court.
Some mock jury research purports to demonstrate that death
qualification results in a jury more prone both to convict and to impose a death
sentence. See Allen et al., Impact of Juror Attitudes about the Death Penalty
on Juror Evaluations of Guilt and Punishment: A Meta-Analysis, 22 LAW &
HUM. BEHAV. 715, 722-25 (1998); see also Haney, On the Selection of Capital
Juries: The Biasing Effects of the Death-Qualification Process, 8 LAW & HUM.
BEHAV. 121, 129 (1984). Other mock jury studies have concluded that death-
qualified jurors have attitudes about law and order and society that differ from
those of the general population. See Haney et al., “Modern” Death
Qualification: New Data on Its Biasing Effects, 18 LAW & HUM. BEHAV. 619,
628-31 (1994).
The CJP findings include that death qualification yields a
disproportionately guilt-prone and death-prone jury in two ways: (1) it “over
excludes” by barring jurors who would be able to impose the death penalty
despite reservations; and (2) it “under-excludes” by failing to dismiss
“automatic death penalty” jurors who would not give effect to mitigation in
making their sentencing decisions. Consequently, according to the CJP,
individuals who are “more prosecution-oriented” are over-represented on
207
capital juries relative to both the population at large and to “correctly selected”
capital juries. The CJP concluded that the death qualification process
prejudices the jury against the defendant in that following this process, “jurors
are more punitive, see fewer problems with the death penalty, and are less
likely to see evidence as mitigating and [are] more likely to see it as
aggravating.”
In a written order dated June 5, 2008, the trial court denied the
defendant’s motion. In doing so, the court concluded that it was “not
persuaded that the research presented by the defendant on death qualification
overcomes the methodological flaws that concerned the Supreme Court in
[McCree].” It discounted the social science data for many of the same reasons
that it did when denying the defendant’s motion to bar imposition of the death
penalty premised upon race. For instance, the trial court underscored the flaw
underlying mock jury studies in that it was “virtually impossible” to simulate in
a laboratory setting a real capital trial in which jurors are subject to voir dire
and repeated jury instructions, and also observe opening and closing
arguments, and direct and cross-examinations. The court also noted that after
performing his own meta-analysis, Dr. Elliott “found a low correlation between
death qualification and jury verdicts, and death penalty attitudes and jury
verdicts,” and that “death penalty attitudes have a tenuous relationship to
predeliberation votes, and that predeliberation votes do not predict final jury
verdicts.”
The trial court further noted that the Supreme Court has criticized the
value of certain social science studies submitted by the defendant to “predict[ ]
the behavior of actual jurors” in that “actual jurors [are] sworn under oath to
apply the law to the facts of an actual case involving the fate of an actual
capital defendant.” McCree, 476 U.S. at 171. The Court in McCree also
questioned the significance of the 1984 Haney study, noting that, standing
alone, the effects on prospective jurors of voir dire questioning about their
attitudes toward the death penalty would not present a federal constitutional
violation. Id. at 169-70 nn.6, 7.
Regarding the CJP, the trial court found that although “[t]he CJP
methodology addresses some of the [McCree] criticisms because the CJP used
actual jurors from many different states who deliberated on real capital trials,”
“the methodology of the CJP creates its own problems.” For example, most
jurors were interviewed approximately two years after the capital trials in
which they served, and some interviews took place up to five years later,
“calling into question the reliability of their information.”
Nevertheless, the trial court followed the analytical framework of the
Supreme Court, which assumed for the purpose of its decision that the social
science studies were “both methodologically valid and adequate to establish
208
that ‘death qualification’ in fact produces juries somewhat more ‘conviction-
prone’ than ‘non-death-qualified’ juries.” McCree, 476 U.S. at 173. The trial
court then observed that “[t]he precise issue raised by the defendant in this
motion was raised in [McCree],” in which the Supreme Court held that “death
qualifying” the jury “does not violate a defendant’s rights under the Sixth or
Fourteenth Amendments of the Federal Constitution to have his guilt or
innocence determined by an impartial jury selected from a fair cross-section of
the community.” Further, the trial court rejected the defendant’s argument
that Part I, Article 35 provides broader protection than the Sixth Amendment.
In his second motion the defendant argued, among other things, that the
process of “death qualifying” the jury violates the Due Process Clause of the
State Constitution. He argued that social science “research and scholarly
articles have established that death qualification results in juries slanted
toward the prosecution, which, by definition, creates the risk of an unjust
finding on either the capital murder charge, or the sentence.” He asserted that
“the potential for [the] erroneous deprivation [of his life] amply justif[ied] [the]
additional time, expense, or burden” of “selecting separate juries for the two
phases of the trial.”
The State objected, and by written order dated June 6, 2008, the trial
court denied the defendant’s motion, concluding that although the private
interest affected was substantial, the risk of an erroneous deprivation of the
defendant’s life resulting from death qualification was “minimal” given the
procedural protections afforded capital defendants, and that the State had a
strong interest in having a single jury for both the guilt and sentencing phases
of the capital trial.
2. Appellate Argument
The defendant argues that the process of “death qualifying” the guilt
phase jury violated both his right to an impartial jury guaranteed by Part I,
Article 35 and his Part I, Article 15 right to due process under the New
Hampshire Constitution. He contends that the process of questioning
prospective jurors about their views as to punishment unfairly conditioned
them to view the defendant as guilty, yielding a more “conviction-prone jury.”
The defendant does not argue that any of the individual jurors who decided his
case lacked impartiality.
3. Discussion
Because the defendant’s arguments rest solely upon the State
Constitution, we base our decision upon it alone and refer to federal law only to
aid our analysis. See State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983). As did the
trial court, we will assume, without deciding, that the research upon which the
209
defendant relies is “both methodologically valid and adequate to establish that
‘death qualification’ in fact produces juries somewhat more ‘conviction-prone’
than ‘non-death-qualified juries.’” McCree, 476 U.S. at 173.
The capital sentencing statute requires that the trial on a capital murder
charge and the corresponding capital sentencing hearing following a conviction
be conducted by the same jury, unless circumstances warrant a separate jury
being impaneled. See RSA 630:5, II, III. The Supreme Court has upheld a
similar statute under the Federal Constitution. See McCree, 476 U.S. at 180.
Although the defendant concedes “the necessity for death-qualification prior to
the sentencing phase,” he argues that there is no need for death qualification
before the guilt phase. He contends that “[b]ecause death-qualified jurors are
not as impartial as possible with regard to the guilt-phase, it therefore follows
that the use of death-qualified jurors in that phase violates [Part I, Article 35
of] the New Hampshire Constitution.” Similarly, regarding due process, he
contends that “death qualified juries have a pro-prosecution slant in the guilt
phase,” “reasonable alternatives exist,” and the State has failed to demonstrate
“any compelling interest in having a death-qualified jury deliberate in the guilt
phase.”
In McCree, the Supreme Court held that the Federal Constitution “[does
not] prohibit the removal for cause, prior to the guilt phase of a bifurcated
capital trial, of prospective jurors whose opposition to the death penalty is so
strong that it would prevent or substantially impair the performance of their
duties as jurors in the sentencing phase.” Id. The defendant in McCree had
been charged with capital felony murder. Id. at 166. In accordance with state
law, the trial judge at voir dire removed for cause, over the defendant’s
objections, eight prospective jurors who stated that they could not under any
circumstances vote to impose the death penalty. Id. The jury convicted the
defendant of capital murder, but rejected the State’s request for the death
penalty, sentencing him to life imprisonment without possibility of parole. Id.
The defendant in McCree argued that his rights under the Sixth and
Fourteenth Amendments to be tried by an impartial jury were violated because
the jury that convicted him was death-qualified. Id. at 167. The Supreme
Court disagreed:
[The defendant’s] “impartiality” argument apparently is
based on the theory that, because all individual jurors are to
some extent predisposed towards one result or another, a
constitutionally impartial jury can be constructed only by
“balancing” the various predispositions of the individual
jurors. Thus, according to [the defendant], when the State
“tips the scales” by excluding prospective jurors with a
210
particular viewpoint, an impermissibly partial jury results.
We have consistently rejected this view of jury impartiality
. . . . [A]n impartial jury consists of nothing more than jurors
who will conscientiously apply the law and find the facts.
. . . .
In our view, it is simply not possible to define jury
impartiality, for constitutional purposes, by reference to some
hypothetical mix of individual viewpoints. Prospective jurors
come from many different backgrounds, and have many
different attitudes and predispositions. But the Constitution
presupposes that a jury selected from a fair cross section of
the community is impartial, regardless of the mix of
individual viewpoints actually represented on the jury, so
long as the jurors can conscientiously and properly carry out
their sworn duty to apply the law to the facts of the particular
case.
Id. at 177-78, 183-84 (quotation omitted). As the Court stated, “[i]t is
important to remember that not all who oppose the death penalty are subject
to removal for cause in capital cases; those who firmly believe that the death
penalty is unjust may nevertheless serve as jurors in capital cases so long as
they state clearly that they are willing to temporarily set aside their own beliefs
in deference to the rule of law.” Id. at 176. Although the dissent suggested
that the State’s interest in submitting the penalty issue to a jury capable of
imposing capital punishment could be accommodated by using one jury to
decide guilt and another to decide punishment, id. at 203-04 (Marshall, J.,
dissenting), the majority concluded that a state has an “entirely proper
interest” in obtaining a single jury to decide all of the issues in a capital case
for both the guilt and sentencing phases of trial, id. at 180.
In Buchanan, the Supreme Court again considered a challenge to death
qualifying a capital jury in advance of the guilt phase. Buchanan, 483 U.S. at
413. The petitioner argued that his right to an impartial jury was violated
because the jury was death-qualified in his joint trial with a co-defendant in
which the death penalty was sought only against the co-defendant. Id. The
Court found the petitioner’s claim to be “no more persuasive” than the claim it
had addressed in McCree. Id. at 420. The Supreme Court later held that a
capital defendant is constitutionally entitled to exclude jurors who would
automatically vote to impose a death penalty. Morgan v. Illinois, 504 U.S. 719,
721, 729 (1992). Thus, just as a juror who in no case would vote for capital
punishment is not an impartial juror, likewise, a juror who would
automatically vote for the death penalty in every case must be removed for
cause. Id. at 728-29.
211
Since McCree was decided, “no court that has considered the issue has
found death qualification to violate the federal, or respective state constitution,”
People v. Hale, 661 N.Y.S.2d 457, 486 (Sup. Ct. 1997), and the defendant has
not cited any state or federal case that supports his argument. The defendant
asserts, however, that Part I, Article 35 is more protective of his right to be
tried by an impartial jury than is the analogous provision under the Federal
Constitution. To support this assertion, he relies upon the difference in
language between Part I, Article 35 and the Sixth Amendment to the Federal
Constitution. Part I, Article 35 states in part: “It is the right of every citizen to
be tried by judges as impartial as the lot of humanity will admit.” N.H. CONST.
pt. I, art. 35. Although this text refers only to judges, we have long applied it to
jurors. See State v. Prevost, 105 N.H. 90, 92 (1963). The Sixth Amendment
mandates in part: “In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the
right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury.” U.S. CONST. amend.
VI.
The defendant contends that because Part I, Article 35 requires “as much
impartiality as practically possible,” the standard for impartiality under Part I,
Article 35 is more demanding than that under the Sixth Amendment. He
argues: “Part I, Article 35 thus sets the standard as high as it can reasonably
be set. In requiring just impartiality, the Sixth Amendment demands less,
amounting only to a convenient or adequate degree of impartiality.” We
disagree.
Despite the difference in language between Part I, Article 35 and the
Sixth Amendment, we apply the same standard for determining impartiality
under the State Constitution that is applied under the Federal Constitution.
We have stated that we believe that the “principles” under the State and
Federal Constitutions with respect to the right to a fair and impartial jury “are
the same.” State v. Weir, 138 N.H. 671, 673 (1994); see State v. Smart, 136
N.H. 639, 646 (1993). Indeed, we have explicitly adopted the federal standard
for determining whether a juror is impartial as set forth in Supreme Court
precedent. See State v. Laaman, 114 N.H. 794, 800 (1974) (citing Irvin v.
Dowd, 366 U.S. 717, 723 (1961)). Under both the State and Federal
Constitutions, a juror is deemed “impartial” if he or she “can lay aside his [or
her] impression or opinion and render a verdict based on the evidence
presented in court.” Laaman, 114 N.H. at 800; see Irvin, 366 U.S. at 723.
Moreover, language identical to that of Part I, Article 35 has been used to
describe the impartiality required by the Federal Constitution. See United
States v. Mine Workers, 330 U.S. 258, 308 (1947) (Frankfurter, J., concurring);
State v. Papasavvas, 751 A.2d 40, 57 (N.J.), corrected on other grounds, 753
A.2d 1148 (N.J. 2000).
We conclude that Part I, Article 35 of the State Constitution and the
Sixth Amendment to the Federal Constitution afford equivalent protection of a
212
criminal defendant’s right to be tried by an impartial jury. In a capital murder
case, “the proper standard for determining when a prospective juror may be
excused for cause because of his or her views on capital punishment” is
“whether the juror’s views would prevent or substantially impair the
performance of his duties as a juror in accordance with his instructions and
his oath.” Wainwright, 469 U.S. at 424. This rule applies to a bifurcated
procedure in a capital trial. Adams v. Texas, 448 U.S. 38, 45 (1980). “[T]he
quest is for jurors who will conscientiously apply the law and the facts. That is
what an ‘impartial’ jury consists of.” Wainwright, 469 U.S. at 423. “[T]he
question whether a venireman is biased has traditionally been determined
through voir dire culminating in a finding by the trial judge concerning the
venireman’s state of mind.” Id. at 428. “Death qualification” as part of the voir
dire process is “carefully designed to serve the State’s concededly legitimate
interest in obtaining a single jury that can properly and impartially apply the
law to the facts of the case at both the guilt and sentencing phases of a capital
trial.” McCree, 476 U.S. at 175-76.
Accordingly, we decline to adopt the defendant’s position that “death
qualifying” a single jury for a capital trial constitutes a per se violation of his
right to a fair and impartial jury under Part I, Article 35 of the State
Constitution.
The defendant also argues that “reasonable alternatives” to “death
qualifying” a single jury before the guilt phase of trial exist, such as empaneling
two juries: a non-death-qualified jury to hear the guilt phase and a separate,
death-qualified jury to hear the sentencing phase. The defendant grounds his
challenge in procedural due process. Our due process analysis balances the
following factors: (1) the private interest that will be affected by the official
action; (2) the risk of an erroneous deprivation of such interest through the
procedures used and the probable value, if any, of additional or substitute
procedural safeguards; and (3) the government’s interest. State v. Lavoie, 155
N.H. 477, 483 (2007).
Under the first factor, the significant private interest at stake in this case
is indisputable — the potential deprivation of life. However, as noted above,
that the private interest is “critical” is not, by itself, dispositive. In re Eduardo
L., 136 N.H. 678, 687 (1993).
Thus, we turn to the second factor, the risk of an erroneous deprivation of
the defendant’s interest through the procedures that apply. We disagree with
the defendant that the process of “death qualifying” a single jury before the
guilt phase of a capital trial inadequately protects his interest in life against
erroneous deprivation. As the trial court stated in its order on this issue,
“[n]umerous . . . procedural safeguards exist to protect the defendant from
juror bias and an erroneous deprivation of his life, such as a jury venire
213
representative of the community, sequestered individual voir dire to ferret out
the jurors’ biases, and the defendant’s large number of peremptory challenges.”
All of these safeguards were employed in this case.
As set forth in Part V (Venue and Jury Selection Review) of this opinion,
the jury selection process in this case was extensive and thorough. It included
individual, sequestered voir dire of prospective jurors during which the court
explained the phases of a death penalty case, including weighing aggravating
and mitigating factors to determine whether a sentence of death or life
imprisonment without possibility of parole should be imposed. The court also
asked each prospective juror whether there was any reason that he or she
could not be a fair and impartial juror. In addition, counsel for both parties
asked probing questions on, among other topics, each individual’s views on the
potential sentence. In response to such questioning, the trial court excused a
number of prospective jurors because they expressed views about the
imposition of the death penalty that reflected an inability to follow the law on
this issue. In addition, the trial court allowed the defendant twenty-four
peremptory challenges, four more than he was statutorily entitled to receive.
See RSA 606:3, I (2001).
With respect to the third factor in the analysis — the government’s
interest in “death qualifying” a single jury for a capital trial — the State’s
interest in a single jury “goes well beyond considerations of administrative
convenience or expense.” People v. Fields, 673 P.2d 680, 694 (Cal. 1983).
Courts have identified a number of valid reasons for requiring a single jury to
determine both guilt or innocence and the proper sentence in a capital case,
including: (1) the issues before the jury at both phases of the trial are
interwoven and require consideration of similar evidence; (2) the jury hearing
the guilt phase of trial may harbor residual doubts, despite having been
persuaded of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, and may take those residual
doubts into account at the sentencing phase of trial; and (3) the use of
repetitive trials for the benefit of two juries is not likely to be fair to either
party. See State v. Fry, 126 P.3d 516, 523 (N.M. 2005) (citing cases); see also
Buchanan, 483 U.S. at 417; McCree, 476 U.S. at 175-76; Blount v. State, 511
A.2d 1030, 1038 (Del. 1986); State v. Hughes, 721 P.2d 902, 908 (Wash. 1986)
(en banc). In light of these legitimate and significant state interests, we weigh
this factor heavily. See State v. Ploof, 162 N.H. 609, 624 (2011).
After balancing the three factors, we conclude that “death qualifying” a
single jury before the guilt phase of trial did not violate the defendant’s rights
to due process under Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution.
We note that both of the defendant’s motions to bar the death penalty
were grounded in the State Constitution. Thus, to the extent that the
defendant raises federal constitutional claims on appeal, we deem them waived.
214
See State v. Eaton, 162 N.H. 190, 195 (2011); State v. Winward, 161 N.H. 533,
542 (2011). In any event, because the Federal Constitution affords the
defendant no greater protection than does the State Constitution in these
circumstances, we reach the same conclusions under the Federal Constitution
as we do under the State Constitution. See McCree, 476 U.S. at 165, 180-84.
G. Non-Statutory Aggravating Factors (Separation of Powers; Grand Jury
Indictment; Duplicative Factors)
Before trial, the defendant filed three motions concerning the State’s
alleged non-statutory aggravating factors. In one motion he argued that the
legislature impermissibly delegated authority to the Attorney General to select
and allege non-statutory aggravating factors, in violation of the Separation of
Powers Clause of the State Constitution. In a second motion he argued that,
among other things, the State’s failure to include its alleged non-statutory
aggravating factors in the grand jury indictment violated his rights under the
State and Federal Constitutions. In a third motion he argued that the State’s
alleged non-statutory aggravating factors were duplicative, in violation of his
rights under the State and Federal Constitutions.
1. Separation of Powers
a. Background
In August 2007, the defendant sought “a declaration that the
legislature’s delegation of authority to [the] Attorney General to select and
allege non-statutory aggravating factors violates [the] separation of powers
[doctrine],” as set forth in Part I, Article 37 of the State Constitution. The
defendant acknowledged that federal courts “have routinely upheld statutes
that permit the prosecution to choose non-statutory aggravating factors,”
rejecting “separation of powers challenges under the federal constitution.” He
argued, however, that under New Hampshire case law, “to satisfy the
constitution, the enabling legislation, itself, must enumerate the principles that
guide the executive’s action.” According to the defendant, “RSA 630:5, I(b)
represents an unlawful delegation of authority to the executive because it does
not contain guidelines, or lay down basic standards to govern, the enumeration
of non-statutory aggravating factors.”
The State objected, and, following a hearing, the trial court denied the
motion by written order dated October 29, 2007. The court noted that federal
courts consistently have concluded that the prosecution’s statutory authority
to identify non-statutory aggravating factors does not violate the federal
separation of powers doctrine but that such courts “are split as to whether this
power is a permissible delegation of legislative power, or not a delegation of
legislative power at all.” The trial court reasoned that, as in non-capital cases
215
where prosecutors present “relevant information concerning the defendant’s
history and circumstances of the crime” to persuade the sentencing court to
impose a certain sentence, “[t]he State’s selection and use of non-statutory
aggravating factors serves the same function in a death penalty sentencing
hearing.” Thus, it agreed with courts that hold that no delegation of legislative
power has occurred when a capital sentencing statute permits the State to
select and use non-statutory aggravating factors to argue for a death sentence.
Following federal authority, the trial court also ruled that “even if this power
were a delegation of legislative power . . . such a delegation does not violate the
separation of powers doctrine.”
b. Appellate Argument
The defendant argues that the death penalty statute, which provides that
the State may include non-statutory aggravating factors in its notice of intent
to seek the death penalty, violates the Separation of Powers Clause of the State
Constitution. N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 37. He contends that a delegation of
authority has occurred “when the Legislature allows the State to select [non-
statutory aggravating] factors” because these factors significantly affect the
weighing process. He further contends that in the absence of express guiding
criteria in the statute, such legislation constitutes an impermissible delegation
of legislative authority.
c. Discussion
Because the defendant’s arguments rest solely upon the State
Constitution, we base our decision upon it alone, and refer to federal law only
to aid our analysis. See State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983). Part I,
Article 37 provides:
In the government of this state, the three essential
powers thereof, to wit, the legislative, executive, and judicial,
ought to be kept as separate from, and independent of, each
other, as the nature of a free government will admit, or as is
consistent with that chain of connection that binds the whole
fabric of the constitution in one indissoluble bond of union
and amity.
N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 37. “Part I, Article 37 is a ‘provision of interrelation,’”
which “‘contemplates no absolute fixation and rigidity of powers between the
three great departments of government.’” New Hampshire Health Care Assoc.
v. Governor, 161 N.H. 378, 386 (2011) (quoting Ferretti v. Jackson, 88 N.H.
296, 299 (1936)). “[W]e have recognized . . . that the three branches of
government, while distinct, must move in concert whenever possible, as the
practical and efficient operation of government is not served by the erection of
216
impenetrable barriers between the branches.” State v. Martin, 164 N.H. 687,
691 (2013) (quotations and ellipsis omitted). “Accordingly, the doctrine of
separation of powers is violated only when one branch usurps an essential
power of another.” Id. (quotation and brackets omitted). “When the actions of
one branch of government defeat or materially impair the inherent functions of
another branch, such actions are unconstitutional.” Id. (quotation omitted).
The defendant concedes that federal courts have routinely held that
authorizing the prosecution to define non-statutory aggravating factors under
federal death penalty statutes does not violate the federal separation of powers
doctrine. Some courts conclude that the power to define non-statutory
aggravating factors is a permissible delegation of legislative power. See, e.g.,
United States v. Paul, 217 F.3d 989, 1003 (8th Cir. 2000); United States v.
Jones, 132 F.3d 232, 239-40 (5th Cir. 1998). Other courts conclude that the
prosecutor’s exercise of this power is an executive function and therefore does
not involve a delegation of legislative power. See, e.g., United States v. Higgs,
353 F.3d 281, 321 (4th Cir. 2003); United States v. Sampson, 275 F. Supp. 2d
49, 98-102 (D. Mass. 2003), aff’d, 486 F.3d 13 (1st Cir. 2007); United States v.
Pitera, 795 F. Supp. 546, 560-63 (E.D.N.Y. 1992).
We first address the defendant’s argument that RSA 630:5, I(b)
constitutes a delegation of legislative power. The statute provides: “Whenever
the state intends to seek the sentence of death for the offense of capital
murder, the attorney for the state, before trial or acceptance by the court of a
plea of guilty, shall file with the court and serve upon the defendant, a notice
. . . [s]etting forth the aggravating factors enumerated in paragraph VII of this
section and any other aggravating factors which the state will seek to prove as
the basis for the death penalty.” RSA 630:5, I(b) (emphasis added).
In determining whether the prosecutor is exercising legislative power or
an executive function under this provision, we examine the role of non-
statutory aggravating factors in the statutory procedure. Under the statute,
the jury first determines whether a defendant has committed capital murder.
See RSA 630:1 (2007) (amended 2011). Once the defendant is found guilty, the
jury then decides whether the defendant is eligible for the death penalty. In
order for the defendant to be eligible for a sentence of death, the State must
prove beyond a reasonable doubt one of the three statutory aggravators
requiring purposeful conduct set forth in RSA 630:5, VII(a) (2007), and at least
one of the other statutory aggravating factors set forth in RSA 630:5, VII(b)-(j).
See RSA 630:5, IV (2007). Only if these criteria are satisfied does the jury then
turn to non-statutory aggravators and “consider whether the aggravating
factors found to exist sufficiently outweigh any mitigating factor or factors
found to exist, or in the absence of mitigating factors, whether the aggravating
factors are themselves sufficient to justify a sentence of death.” Id.
217
“Determining the criteria that define who is eligible for a sentence of
death, by defining the substantive crime and the additional factors that make a
person who commits that crime eligible for the death penalty, is a legislative
function.” Sampson, 275 F. Supp. 2d at 100. Accordingly, the legislature
“may not delegate to the executive branch the authority to enlarge the class of
people who are eligible for a . . . death sentence, by allowing the Executive to
either define new substantive crimes or to add to the gateway mental states
and statutory aggravating factors set forth in the [statute].” Id.
However, unlike statutory aggravating factors, non-statutory aggravating
factors relate solely to the individualized determination of whether a death
sentence is justified for a defendant who has, based upon proven statutory
aggravating factors, been found eligible for the death penalty. Id.; see also Zant
v. Stephens, 462 U.S. 862, 879 (1983) (“What is important at the selection
stage is an individualized determination on the basis of the character of the
individual and the circumstances of the crime.”).
At the time of the defendant’s crime, the statute identified six types of
capital murder and required that the jury unanimously find beyond a
reasonable doubt at least two statutory aggravating factors. RSA 630:1, I; RSA
630:5, I, III, IV, VII (2007). “Only after the selection of those critical,
legislatively-defined factors is made is the prosecution afforded discretion to
argue that additional nonstatutory aggravators combine with the statutory
aggravators to outweigh any mitigating factors that have been submitted for
consideration, thus assisting the jury in its task of determining whether a
death-eligible defendant should indeed receive that maximum sentence.”
Higgs, 353 F.3d at 321; see United States v. Davis, 904 F. Supp. 554, 558 (E.D.
La. 1995) (“[I]t is the statutory aggravating factors, which are defined by
Congress and not delegated, that set the mandatory minimum requirements for
the jury to consider the death penalty.”). “[T]he nonstatutory aggravating
factors are simply a means to provide the jury with additional information
about the defendant, just as a defendant is free to provide with regard to
information in mitigation. In that sense, the government (and the defense) are
engaging in advocacy, not legislation.” Davis, 904 F. Supp. at 559 (quotation
omitted).
In this case, the non-statutory aggravating factors identified in the
State’s notice of intent to seek the death penalty included the defendant’s prior
convictions or involvement in acts of “other serious criminal behavior,” the
defendant’s future dangerousness, and the impact of the crime on Officer
Briggs’s family. Because the finding of a non-statutory aggravating factor is
not a prerequisite to imposing a death sentence, “in alleging a non-statutory
aggravating factor, the prosecutor is not ‘making law’ by creating any
substantive obligation, criminalizing any conduct, or increasing the maximum
penalty to which a particular defendant is exposed.” Sampson, 275 F. Supp.
218
2d at 100. Rather, when the State selects non-statutory aggravating factors to
argue for a death sentence, it is exercising one of “the Executive’s traditional
function[s]” of “seeking to persuade the court . . . that the sentence that it
advocates is the most appropriate sanction.” Id. at 101.
In most criminal cases, “both the prosecution and defense routinely cite
and argue factors that they think are relevant to the court’s sentencing
decision.” Pitera, 795 F. Supp. at 561; see also United States v. Einspahr, 35
F.3d 505, 507 (10th Cir. 1994) (“Criminal sentencing exists at a nexus where
legislative, judicial and executive prerogatives intersect.”). “The prosecution, in
engaging in such advocacy, exercises discretion derived from the executive’s
enforcement powers, not from any delegated legislative powers.” Pitera, 795 F.
Supp. at 561. “In identifying non-statutory aggravating factors . . . the
prosecution plays virtually the same role in a capital sentencing proceeding as
it does in a non-capital one. It brings relevant facts to the sentencer’s attention
and urges it to reach a particular result.” Id. at 562 (citation and parenthetical
omitted); see Sampson, 275 F. Supp. 2d at 100-01 (the purpose of non-
statutory aggravating factors is to allow the State to advocate “concerning the
propriety of the death penalty in a particular case”). “In a capital case, this
advocacy will, in no small part, reflect the prosecution’s considered judgment
as to why the case was a ‘proper occasion’ for serving a death penalty notice in
the first place: an enforcement, not a legislative, decision.” Pitera, 795 F.
Supp. at 562.
Thus, when identifying non-statutory aggravating factors that bear on
the jury’s decision whether to impose the death penalty on the defendant, the
prosecutor is performing its traditional function as the State’s advocate. “The
attorney general is the chief law enforcement officer for the State,” Bussiere v.
Cunningham, Warden, 132 N.H. 747, 755 (1990), whose “powers . . . are broad
and numerous.” State v. Swift, 101 N.H. 340, 342 (1958); see Bokowsky v.
State, 111 N.H. 57, 58 (1971). “The authority to define nonstatutory
aggravating factors falls squarely within the Executive’s broad prosecutorial
discretion, much like the power to decide whether to prosecute an individual
for a particular crime.” Jones, 132 F.3d at 239.
Accordingly, we hold that because the use of non-statutory aggravating
factors serves only to individualize the sentencing determination after the
defendant has been found guilty and eligible for the death penalty, the
authority to select and allege non-statutory aggravating factors pursuant to
RSA 630:5, I(b) is not a delegation of legislative power in violation of the
Separation of Powers Clause in Part I, Article 37 of the State Constitution.
219
2. Grand Jury Indictment
a. Background
In August 2007, the defendant moved to strike the non-statutory
aggravating factors arguing, among other things, that the State’s failure to
include them in the grand jury indictment violates his right under the State
Constitution to have the grand jury determine all facts that may subject him to
enhanced punishment. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 15. The State objected,
and the trial court denied the motion by written order dated December 20,
2007.
The trial court stated that we had interpreted the Supreme Court’s
decision in Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466 (2000), “to require indictment
of all facts that might increase a penalty beyond the statutory maximum in this
state.” See State v. Ouellette, 145 N.H. 489, 491 (2000). But see State v.
Marshall, 162 N.H. 657, 664-65 (2011) (recognizing that we erred when we
stated in Ouellette that the United States Supreme Court held in Apprendi that
sentencing factors, other than prior convictions, had to be fully alleged in an
indictment). The court ruled, however, that the “Apprendi/Ouellette analysis”
does not apply to non-statutory aggravating factors. It reasoned that unlike
statutory aggravating factors that must be found proven for a defendant to be
eligible for the death penalty, non-statutory aggravating factors “serve to assist
the jury in determining whether the death penalty is appropriate for a death
eligible defendant.” The court concluded that non-statutory aggravating factors
neither “increase the penalty for a crime beyond the prescribed statutory
maximum” nor “allow the imposition of a more severe sentence than could have
been imposed without it.” Accordingly, the trial court ruled that Part I, Article
15 does not require the State to submit the alleged non-statutory aggravating
factors to the grand jury.
b. Appellate Argument
The defendant asserts that “the State’s failure to present the non-
statutory aggravating factors to the grand jury rendered them invalid.” He
“invokes the state constitutional right to grand jury indictment under Part I,
Article 15,” and what he characterizes as “this Court’s recognition that Part I,
Article 15 provides enhanced due process protection to individual rights,
especially where the penalty is severe,” to “advocat[e] for a rule that requires
the presentation of non-statutory aggravating factors to the grand jury.”
220
c. Discussion
Because the defendant’s argument rests solely upon the State
Constitution, we base our decision upon it alone and refer to federal law only to
aid our analysis. See State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
Part I, Article 15 of the New Hampshire Constitution provides in part:
“No subject shall be held to answer for any crime, or offense, until the same is
fully and plainly, substantially and formally, described to him . . . .” N.H.
CONST. pt. I, art. 15. “We have interpreted Part I, Article 15 as safeguarding
the right to indictment by a grand jury for any offense punishable by
imprisonment for more than one year . . . .” State v. LeBaron, 148 N.H. 226,
230 (2002) (quotation and ellipsis omitted). For an indictment to be sufficient
under Part I, Article 15, it must “give the defendant enough information to
allow him to prepare for trial, and it must include all of the elements which
constitute the offense charged.” Id. at 230-31 (quotation omitted).
In the context of capital sentencing under the Federal Death Penalty Act,
18 U.S.C. §§ 3591 et seq. (2006) (FDPA), federal courts of appeals uniformly agree
that, under the Federal Constitution, statutory aggravating factors are the
functional equivalent of offense elements and must be alleged in the grand jury
indictment. See, e.g., United States v. Sampson, 486 F.3d 13, 21 (1st Cir. 2007).
Federal courts of appeals also agree that, under the Federal Constitution, non-
statutory aggravating factors are not the functional equivalent of offense elements
and, therefore, need not be alleged in the indictment. See United States v.
Lighty, 616 F.3d 321, 367-68 (4th Cir. 2010); United States v. Fell, 531 F.3d 197,
237-38 (2d Cir. 2008); Mitchell, 502 F.3d at 979; United States v. Brown, 441
F.3d 1330, 1368 (11th Cir. 2006); United States v. Purkey, 428 F.3d 738, 749-50
(8th Cir. 2005); United States v. Bourgeois, 423 F.3d 501, 507-08 (5th Cir. 2005).
Federal courts distinguish between statutory and non-statutory
aggravating factors based upon their role in capital sentencing. Under the
FDPA, a defendant is not eligible for the death penalty unless the sentencing
jury finds that the defendant had the requisite intent and “that the
Government has proved beyond a reasonable doubt at least one of the
statutory aggravating factors.” Jones v. United States, 527 U.S. 373, 376-77
(1999). Once a defendant becomes “death eligible,” the jury must then make a
sentence selection decision, in which it “consider[s] all of the aggravating and
mitigating factors and determine[s] whether the former outweigh[ ] the latter
(or, if there are no mitigating factors, whether the aggravating factors alone are
sufficient to warrant a death sentence).” Id. at 377. “The Supreme Court’s
distinction between eligibility and selection has led lower courts to conclude
that only those factors which comprise death eligibility — intent and statutory
aggravation — must be included in the indictment because those factors must
be found before imposition of the maximum authorized penalty.” Fell, 531 F.3d
221
at 238. “The non-statutory aggravating factors, although relevant to
determining whether a jury decides to impose the death penalty, do not make a
defendant statutorily eligible for any sentence that could not be otherwise
imposed in their absence. They are neither sufficient nor necessary under the
FDPA for a sentence of death.” Brown, 441 F.3d at 1368 (quotation and
emphasis omitted); accord Purkey, 428 F.3d at 749.
Federal courts so holding have relied upon the Supreme Court’s
decisions in Apprendi, 530 U.S. 466, and Ring v. Arizona, 536 U.S. 584 (2002).
In Apprendi, the defendant pleaded guilty to second-degree possession of a
firearm, which was punishable by a term of imprisonment of between five and
ten years. Apprendi, 530 U.S. at 468, 469-70. However, he was sentenced to
twelve years of imprisonment under a statute that authorized an enhanced
sentence of between ten and twenty years if the sentencing judge found, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the crime was motivated by racial bias. Id.
at 468-69, 471. The Supreme Court reversed, holding that under the Due
Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Federal Constitution,
“[o]ther than the fact of a prior conviction, any fact that increases the penalty
for a crime beyond the prescribed statutory maximum must be submitted to a
jury, and proved beyond a reasonable doubt.” Id. at 490; see Alleyne v. United
States, 133 S. Ct. 2151, 2155 (2013).
In Ring, decided two years after Apprendi, the Supreme Court considered
Arizona’s capital sentencing scheme under which a trial judge alone
determined the presence or absence of statutory aggravating factors. Ring, 536
U.S. at 588. The Court noted that in a prior case, Walton v. Arizona, 497 U.S.
639, 649 (1990) (plurality opinion), it had ruled that the Arizona scheme was
constitutional because the additional facts found by the trial judge were
“sentencing considerations” and did not constitute elements of the charged
offense. Ring, 536 U.S. at 588. In Ring, the Court overruled Walton, holding
that the Sixth Amendment to the Federal Constitution mandates that “[c]apital
defendants, no less than noncapital defendants, . . . are entitled to a jury
determination of any fact on which the legislature conditions an increase in
their maximum punishment.” Id. at 588-89. The Court stated:
If a State makes an increase in a defendant's authorized
punishment contingent on the finding of a fact, that fact —
no matter how the State labels it — must be found by a jury
beyond a reasonable doubt. A defendant may not be
exposed to a penalty exceeding the maximum he would
receive if punished according to the facts reflected in the jury
verdict alone.
Id. at 602 (quotation, citation, brackets, and ellipsis omitted). “Because
Arizona's enumerated aggravating factors operate as the functional equivalent
222
of an element of a greater offense,” the Court held that the Sixth Amendment
requires that they be found by a jury. Id. at 609 (quotation omitted).
Although neither Apprendi nor Ring concerned the Indictment Clause of
the Fifth Amendment, federal courts of appeals have held that their reasoning
applies in the context of an Indictment Clause challenge in a capital case. See
United States v. Robinson, 367 F.3d 278, 284 (5th Cir. 2004); see, e.g., United
States v. Allen, 406 F.3d 940, 942-43 (8th Cir. 2005) (en banc); Higgs, 353 F.3d
at 297. Applying the reasoning of Apprendi and Ring, federal courts of appeals
thus have concluded that statutory aggravating factors must be alleged in the
indictment because they alone increase the penalty for the charged crime from
life imprisonment to death. See Higgs, 353 F.3d at 298. By contrast, non-
statutory aggravating factors do not increase the potential penalty for the
charged crime because the jury does not consider them until it has determined
that the defendant is eligible for the death penalty. See id. at 298-99;
Bourgeois, 423 F.3d at 507-08; cf. Alleyne, 133 S. Ct. at 2163 (distinguishing
between fact finding that increases mandatory minimum sentences, which
must be submitted to a jury, and those facts that affect sentencing discretion,
which do not need to be submitted to a jury under the Sixth Amendment).
Because our capital sentencing statute is similar to the FDPA, we find
these federal decisions persuasive. Under our statute, for a defendant to be
eligible for a death sentence, a unanimous jury must find beyond a reasonable
doubt both that he possessed one of three purposeful mental states
enumerated under RSA 630:5, VII(a), and that at least one of the statutory
aggravating factors set forth in RSA 630:5, VII(b)-(j) exists. See RSA 630:5, IV.
Only then does the jury “consider whether the aggravating factors found to
exist sufficiently outweigh any mitigating factor or factors found to exist, or in
the absence of mitigating factors, whether the aggravating factors are
themselves sufficient to justify a sentence of death.” Id. Accordingly, under
our statute, as under the FDPA, only the statutory aggravating factors — which
the State did set forth in the grand jury indictment in this case — determine
whether a defendant is eligible for a death sentence. The non-statutory
aggravating factors do not serve this purpose.
The defendant argues that we should not rely upon federal cases because
Part I, Article 15 affords enhanced protection to a criminal defendant under
these circumstances. We rejected a similar argument in State v. Melvin, 150
N.H. 134, 141 (2003). The defendant in Melvin pleaded guilty to fifteen counts
of aggravated felonious sexual assault and one count of felony indecent
exposure. Melvin, 150 N.H. at 135. Because he had two prior convictions for
aggravated felonious sexual assault, the trial court sentenced him to life
imprisonment without possibility of parole. Id. The defendant argued that
reversal was required because the State failed to set forth the prior convictions
in the indictments. Id. at 140. We disagreed. Id. at 140-41. We explained
223
that although we had previously held that due process required the State to
prove the prior convictions used to enhance a defendant’s sentence to life
imprisonment without possibility of parole, we had not held that due process
requires the State to plead the prior convictions or to prove them to a jury. Id.
at 140. We also specifically rejected the defendant’s argument that the severity
of his sentence justified heightened protection under Part I, Article 15 of the
State Constitution. Id. at 141. We explained that the rule that the State need
not allege a defendant’s prior convictions used to enhance his sentence applies
even when the conviction of the subsequent offense carries a heavy penalty. Id.
The defendant argues that Melvin is distinguishable because of “the role
of non-statutory aggravating factors in a capital murder weighing scheme.” He
argues that “[b]ecause non-statutory aggravating factors are in the ‘same pot’
as the statutory aggravating factors at the stage of sentence selection, they
weigh heavily in the jury’s decision to impose a death sentence.” He contends
that if one non-statutory aggravating factor “tips the scale in favor of a death
sentence,” then it has “converted into a death sentence one which would have
otherwise been life without parole.” We disagree that this characterization of
the import of non-statutory aggravators requires that we reach a conclusion
here different from the conclusion we reached in Melvin.
Moreover, we note that “[i]t is . . . an open question whether, under the
State Constitution, any fact, other than a prior conviction, that increases the
penalty for a crime beyond the prescribed statutory maximum must be alleged
in an indictment.” Marshall, 162 N.H. at 665. The defendant does not advance
any argument on this issue. Accordingly, we hold that the defendant has not
established that the State was constitutionally required to present the non-
statutory aggravating factors to the grand jury under Part I, Article 15 of the
State Constitution.
Although the defendant states, in passing, that he “arguably” has a
similar due process right under the Fourteenth Amendment to the Federal
Constitution, he does not adequately develop this argument for appellate
review. See State v. Chick, 141 N.H. 503, 504 (1996). Moreover, he concedes
that he does not rely upon the Fifth Amendment to the Federal Constitution
because “the Fifth Amendment right to a grand jury indictment is not
applicable to a state court defendant.” See McDonald v. City of Chicago, Ill.,
130 S. Ct. 3020, 3035 n.13 (2010).
3. Duplicative Factors
a. Background
In April 2008, the defendant moved to strike certain of the State’s alleged
non-statutory aggravating factors as unconstitutionally duplicative. He
224
argued: “The use of duplicative factors artificially inflates the prospective
number of aggravating factors, which, in turn, unfairly increases the likelihood
that the jury will find more aggravating factors. In turn, this skews the
weighing process in favor of aggravating factors.” He claimed that “[t]he State’s
practice of ‘double-counting’ non-statutory aggravating factors” violates his
“rights to due process, a fair trial, and to be protected against cruel, unusual,
or disproportionate punishments” under the State and Federal Constitutions.
See N.H. CONST. pt. I, arts. 15, 18, 33; U.S. CONST. amends. V, VIII, XIV.
The State objected. Following a hearing, the trial court, by written order
dated August 6, 2008, granted the motion as to one non-statutory aggravating
factor because it referred to criminal conduct of which the defendant had been
acquitted. The court otherwise denied the motion.
At the close of the sentence selection phase of trial, the court explained
to the jury the process to follow when weighing aggravating and mitigating
factors. The court instructed that each juror was “required to weigh in [his or
her] own mind these proven factors to decide the appropriate sentence.” It
explained that the weighing process consists of “decid[ing] whether the proven
aggravating factors sufficiently outweigh any proven mitigating factors, or if no
mitigating factors are found, whether the proven aggravating factors are
sufficient in themselves to justify a sentence of death.” The court also
instructed the jurors that: “The weighing process you will undertake is not a
mechanical process and is more than a numerical counting or tabulation of
factors on each side. Rather, you must consider the aggravators and
mitigators qualitatively. The difference in the burdens of proof between
aggravators and mitigators does not indicate what weight you should give
[them]. Each juror must weigh in value each factor for him or herself.”
Ultimately, as set forth in Part VII (Sentencing Phase Review) of this opinion,
the jurors considered fifteen proven aggravating factors and sixteen proven
mitigating factors in determining the defendant’s sentence.
b. Appellate Argument
The defendant argues that certain prior crimes non-statutory aggravating
factors were impermissibly duplicative. He first points to three pairs of factors,
each of which relate to the same criminal incident (factors 4 and 5, factors 6
and 7, factors 8 and 9). He also challenges three factors that allege his felon
status relating to separate criminal incidents (factors 7, 9, and 11).
The first pair of challenged aggravating factors, which relate to the 2003
false imprisonment incident, allege:
4. Other Serious Criminal Behavior: False Imprisonment.
On or about October 27, 2003, in Londonderry, New
225
Hampshire, the defendant, Michael K. Addison, acting in
concert with Mathys Morgan, knowingly confined Brian
St. Peter unlawfully as to interfere substantially with his
physical movements, by keeping him inside a locked
vehicle. The defendant, Michael K. Addison, pled guilty
and was convicted of this offense on November 4, 2003.
5. Other Serious Criminal Behavior: Probation Violation.
On or about October 27, 2003, in Londonderry, New
Hampshire, the defendant, Michael K. Addison, violated
the terms of his probation by committing the crime of
false imprisonment. On August 6, 2004, the defendant,
Michael K. Addison, stipulated to the violation of
probation and was found in violation by the Court.
The second pair of challenged aggravating factors relate to the 2006 El
Mexicano Restaurant robbery and allege:
6. Other Serious Criminal Behavior: Armed Robbery. The
defendant, Michael K. Addison, committed armed robbery
when he and his accomplices/co-conspirators, including
Antoine Bell Rogers, robbed customers of the El Mexicano
Restaurant in Manchester, New Hampshire on or about
October 10, 2006. A jury convicted Michael K. Addison of
this offense on February 27, 2008.
7. Other Serious Criminal Behavior: Felon in Possession.
The defendant, Michael K. Addison, was a felon in
possession of a deadly weapon when he committed the
armed robbery of the El Mexicano Restaurant in
Manchester, New Hampshire with his accomplices/co-
conspirators, including Antoine Bell Rogers, on or about
October 10, 2006. A jury convicted Michael K. Addison of
this offense on February 27, 2008.
The third pair of challenged aggravating factors relate to the 2006 7-Eleven
convenience store robbery and allege:
8. Other Serious Criminal Behavior: Armed Robbery and
Conspiracy to Commit Robbery. The defendant, Michael
K. Addison, agreed to rob a store and then committed
armed robbery with a firearm when he and his
accomplices/co-conspirators, including Antoine
Bell Rogers, robbed the 7-Eleven Store in Hudson, New
Hampshire on or about October 11, 2006. A jury
226
convicted Michael K. Addison of these offenses on
December 19, 2007.
9. Other Serious Criminal Behavior: Felon in Possession.
The defendant, Michael K. Addison, was a felon in
possession of a firearm when he committed the armed
robbery of the 7-Eleven Store with his accomplices/co-
conspirators, including Antoine Bell Rogers, on or about
October 11, 2006, in Hudson, New Hampshire. A jury
convicted Michael K. Addison of this offense on December
19, 2007.
The defendant argues that within each pairing, “the jury’s finding of one factor,
under the circumstances of the case, necessarily proved the other” and, thus,
they were impermissibly duplicative.
Additionally, the defendant asserts that “unconstitutional duplication
arose because the State invoked [his] status as a felon to support” factors
seven, nine, and eleven. Factors seven and nine are set forth above. Factor
eleven alleged:
11. Other Serious Criminal Behavior: Felon in Possession.
The defendant, Michael K. Addison, was a felon in
possession of a firearm, when he committed the murder
of Manchester Police Officer Michael L. Briggs in
Manchester, New Hampshire on or about October 16,
2006.
The defendant does not argue that any of the challenged non-statutory
aggravating factors was legally invalid. Rather, relying primarily upon law
developed by the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit, see
United States v. McCullah, 76 F.3d 1087, 1111-12 (10th Cir. 1996), the
defendant contends that allowing the State to proceed with duplicative
aggravating factors violated “[his] rights to due process and to be protected
against cruel and unusual punishments” under the State and Federal
Constitutions. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, arts. 15, 18, 33; U.S. CONST. amends.
V, VIII, XIV.
c. Discussion
We first address the defendant’s arguments under the State Constitution
and rely upon federal law only to aid our analysis. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226,
231-33 (1983). The concern some courts have expressed regarding duplicative
aggravating factors is that when a sentencing body is asked, in essence, to
weigh the same factor twice, “[s]uch double counting of aggravating factors,
227
especially under a weighing scheme, has a tendency to skew the weighing
process and creates the risk that the death sentence will be imposed arbitrarily
and thus, unconstitutionally.” McCullah, 76 F.3d at 1111; see Allen v.
Woodford, 395 F.3d 979, 1012-13 (9th Cir. 2005); United States v. Tipton, 90
F.3d 861, 898-99 (4th Cir. 1996). Both federal and state courts are divided as
to whether duplicative aggravators raise constitutional concerns.
We need not decide this issue, however, because the trial court’s
instructions to the jury at the conclusion of the sentence selection phase of
trial eliminated any risk that the weighing process would be impermissibly
skewed. See Jones v. United States, 527 U.S. 373, 399-400 (1999) (plurality
opinion) (“Moreover, any risk that the weighing process would be skewed was
eliminated by the District Court’s instruction that the jury should not simply
count the number of aggravating and mitigating factors and reach a decision
based on which number is greater [but rather] should consider the weight and
value of each factor.” (quotation omitted)); Fell, 531 F.3d at 236 (“Moreover,
although we find no constitutional error in the submission of the aggravating
factors, assuming we were to conclude otherwise, any such error would not
have affected the fairness of the proceedings in light of the district court’s
instructions to the jury.”).
As the State points out, the jury was instructed that: (1) the process of
weighing aggravating and mitigating factors “is not a mechanical process and is
more than a numerical counting or tabulation of factors on each side”; (2) the
jurors must “consider the aggravators and mitigators qualitatively”; and (3)
“[e]ach juror must weigh in value each factor for him or herself.” The
instructions are similar to those given in Jones and Fell — instructions that
the Supreme Court and the United States Court of Appeals for the Second
Circuit concluded eliminated any risk that the weighing process would be
skewed by the jury’s consideration of allegedly duplicative aggravating factors.
See Jones, 527 U.S. at 399-400; Fell, 531 F.3d at 236; cf. Davis v. Executive
Director of Dept. of Corrections, 100 F.3d 750, 774 (10th Cir. 1996) (finding
harmless error based upon “[a]n instruction that the weighing process is not
simply a mathematical exercise, but instead requires critical evaluation of the
factors”). As the Second Circuit has explained: “The [trial] court instructed the
jurors not to simply count the number of aggravating factors in reference to the
mitigators, but to ‘consider the weight and value of each.’ Thus, the jury would
have known going into deliberations that, in reaching the verdict, it should
make a qualitative assessment of the aggravating and mitigating evidence as a
whole, rather than focusing on the number of factors on each side of the scale.”
Fell, 531 F.3d at 236. Similarly, here, the trial court’s instructions required
the jurors to qualitatively weigh proven aggravating and mitigating factors,
rather than focusing simply on the number of factors on each side.
228
Accordingly, we hold that the defendant has failed to establish that the
submission of the challenged non-statutory aggravating factors gave rise to a
constitutional violation under Part I, Articles 15, 18, or 33 of the State
Constitution. Because the Federal Constitution affords the defendant no
greater protection than does the State Constitution in these circumstances, we
reach the same conclusion under the Federal Constitution as we do under the
State Constitution. See Jones, 527 U.S. at 398-400.
H. Post-Verdict Request for Discovery
In December 2010, while this appeal was pending, the defendant filed a
motion for partial remand to seek additional discovery and proceedings. We
granted his motion in part, and, on remand, the trial court considered the
defendant’s post-verdict motion for discovery. After a hearing, the trial court
denied the defendant’s request for discovery by written order dated May 18,
2011. The defendant now challenges aspects of the trial court’s order and
requests that we vacate his death sentence and remand for a new sentencing
phase trial.
1. Background
a. Prosecutorial Discretion
Before trial, in January 2008, the defendant filed a motion to bar the
imposition of the death penalty on the ground that then Attorney General Kelly
Ayotte’s decision to seek the death penalty was not a meaningful exercise of
prosecutorial discretion guided by standards intended to prevent arbitrariness.
He argued that Attorney General Ayotte’s decision to seek the death penalty
was arbitrary and violated his right to due process under the State and Federal
Constitutions because “[t]he decision was made just hours after the victim’s
death, without consideration of any mitigating evidence, without reference to
any guidelines and without an objective comparison to other murder cases over
the last 30 years.” The defendant also moved for discovery, seeking, among
other things, information about any standards or procedures used to guide the
attorney general’s determination whether to seek a sentence of death and the
names of “[a]ll persons, whether or not members of the New Hampshire
Attorney General’s Office[ ], who were involved in or who were consulted, in
connection with the October 17, 2006 decision to seek the death penalty in this
case.” The State objected to both motions. It argued that the defendant’s
allegations did not state a claim of selective prosecution as a matter of law or
otherwise establish that he was entitled to the relief he requested.
Following a hearing, the trial court by written order dated February 19,
2008, denied without prejudice the defendant’s motion for discovery. It ruled
that the request was premature because the prosecutor’s charging decision
229
carried a “presumption of regularity,” the defendant’s due process claim was a
novel one, and while a hearing had been scheduled for the underlying motion
to bar the imposition of the death penalty, the substance of the issue had not
yet been resolved. The court subsequently denied the defendant’s motion to
bar by written order dated August 13, 2008, ruling that the timing of the
attorney general’s announcement did not make the decision to seek the death
penalty premature or improper. It reasoned, in part, that by statute, “the
murder of a police officer in the line of duty is a capital offense” and that this
fact, combined with “the circumstances of Officer Briggs’ murder and the
defendant’s background known at the time, [brought] the Attorney General’s
announcement well within her broad discretion.” The defendant does not
appeal either trial court order.
b. Plea Offer Mitigating Factor
Subsequently, approximately four months before trial, the defendant
sent a letter to the State offering to plead guilty to capital murder “in exchange
for a recommendation of a sentence of life in prison without the possibility of
parole.” He also offered to “withdraw all pending motions and forego all
appeals of any felony convictions” and to withhold “any arguments or evidence
at sentencing on those cases.” In the letter, the defendant stated that he
sought to resolve the case by plea because “the trials of the other pending
felonies [we]re completed and the court ha[d] heard most of the pretrial motions
that raise purely legal issues,” and the parties “[we]re faced with at least
another eight to nine months of intense litigation in pretrial motions and the
trial of the Capital Murder charge itself.”
The State declined the defendant’s offer by letter dated July 28, 2008. It
stated: “Based on the circumstances surrounding Mr. Addison’s murder of
Officer Briggs, including the crime spree he engaged in preceding the murder,
the seriousness of his prior criminal history and the impact this crime has had
on Michael Briggs’ family, the Manchester Police Department and the State, we
believe that the death penalty is the appropriate sentence in this case.” The
letter was signed by Attorney General Ayotte.
Thereafter, in August 2008, the defendant filed a motion requesting that
the trial court instruct the jury in the sentence selection phase of trial that “it
may consider as a mitigating factor the fact that four months prior to trial [he]
offered to plead guilty to Capital Murder with a sentence of life in prison
without the possibility of release and that the prosecution rejected that offer.”
The defendant argued that this information was relevant mitigating evidence
because it showed “[h]is willingness to accept responsibility for the crime, to
spare the victims and the State the burden of trial, and to, literally, give up
everything except his own life.” The defendant’s May 2008 plea offer letter and
the State’s July 2008 response letter were appended to his motion.
230
In response, the State indicated that it did not oppose the defendant’s
motion provided that the trial court allow it to present to the jury rebuttal
information and argument “placing the plea offer in its proper context,” which
included its July 2008 response letter. Specifically, the State sought to present
“information that reasonably suggests other motives behind the offer and with
fair argument that asks the jurors to consider alternative inferences to draw
from the offer.” The State argued that “it is critical that the jury accurately
understand the procedural circumstances of the case at the time the offer was
made” in that “[a]t the time he made this offer, the defendant had already failed
multiple times in his quest to bar the imposition of the death penalty and he
was facing the potential imposition of a lengthy prison sentence for his role in
the armed robberies and shooting leading up to the murder.” The State also
contended that the jury “should be informed, through stipulation or otherwise,
that nothing . . . prohibited [the defendant] from pleading guilty without
condition as to a particular sentence recommendation.”
The trial court granted both the defendant’s motion and the State’s
request to present the proffered rebuttal evidence and argument. The
defendant does not challenge that order on appeal.
Later, during the sentence selection phase of trial, the defendant sought
to introduce into evidence a stipulation signed by the parties, to which the
defendant’s May 2008 plea offer letter and the State’s July 2008 response letter
were attached. The stipulation stated that these “letters reflect the
communication between the parties regarding the plea offer in this case.”
Defense counsel asked the court to “notify the jury that [the parties] made the
stipulation and the letters are in the record”; he informed the court that it
“seems unnecessary” to read the letters to the jury. The court admitted the
exhibit into evidence and, after the jury entered the courtroom, it read the
parties’ stipulation to the jury. The court reminded the jury of the defendant’s
plea offer mitigating factor and stated “these letters are all the documents that
relate to that.”
Subsequently, during the State’s rebuttal, the court read another
stipulation to the jury:
[T]he parties stipulate that, prior to May 20th, 2008, the
defendant’s attorneys, on his behalf, filed twenty-six separate
motions submitted in twenty-one separate written
submissions to the trial court challenging the
constitutionality of New Hampshire’s capital murder statute,
seeking to prevent the State from presenting aggravating
factors to the jury and otherwise seeking to preclude the jury
from considering the death penalty. The trial court had
denied all of these motions as of January 11th, 2008.
231
The parties further stipulate that the defendant . . . at
any time during the pendency of this case could have pleaded
guilty to capital murder without condition and proceeded to
trial on the issue of sentence only.
After the close of evidence, the State, during its closing argument,
asserted that the defendant’s offer to plead guilty did not constitute a
mitigating factor because it did not represent an acceptance of responsibility.
The State argued in part:
He only offered to plead guilty in exchange for a life
sentence after he lost his challenges to the death penalty. He
only offered to plead guilty after he was convicted by three
different juries of multiple crimes for his role in the El
Mexicano robbery, the 7-Eleven robbery, and the shooting at
Edward J. Roy Drive. And he only made that offer after he
was facing thirty-one-and-a-half to sixty-three years in prison
for those convictions even before we went to trial on this
murder. It was not an offer to accept responsibility. He
didn’t make that offer to spare the victims of this crime
further pain and trauma. It was an offer to advance his own
interests, to avoid responsibility, to get away with murder.
And if you have any doubt that those convictions motivated
him to make that offer, when you’re back in your
deliberations, look at the letter from his lawyers making that
offer to us. . . . That plea offer was hollow because he was
already facing essentially a life sentence.
The State did not make any reference to its July 2008 response letter declining
the plea offer.
During the final jury charge, the trial court instructed the jury that the
defendant alleged, among others, the following mitigating factor: “[T]he
defendant attempted to plead guilty to capital murder but his offer was rejected
by the State.” When the jury returned its findings and verdict at the end of the
sentence selection phase, it found that the defendant had not proved the plea
offer mitigating factor.
c. Post-Verdict Request for Discovery
In December 2010, the defendant filed a motion in this court requesting
“a partial remand for additional discovery and proceedings regarding new
evidence which should be made part of the record for this appeal.” The “new
evidence” to which the defendant referred consisted of publicly disclosed e-mail
messages that former Attorney General and current United States Senator
232
Kelly Ayotte exchanged with political consultant Robert Varsalone in the fall of
2006 relating to her then-potential United States Senate campaign. The
defendant attached to his motion copies of e-mail messages that the State had
provided to him at his request in May 2010. One e-mail exchange shows the
following: On October 27, 2006, Varsalone sent an e-mail message to Attorney
General Ayotte with the subject line “Get ready to run . . .” in which Varsalone
discussed the campaign efforts of certain candidates; Attorney General Ayotte’s
reply stated, “Have you been following the last 2 Weeks. A police officer was
klilled [sic] and I hannounced [sic] that I would seek the death penalty?”
Varsalone responded: “I know, I read about it. Where does AG Ayotte stand on
the Death Penalty? BY THE SWITCH.” In November 2006, Varsalone and
Attorney General Ayotte exchanged additional e-mail messages about her
potential senate campaign; however, none mentioned the decision to seek the
death penalty.
In his motion for partial remand, the defendant stated that “[a]lthough
final conclusions should not be drawn until there is further investigation,” the
e-mail messages between Varsalone and Attorney General Ayotte “indicate that
personal or political goals may have influenced Ayotte’s decision to seek death
for Addison.” The defendant outlined three grounds justifying his discovery
request: the “new email evidence would have been relevant to rebut the State’s
explanation for rejecting Addison’s [plea] offer”; it was relevant “to the pending
statutory review by this court to determine whether the sentence of death was
imposed under the influence of an arbitrary factor,” see RSA 630:5, XI(a)
(2007); and it should have been disclosed by the State in relation to his prior
motion to bar the death penalty on the ground that the attorney general’s
decision was not a meaningful exercise of prosecutorial discretion. He sought a
partial remand to seek additional discovery and an order from the trial court
making the new information part of the record. The defendant attached to his
motion a copy of the post-verdict motion for discovery that he sought to file
with the trial court.
Over the State’s objection, we granted the defendant’s motion, stating
that “[t]he case is remanded to the trial court for the purpose of ruling upon
the defendant’s ‘Post-Verdict Motion for Discovery,’ a copy of which is attached
to the motion for partial remand, and for such other proceedings as the trial
court deems appropriate.” Our order also stated that we “express[ed] no
opinion as to whether the post-verdict motion for discovery should be granted.”
Thereafter, the defendant filed the post-verdict motion in the trial court,
requesting “discovery from the State for the reasons set forth in his Motion for
Partial Remand filed at the Supreme Court.” He specifically sought “any
information or evidence which might tend to show that Ayotte considered or
was influenced by any factor not listed in her letter of July 28, 2008 rejecting
[his] plea offer.” In addition, the defendant sought “all evidence or
233
communications in any way relating to the decision to seek the death penalty”
and “any information which might tend to indicate that Ayotte’s personal
political career was a consideration or factor to any extent in her decision to
seek [the] death [penalty] at any stage of this case.” The State objected,
arguing that none of the defendant’s arguments based upon the e-mail
messages gave rise to any need for further discovery.
The defendant filed a responsive pleading, clarifying his reasons for
seeking discovery regarding Attorney General Ayotte’s motivations for seeking
the death penalty in this case. First, he argued that by submitting the July
2008 letter authored by Attorney General Ayotte at sentencing as rebuttal
evidence to his plea offer mitigating factor, the State became obligated to
disclose the e-mail messages. Second, he argued that the State should have
provided the e-mail messages and related materials when he first requested
discovery regarding his motion to bar the imposition of the death penalty for
lack of a meaningful exercise of prosecutorial discretion. He emphasized that
he had “sought discovery identifying everyone involved in the decision to seek
death” and “specifically requested discovery regarding any persons consulted
outside of the Attorney General’s Office in connection with the decision.”
Third, he argued that the e-mail messages and related discovery were relevant
to, and must be made part of the record for, our independent review of the
death sentence for the influence of arbitrary factors under RSA 630:5, XI(a).
According to the defendant, he “should be allowed to make a record regarding
the exercise of prosecutorial discretion because it is well recognized that such
decisions may result in the arbitrary imposition of the death penalty.”
After conducting a hearing in April 2011, the trial court denied the
defendant’s motion for additional discovery in an order dated May 18, 2011. It
ruled that evidence tending to show that Attorney General Ayotte was
motivated by political ambition when seeking the death penalty was not
relevant to rebut the reasons identified by the State in its July 2008 letter for
rejecting the defendant’s plea offer. Reviewing the capital trial record, the court
found that the July 2008 letter “serve[d] as a summary of the State’s
arguments as to why the defendant’s offer to plead guilty was not mitigating,”
and that “Ayotte’s letter was admitted as it related to the defendant’s, not
Ayotte’s, state of mind.” The court also ruled that the July 2008 letter would
not have been admissible to prove Attorney General Ayotte’s motivations for
seeking the death penalty because such reasons would not have been relevant
to rebut the plea offer mitigating factor.
The trial court further ruled that evidence tending to show that Attorney
General Ayotte was motivated by political ambition when seeking the death
penalty was not relevant to buttress arguments that the defendant made in his
pretrial motion to bar the death penalty. Although the defendant had
“conced[ed] that he [was] not claiming selective prosecution,” the court
234
nonetheless found that the e-mail messages did not “constitute clear evidence
that Ayotte acted with the requisite discriminatory or vindictive motive
sufficient to overcome the presumption of regularity surrounding prosecutorial
charging decisions.” The trial court specifically observed that “[c]ourts have
held that a prosecutor’s political ambitions do not rise to the level of
unconstitutional conduct or even a conflict of interest.” See, e.g., Dick v.
Scroggy, 882 F.2d 192, 196-97 (6th Cir. 1989); People v. Vasquez, 137 P.3d
199, 209 (Cal. 2006).
Finally, the trial court ruled that evidence tending to show that Attorney
General Ayotte was motivated by political ambition when seeking the death
penalty was not relevant to our statutory review under RSA 630:5, XI(a). See
RSA 630:5, XI(a) (supreme court must review “[w]hether the sentence of death
was imposed under the influence of passion, prejudice or any other arbitrary
factor”). Based upon the plain language of the statute, the trial court rejected
the defendant’s argument that review under this provision encompasses the
attorney general’s subjective reasons for charging him with capital murder and
seeking the death penalty. It concluded that the statutory review “is concerned
with whether the jury arbitrarily decided to impose the death penalty, not with
whether Ayotte arbitrarily charged the defendant with capital murder.”
Accordingly, the trial court ruled that the defendant’s discovery request
was “not reasonably calculated to lead to the discovery of evidence admissible
to the issues he raises.”
2. Appellate Argument
The defendant argues that the State violated his due process rights by
withholding exculpatory evidence regarding its decision to reject his plea offer.
According to the defendant, the State made Attorney General Ayotte’s reasons
for seeking the death penalty an issue in this case by introducing her July
2008 response letter into evidence to rebut his plea offer mitigating factor.
Thus, he contends that “documentary evidence of her political motivations was
discoverable, material and relevant,” and the State was constitutionally
required to disclose such evidence to the defense for its use in addressing the
State’s rebuttal evidence; namely, the July 2008 letter. The defendant
concludes that “[u]nder the unique circumstances of this case, this Court must
find that the State failed to disclose material, exculpatory evidence” in violation
of the State and Federal Constitutions, and as a result, “must vacate [his]
sentence and remand this case for a new sentencing phase trial.” See N.H.
CONST. pt. I, art. 15; U.S. CONST. amends. V, XIV.
235
3. Discussion
We first address the defendant’s claim under the State Constitution and
rely upon federal law only to aid our analysis. See State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226,
231-33 (1983). Part I, Article 15 of the New Hampshire Constitution imposes
upon the prosecutor the “duty to disclose evidence favorable to the accused
where the evidence is material either to guilt or to punishment.” State v.
Shepherd, 159 N.H. 163, 169 (2009) (quotation omitted). “Generally, to secure
a new trial, a defendant must prove that the prosecution withheld evidence
that is favorable and material.” State v. Etienne, 163 N.H. 57, 88 (2011)
(quotation omitted). Here, if the defendant establishes that the prosecution
knowingly withheld favorable evidence, the burden shifts to the State to prove
beyond a reasonable doubt that the omitted evidence would not have affected
the sentence. See State v. Laurie, 139 N.H. 325, 330 (1995); cf. Etienne, 163
N.H. at 88. Otherwise, the defendant retains the burden to prove materiality.
Etienne, 163 N.H. at 89.
The defendant bears the initial burden of proving that the evidence
allegedly withheld was “favorable.” Shepherd, 159 N.H. at 170. “Favorable
evidence is that which is admissible, likely to lead to the discovery of
admissible evidence, or otherwise relevant to the preparation or presentation of
the defense.” Id. (quotation omitted). Favorable evidence may include
impeachment evidence. Id.; see United States v. Bagley, 473 U.S. 667, 676
(1985). In the context of discovery requests, the information sought is material
to guilt or punishment if it is reasonably calculated to lead to the discovery of
admissible evidence. See State v. Dukette, 127 N.H. 540, 548-49 (1986).
The State contends that the defendant’s assertion that he is entitled to a
new sentencing trial on the basis of an alleged discovery violation relating to
the plea offer mitigating factor is not preserved for appellate review, and we
agree. It is a long-standing rule that parties may not have judicial review of
matters not raised in the forum of trial. See State v. Eaton, 162 N.H. 190, 195
(2011). It is the burden of the appealing party, here the defendant, to
demonstrate that he raised his issues before the trial court. State v. Winward,
161 N.H. 533, 542 (2011).
The purportedly favorable, withheld evidence identified by the defendant
on appeal as entitling him to a new sentencing trial is the e-mail exchange
between Varsalone and Attorney General Ayotte. Before the trial court,
however, the defendant relied upon the e-mail exchange only to seek discovery
of materials that might tend to show that Ayotte’s decision to seek the death
penalty was politically motivated. Other than his discovery request, he did not
seek any relief from the trial court based upon the alleged favorable or
exculpatory nature of the e-mail exchange itself.
236
Indeed, during the April 2011 hearing, the trial court asked the
defendant what relief he intended to seek in the event discovery produced the
type of information he was seeking. Through defense counsel, the defendant
stated that he might renew his prior unsuccessful challenge to the State’s
exercise of prosecutorial discretion, seek relief based upon “arbitrariness in
connection with the mitigating factor,” or bring a motion for a new sentencing
hearing. Although defense counsel noted the trial court’s authority under our
remand order to conduct “such other proceedings [as it] deem[ed] appropriate,”
he told the trial court during the hearing that the discovery materials he
sought might form the basis of a future motion for a new sentencing hearing.
Because the defendant failed to request relief stemming from the e-mail
exchange that he already had in his possession, he waived the issue of whether
the State failed to disclose that e-mail exchange as favorable or exculpatory
evidence in relation to the plea offer mitigating factor. See State v. Larose, 157
N.H. 28, 39 (2008) (declining to consider argument that trial court deprived
defendant of due process when it denied his motion for additional discovery
because the defendant failed to demonstrate that he preserved this argument
for appellate review).
In his reply brief, the defendant argues that “[i]n the alternative, if this
Court determines that a lesser remedy is appropriate, it may remand the case
with an order that the trial court permit [him] to conduct additional discovery
and thereafter pursue claims for a new sentencing hearing or to bar the death
penalty.” Assuming that this request was preserved and has not been waived,
we reject his argument on the merits.
The defendant argues that the State made former Attorney General
Ayotte’s political motivation for seeking the death penalty a relevant issue at
the sentence selection phase of trial. The defendant acknowledges that “a
prosecutor’s motivation is not generally an issue of consequence at trial” and
that “considered in the abstract, evidence of the Attorney General’s political
motivation does not tend to prove [his] alleged mitigating factors.” He
contends, however, that Attorney General Ayotte’s motivation, and, thus, the
e-mail messages, became relevant to his plea offer mitigating factor because the
July 2008 response letter purported to set forth Attorney General Ayotte’s
reasons for rejecting his offer to plead guilty. He argues that he could have
used the e-mail evidence to show that the letter “did not tell the whole story” —
that Attorney General Ayotte “had undisclosed political motivations beyond the
explanation given in her letter for rejecting [the defendant’s] offer.” According
to the defendant, “[a] juror, aware of that information, would have been less
inclined to trust the evidence the State offered in opposition to the mitigating
factor,” and “[a]bsent that trust, the same juror would have been more inclined
to find proven [his] proposed mitigating factor.”
237
The trial court expressly rejected the foundation of the defendant’s
appellate argument. Based upon the capital trial record, the court ruled that
Attorney General Ayotte’s July 2008 response letter was neither proffered nor
used by the State to present her reasons or motivations for seeking a death
sentence for the jury to consider when evaluating the plea offer mitigating
factor. The court found that the record established that “the parties appear to
have understood that the letter would serve as a summary of the State’s
arguments as to why the defendant’s offer to plead guilty was not mitigating,”
and that rebuttal of the plea offer mitigating factor exclusively focused upon
what the State viewed as the defendant’s self-interested motivation for offering
to plead guilty. The court found that “[Ayotte’s] motivations for rejecting the
plea offer were simply not part of the discussion.” The court further ruled that
even if the State had sought to use the letter to prove Attorney General Ayotte’s
motivations for seeking the death penalty, the letter’s reflection of that
motivation “is not of consequence, or material, to whether the defendant’s offer
to plead guilty was a mitigating factor”; that is, “whether the defendant’s offer
demonstrated his remorse and acceptance of responsibility.”
The trial court’s decision is supported by the record. The defendant
attached to his motion regarding his plea offer mitigator both his May 2008
plea offer letter and the State’s July 2008 letter declining that offer. In the
motion, he made clear that the mitigating factor at issue related to his alleged
willingness to accept responsibility for his crime. In its responsive pleading,
the State identified its July 2008 letter as part of the body of proffered rebuttal
evidence focusing upon the circumstances of the case and the defendant’s
alleged self-interest underlying his conditional plea offer. As the trial court
found, the pleadings themselves show that the attorney general’s letter served
as context — that the State declined the defendant’s conditional plea offer —
and as a summary of why the State at the sentencing phase of trial did not
view the plea offer as a mitigating factor. As the trial court further observed,
that this was the purpose for admitting the State’s rebuttal information,
including the July 2008 response letter, is supported by the State’s closing
remarks on the defendant’s plea offer. Accordingly, the record supports the
trial court’s finding that the July 2008 letter “was admitted as it related to the
defendant’s, not Ayotte’s, state of mind.”
We agree with the trial court that “if the State had offered Ayotte’s letter
to prove her motivations for seeking the death penalty, the letter would not
have been admissible because it would not have been relevant to counter
defendant’s argument that his offer to plead guilty was a mitigating factor.”
The only issue for the jurors to decide with respect to the plea offer mitigating
factor was whether the offer reflected positively or negatively upon the
defendant’s character: whether, as he contended, it showed that he accepted
responsibility for his actions, or whether, as the State contended, the
defendant conditionally offered to plead guilty merely to advance his own
238
interests. Neither the State’s reasons for rejecting the offer, nor Attorney
General Ayotte’s alleged personal motives for doing so, affected the mitigating
quality of the offer itself; the plea offer mitigating factor required the jurors to
assess the defendant’s credibility and sincerity in making the offer. Therefore,
the e-mail messages do not tend to make it more or less probable that he
accepted responsibility for his conduct when he offered to plead guilty. See
RSA 630:5, III (threshold for admissibility of evidence at capital sentencing is
whether information relates to or is relevant to an aggravating or mitigating
factor).
For the first time on appeal, the defendant argues that the e-mail
messages constitute favorable evidence because they would have been
admissible under the specific contradiction doctrine. This doctrine applies
when one party has introduced admissible evidence that creates a misleading
advantage, and the opponent is then allowed to introduce previously
suppressed or otherwise inadmissible evidence to counter the misleading
advantage. State v. Wamala, 158 N.H. 583, 589 (2009). The defendant argues
that the doctrine applies here because “evidence not otherwise admissible —
Ayotte’s political motivation — became admissible due to the State’s strategy in
attacking the mitigating factor.” Even assuming that the defendant preserved
this argument for appeal, we conclude that, for the reasons we have already
discussed, the State did not derive any misleading advantage by introducing
the July 2008 letter as part of the body of rebuttal evidence to the plea offer
mitigating factor. See State v. Bird, 161 N.H. 31, 35 (2010).
We hold that the defendant has failed to establish that the State denied
him access to favorable or exculpatory evidence regarding its decision to reject
his plea offer in violation of his due process rights under the State
Constitution. In so holding, we affirm the trial court’s findings and rulings
pertaining to the irrelevant and immaterial nature of the e-mail exchange in
relation to the plea offer mitigating factor. Because the Federal Constitution
affords the defendant no greater protection than does the State Constitution in
these circumstances, we reach the same conclusion under the Federal
Constitution as we do under the State Constitution. See Etienne, 163 N.H. at
95; Shepherd, 159 N.H. at 170; see also Bagley, 473 U.S. at 675-76; Brady v.
Maryland, 373 U.S. 83, 86-87 (1963).
We observe that the defendant does not challenge the trial court’s legal
ruling that our independent statutory review under RSA 630:5, XI(a) focuses
upon “whether the jury arbitrarily decided to impose the death penalty,” not
upon the State’s charging decision. He also does not challenge the trial court’s
ruling that the substance of the e-mail messages does not support his claim
that the State failed to comply with his pretrial discovery request relating to his
motion to bar the death penalty. Furthermore, the defendant does not
challenge the trial court’s ruling that even if he were advancing a selective
239
prosecution claim, he failed to demonstrate that he is entitled to the requested
discovery. See Scroggy, 882 F.2d at 196 (“Politically ambitious and aggressive
prosecutors are by no means uncommon . . . . Absent a demonstration of
selective prosecution, however, even a clear appearance of impropriety in the
participation of the prosecutor is normally insufficient to justify a decision, in
collateral proceedings, . . . [to] set[ ] aside a conviction of one found guilty
beyond a reasonable doubt in a fair trial before an impartial judge and an
unbiased jury.”); Vasquez, 137 P.3d at 209 (Prosecutors, “as people, inevitably
hold individual personal values and allegiances” and “may also have political
ambitions or apprehensions. But that a public prosecutor might feel unusually
strongly about a particular prosecution or, inversely, might hesitate to commit
to a prosecution for personal or political reasons does not inevitably indicate an
actual conflict of interest, much less a constitutional bar to prosecution.”); see
also United States v. Armstrong, 517 U.S. 456, 463-64 (1996) (discussing
selective prosecution and the “presumption of regularity”).
IX. MANDATORY SUPREME COURT REVIEW
Pursuant to RSA 630:5, XI (2007), we are required to review the
defendant’s death sentence to answer three questions. The statute requires
that we determine: “(a) [w]hether the sentence of death was imposed under the
influence of passion, prejudice or any other arbitrary factor”; “(b) [w]hether the
evidence supports the jury’s finding of an aggravating circumstance, as
authorized by law”; and “(c) [w]hether the sentence of death is excessive or
disproportionate to the penalty imposed in similar cases, considering both the
crime and the defendant.” RSA 630:5, XI. Only the first two statutory
questions are before us at this stage of the proceeding.
These provisions must be viewed in light of capital sentencing
jurisprudence. We previously have reviewed at some length the jurisprudential
background relevant to the development of this state’s capital murder
sentencing scheme. See State v. Addison, 160 N.H. 732, 741-47 (2010).
Briefly stated, the current sentencing scheme was adopted following the United
States Supreme Court’s decisions in Furman v. Georgia, 408 U.S. 238 (1972)
(per curiam), and Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153 (1976). See Addison, 160
N.H. at 742. In Gregg, the Supreme Court upheld Georgia’s amended statute,
upon which RSA 630:5, XI is largely modeled, because “the concerns expressed
in Furman that the penalty of death not be imposed in an arbitrary or
capricious manner can be met by a carefully drafted statute that ensures that
the sentencing authority is given adequate information and guidance.” Gregg,
428 U.S. at 195. The Supreme Court described the mandatory appellate review
provisions as “an important additional safeguard against arbitrariness and
caprice,” id. at 198, and as “a check against the random or arbitrary imposition
of the death penalty.” Id. at 206. As we have recognized, “[d]eath is different in
kind from all other forms of punishment, and meaningful appellate review is a
240
crucial safeguard to ensure that the death penalty is not imposed in an
arbitrary and capricious, or wanton and freakish, manner.” Addison, 160 N.H.
at 779.
A. Passion, Prejudice or Other Arbitrary Factor
According to the defendant, our independent appellate review under RSA
630:5, XI(a) focuses upon the risk of, or the degree to which, any indefensible
influence played a role in the sentencing process. The defendant argues that
“passion or emotion had undue influence by reason of the State’s choice to
place great emphasis on the victimization of [Officer] Briggs’s survivors, of the
survivors of Addison’s other crimes, and of the jurors themselves in their
capacity as members of a violated Manchester community.” Additionally, he
argues that the racial identities of Officer Briggs and the defendant and “their
respective statuses as much-beloved local police officer and outsider from
Boston” created a “significant risk of the influence of prejudice.” He further
contends that “evidence and [closing] argument” relating to, for example, his
future conditions of confinement and the extent of his trial rights, were “not
relevant” to the matters at issue in sentencing and, thus, “injected into the
sentencing deliberations factors that are arbitrary.” The defendant asserts that
“[i]n this case, procedural protections did not prevent the jury from exposure to
[these] arbitrary influences . . . and did not eliminate the risk deriving from
that exposure.”
Much of the defendant’s argument focuses upon remarks made by the
prosecutor during the State’s closing argument in the sentence selection phase
of trial. We have considered and rejected his characterization that many of the
prosecutor’s statements constitute impermissible prosecutorial advocacy in
Part VII.B.4 (Sentencing Phase Review-Closing Argument) of this opinion.
Indeed, the defendant’s arguments with respect to the influence of passion,
prejudice or any other arbitrary factor do not raise any issues that we have not
already considered and addressed. Nevertheless, the defendant argues that,
even if the errors that he alleges, viewed in isolation, would not require
reversal, based upon “the combined effect of those influences, the death
sentence in this case cannot survive this Court’s review under RSA 630:5,
XI(a).” We disagree.
The statute requires that the jury not impose a sentence of death under
the influence of passion, prejudice or any other arbitrary factor. However, “a
death penalty case will not be emotionless.” United States v. Barnette, 211
F.3d 803, 821 (4th Cir. 2000). Certainly, the matters presented throughout the
trial would be expected to evoke emotion from witnesses and jurors. As the
defendant recognizes, “it is not possible to eliminate all emotion from capital
sentencing proceedings.”
241
Our review of the record in this case does not indicate that any influence
prohibited under RSA 630:5, XI(a) was interjected into this trial. We note that,
as reflected on the Special Findings Form and the Special Verdict Form
included in the appendices to this opinion, the jury found the existence of some
aggravating and mitigating factors and did not find the existence of others.
Further, we have examined the defendant’s “combined effect” assertion and
find no support for it in the record. In addition to having considered all of the
defendant’s specific contentions, we have independently reviewed the record
and we determine that the death sentence in this case was not imposed under
the influence of passion, prejudice or any other arbitrary factor. See RSA
630:5, X, XI(a) (2007).
B. Evidence of Aggravating Circumstances
Also as part of our mandatory statutory review of the defendant’s death
sentence, we must determine “[w]hether the evidence supports the jury’s
finding of an aggravating circumstance, as authorized by law.” RSA 630:5,
XI(b). The defendant argues that our record review under this provision
extends to the fifteen aggravating factors found proven and weighed by the jury
in determining the recommended sentence. According to the defendant, we
need not evaluate whether the record supports the grave risk of death statutory
aggravating factor that the jury found proven at the eligibility phase of trial but
did not consider during its sentencing deliberations at the sentence selection
phase of trial. The State argues, however, that our record review involves all
sixteen aggravating factors found by the jury. With respect to the applicable
legal standard, both parties rely upon our traditional standard for reviewing
the sufficiency of the evidence in a criminal case. See, e.g., State v. Burke, 162
N.H. 459, 460-61 (2011); State v. Dodds, 159 N.H. 239, 246 (2009).
Considering the plain language of the statute, we agree with the State
that our review extends to evaluating the sufficiency of the evidence for
aggravating circumstances regarding all sixteen aggravating factors found by
the jury. See State v. Moussa, 164 N.H. 108, 127-28 (2012) (outlining
standards for statutory construction). We are required under RSA 630:5, XI(b)
to determine “[w]hether the evidence supports the jury’s finding of an
aggravating circumstance, as authorized by law,” and the statute does not
confine our review to those aggravating circumstances that were both found
and weighed by the jury in determining the sentence.
Additionally, we agree with the parties that the plain language of the
statute anticipates that we apply our traditional standard for evaluating the
sufficiency of the evidence. In particular, viewing all of the evidence, and all
reasonable inferences from it, in the light most favorable to the State, we must
assess whether a rational trier of fact could have found each aggravating
circumstance beyond a reasonable doubt. See Burke, 162 N.H. at 460-61;
242
Dodds, 159 N.H. at 246. In so doing, we examine each evidentiary item in the
context of all of the evidence, not in isolation, mindful that circumstantial
evidence may be sufficient to support a jury finding. See Burke, 162 N.H. at
460-61; Dodds, 159 N.H. at 246.
Throughout this opinion, we have outlined the evidence supporting the
aggravating factors that the jury unanimously found beyond a reasonable
doubt. In particular, evidence of the statutory aggravating factors is set forth
in Part I (The Capital Murder), Part VI (Guilt Phase Review), and Part VII.A
(Sentencing Phase Review-Eligibility Phase Trial). Evidence of the non-
statutory aggravating factors also is set forth in those portions of the opinion,
as well as in Part VII.B (Sentencing Phase Review-Sentence Selection Phase
Trial). Thus, it is not necessary for us to recite here the evidence supporting
the jury’s findings. After a full review of the record, we conclude that a rational
juror could have found proven, beyond a reasonable doubt, each aggravating
factor the jury found proven. Therefore, we conclude that the evidence
supports the jury’s finding as to each aggravating factor, as authorized by law.
See RSA 630:5, X, XI(b). Because we make this determination, we have no
reason to consider what the remedy would be if we had concluded that the
evidence was insufficient as to any of the aggravating factors.
We affirm the defendant’s capital murder conviction and will conclude
our review of his sentence of death after additional briefing and oral argument
as to comparative proportionality under RSA 630:5, XI(c). See Addison, 160
N.H. at 779-80.
So ordered.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY, LYNN and BASSETT, JJ.,
concurred.
243