THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2013-0290, State of New Hampshire v. Justin L.
Roy, the court on March 19, 2015, issued the following order:
After review of the defendant’s motion to reconsider, the court modifies the
slip opinion as set forth below. In all other respects, the defendant’s motion to
reconsider is denied.
The slip opinion dated January 16, 2015, is modified by deleting the first
full paragraph on page 13 and replacing it with:
Assuming, without deciding, that the sealed motion to continue was
exculpatory material that should have been disclosed to the defense
earlier, we conclude that the trial court did not err in denying the
defendant’s motion to dismiss because the defendant has failed to
demonstrate prejudice. See id. The defendant was apprised of the
motion and the nature of the prosecution’s agreement with Downs
several hours before Downs began to testify, and several hours before the
court heard oral argument on the defendant’s motion to unseal.
Additionally, after the court unsealed the motion and the defendant was
given a copy, the defendant asked the court for “approximately five
minutes” to review the motion in advance of oral argument. The court
granted the request. Moreover, the defense was able to cross-examine
Downs about her agreement with the prosecution, thereby challenging
her credibility. See State v. Stowe, 162 N.H. 464, 467 (2011) (explaining
that cross-examination provides the defendant with an opportunity to
impeach a witness’s credibility and expose possible biases of the
witness). The record does not establish that the initial nondisclosure
“impeded to a significant degree” the defendant’s case; therefore, we
conclude that the trial court did not err in denying the defendant’s
motion to dismiss. See Stickney, 148 N.H. at 236.
The slip opinion is further modified on page 2, line 2, and page 13, line 2
of the second full paragraph, by replacing “for a directed verdict” with “to set
aside the verdicts.”
Reconsideration denied;
slip opinion modified.
Dalianis, C.J., and Hicks, Conboy, Lynn, and Bassett, JJ., concurred.
Eileen Fox,
Clerk