THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
6th Circuit Court – Franklin Family Division
No. 2013-276
IN RE SOPHIA-MARIE H.
Submitted: September 19, 2013
Opinion Issued: October 1, 2013
Law Office of Joshua L. Gordon, of Concord (Joshua L. Gordon on the
brief), for the mother.
Nancy K. Quinlan, of Dover, on the brief, for the father.
CONBOY, J. The respondent, the father of Sophia-Marie H. (father),
appeals an order of the 6th Circuit Court – Franklin Family Division (Gordon,
J.) terminating his parental rights. See RSA 170-C:5 (2002 & Supp. 2012). He
argues that the evidence does not support the family division’s findings: (1)
that he failed to support, educate, and care for Sophia-Marie; and (2) that
termination of his parental rights is in Sophia-Marie’s best interest. We
reverse.
The record supports the following facts. Sophia-Marie was born on
November 10, 2008. She lived with the father and her mother, the petitioner
(mother), until November 2009, when the father moved out. In February 2010,
the mother filed a parenting petition seeking full custody of Sophia-Marie. The
trial court granted the mother primary residential responsibility for Sophia-
Marie until further hearing and awarded the father regular supervised
parenting time.
On August 17, 2010, the father was incarcerated in the New Hampshire
State Prison as a result of convictions for the possession and sale of drugs. On
December 6, the trial court issued a final decree and parenting plan awarding
the mother sole custody of Sophia-Marie. The court recommended that the
father have no visitation with Sophia-Marie while he was in prison, but noted
that after he was released from prison he could file a motion for the court to
consider “whether he should have parenting rights.” The court further ordered
the father to pay $50 a month in child support, which would accrue as an
arrearage during his incarceration “to be paid after he obtains employment.”
During his incarceration, the father sent at least sixteen letters to
Sophia-Marie between October 8, 2010, and October 17, 2011. The father also
made telephone calls to the mother and Sophia-Marie between November 2010
and February 2011. The mother then changed her telephone number so that
the father could no longer contact them. The father testified that he continued
to call for a few more months because he “thought maybe the phone was just
turned off.” In November 2011, after being released to a halfway house, the
father telephoned the child’s maternal grandmother in an attempt to contact
the mother and Sophia-Marie. The grandmother hung up on him. She then
advised prison authorities that she did not want the father contacting her. The
father testified that a prison official told him that further attempts to contact
the mother could result in his return to prison.
On February 13, 2012, the father was released from incarceration. In
April, he filed a motion seeking to reinstate visitation with Sophia-Marie. In
August, the mother filed a petition seeking termination of the father’s parental
rights on grounds of abandonment and nonsupport. See RSA 170-C:5, I, II
(2002). That same month, the court held a hearing on the father’s motion
seeking visitation and, thereafter, issued an order awarding the father
supervised visitation with Sophia-Marie. However, no visitation occurred
because visitation was thereafter suspended pending resolution of the mother’s
termination petition.
On February 20, 2013, the court held a hearing on the termination
petition. At the hearing, the mother testified that she and Sophia-Marie live
with the mother’s fiancé. She stated that Sophia-Marie refers to him as
“daddy” and that, if the termination petition were granted, he would adopt
Sophia-Marie. The mother testified that she did not inform Sophia-Marie about
the letters that the father had sent and that, although she has not told Sophia-
Marie that he is her father, she plans to do so eventually. She further testified
that the only child support payment she had received from the father since his
release from incarceration was in December 2012.
At the final hearing, the father admitted that, prior to his incarceration,
he was not a very good father to Sophia-Marie, but that he was now committed
2
to being in her life. He testified that it does not bother him that Sophia-Marie
refers to the mother’s fiancé as “daddy” and that he believes that the
relationship Sophia-Marie has with the mother’s fiancé is good for her. He
testified that he obtains sporadic employment from his father as a painter and
remodeler, but that he was currently “on leave” because there was “no work
temporarily.” He stated that, although he did not provide financial support for
Sophia-Marie prior to his incarceration, he had started paying child support.
Sophia-Marie’s guardian ad litem (GAL) submitted a detailed final report
that recommended that the termination petition be denied. At the hearing, the
GAL testified that this was not an easy decision. He stated that the father
appears to be a changed man and has “made an effort to turn his life around
[and] he wants to be involved in [his] daughter’s life.” When asked by the court
whether he thought it was in Sophia-Marie’s best interest to create a
relationship with the father, the GAL testified that he had spoken with the
father’s parole officer and counselor and “they both think he’s doing well,” but
that the father’s “track record” concerned him. However, he also expressed
concern that, if the termination petition were granted and the father “has
pulled it together,” then Sophia-Marie “would . . . miss[] out on [a] relationship”
with her father. The GAL stated, “I don’t have . . . a crystal ball.” He later said,
“I know what we have, but I’m just not sure what the future will hold, and I’m
not sure how to weigh the risks and benefits of that.”
In its termination order, the court found that the father had not
abandoned Sophia-Marie, but that he had failed to support, educate, and care
for her. See RSA 170-C:5, II. The court also determined that it was in Sophia-
Marie’s best interest to terminate the father’s parental rights. The father’s
motion for reconsideration was denied, and this appeal followed.
Parental rights are “natural, essential, and inherent” within the meaning
of Part I, Article 2 of the New Hampshire Constitution. In re Jack L., 161 N.H.
611, 614 (2011) (quotation omitted). The dominant consideration in
termination proceedings under RSA chapter 170-C (2002 & Supp. 2012) is the
welfare of the child, which prevails over the interests of the parents. In re Jack
L., 161 N.H. at 614.
Before a court may order the termination of a parent’s rights, the
petitioning party must prove a statutory ground for termination beyond a
reasonable doubt. In re Haley K., 163 N.H. 247, 249 (2012); see RSA 170-C:5;
RSA 490-D:2, VII (2010) (authorizing family division to exercise jurisdiction
over termination of parental rights cases under RSA chapter 170-C). Once a
statutory ground is established, the court must then consider whether
termination is in the child’s best interest. In re Adam R., 159 N.H. 788, 792
(2010). Such a determination requires assessment of which of the possible
alternative dispositional orders is the most desirable, under a standard giving
3
priority to the assumed interest of the child. In re Shannon M., 146 N.H. 22,
28 (2001); In re Adam R., 159 N.H. at 792 (in weighing fundamental rights of
parent against best interest of child under RSA chapter 170-C, dominant
consideration is welfare of child, which must prevail over interest of parent).
We will affirm the trial court’s order unless it is unsupported by the evidence or
plainly erroneous as a matter of law. See In re Haley K., 163 N.H. at 249.
As a threshold matter, the mother asserts that we should dismiss the
father’s appeal because he has failed to allege that the court’s order was plainly
erroneous as a matter of law. We disagree. The father argues that the trial
court erred in terminating his parental rights because the mother failed to
prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, that he did not adequately support, educate,
and care for Sophia-Marie and that termination was in Sophia-Marie’s best
interest. Thus, he contends that the trial court’s decision terminating his
parental rights was unsupported by the evidence and, therefore, erroneous as a
matter of law. We therefore decline to dismiss his appeal on this ground.
The father first argues that the mother failed to “provide sufficient
evidence to prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, that [he], although financially
able to do so, had failed to support” Sophia-Marie under RSA 170-C:5, II. We
agree.
RSA 170-C:5, II authorizes termination when,
although the parents are financially able, they have substantially
and continuously neglected to provide the child with necessary
subsistence, education or other care necessary for his mental,
emotional, or physical health or have substantially and
continuously neglected to pay for such subsistence, education or
other care when legal custody is lodged with others.
RSA 170-C:5, II (emphasis added). Because the mother has sole legal custody
of Sophia-Marie, she had the burden to prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, that
the father was “financially able” but nonetheless had “substantially and
continuously neglected to pay for [the child’s necessary] subsistence, education
or other care.” RSA 170-C:5, II.
The statute does not define, and we have not addressed, what it means
to be “financially able” in this context. We need not do so here, however,
because the record contains scant evidence as to the father’s financial
circumstances. The evidence concerning the father’s employment was limited
to testimony that he was sporadically employed by his father, but that he was
currently “on leave” because there was “temporarily” no work. The mother had
the heavy burden to produce evidence demonstrating beyond a reasonable
doubt that the father was “financially able” to pay for Sophia-Marie’s care, but
4
substantially and continuously neglected to do so. The mere fact that the
father had sporadic employment does not establish, beyond a reasonable
doubt, his ability to provide for Sophia-Marie.
The mother points to the father’s fianceé’s opinion that he is a good
provider for her family to show that he was “financially able” to provide for
Sophia-Marie. The fact that the father’s fianceé believes that the father is “a
good provider” for her family, however, does not establish that the father is
“financially able” to support Sophia-Marie. Moreover, although the mother
testified, and the trial court found, that the father was not current on his
court-ordered child support payments, in the absence of any evidence
demonstrating his ability to make such payments, the mother failed to meet
her burden of proving he was “financially able.”
To the extent that the court relied upon the father’s failure to pay child
support during his incarceration as evidence that the mother met her burden,
this was error. It is true that incarceration did not absolve the father of his
parental obligation to provide for the care of his child. See In re Haley K., 163
N.H. at 252. However, the final decree on the parenting plan provided that the
father’s child support obligation would accrue as an arrearage during his
incarceration “to be paid after he obtains employment.” Thus, the father’s
failure to pay child support while he was incarcerated was anticipated, and his
obligation to do so was postponed, by the family division. Therefore, the
father’s failure to pay support during his incarceration cannot be used to meet
the mother’s burden under RSA 170-C:5, II. Cf. In re Sheena B., 139 N.H. 179,
184-85 (1994) (lack of contact when father was subject to restraining order
prohibiting contact with child was not evidence of abandonment where record
did not support a finding that father engaged in conduct that he knew, or
should have known, would lead to loss of opportunity to see his child).
Accordingly, we conclude that the evidence did not support the trial court’s
finding that the mother proved beyond a reasonable doubt that the father failed
to provide for Sophia-Marie’s support, education, or care under RSA 170-C:5,
II. Therefore, that finding was erroneous as a matter of law.
In light of our determination that the mother failed to prove a statutory
ground for termination, we need not address the trial court’s finding that
termination of the father’s parental rights was in the best interest of Sophia-
Marie. See In re Lisa H., 134 N.H. 188, 193 (1991) (noting that trial court’s
consideration of child’s best interest is necessary only after finding one of the
statutory conditions for termination of parental rights). However, because this
issue could arise in a future proceeding between these parties and because
both parties discuss it in their briefs, we take the opportunity to explain why,
on this record, the trial court erred in its finding. Cf. George v. Al Hoyt & Sons,
Inc., 162 N.H. 123, 138 (2011).
5
The court determined that termination of the father’s parental rights was
in Sophia-Marie’s best interest based upon the GAL’s report and “the evidence
received at the hearing.” The court observed that Sophia-Marie “has no bond
with or connection to [the father] and is apparently unaware of his existence.”
The court concluded that “[a]ttempting to reintroduce [the father] into [Sophia-
Marie’s] life at this point would be difficult and confusing” and the mother’s
fiancé, “whom she already considers to be her father, is willing and prepared to
adopt her.”
We recognize that the difficulty and confusion that may result from
reintroducing the father to Sophia-Marie is a factor to be considered in
assessing whether termination of the father’s parental rights is in Sophia-
Marie’s best interest. Cf. In re Jessica B., 121 N.H. 291, 296 (1981) (upholding
termination of parental rights where part of basis for termination was that
child had not lived with mother for nearly five years and saw mother only
occasionally). Sophia-Marie has not seen the father since she was nearly two
years old. She is now almost five years old and, in that time, she has
developed a strong relationship with the mother’s fiancé.
However, the father has endeavored to maintain a relationship with
Sophia-Marie, and we cannot ignore the fact that to the extent that Sophia-
Marie does not know her father, it is, in part, due to the mother’s decision not
to disclose the father’s attempts to contact her or even that he is her father. It
cannot be assumed that termination is in the best interest of a child where the
child’s lack of knowledge of the parent whose rights are being terminated is
due, in part, to the other parent’s efforts to thwart attempts made to establish
a relationship with the child. Cf. In the Matter of Miller & Todd, 161 N.H. 630,
641 (2011) (stating that “the obstruction by a custodial parent of visitation
between a child and the noncustodial parent may, if continuous, constitute
behavior so inconsistent with the best interests of the child as to raise a strong
possibility that the child will be harmed” (quotation omitted)); In re Sheena B.,
139 N.H. at 184 (finding no statutory abandonment by one parent where
separation from the child is caused solely by the other parent). Although it
might be difficult and confusing for Sophia-Marie to be reintroduced to her
father, we cannot say, under the facts of this case, that it would be in her best
interest to terminate his parental rights and deny her the opportunity of
reunification. Cf. In re Lisa H., 134 N.H. at 193 (child’s identification of foster
parents as “mom” and “dad” was one factor to consider in conjunction with
other factors).
Moreover, there is no evidence that the strength of the relationship
Sophia-Marie has with the mother’s fiancé would be disrupted if the father’s
parental rights are not terminated. The mother has legal and physical custody
of Sophia-Marie, and she will remain with both the mother and the mother’s
fiancé, absent further court order. The record does not reflect any effort by the
6
father to acquire legal and physical custody of his daughter or to disrupt the
relationship that she has with the mother’s fiancé. Indeed, the father testified
that he believes the relationship Sophia-Marie has with the mother’s fiancé is
good for her. The father merely wants the right to visit with his daughter to
rebuild their relationship. Cf. In re William A., 142 N.H. 598, 601-02 (1998)
(termination not in best interest of child where mother merely wanted to visit
with child and had consented to step-mother’s appointment as legal guardian).
Furthermore, the evidence suggests that the father has enhanced his
ability to have a positive relationship with Sophia-Marie. During his
incarceration he completed a parenting class “designed to promote healthy
parenting skills” and “responsible [f]atherhood.” See id. (evidence that mother
had enhanced her ability to parent where she was participating in parenting
classes supported denying termination petition). The GAL testified that the
father has “made an effort to turn his life around [and] he wants to be involved
in [his] daughter’s life.” The GAL testified that he spoke with the father as well
as the father’s counselor and parole officer, and it appears that the father has
changed his life. We recognize the GAL’s concern that the father’s future
behavior cannot be predicted. However, we cannot say that the inability to
predict the father’s future behavior supports a finding that termination is in
Sophia-Marie’s best interest. Indeed, the GAL also testified that he was
concerned that if termination were ordered, Sophia-Marie would miss out on
having a relationship with her father. Cf. id. at 601.
We note that trial courts have broad discretion in managing visitation
and a child’s contact with noncustodial parents. See In the Matter of Miller &
Todd, 161 N.H. at 640. This discretion affords trial courts various means by
which to protect a child from the difficulty and confusion associated with
reunification, short of terminating parental rights. As we have said before,
termination of a parent’s legal bond to a child is a solemn and irreversible
event of constitutional import. See In re William A., 142 N.H. at 602. Although
termination is sometimes required to protect a child’s best interest, this is not
such a case. Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court erred in finding that
termination was necessary.
Reversed.
HICKS, LYNN and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
7