THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
10th Circuit Court – Salem Family Division
No. 2013-542
IN RE B.C.
Argued: September 11, 2014
Opinion Issued: January 29, 2015
Joseph A. Foster, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
B.C., for herself, filed no brief.
David M. Rothstein, deputy director, of Concord, on the brief and orally,
for the New Hampshire Appellate Defender Program, as amicus curiae.
BASSETT, J. The State appeals an order of the Circuit Court (Sullivan,
J.) granting the motion of the juvenile, B.C., to suppress a statement obtained
in violation of her rights under Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966), and
State v. Benoit, 126 N.H. 6 (1985). We affirm.
I. Factual Background
The trial court found, or the record establishes, the following facts. The
juvenile, who was fourteen years of age at the time, was arrested for shoplifting
merchandise from “Claire’s,” a discount jewelry store in the Rockingham Mall.
She was transported, in handcuffs, to the Salem Police station. At the station,
the handcuffs were removed, and the juvenile was taken to the booking room,
which has a locked entry. The arresting officer telephoned the juvenile’s
mother to pick her up. While in the booking room, the juvenile asked if she
could use the bathroom. An officer allowed her to use the bathroom in one of
the holding cells. Another officer observed her via a closed circuit monitor in
the supervisor’s office. He saw the juvenile “just . . . flush the toilet” and
believed that “[i]t looked like she had flushed something down the toilet.” The
officer, who had observed the juvenile, spoke with the arresting officer, and the
arresting officer asked the juvenile “what she had flushed down the toilet.” The
juvenile told the arresting officer “that it was a necklace that she had taken
and . . . had concealed in her pants.” The officer did not inform the juvenile of
her Miranda rights before questioning her or at any other time. The juvenile
remained at the police station until her mother picked her up.
After she admitted to flushing the necklace down the toilet, the juvenile
was charged with falsifying evidence. After a hearing in August 2011, she was
found delinquent. During the merits hearing, she moved to suppress her
admission on the ground that it was the product of custodial interrogation and
that she was not advised of her Miranda rights before making it. The court
denied her motion, and the juvenile appealed. We remanded the case for
further fact finding.
On remand, the trial court conducted an evidentiary hearing at which
the arresting officer was the only witness. At the hearing, the juvenile argued
that suppression of her response to the officer’s question was required by both
Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution and the Fifth Amendment to the
Federal Constitution. Following the hearing, the court granted the juvenile’s
motion to suppress her admission, and the State filed the instant appeal. The
juvenile has not participated in this appeal. We have allowed the New
Hampshire Appellate Defender Program to appear as amicus curiae.
II. Legal Background
The Fifth Amendment to the Federal Constitution, which applies to the
States by virtue of the Fourteenth Amendment, Malloy v. Hogan, 378 U.S. 1, 6,
(1964), provides: “No person . . . shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a
witness against himself.” Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution similarly
provides: “No subject shall be . . . compelled to accuse or furnish evidence
against himself.”
In Miranda, the Supreme Court “addressed the problem of how the
privilege against compelled self-incrimination guaranteed by the Fifth
Amendment could be protected from the coercive pressures that can be
brought to bear upon a suspect in the context of a custodial interrogation.”
2
Berkemer v. McCarty, 468 U.S. 420, 428 (1984). “[T]he Court saw as
inherently coercive any police custodial interrogation conducted by isolating
the suspect with police officers; therefore, the Court established a per se rule
that all incriminating statements made during such interrogation are barred as
‘compelled.’” United States v. Washington, 431 U.S. 181, 187 n.5 (1977). The
Court stated that “[e]ven without employing brutality [or] the ‘third degree’ . . . ,
the very fact of custodial interrogation exacts a heavy toll on individual liberty
and trades on the weakness of individuals.” Miranda, 384 U.S. at 455.
Consequently, the Court reasoned, “[u]nless adequate protective devices are
employed to dispel the compulsion inherent in custodial surroundings, no
statement obtained from the defendant can truly be the product of his free
choice.” Id. at 458; see Maryland v. Shatzer, 559 U.S. 98, 103 (2010).
“To counteract the coercive pressure, Miranda announced that police
officers must warn a suspect prior to questioning that he has a right to remain
silent, and a right to the presence of an attorney.” Shatzer, 559 U.S. at 103-
04; see Miranda, 384 U.S. at 444, 467-73. The central principle of Miranda is
that “if the police take a suspect into custody and then ask him questions
without informing him of the rights enumerated above, his responses cannot be
introduced into evidence to establish his guilt.” Berkemer, 468 U.S. at 429. In
Benoit, we held that Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution entitled a
juvenile to be informed of her Miranda rights “in language understandable to a
child.” Benoit, 126 N.H. at 19.
Here, the trial court determined that the juvenile did not receive the
procedural safeguards required by Miranda and Benoit before the officer
questioned her regarding the object that she had flushed down the toilet. The
trial court impliedly concluded that she was entitled to those safeguards
because she was subject to custodial interrogation.
III. Analysis
As a general rule, two conditions must be met before Miranda and Benoit
warnings are required: (1) the suspect must be “in custody”; and (2) she must
be subject to “interrogation.” See Miranda, 384 U.S. at 478. The State appears
to dispute that either condition was met in this case.
We first address the State’s claims under the State Constitution and rely
upon federal cases only to aid our analysis. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-
33 (1983). “Because the ultimate determination of custody requires an
application of a legal standard to historical facts, it is not merely a factual
question but a mixed question of law and fact.” State v. Ford, 144 N.H. 57, 62
(1999). Thus, we review the ultimate determination of custody de novo. Id. at
63. “We will not overturn the trial court’s factual findings relevant to the
question of custody unless they are contrary to the manifest weight of the
3
evidence.” State v. Jennings, 155 N.H. 768, 772-73 (2007). The State has not
challenged any of the trial court’s factual findings on appeal.
A. Custody
“Custody entitling a defendant to Miranda protections requires formal
arrest or restraint on freedom of movement to the degree associated with
formal arrest.” Id. at 772 (quotation omitted). “Absent a formal arrest, the trial
court must determine whether a suspect’s freedom of movement was
sufficiently curtailed by considering how a reasonable [person] in the suspect’s
position would have understood his situation.” Ford, 144 N.H. at 63 (quotation
omitted). To determine whether a reasonable person in a suspect’s position
would believe herself to be in custody, the trial court should consider the
totality of the circumstances of the encounter, including: the suspect’s
familiarity with her surroundings, the number of officers present, the degree to
which the suspect was physically restrained, and the interview’s duration and
character. State v. McKenna, 166 N.H. ___, ___ (decided Sept. 9, 2014). Like
the analysis used by other courts, our custody analysis is binary: we determine
whether the suspect either is under formal arrest or has had her freedom of
movement restricted to the degree associated with formal arrest. See J.D.B. v.
North Carolina, 131 S. Ct. 2394, 2402 (2011) (observing that to determine
custody for Miranda purposes, “the ultimate inquiry” is “was there a formal
arrest or restraint on freedom of movement of the degree associated with formal
arrest” (quotation omitted)); McKenna, 166 N.H. at ___ (observing that
“[c]ustody for Miranda purposes can arise because of a formal arrest or the
functional equivalent of arrest”); Jennings, 155 N.H. at 772 (noting that the
court determines whether the suspect’s freedom of movement has been
sufficiently curtailed only “[i]n the absence of formal arrest”).
Using our well-established custody analysis, there can be no question
that the juvenile was in custody for Miranda and Benoit purposes. When she
was interrogated, she was under formal arrest and had been taken to the police
station. This is “the paradigmatic Miranda situation,” in which a person has
been “arrested . . . and whisked to a police station for questioning.” Howes v.
Fields, 132 S. Ct. 1181, 1190 (2012). She was subject to “incommunicado”
interrogation in the very same “unfamiliar,” “police-dominated atmosphere,” as
were the defendants in Miranda. Miranda, 384 U.S. at 456-57. She was
interrogated in the very environment that the Court in Miranda decided
involved “inherently compelling pressures which work to undermine the
individual’s will to resist and to compel him to speak where he would not
otherwise do so freely.” Id. at 467.
The State contends, however, that we should not apply our traditional
test for determining custody, but should apply a test that we have previously
applied only to prison and jail inmates. See Ford, 144 N.H. at 63-64. The
4
State further contends that, under the test we apply to prison and jail inmates,
the defendant was not “in custody.”
In Ford, we held that “[w]hen a defendant is already incarcerated at the
time of interrogation, the traditional custody analysis is inappropriate.” Id. at
63. This is so because our traditional analysis focuses upon the degree to
which a suspect’s “freedom of movement” is curtailed. Id. Because, “by its
very nature, a prison setting restrains the freedom of movement of its inmates,”
we observed that applying our “traditional analysis” to “prisoner interrogation
would lead inexorably to a per se rule that all interrogations of prison inmates
are custodial.” Id. We eschewed adopting such a per se rule, and, instead,
held that “when an individual is incarcerated for an offense unrelated to the
subject of his interrogation, custody for Miranda purposes occurs when there is
some act or circumstance that places additional limitations on the prisoner.”
Id.
In Ford, we concluded that the defendant was not in custody when he
was interviewed by police officers because: (1) he was interviewed “in a
relatively [non-]coercive area of the prison, the correctional officers’ lunch
room, not a prison cell or interrogation room”; (2) he “was not pressured to
disclose information”; (3) he “was free to terminate the interview,” and, at one
point, did so, only to “call[ ] the officers back and agree[ ] to speak with them”;
(4) he “largely controlled the topics discussed”; and (5) until he implicated
himself, the officers did not consider him a suspect in the robbery to which he
confessed. Id. at 64. We concluded that, because the circumstances
surrounding the officers’ questioning did not “impose[ ] any additional restraint
on the defendant’s freedom of movement,” the defendant was not in custody.
Id. We have applied Ford to a defendant confined pretrial at a county jail, see
State v. Pehowic, 147 N.H. 52, 53, 55 (2001), and to a defendant who was at a
county jail serving a sentence on a parole violation, see State v. Dorval, 144
N.H. 455, 455, 457 (1999).
Ford’s “additional limitations” test is consistent with the test used by
numerous other jurisdictions. See, e.g., Cervantes v. Walker, 589 F.2d 424,
428 (9th Cir. 1978); United States v. Conley, 779 F.2d 970, 973 (4th Cir. 1985);
see also 2 W. LaFave et al., Criminal Procedure § 6.6(b), at 724-25 (3d ed.
2007) (citing cases and explaining that “a unique body of caselaw has
developed about the need for Miranda warnings in a prison setting” (quotation
omitted)). Ford is also consistent with Fields, 132 S. Ct. at 1192. In Fields, the
Supreme Court declined to adopt a per se rule that a prison inmate is in
custody for Miranda purposes solely because of his incarceration, and, instead,
ruled that “[w]hen a prisoner is questioned, the determination of custody
should focus on all of the features of the interrogation,” including “the language
that is used in summoning the prisoner to the interview and the manner in
which the interrogation is conducted.” Fields, 132 S. Ct. at 1192.
5
The State asserts that the “additional limitations” test applies to the
juvenile because “she was not questioned about the crime for which she was
arrested.” We disagree with the State that the question to the juvenile was not
about the shoplifting offense for which she was arrested. Moreover, even if the
question concerned a different offense, we conclude that our traditional
custody analysis would still apply. See Mathis v. United States, 391 U.S. 1
(1968), clarified by Fields, 132 S. Ct. at 1188; see also 2 LaFave supra § 6.6(b),
at 724 (“Miranda applies to interrogation of one in custody for another purpose
or with respect to another offense”); 1 C. Wright & A. Leipold, Federal Practice
and Procedure: Criminal § 75, at 206 (4th ed. 2008) (“If a person is in custody,
the Miranda rules apply even though the interrogation of him relates to an
investigation unrelated to the reason he is in custody.”).
The State argues that the “additional limitations” test should control
regardless of whether “a juvenile is being held under arrest in a police station”
or is subject “to a more lengthy detention, such as in a youth facility.”
However, like the United States Supreme Court, we discern an important
distinction between an arrestee, who is temporarily detained in a police station
booking room, on one hand, and an inmate in a prison or jail, on the other
hand. As the Court observed in Fields, a person who is arrested “is cut off
from his normal life and companions and abruptly transported from the street
into a police-dominated atmosphere.” Fields, 132 S. Ct. at 1190 (quotations
and citations omitted). By contrast, “questioning a person who is already
serving a prison term” generally does not “involve the shock that very often
accompanies arrest.” Id.
Moreover, an arrestee is subject to a “sharp and ominous change” in
environment when arrested and then “whisked to a police station for
questioning,” and the shock of such a change “may give rise to coercive
pressures.” Id. “By contrast, when a person who is already serving a term of
imprisonment is questioned, there is usually no such change” in environment.
Id. at 1190-91. “Interrogated suspects who have previously been convicted of
crime live in prison,” and the “ordinary restrictions of prison life . . . are
expected and familiar and thus do not involve the same inherently compulsive
pressures that are often present when a suspect is yanked from familiar
surroundings . . . and subjected to interrogation in a police station.” Id. at
1191 (quotation omitted).
Additionally, “[w]hen a person is arrested and taken to a [police] station
. . . for interrogation, [he] . . . may be pressured to speak by the hope that, after
doing so, he will be allowed to leave and go home.” Id. “On the other hand,
when a prisoner is questioned, he knows that when the questioning ceases, he
will remain under confinement.” Id. Further, a prisoner, serving a sentence
after conviction, “knows that the law enforcement officers who question him
lack the authority to affect the duration of his sentence.” Id.
6
“In short,” arrest, unlike the “standard conditions of confinement” for a
prison or jail inmate, necessarily implicates the very interests that the Supreme
Court “sought to protect when it afforded special safeguards to persons
subjected to custodial interrogation.” Id.
The State has cited, and we have found, only one case that applies the
“additional limitations” test to an arrestee temporarily detained while awaiting
further processing. See Herrera v. State, 241 S.W.3d 520 (Tex. Crim. App.
2007). The suspect in Herrera was involved in a fight outside of a bar. Id. at
522. After he was questioned, he was arrested on an outstanding warrant and
transported to the county jail. Id. The next morning, he was interviewed at the
jail about the fight and told a police investigator that he had a knife during the
fight, although he denied using it. Id. at 522-23. He sought to suppress his
statement on the ground that, when he was questioned, he was in custody
“because he was an inmate in the county jail.” Id. at 527. The court “refuse[d]
to equate incarceration with ‘custody’ for purposes of Miranda when an inmate
is questioned . . . about an offense unrelated to the inmate’s incarceration.” Id.
at 532. Instead, the court applied a test similar to our “additional limitations”
test and determined that, under that test, the suspect was not in custody for
Miranda purposes. Id. at 532-33.
Herrera is distinguishable from this case. Unlike the arrestee in Herrera,
who was interrogated after having been detained overnight in a county jail, the
juvenile was interrogated shortly after having been arrested, while she was still
in the booking room of the police station and, arguably, while she was still
under the shock that accompanied her original arrest. See Fields, 132 S. Ct. at
1190. Additionally, while the arrestee in Herrera was an adult, the juvenile
was fourteen years old at the time of her arrest, and, therefore, was more likely
to feel coercive pressure as a result of her arrest. See J.D.B., 131 S. Ct. at
2402-08. Moreover, even if this case were not factually distinguishable,
Herrera, standing alone, does not persuade us that we should apply the
“additional limitations” test to the facts of this case.
Here, because we have concluded that the juvenile was in custody for
Miranda purposes, she was entitled to Miranda and Benoit warnings before
being subject to “interrogation.” We turn next to analyzing whether she was, in
fact, interrogated.
B. Interrogation
“Interrogation for Miranda purposes occurs when a person in custody is
subjected to either express questioning or its functional equivalent.” State v.
Gribble, 165 N.H. 1, 11 (2013) (quotation omitted). The functional equivalent
of interrogation refers to “any words or actions on the part of the police (other
than those normally attendant to arrest and custody) that the police should
know are reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from the
7
suspect.” Rhode Island v. Innis, 446 U.S. 291, 301 (1980). “The functional
equivalent aspect of the term focuses primarily upon the perceptions of the
suspect, rather than the intent of the police.” Gribble, 165 N.H. at 11
(quotations omitted). “This focus reflects the fact that the Miranda safeguards
were designed to vest a suspect in custody with an added measure of
protection against coercive police practices, without regard to objective proof of
the underlying intent of the police.” Id. at 11-12 (quotation omitted).
In this case, the juvenile was directly asked about what she flushed
down the toilet. Given that she had just been arrested for shoplifting jewelry,
we have “a difficult time reaching the conclusion that the question was meant
to do anything other than garner a potentially incriminating response” from the
juvenile. United States v. Stately, Criminal No. 13-280(1) (DWF/LIB), 2014 WL
668167, at *7-8 (D. Minn. Feb. 20, 2014) (determining that asking a suspect
whether there were any guns in the vehicle constituted interrogation when he
had been stopped because he was suspected of having fired a gun, was
“unequivocally in custody,” and the question was reasonably likely to elicit an
incriminating response). Accordingly, we hold that she was subject to
interrogation within the meaning of Miranda.
The State argues that, even though the juvenile was in custody, she was
not “interrogated” for Miranda purposes but was, instead, subject to “[g]eneral
on-the-scene questioning.” Miranda, 384 U.S. at 477. The State’s argument is
based upon the following passage from Miranda:
Our decision is not intended to hamper the traditional
function of police officers in investigating crime. When an
individual is in custody on probable cause, the police may, of
course, seek out evidence in the field to be used at trial against
him. Such investigation may include inquiry of persons not under
restraint. General on-the-scene questioning as to facts
surrounding a crime or other general questioning of citizens in the
fact-finding process is not affected by our holding. It is an act of
responsible citizenship for individuals to give whatever
information they may have to aid in law enforcement. In such
situations the compelling atmosphere inherent in the process of
in-custody interrogation is not necessarily present.
Id. at 477-78 (citation omitted). However, the State has not cited, nor have we
found, any case in which a court has allowed “on-the-scene questioning” of a
suspect who is already in custody for Miranda purposes. Miranda warnings
are not required for “on-the-scene” questioning precisely “because the
individuals being questioned are not in custody at all and there is no coercive
atmosphere.” United States v. Thomas, Crim. No. 12-128 (MJD/JJK), 2012 WL
6812536, at *8 (D. Minn. Dec. 19, 2012) (emphasis added). The questioning
here occurred shortly after the juvenile was arrested, and, therefore, in custody
8
for Miranda purposes. Moreover, the question itself revealed to the juvenile
that she was being observed while using the toilet. The questioning here did
not take place in a non-coercive atmosphere.
“[T]he circumstances of this case simply do not involve general on-the-
scene questioning of the type the Supreme Court discussed in Miranda.” Id.
“This case involves a coercive pressure on a restrained individual’s will that is
fundamentally different than the non-coercive atmosphere when an officer
meets with citizens on the street or in their homes to ask questions as part of
the fact-gathering part of investigation.” Id. The pointed question in this case,
asking the juvenile what she flushed down the toilet, “was not benign.” Stately,
supra at *8. Asking the juvenile that question, shortly after she was formally
arrested for shoplifting, transported in handcuffs to the police station, and
detained in a locked booking room, “is fundamentally different from a police
officer . . . ask[ing] unrestrained citizens what they know about a suspected
crime.” Thomas, supra at *8.
In support of its “on-the-scene questioning” argument, the State relies
entirely upon cases involving questioning an inmate in a prison, jail, or juvenile
detention facility. See Cervantes, 589 F.2d at 426-27 (county jail); In re D.F.,
951 N.E.2d 99, 100-01 (Ohio Ct. App. 2011) (juvenile detention facility); In re
JOE L., No. B180443, 2006 WL 696693, at *1 (Cal. Ct. App. Mar. 21, 2006)
(juvenile correctional facility); In re Jacob R., No. 1 CA-JV 09-0143, 2010 WL
1729881, at *1 (Ariz. Ct. App. Apr. 29, 2010) (juvenile correctional facility). In
all of these cases, the suspects were deemed not to be in custody for Miranda
purposes when they were subjected to “on-the-scene questioning.” See
Cervantes, 589 F.2d at 429; In re D.F., 951 N.E.2d at 103; In re JOE L., supra
at *2-3; In re Jacob R., supra at *2-3. None of these cases requires us to
conclude that in this case, there was only on-the-scene questioning or that the
juvenile was not subject to custodial interrogation.
Moreover, the State does not contend that there was a public safety
emergency that necessitated asking the juvenile the question without first
advising her of her Miranda and Benoit rights. See New York v. Quarles, 467
U.S. 649, 657-58 (1984) (recognizing a “narrow” public safety exception to
Miranda based upon court’s conclusion “that the need for answers to questions
in a situation posing a threat to the public safety outweighs the need for the
prophylactic rule protecting the Fifth Amendment’s privilege against self-
incrimination”); State v. Lopez, 139 N.H. 309, 311 (1994) (leaving open the
question of whether we recognize a “public safety” exception to Miranda under
the State Constitution). Were we to hold that the officer’s question about what
 Although California Rule of Court 8.1115 provides that “an opinion of a California Court of
Appeal or superior court appellate division that is not certified for publication . . . must not be
cited or relied on by a court or a party in any other action,” we cite In re JOE L., No. B180443,
2006 WL 696693 (Cal. Ct. App. Mar. 21, 2006) because the State has relied upon it.
9
the juvenile flushed down the toilet constituted merely general “on-the-scene
questioning” not subject to Miranda, we would create an exception to Miranda
that would swallow the rule. We decline to do so. Although the State suggests
that this is “an absurd result,” we disagree – it is the result that Miranda
requires.
IV. Conclusion
In sum, we conclude that the juvenile in this case was in custody for
Miranda and Benoit purposes when she was interrogated in a locked booking
room in the police station, shortly after she was arrested. Because she was
entitled to receive, but did not receive, Miranda and Benoit warnings before
being interrogated, her admission that she flushed a necklace down the toilet
was the product of custodial interrogation and, as such, was properly
suppressed. In light of the result we reach under the State Constitution, we
need not reach the State’s arguments under the Federal Constitution. See
Ball, 124 N.H. at 237.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred; LYNN, J.,
dissented.
LYNN, J., dissenting. Because I do not agree that the single question
asked of the juvenile by the arresting officer concerning new suspicious
conduct she committed after being arrested and brought to the police station
constitutes custodial interrogation within the meaning of Miranda v. Arizona,
384 U.S. 436 (1966), I would reverse the trial court’s ruling granting her
motion to suppress her statement. Therefore, I respectfully dissent.
I
I do not dispute the facts as recited by the majority, but add some details
drawn from the testimony at the adjudicatory hearing and at the suppression
hearing. Such details help in understanding the precise context in which the
question was asked and the answer given, which is important to a resolution of
the propriety of the police action. The arresting officer, Eric Pappalardo, was
called to the Rockingham Mall at approximately 4:30 p.m. on May 28, 2011, to
respond to an incident of shoplifting. Upon arrival, Pappalardo spoke with a
mall security officer as well as a representative of Claire’s Store, who showed
him merchandise from the store that had been recovered from the juvenile
when she was detained. Pappalardo then placed the juvenile under arrest,
handcuffed her, and transported her to the Salem Police Department. There is
no evidence indicating that at the time of the arrest the juvenile was searched,
frisked, interrogated, or advised of her Miranda rights. During the booking
process at the police station and after her handcuffs had been removed, the
10
juvenile asked if she could use the bathroom. Pappalardo allowed her to do so,
and directed her to a toilet located in a row of cells adjacent to the booking
room. Although the perimeter of the combined cellblock and booking room
area was secured, so that the juvenile could not leave this area, the door
between the booking room and the cellblock was open, as was the door to the
cell the juvenile entered to use the toilet. Pappalardo did not accompany the
juvenile into the cell; rather, he returned to the booking room, from which he
could not see the cell that the juvenile entered.
The cellblock area of the police department is monitored by video
cameras. While the juvenile was in the cell, Lieutenant Peddle, who was in his
office, observed on the video monitor that the juvenile appeared to flush the
toilet without having used it. Peddle immediately went to the booking room
and informed Pappalardo about what he had observed, indicating that it looked
like the juvenile had flushed something down the toilet. When the juvenile
returned, Pappalardo asked her, without first advising her of her Miranda
rights, what she had flushed down the toilet. The juvenile responded that she
had flushed a necklace that she had taken and had concealed in her pants.
II
Before turning to the specific issue before us, I believe it helpful to review
generally the circumstances in which the prophylactic protections of Miranda
have been held not to come into play. The majority correctly observes that two
basic conditions must be met before Miranda warnings are required: (1)
custody and (2) interrogation. See Miranda, 348 U.S. at 478. But as both
United States Supreme Court and our own case law make clear, for Miranda
purposes “custody” and “interrogation” have become terms of art with
specialized meanings more limited than common usage or the dictionary
definitions of the terms would indicate. See Howes v. Fields, 132 S. Ct. 1181,
1189 (2012) (“As used in our Miranda case law, ‘custody’ is a term of art that
specifies circumstances that are thought generally to present a serious danger
of coercion.”). For example, a person who has been “seized” by the police
during a Terry1 stop might, in common understanding, be thought to be in
custody because the person has been restrained by the police and is not free to
leave. But the law is very clear that such a person is not in custody for
Miranda purposes. See State v. Turmel, 150 N.H. 377, 383 (2003). Because
police must have reasonable suspicion to believe that the person has engaged,
is engaging, or is about to engage in criminal activity as a prerequisite to
effectuating a Terry stop, see id. at 380, there is reason to believe that the
person may provide self-incriminating responses when the officer makes
inquiry regarding such activity. Notwithstanding that the person’s response
may confirm a police officer’s suspicions, the officer is entitled to ask a
“moderate number of questions” during the stop without advising the suspect
1 Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968).
11
of his or her Miranda rights. Id. at 383. The Terry doctrine is completely
consistent with that portion of the Supreme Court’s earlier decision in
Miranda, in which it stated that “[g]eneral on-the-scene questioning as to facts
surrounding a crime or other general questioning of citizens in the fact-finding
process is not affected by our holding.” Miranda, 384 U.S. at 477.
Courts also have recognized several other circumstances in which
Miranda does not apply even though a suspect is unquestionably in the
custody of police or correctional authorities and is subjected to interrogation,
i.e., is asked questions, by such authorities. In New York v. Quarles, 467 U.S.
649 (1984), the Supreme Court recognized a public safety exception to
Miranda, holding that “the doctrinal underpinnings of Miranda [do not] require
that it be applied in all its rigor to a situation in which police officers ask
questions reasonably prompted by a concern for the public safety.” Quarles,
467 U.S. at 656.
In Pennsylvania v. Muniz, 496 U.S. 582 (1990), a four-justice plurality of
the Court recognized a “routine booking question exception” that “exempts
from Miranda’s coverage questions to secure the ‘biographical data necessary
to complete booking or pretrial services.’” Muniz, 496 U.S. at 601. Although
rejecting Pennsylvania’s assertion that the booking questions should not be
regarded as custodial interrogation because they were “not intended to elicit
information for investigatory purposes,” id., the plurality concluded that “the
questions fall outside the protections of Miranda” because they were
“reasonably related to the police’s administrative concerns.” Muniz, 496 U.S.
at 601-02. Muniz is consistent with the Court’s earlier decision in Rhode
Island v. Innis, 446 U.S. 291 (1980), in which it held that “‘interrogation’ under
Miranda refers not only to express questioning, but also to any words or
actions on the part of the police (other than those normally attendant to arrest
and custody) that the police should know are reasonably likely to elicit an
incriminating response from the suspect.” Innis, 446 U.S. at 301 (emphasis
added; footnotes omitted);2 see also South Dakota v. Neville, 459 U.S. 553, 564
2 In Alford v. State, 358 S.W.3d 647 (Tex. Crim. App. 2012), the court observed the arguable
tension between Muniz’s disallowance of booking questions that are “designed [by the police] to
elicit incriminatory admissions,” Muniz, 496 U.S. at 602 n.14 (emphasis added), and the holding
in Innis that interrogation for Miranda purposes includes “any words or actions on the part of the
police (other than those normally attendant to arrest and custody) that the police should know are
reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from the suspect.” Innis, 446 U.S. at 301
(emphasis added; footnotes omitted). After reviewing the divergent manner in which courts have
interpreted the “booking questions” exception, see Alford, 358 S.W.3d at 656-59, the court held
that the exception was to be applied based on an objective assessment of “whether, under the
totality of the circumstances, a question is reasonably related to a legitimate administrative
concern,” id. at 661, “regardless of whether police should know that such questions are
reasonably likely to elicit incriminating information.” Id. at 660. The court did not reach the
question of “whether there is any limitation to the booking exception when an officer’s actual
intent was to elicit incriminating admissions through questions characterized by the officer as
booking questions.” Id. at 660 n.27.
12
n.15 (1983) (“In the context of an arrest for driving while intoxicated, a police
inquiry of whether the suspect will take a blood-alcohol test is not an
interrogation within the meaning of Miranda.”); United States v. Woods, 711
F.3d 737, 741 (6th Cir. 2013) (holding that police officer’s question to arrested
subject about contents of his pockets did not constitute custodial interrogation
requiring Miranda warnings; “[t]o say that [the police officer] had the right to
physically go through Woods’s pockets but could not simply ask him ‘What is
in your pocket?’ would be illogical”).
In Illinois v. Perkins, 496 U.S. 292 (1990), the Court held that Miranda
did not apply to a situation in which an undercover government agent was
placed in the cellblock of a suspect who had been incarcerated for two days3
while awaiting trial, and engaged him in conversation designed to elicit the
suspect’s involvement in an unrelated murder. Perkins, 496 U.S. at 300. The
Court
reject[ed] the argument that Miranda warnings are required
whenever a suspect is in custody in a technical sense and
converses with someone who happens to be a government agent.
Questioning by captors, who appear to control the suspect’s fate,
may create mutually reinforcing pressures that the Court has
assumed will weaken the suspect's will, but where a suspect does
not know that he is conversing with a government agent, these
pressures do not exist.
Id. at 297. The Court distinguished Perkins from Mathis v. United States, 391
U.S. 1 (1968), in which it had held that an incarcerated person must be given
Miranda warnings even if the questioning relates to an offense unrelated to the
basis for incarceration, on the ground that in Mathis the suspect knew his
interrogator was a government agent. Perkins, 496 U.S. at 299. Significantly,
however, the Court also added: “The bare fact of custody may not in every
instance require a warning even when the suspect is aware that he is speaking
to an official, but we do not have occasion to explore that issue here.” Id.
(emphasis added).
Yet another circumstance in which Miranda has been held not
automatically applicable despite the fact that both custody and interrogation in
a generic sense clearly exist, involves the questioning of persons who are
incarcerated in a jail or prison about conduct other than that on which the
incarceration is based. Although Mathis established the rule that a person
who is otherwise in custody must be given Miranda warnings even if he is
questioned about a subject unrelated to the reason for his incarceration and
even if there is no criminal investigation pending when the questioning occurs,
3 See Perkins, 496 U.S. at 304 (Marshall, J., dissenting) (reciting that Perkins had been in jail for
two days prior to his interaction with the undercover agent).
13
it did not address the core question of whether incarceration itself is sufficient
to constitute custody. See Fields, 132 S. Ct. at 1188. Answering the question
left open in Mathis and Perkins, the Court made it clear in its later decisions in
Maryland v. Shatzer, 559 U.S. 98 (2010), and Fields, that “service of a term of
imprisonment, without more, is not enough to constitute Miranda custody.”
Fields, 132 S. Ct. at 1191; see also State v. Dorval, 144 N.H. 455, 455-56, 457
(1999) (holding that defendant was not in custody for Miranda purposes when
questioned by police about unrelated offense while serving a sixty-day sentence
for parole violation). Although Shatzer and Fields involved individuals who
were serving sentences, both this and other courts have applied the rule that
incarceration does not automatically equal custody for Miranda purposes even
when the person questioned was not serving a sentence, but, rather, was being
held in jail or prison awaiting trial. See United States v. Ellison, 632 F.3d 727,
730 (1st Cir. 2010); State v. Ford, 144 N.H. 57, 59, 64 (1999); State v. Pehowic,
147 N.H. 52, 53, 55 (2001).
Finally, courts have recognized a “new crime” exception to Miranda.
Under this exception, a statement made by a person who is under arrest and is
subject to questioning not preceded by Miranda warnings is admissible as
evidence if the statement itself constitutes a new crime. See State v. Tucker,
145 N.H. 723, 726-27 (2001); accord United States v. Paskett, 950 F.2d 705,
707-08 (11th Cir. 1992); United States v. Kirk, 528 F.2d 1057, 1062 (5th Cir.
1976) (“[N]o fifth amendment problem is presented when a statement is
admitted into evidence which is not confessional in nature, but in and of itself
constitutes the crime charged.”).
Application of the Miranda rule is not a cost free exercise. As a
prophylactic rule, it by definition excludes from evidence some statements that
are made freely and voluntarily. And of course, “Voluntary confessions are not
merely a proper element in law enforcement, they are an unmitigated good,
essential to society’s compelling interest in finding, convicting, and punishing
those who violate the law.” Shatzer, 559 U.S. at 108 (quotations and citations
omitted). Collectively, the cases discussed above demonstrate a variety of
circumstances in which, for one reason or another, courts have found that the
costs of applying Miranda are too high. As explained below, this case fits
comfortably within the Miranda exception recognized in Cervantes v. Walker,
589 F.2d 424 (9th Cir. 1978), and its progeny for on-the-scene questioning of
incarcerated individuals regarding suspected ongoing or recently-committed
suspicious activity within the place of confinement.
III
The majority’s conclusion that the defendant was in custody for Miranda
purposes when Pappalardo asked her what she had flushed down the toilet is
based primarily on its determination that this case is distinguishable from
Fields. In particular, the majority focuses on the fact that, unlike the
14
defendant in Fields, who was already serving a prison sentence at the time he
was questioned and thus did not experience the shock and sudden isolation
that normally accompanies an arrest, the juvenile here was still subject to
these coercive pressures because the questioning took place shortly after she
was arrested and “whisked away” to the police station. The majority also relies
on the fact that this case involves a minor who may be more likely than an
adult to feel coercive pressure as a result of police questioning. See J.D.B. v.
North Carolina, 131 S. Ct. 2394, 2403 (2011). I acknowledge that this case is
distinguishable from Fields both in terms of the temporal proximity between
the juvenile’s removal from the community (by arrest) and the questioning at
issue, and because of her status as a minor, and that both of these factors
weigh in favor of a finding that she was in custody for the purposes of Miranda.
But, in my view, these factors are outweighed by a number of countervailing
considerations that persuade me that what occurred here did not amount to
custodial interrogation within the meaning of Miranda.4
As the Court makes clear in Fields, the seminal question for purposes of
determining Miranda custody is not simply the degree to which a person’s
freedom of movement has been restricted, but “whether the relevant
environment presents the same inherently coercive pressures as the type of
station house questioning at issue in Miranda.” Fields, 132 S. Ct. at 1190
(emphasis added). To determine whether such Miranda-like coercive pressures
exist, a court must examine all the relevant circumstances, not just the age of
the arrestee and the time interval between the arrest and the questioning.
Among the other factors that are relevant to the determination of Miranda
custody are the location of the questioning, its duration, the language used in
summoning the person, statements made during the interview, the presence or
absence of physical restraints, and the release of the interviewee at the end of
the questioning. See id. at 1189, 1192.
4 The Fields Court also found that, unlike a person recently arrested, a sentenced prisoner: (1)
would not feel “pressured to speak by the hope that, after doing so, he will be allowed to leave and
go home” because “he knows that when the questioning ceases, he will remain under
confinement”; and (2) “knows that the law enforcement officers who question him probably lack
the authority to affect the duration of his sentence.” Fields, 132 S. Ct. at 1191. Although these
may be valid distinctions between a prisoner serving a sentence and a person recently arrested, it
is not at all clear that such distinctions exist between a person recently arrested and a person
being held in jail awaiting trial. On the contrary, notwithstanding that a pretrial detainee may be
held on charges different from those about which he is questioned by the police, he may well
believe that cooperating with the police by answering their questions will assist him in securing
pretrial release, reduced bail, and/or a more favorable disposition on the charges on which he is
already being held. In short, the prospect that a detainee may be desirous of achieving a global
settlement of all his difficulties with the law is hardly an unheard of phenomenon. See Ellison,
632 F.3d at 730. In fact, as the Court recognized in Minnick v. Mississippi, 498 U.S. 146 (1990),
it is entirely possible that coercive pressures “may increase as custody is prolonged.” Minnick,
498 U.S. at 153. Nonetheless, the prospect that a pretrial detainee may experience such
potentially coercive pressures has not led us to hold that such persons are per se in custody for
Miranda purposes. See Ford, 144 N.H. at 59, 64; Pehowic, 147 N.H at 53, 55.
15
As noted above, in Miranda, the Supreme Court explicitly excepted from
the prophylactic warnings requirement “[g]eneral on-the-scene questioning as
to facts surrounding a crime.” Miranda, 384 U.S. at 477. Relying on this
exception, a substantial body of case law has developed which holds that
warnings need not precede general questioning of this type even when the
crime scene is a jail, prison, or detention facility and the person questioned is
being held there for an earlier offense. The seminal case on point is Cervantes
v. Walker, 589 F.2d 424 (9th Cir. 1978). In that case, the defendant was an
inmate at a county jail. While he was being moved to a new cell, a prison
officer searched his belongings and found a matchbox containing what looked
like marijuana. Cervantes, 589 F.2d at 426-27. Without administering
Miranda warnings, the officer asked, “What’s this?” The defendant replied,
“That’s grass, man.” Id. at 427. Relying on Mathis, the defendant argued that
because he was incarcerated at the time of questioning, his Miranda rights had
been violated. The court disagreed, writing:
To interpret Mathis as Cervantes urges would, in effect, create
a per se rule that any investigatory questioning inside a prison
requires Miranda warnings. Such a rule could totally disrupt
prison administration. Miranda certainly does not dictate such a
consequence. . . .
Adoption of Cervantes’ contention would not only be
inconsistent with Miranda but would torture it to the illogical
position of providing greater protection to a prisoner than to his
nonimprisoned counterpart. We cannot believe the Supreme Court
intended such a result.
Id.
The court went on to hold that for a prisoner to be considered in custody
for Miranda purposes, there must be “a change in the surroundings of the
prisoner which results in an added imposition on his freedom of movement”;
that is, “some act which places further limitations on the prisoner.” Id. at 428.
Applying this standard, the court relied on the following circumstances in
concluding that the defendant had not been subjected to custodial
interrogation within the meaning of Miranda:
The marijuana was uncovered in the course of a routine search.
[The officer’s] question sought to ascertain the nature of the
substance. The questioning took place in the prison library and
appears to have been a spontaneous reaction to the discovery.
Under these circumstances, we also conclude that neither the
prison setting nor the presence of [the two officers] exerted a
pressure to detain sufficient to have caused a reasonable person to
believe his freedom of movement had been further diminished.
16
Rather, this was an instance of on-the-scene questioning enabling
[the officer] to determine whether a crime was in progress.
Id. at 429.
Cervantes has been followed by other state and federal courts, see Garcia
v. Singletary, 13 F.3d 1487, 1491-92 (11th Cir. 1994); United States v. Conley,
779 F.2d 970, 972-74 (4th Cir. 1985); United States v. Scalf, 725 F.2d 1272,
1276 (10th Cir. 1984); Herrera v. State, 241 S.W.3d 520, 527-33 (Tex. Crim.
App. 2007), and its reasoning essentially formed the basis for the “additional
limitations” test we employed in Ford. See Ford, 144 N.H. at 63-64.
Courts also have routinely applied the Cervantes rationale to cases
involving juveniles who are questioned about ongoing or recently-occurring
offenses committed while they are incarcerated on other charges. For example,
in In re D.F., 951 N.E.2d 99 (Ohio Ct. App. 2011), residents in a juvenile
detention facility were lined up when a pen (a potential weapon) was discovered
missing. In re D.F., 951 N.E.2d at 100-01. The appellant volunteered that
another resident had taken the pen and flushed it down the toilet. Id. at 101.
Questioning of the other resident revealed that he had possession of a pill that
had been dispensed by the staff to the appellant. Id. When the appellant was
then asked, without benefit of Miranda warnings, how the other resident came
to possess the pill, he admitted that he had “cheeked it” rather than consume
it. Id. The court rejected the appellant’s claim that the questioning violated
Miranda:
The encounter lasted only one to two minutes in appellant’s
own cell. He was not handcuffed, searched, or removed from the
general facility population. This was an on-the-scene investigation
of a missing potentially dangerous object and then a
contemporaneous investigation of a drug offense by corrections
officers in a prison setting. Under the totality of the
circumstances, appellant’s freedom of movement was not imposed
upon over and above the normal situation in the detention facility
environment. Therefore, Miranda warnings were unnecessary.
Id. at 103; see also In re Jacob R., No. 1 CA-JV 09-0143, 2010 WL 1729881, at
*3 (Ariz. Ct. App. Apr. 29, 2010); In re JOE L., No. B180443, 2006 WL 696693,
at *2-*3 (Cal. Ct. App. Mar. 21, 2006).
The majority asserts that “the State has not cited, nor have we found,
any case in which a court has allowed ‘on-the-scene questioning’ of a suspect
who is already in custody for Miranda purposes.” Supra at 8. This assertion is
unpersuasive because it assumes the very point at issue. The question in
Cervantes and all the cases that follow it was whether the person was in fact in
custody for Miranda purposes. In each of those cases, the defendant
17
contended that he was in custody because he was incarcerated, and therefore,
not free to leave. In each case, the court rejected the argument because the
circumstances of the questioning did not present sufficient additional indicia of
coercive pressures beyond the baseline inherent in incarceration itself. That is
the same point at issue here – whether, despite being incarcerated at the police
station, the defendant was in custody for Miranda purposes when questioned
by Officer Pappalardo. Merely because the majority chooses not to apply the
reasoning of these cases to the circumstances presented here does not mean
that the cases can simply be ignored.
This case is distinguishable from Fields in two crucial respects that the
majority fails to recognize. First, unlike this case, Fields did not involve
questioning about recently-committed suspicious conduct occurring at the
place of incarceration after the suspect was jailed for other reasons. On the
contrary, in Fields, the defendant was questioned about alleged sexual assaults
that occurred before he began serving his sentence. Fields, 132 S. Ct. at 1185.
Second, unlike the single question asked of the juvenile here, Fields was
questioned by the sheriff’s deputies for five to seven hours. Id. at 1186. In
short, the facts and circumstances of Fields are such that no one could
seriously contend that the questioning there at issue was justified under
Miranda’s on-the-scene questioning rubric. By contrast, in this case,
Pappalardo’s “what did you just flush” inquiry that immediately followed the
juvenile’s return from the toilet constitutes a prototypical example of the type of
crime-scene questioning that Miranda and its progeny hold need not be
preceded by warnings.
The above distinctions between this case and Fields are significant
because, as Miranda, Terry,5 the Cervantes-Ford line of cases, and cases such
as Wolff v. McDonnell, 418 U.S. 539 (1974), recognize, law enforcement and
correctional authorities have an especially strong interest both in being able to
respond quickly to emergent criminal activity and in maintaining the integrity
of facilities that house those held for or convicted of violating the criminal law.
The majority’s refusal to employ the Cervantes-Ford analysis to this case
produces the strange result that, by timing the commission of her new crime
sufficiently close to her arrest that she may claim to be still subject to the
coercive pressures of that event, the juvenile is able to preclude the police from
conducting the normal on-the-scene questioning they would typically be able to
employ in investigating a new crime. As the State aptly observes, if upon his
arrival at the mall but prior to placing the juvenile under arrest, Officer
Pappalardo had observed her attempting to discard the stolen jewelry, Terry
unquestionably would have permitted him to ask her what she was doing
5 See Terry, 392 U.S. at 20 (“But we deal here with an entire rubric of police conduct —
necessarily swift action predicated upon the on-the-spot observations of the officer on the beat —
which historically has not been, and as a practical matter could not be, subjected to the warrant
procedure.”).
18
without advising her of her Miranda rights. By the same token, under the
majority’s reasoning, if the juvenile’s mother had not been available to pick her
up and she instead had been transferred to a detention facility or detained at
the police station for a sufficient period of time to have “settled in” to her new
environment before she attempted to discard the jewelry, she also presumably
could have been asked about what she was doing without Miranda warnings.
See Ford, 144 N.H. at 63. Like Goldilocks’s third bowl of porridge, however, the
majority finds the juvenile’s timing to be “just right” to preclude application of
the Miranda exception for on-the-scene questioning. I see no justification for
this odd outcome, which expands the scope of Miranda beyond its doctrinal
underpinnings, and permits the juvenile, through the timing of her own bad
behavior, to effectively create an “on-the-scene-questioning-free-zone” that
precludes the police from employing what would otherwise be standard police
crime-scene procedures.
Far from being cowed by the “shock and awe” of arrest, as the majority
hypothesizes, the juvenile’s actions objectively demonstrate that she was so
unfazed by her arrest that, virtually without losing a beat, she promptly set
about committing a new crime after arriving at the police station. Under the
Cervantes-Ford rationale, which I believe should control our analysis, Officer
Pappalardo was permitted to question the juvenile about the suspicious activity
Lieutenant Peddle had just observed on the surveillance camera without
administering Miranda warnings, provided that the circumstances of the
questioning did not impose significant additional limitations beyond those
inherent in her status as a person held under incarceration. The facts here
easily satisfy this standard. The juvenile proceeded to and from the cellblock
toilet on her own, unaccompanied by officers. She was not handcuffed at the
time. Although the circumference of the booking room and cellblock area was
secure, the door between the two was open and the individual cells were not
locked, meaning that the open area to which the juvenile had access appears to
have been far larger than, say, a typical interview room. When the juvenile
emerged from the cellblock, Pappalardo did not physically restrain her or
engage in any other threatening words or conduct. Rather, he simply
approached her and asked a single question – “What did you flush down the
toilet?” Upon admitting that she had flushed a necklace that she had taken
and concealed in her pants, she was not asked any further questions, and
simply remained in detention at the police station until her mother picked her
up.
Despite the fact that the trial court made no finding on this point, the
majority opines that the State is incorrect in asserting that the question asked by
Pappalardo was “not about the shoplifting offense for which [the juvenile] was
arrested,” supra at 6, and it later asserts that “[t]he pointed question in this case,
asking the juvenile what she had flushed down the toilet, ‘was not benign.’”
Supra at 9. If what the majority means by these statements is that, given the
nature of the charge for which the juvenile had been arrested (shoplifting),
19
Pappalardo might reasonably have anticipated that one possible answer to his
question would be that the juvenile had sought to dispose of evidence of the
crime, I do not disagree that such an answer was one of many reasonable
possibilities. But as discussed earlier, even police officers questioning a suspect
whose freedom has been curtailed from that which existed immediately before he
is subjected to a Terry stop may ask questions that, by definition, may
reasonably confirm (as well as dispel) the officer’s suspicions. There is no reason
for a different result where, as here, the juvenile’s freedom at the time of
Pappalardo’s question was not further curtailed from that which already existed
as a result of her arrest and detention at the police station. Moreover, as
Pappalardo explained at the suppression hearing, “he wasn’t sure if it was
evidence or drugs or what it was” that she had flushed. It just as plausibly could
have been some other small object that could be used as a weapon or that
potentially could have interfered with the proper operation of the toilet. The
important point is that, irrespective of these various possibilities, the
circumstances were sufficiently suggestive of new criminal conduct beyond that
for which the juvenile had already been arrested to justify on-the-scene
questioning regarding such conduct. It might be the case that, once the
juvenile’s answer clearly established the connection between the new crime and
the one for which she had been arrested, further questioning about the related
matters would no longer be justified without administering Miranda warnings,
but we are not faced with that issue here because Pappalardo asked no further
questions.
The two Minnesota federal court cases on which the majority relies are
readily distinguishable from this case, and one of them actually supports my
conclusion that the questioning in this case did not involve custodial
interrogation. United States v. Stately, Criminal No. 13-280(1) (DWF/LIB), 2014
WL 668167 (D. Minn. Feb. 20, 2014), is inapposite in that it did not involve a
situation in which, after being arrested or incarcerated for a crime, the defendant
then committed a new offense. Thus, the additional limitations test was simply
not implicated in that case. Nonetheless, the court’s conclusion that the
defendant in Stately was in Miranda custody merely because he had been
handcuffed, placed in a police cruiser, and advised that he was being detained is
questionable. See State v. Reid, 135 N.H. 376, 381-82 (1992) (defendant who
was frisked, handcuffed, and placed in police cruiser was seized but not arrested
prior to arrival of another officer who identified him).
In United States v. Thomas, Crim. No. 12-128 (MJD/JJK), 2012 WL
6812536 (D. Minn. Dec. 19, 2012), the defendant was suspected of assaulting a
fellow inmate. In contrast to this case, Thomas was questioned by a corrections
supervisor several minutes after the staff had gained control of the situation and
while she was handcuffed and physically held from behind by the officer as she
was escorted to a special area of the prison where inmates are segregated from
the general population. Thomas, 2012 WL 6812536, at *1-3. The court found
that these circumstances involved sufficient additional restrictions beyond those
20
inherent in incarceration to constitute Miranda custody. Id. at *9. However, in
an observation that is prescient of what the proper result should be in this case,
the court observed: “This might be a different case if, upon reaching [the crime
scene], Lieutenant Dern had excitedly blurted out ‘What happened? What’s going
on? What is that rope for?’ and Defendant made her statements then.” Id. The
circumstances of this case are, I submit, far closer to those of the foregoing
hypothetical than they are to the actual facts presented in Thomas, and
consequently the outcome of that case should not control the result here.
Although the majority does not explicitly say as much, its holding
effectively reads Fields as limiting the Cervantes-Ford line of cases so as to
allow questioning of incarcerated persons without Miranda warnings only when
such persons are sufficiently settled into incarceration that the putative
upheaval of removal from the community has dissipated. I believe that this is
far too broad a reading of Fields, given that: (1) the case dealt only with a
sentenced prisoner; and (2) did not involve the situation of an on-going or
recently-committed offense occurring within the place of confinement. Law
enforcement and corrections authorities obviously have an interest in being
able to respond quickly and decisively to emergent criminal conduct, especially
that occurring in the often highly-charged environment of a prison or detention
facility. That interest exceeds even the weighty governmental interests at stake
in investigating past criminal conduct. Indeed, recognition of this interest is
the very foundation of the Terry doctrine. Moreover, as noted previously,
unlike sentenced prisoners, persons held in pretrial status may very well feel
pressure to respond to police questioning in the hopes of securing release from
detention or more favorable disposition of their pending charges, and this
pressure may increase – not decrease – the longer the person is held. Minnick
v. Mississippi, 498 U.S. 146, 153 (1990). Yet, this prospect has not prevented
courts, including our own, from applying the additional limitations test to
persons held in pretrial status. Thus, the majority’s broad reading of Fields is
not only at odds with the Cervantes on-the-scene questioning rationale, but
also calls into question the continuing validity of our decisions in Ford and
Pehowic. In light of the completely different factual circumstances before the
Court in Fields, the majority’s implication that that case must dictate the
outcome here is unwarranted.
IV
Because what occurred here was nothing more than a single on-the-
scene question about new suspicious conduct committed after the juvenile’s
arrest and detention, and because the circumstances clearly demonstrate that
the juvenile was not subjected to any additional restrictions beyond those
inherent in her incarcerated status, I would find that the trial court erred in
granting the motion to suppress. I, therefore, respectfully dissent.
21