THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2013-0833, State of New Hampshire v. Wade S.
Holmes, the court on March 16, 2015, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
defendant, Wade S. Holmes, appeals his conviction following a jury trial for
negligent homicide. See RSA 630:3 (2007). He argues that the trial court
(Bornstein, J.) erred when it excluded evidence of the victim’s alleged heroin use,
and that the exclusion of this evidence violated both the defendant’s due process
rights and public policy. We affirm.
We briefly summarize the record before us. On the morning of November
9, 2011, the defendant was hunting in the woods behind his home. At the same
time, a group of individuals, including the victim, also was hunting in the woods.
The group split up: two people headed to a logging road to try to flush out any
deer in the area and get them moving toward the other members of the hunting
party. The victim and his father walked down the logging road to a clearing to
wait for deer. When they encountered a large fallen tree, they separated. The
victim climbed over the tree and his father walked around it. While they were
separated, the victim’s father heard a shot and saw a muzzle blast. He “hit the
ground,” assuming that the victim had also done so. When he looked up, he
thought that he saw the victim. However, as he walked closer, he saw the
defendant standing over the victim, who was lying on the ground on his right
side, face down. The defendant said that he had shot at a doe. When the
defendant called 911, he reported: “I was huntin’ and a deer ran up through and
I sat down and waited and I thought the deer come back through, and I shot, and
I shot and I just it this kid had to be there and I don’t understand how but[.]”
After an investigation, the defendant was charged with alternative counts
of negligent homicide and reckless conduct with a deadly weapon. It appears
that, before trial, the State filed a motion in limine to exclude evidence of the
victim’s alleged heroin use and possession. The trial court granted the motion.
The court ruled that the evidence was not relevant, or, in the alternative, that any
de minimis probative value was substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair
prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury. The court also ruled
that the evidence was inadmissible under New Hampshire Rules of Evidence
404(a)(2) and 404(b). See N.H. R. Ev. 404(a)(2), 404(b).
The limited record before us indicates that the trial court considered the
defendant’s request to introduce evidence of alleged heroin intoxication multiple
times prior to trial. The transcript of an August 1, 2013 hearing, during which
the court denied the defendant’s request “for the third time,” indicates that the
trial court had before it motions that incorporated “recitations of the depositions
and statements and other relevant evidence.” We have not been provided with
copies of those pleadings.
After a jury trial, the defendant was found guilty of both offenses. He was
subsequently sentenced to a prison term of two to four years on the negligent
homicide charge.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in ruling that
evidence of the victim’s alleged heroin intoxication was inadmissible. The
decision to admit or exclude evidence is within the discretion of the trial court.
State v. Mitchell, 166 N.H. 288, 291 (2014). In determining whether the trial
court’s ruling is a proper exercise of judicial discretion, we consider whether the
record establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the discretionary
decision made. Id. To establish an unsustainable exercise of discretion, the
defendant must demonstrate that the trial court’s ruling was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Id.
We first address the defendant’s argument that the trial court applied the
wrong standard in evaluating the admissibility of the challenged evidence. The
defendant argues that the trial court applied an incorrect analysis “when it
considered evidence of the decedent’s heroin intoxication as comparative
negligence rather than as situational evidence.” We disagree with the defendant’s
premise that the trial court based its ruling solely on a characterization of the
evidence as evidence of contributory negligence. The trial court’s analysis was
broader than as characterized by the defendant.
We next turn to the question of whether the evidence was relevant. The
defendant argues that the evidence was relevant because “it was part of the
situation that [he] found himself in that day” and to exclude it “left a large gap in
the evidence and the story that the jury would hear.” To support his claim, the
defendant cites the statutory definitions of “recklessly” and “negligently.” RSA
626:2, II(c) (2007) provides in pertinent part:
A person acts recklessly with respect to a material element of
an offense when he is aware of and consciously disregards a
substantial and unjustifiable risk that the material element exists
or will result from his conduct. The risk must be of such a nature
and degree that, considering the circumstances known to him, its
disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the conduct that a
law-abiding person would observe in the situation.
2
RSA 626:2, II(d) (2007) provides:
A person acts negligently with respect to a material element
of an offense when he fails to become aware of a substantial and
unjustifiable risk that the material element exists or will result
from his conduct. The risk must be of such a nature and degree
that his failure to become aware of it constitutes a gross deviation
from the conduct that a reasonable person would observe in the
situation.
The defendant argues that the “heroin evidence was a material situational fact,”
and that, had this evidence been introduced, the jury “would have had to
consider” whether the victim could have been kneeling, sitting or stationary
while injecting the heroin and whether he was attempting to conceal himself
while ingesting it.
Assuming, without deciding, that sufficient evidence existed to support a
conclusion that the victim had injected heroin immediately before he was shot,
our analysis of relevance does not end there. See N.H. R. Ev. 401 (“‘Relevant
evidence’ means evidence having any tendency to make the existence of any fact
that is of consequence to the determination of the action more probable or less
probable than it would be without the evidence.”). As the trial court explained at
the August 1, 2013 motion hearing:
[T]he Defendant’s asking the jury to make determinations
with this evidence that are beyond the ken of a lay jury.
Again, the Defendant’s also asking the jury to determine
what effect, whatever level of heroin the dece[de]nt had in his
system would have had on the decedent’s behavior and actions in
the moments immediately preceding the fatal shooting. And, you
know, what effect, if any, heroin would have on the decedent’s
behavior is not a matter within the knowledge of a lay jury, but
would require expert testimony. And, again, even whatever expert
evidence I do have, even Dr. Duval indicates that because of the
variable degrees of tolerance, an expert really can’t determine the
clinical effect of blood concentration of morphine in a particular
individual in particular circumstances. So the jury would be asked
to speculate about what effect, if any, this had.
Again, the decedent’s -- whether the decedent was injecting
heroin in the moments immediately -- or did inject heroin in the
moments immediately prior to the fatal shooting, and whether he
had some degree of heroin in his system at the time of his death, is
irrelevant and is not being offered for a permissible purpose.
We find no error in this cogent analysis.
3