THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2013-0653, State of New Hampshire v.
Benjamin L. Duling, Sr. the court on April 29, 2015, issued the
following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
defendant, Benjamin L. Duling, Sr., appeals his conviction by a jury on
alternate counts of second degree murder. See RSA 630:1-b (2007). On
appeal, he argues that the Superior Court (Nicolosi, J.) erroneously: (1)
concluded that his amnesia did not render him incompetent to stand trial; (2)
allowed the State to display repeatedly photographs and videos of the victim’s
dead and bloody body; (3) found certain evidence inadmissible; (4) ruled that a
defense witness was not qualified to testify as an expert; (5) did not allow
defense counsel’s closing argument to exceed 80 minutes; and (6) instructed
the jury. We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. The defendant, the victim,
and their two young children were scheduled to leave for a London vacation on
April 19, 2008. On the evening of April 18, 2008, the defendant and the victim
argued. During the argument, the defendant grabbed a knife from the victim
and stabbed her in the neck and back. The defendant was charged with
alternate counts of knowing and reckless second degree murder, and, following
a six-day jury trial, was convicted of both charges. This appeal followed.
I. Competency Determination
The trial court evaluated the defendant’s competency both before and
after trial. Before trial, the court found that, although the defendant has
amnesia, it did not render him incompetent because, despite his lack of
memory about the actual moment of the victim’s stabbing, he had “other tools
at his disposal in formulating [his] defense.” The court observed that the
defendant “does have a memory of the tumultuous nature of his relationship
with [the victim], particularly in the days leading up to the incident.” The court
also found that the defendant “is aware of [the victim’s] character for violence,”
his own character for violence, “his feelings for [the victim],” and whether “he
desired to harm her in the past.” The court further found that the defendant is
“able to recall much of the day of April 18, 2008,” and that his recall “combined
with the physical evidence and the context of his relationship [might] lead to a
successful justification or provocation defense.”
The court determined that, although the defendant’s amnesia might
“present challenges to constructing a defense,” he could “work with his lawyers
and evaluate his chances at trial based on the evidence . . . presented by both
sides.” The court found that he had the ability to “decide whether to testify in
order to explain the relationship he had with [the victim] and the
circumstances leading to and following the ultimate confrontation” and could
“provide his lawyers background about [the victim] in order to focus an
investigation.” The court also found that the defendant had the capacity “to
decide whether to go to trial or engage in a plea bargain based on his lawyers’
and his evaluation of the available evidence.”
After trial, the court confirmed its competency determination based, in
part, upon its observations of the defendant during trial. For instance, the
court observed that the defendant “was able to rationally evaluate the evidence
with his attorney and consult with counsel” about strategic decisions, such as
moving to exclude all evidence and argument about his amnesia. The court
also observed that, during trial, the defendant “was attentive, wrote notes and
communicated with his lawyer, and appeared actively involved as the evidence
developed.”
Although defense counsel argued that, because of the defendant’s
amnesia, it was “impossible” for him to testify, the court disagreed. The court
found that he could have testified “as to what he did know, what he felt about
[the victim], the events leading up to the killing, his feelings and actions before
and after, his character and hers for violence, etc.” The court noted that the
defendant could have explained his amnesia to the jury.
The court observed that, during the course of the trial, “the defendant
presented several alternative and viable defenses to the State’s allegations.”
The court noted that defense counsel “extensively cross-examined the State’s
medical examiner” and that he argued to the jury in his closing argument that
the defendant “had acted in self-defense or had not formed the requisite mental
state to convict him of second degree murder.” The court stated, “Not only did
defense counsel cross-examine the State’s witnesses based on his theory of
defense, he also presented several witnesses on the defendant’s behalf in order
to further his assertion of self-defense and/or his mens rea defense.”
Moreover, although the defendant argued that “he was prejudiced by his
inability to knowingly enter an Alford plea,” the court found this claim did not
appear genuine and was not timely made. See North Carolina v. Alford, 400
U.S. 25 (1970). The court observed that there was “no indication whatsoever
that the defendant ever sought to negotiate or considered negotiating an Alford
plea with the help of any [of] his lawyers.” Indeed, the court noted, “the letters
between counsel concerning pre-trial negotiations include the defendant’s offer
to plead guilty in exchange for certain concessions by the State, without
limitation on his ability to admit guilt.” The court stated that all of the letters
2
“from both current and former defense counsel indicate that the defendant
authorized the enclosed offer.”
On appeal, the defendant argues that his amnesia rendered him “unable
to meaningfully plea bargain [or] take the stand.” He further contends that,
because of his amnesia, “he could not begin to mount any viable form of mens
rea defense, . . . [and] could not effectively challenge prosecution witnesses, . . .
or the flood of prosecutorial inferences of his guilt.” Accordingly, he contends,
the trial court erred when it found him competent to stand trial.
A criminal defendant has a constitutional right not to be tried if he is
legally incompetent. State v. Decato, 165 N.H. 294, 296 (2013). The State has
the burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, that a defendant is
competent to stand trial. Id. at 296-97. Our two-pronged test for competency,
which is based upon the test set forth in Dusky v. United States, 362 U.S. 402
(1960), requires that a defendant have: “(1) a sufficient present ability to
consult with and assist his lawyer with a reasonable degree of rational
understanding; and (2) a factual as well as rational understanding of the
proceedings against him.” Id. at 297 (quotation omitted); see Dusky, 362 U.S.
at 402; see also RSA 135:17, II (Supp. 2014). The defendant challenges only
the first prong of the competency test.
To satisfy the first prong of the competency test, “the defendant must be
able to communicate meaningfully with his attorney so as to be able to make
informed choices regarding trial strategy.” Decato, 165 N.H. at 297 (quotation
omitted). “He must be sufficiently coherent to provide his counsel with the
information necessary to construct a defense.” Id. (quotation omitted). We
defer to the trial court’s determination of competence unless we conclude that
no reasonable fact finder could have found as the trial court did. Id. at 296.
We have previously concluded “that a defendant can consult with and
assist his trial counsel with a reasonable degree of rational understanding
without necessarily remembering an event.” State v. Kincaid, 158 N.H. 90, 94
(2008). Thus, we have rejected the notion that an accused possesses the
ability to assist his attorneys only if he is able to remember the circumstances
of the crime with which he is charged. Id. at 94-95; see Decato, 165 N.H. at
297.
The defendant has failed to provide a sufficient record for any further
review of the trial court’s competency determination. Specifically, the
defendant has not provided copies of the evaluations conducted by a number of
forensic experts, even though those evaluations were admitted as exhibits at
the pretrial competency hearing. It is the burden of the appealing party, here
the defendant, to provide this court with a record sufficient to decide his issues
on appeal. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004).
Because our rules affirmatively require the moving party both to provide a
3