THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
9th Circuit Court – Manchester Family Division
No. 2013-263
NATHALIE HURLEY
v.
CRAIG HURLEY
Submitted: November 14, 2013
Opinion Issued: December 20, 2013
Nathalie Hurley, self-represented party, filed no brief.
Dame & Lucas, PLLC, of Gilford (Allen J. Lucas on the brief), for the
defendant.
CONBOY, J. The defendant, Craig Hurley, appeals an order of the 9th
Circuit – Manchester Family Division (Emery, J.) granting a domestic violence
final order of protection to the plaintiff, Nathalie Hurley. See RSA 173-B:5
(2002 & Supp. 2013) (amended 2013). He argues that the evidence was
insufficient to support the court’s findings. We reverse.
The following facts are drawn from the record. The parties have been
divorced since 2008. On December 9, 2012, the defendant sent a text message
to the plaintiff telling her that his grandmother had just died, but asking her
not to tell their child. During the course of approximately fifteen subsequent
reciprocal messages, the exchanges became heated, and the plaintiff testified
that, in his final text, the defendant wrote, “Whatever. Wish you would die in a
fiery crash.” She filed her petition for a domestic violence protective order the
following day.
Although the defendant had never threatened or abused the plaintiff
prior to this one text message, the court found that, by sending the message,
the defendant committed criminal threatening, see RSA 631:4, I (2007), and
that such conduct constituted a credible present threat to the plaintiff’s safety,
see RSA 173-B:5, I, because the defendant “has worked on [the] plaintiff’s car
[and] know[s] where she live[s].” The court issued a domestic violence final
order of protection restricting certain of the defendant’s activities for one year,
subject to extension. This appeal followed.
The defendant argues that the evidence was insufficient to support the
court’s findings that he (1) committed criminal threatening and (2) posed a
credible present threat to the plaintiff’s safety. We review sufficiency of the
evidence claims as a matter of law and uphold the findings and rulings of the
trial court unless they are lacking in evidentiary support or tainted by error of
law. Walker v. Walker, 158 N.H. 602, 608 (2009). We accord considerable
weight to the trial court’s judgments on the credibility of witnesses and the
weight to be given testimony. Id. We view the evidence in the light most
favorable to the plaintiff. Id.
RSA 173-B:5, I, predicates relief for domestic violence upon a showing of
“abuse” by a preponderance of the evidence. “Abuse,” as defined in RSA 173–
B:1, I (Supp. 2013), means “the commission or attempted commission” by,
among others, a “former sexual or intimate partner” of one or more certain
enumerated criminal acts, including criminal threatening, when such conduct
constitutes “a credible present threat to the [plaintiff’s] safety.” A credible present
threat requires “more than a generalized fear for personal safety.” Knight v.
Maher, 161 N.H. 742, 745 (2011).
We conclude, based upon all the facts and circumstances of this case, that
the defendant’s single text message – “Wish you would die in a fiery crash” – did
not constitute criminal threatening. RSA 631:4, I(d) sets forth the three elements
of criminal threatening: (1) a defendant must threaten to commit a crime, (2)
against the person of another, (3) with a purpose to terrorize any person. State v.
Morabito, 153 N.H. 302, 305 (2006). Given the particular circumstances here,
we conclude that the plaintiff failed to establish, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the defendant threatened to commit a crime or sent the message
with a purpose to terrorize her.
The plaintiff’s testimony focused upon only the one message. She did not
contest the defendant’s testimony that he had never threatened or abused her in
the past. She further testified that he did not threaten to “tinker” with her car or
2
to start a fire. The evidence established that the defendant’s message was the
culmination of a lengthy exchange, which began with him informing the plaintiff
of his grandmother’s death. The defendant testified, “I shouldn’t have said what I
did, but I did, because . . . everything was all built up inside of me.”
Although the defendant’s “wish” may well be regarded as reprehensible, we
conclude that the plaintiff did not present sufficient evidence that the defendant’s
“wish” amounted to a threat to commit a crime or that his purpose in sending the
message was to terrorize her, rather than merely to express transitory anger. Cf.
State v. Fuller, 147 N.H. 210, 214 (2001) (finding that events leading up to
defendant’s statements allowed reasonable jury to conclude that defendant’s
purpose was to terrorize, not merely to express transitory anger). Accordingly,
the evidence was insufficient to establish “abuse” within the meaning of the
statute. See RSA 173–B:1, I. We conclude, therefore, that the court erred in
entering a domestic violence final order of protection against the defendant.
See RSA 173-B:5, I.
Reversed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, LYNN and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
3