THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Belknap
No. 2013-543
DEAN INGRAM & a.
v.
MICHAEL C. DROUIN & a.
Argued: January 7, 2015
Opinion Issued: February 12, 2015
Tarbell & Brodich Professional Association, of Concord (Friedrich K.
Moeckel on the brief and orally), for the plaintiffs.
Getman, Schulthess & Steere, P.A., of Manchester (Elizabeth L. Hurley
and Clara E. Lyons on the brief, and Ms. Hurley orally), for the defendants.
DALIANIS, C.J. The plaintiffs, Dean and Suzanne Ingram, appeal an
order of the Superior Court (O’Neill, J.) granting summary judgment to the
defendants, Michael C. Drouin and Drouin Builders, Inc. (Drouin Builders), on
the plaintiffs’ claims for damages. We affirm.
The record establishes the following facts. The plaintiffs own a house in
Laconia. The lot on which the house sits was purchased by Drouin Builders in
January 2000 and then conveyed to Drouin Builders’ sole shareholder, Drouin.
Thereafter, the defendants built the house, which was completed in 2001.
Drouin lived there until 2005, when he sold the house to the plaintiffs. The
plaintiffs contend that they did not notice any problems with the house until
2008.
In 2011, the plaintiffs brought a writ seeking damages against the
defendants for their “failure to properly construct” the house. The writ alleges
latent defects in the construction of the home, including the following: (1)
failing to build the house with sufficient floor joists; (2) failing to follow
manufacturer instructions; (3) improperly mixing different kinds of lumber in
framing the floors; (4) failing to install or improperly installing carrying beams;
(5) improperly constructing wall framing; (6) improperly installing the
foundation and basement floor; (7) failing to install or improperly installing
flashing and roofing; (8) improperly installing exterior concrete slabs and
asphalt paving; and (9) improperly installing sheathing and siding. The
defendants filed a motion for summary judgment, which the trial court granted
because it concluded that the plaintiffs’ claims were barred by the eight-year
statute of repose for “Damages From Construction,” RSA 508:4-b, I (2010).
This appeal followed.
In reviewing the trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider
the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from them,
in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Camire v. Gunstock Area
Comm’n, 166 N.H. 374, 376 (2014). If our review of that evidence discloses no
genuine issue of material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to judgment
as a matter of law, we will affirm the grant of summary judgment. Id. We
review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de novo. Id.
The plaintiffs argue that the trial court erroneously determined that the
statute of repose barred their claims. See RSA 508:4-b, I. Addressing this
argument requires that we interpret RSA 508:4-b (2010). The construction of a
statute presents a question of law, which we review de novo. See In the Matter
of Liquidation of Home Ins. Co., 166 N.H. 84, 88 (2014). We are the final
arbiters of the legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute
considered as a whole. Id. We first examine the language of the statute, and,
wherever possible, ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used.
Id. Our goal is to apply statutes in light of the legislature’s intent in enacting
them, and in light of the policy sought to be advanced by the entire statutory
scheme. Id.
RSA 508:4-b, I, provides, in pertinent part:
Except as otherwise provided in this section, all actions to
recover damages . . . arising out of any deficiency in the creation of
an improvement to real property, including without limitation the
design, labor, materials, engineering, planning, surveying,
construction, observation, supervision or inspection of that
2
improvement, shall be brought within 8 years from the date of
substantial completion of the improvement, and not thereafter.
Here, the plaintiffs do not dispute that their writ constitutes an “action[ ] to
recover damages . . . arising out of” alleged deficiencies in the construction of
the house. RSA 508:4-b, I; see Phaneuf Funeral Home v. Little Giant Pump
Co., 163 N.H. 727, 731 (2012) (explaining that the language of RSA 508:4-b, I,
“unambiguously encompasses all types of claims as long as they arise from a
deficiency in the creation of an improvement to real property”). Moreover, there
is also no dispute that construction of the house was substantially completed
in 2001, when Drouin moved into the house. Thus, pursuant to RSA 508:4-b,
I, the plaintiffs’ claims are barred because they were brought in 2011, more
than eight years after the home’s construction was substantially completed.
Nevertheless, the plaintiffs argue that the eight-year statute of repose
does not bar their claims because the defendants not only built the home, but
also once owned and possessed it, and, therefore, are not entitled to the
protection of the statute of repose. Their argument is based upon Paragraph VI
of the statute, which provides:
Nothing in this section shall affect the liabilities of a person
having actual possession or control of an improvement to real
property as owner or lawful possessor thereof, and nothing
contained in this section shall alter or amend the time within
which an action in tort may be brought for damages arising out of
negligence in the repair, maintenance or upkeep of an
improvement to real property.
RSA 508:4-b, VI. The plaintiffs contend that, because the defendants once had
“actual possession or control” of the house as “owner[s] or lawful possessor[s],”
the defendants are not within the class of individuals protected by the statute
of repose. We disagree.
RSA 508:4-b, VI provides that when claims concern the “liabilit[y]” of a
person “as owner or lawful possessor” of “an improvement to real property,” the
statute of repose contained in Paragraph I of RSA 508:4-b does not apply.
Paragraph VI also provides that when the claims at issue are for “negligence in
the repair, maintenance or upkeep of an improvement to real property,” the
statute of repose does not apply. Here, the plaintiffs concede that they have
not brought any claims against the defendants for “negligence in the repair,
maintenance or upkeep” of the house. Moreover, they have not alleged any
claims against the defendants that are premised upon the defendants’ liability
as owners or lawful possessors of the house. Cf. Rallis v. Demoulas Super
Markets, 159 N.H. 95, 99 (2009) (explaining that a premises owner owes a duty
to entrants to use ordinary care to keep the premises in a reasonably safe
condition, to warn entrants of dangerous conditions, and to take reasonable
3
precautions to protect them against foreseeable dangers arising out of the
arrangements or use of the premises). All of the plaintiffs’ claims are premised
upon the defendants’ liability as builders for their failure to do such things as
include sufficient floor joists, frame the floors and walls properly, and properly
install flashing, roofing, exterior concrete slabs, asphalt paving, sheathing, and
siding. Accordingly, the plaintiffs’ reliance upon RSA 508:4-b, VI is misplaced.
The plaintiffs also mistakenly rely upon Winnisquam Regional School
District v. Levine, 152 N.H. 537 (2005), to support their argument. In that
case, it was argued that the statute of repose violated the State Equal
Protection Clause, in part, “because it excludes owners and lawful possessors
of the property from the protected group of defendants.” Winnisquam Reg.
School Dist., 152 N.H. at 541; see N.H. CONST. pt. I, arts. 1, 14. Using a test
for “intermediate scrutiny” that we have since clarified, see Cmty. Res. for
Justice v. City of Manchester, 154 N.H. 748, 759-63 (2007), we opined that
distinguishing between owners and lawful possessors, on one hand, and
builders and other members of the construction industry, on the other hand,
was “reasonable” and rested upon “significant differences” between the two
groups that bore a “fair and substantial relation” to the object of the statute of
repose. Winnisquam Reg. School Dist., 152 N.H. at 541 (quotations omitted).
Contrary to the plaintiffs’ assertions, when we stated in Winnisquam that
the statute of repose “excludes owners and lawful possessors of the property,”
we were merely reciting the appealing party’s argument. See id. We were not
interpreting the meaning of RSA 508:4-b, VI. As we have explained, the statute
of repose does not exclude all owners and lawful possessors, but rather
excludes from its purview claims that are premised upon their liability as such
or upon their alleged “negligence in the repair, maintenance or upkeep of an
improvement to real property.” RSA 508:4-b, VI.
The plaintiffs argue that in Winnisquam, we “recognized that where, as
here, the owner is also the builder, the Legislature permissibly distinguished
among different types of builders.” This is incorrect. Although we stated
“when an owner both constructs and controls an improvement, it is more
difficult for a court to determine when construction activities were actually
completed,” Winnisquam Reg. School Dist., 152 N.H. at 541, this statement
was dicta and did not constitute a holding that the statute of repose does not
apply to builder-owners. Moreover, we have previously ruled that an earlier
version of the statute was unconstitutional because it distinguished among
members of the building industry. See Henderson Clay Prod’s, Inc. v. Edgar
Wood & Assoc’s, Inc., 122 N.H. 800, 801-02 (1982) (concluding that prior
version of the statute of repose violated equal protection guarantee because it
applied to architects, but did not apply to materialmen and other suppliers of
labor).
4
In arguing that the statute of repose does not apply to builder-owners,
such as the defendants, the plaintiffs also rely upon Mississippi case law. See
West End Corp. v. Royals, 450 So. 2d 420 (Miss. 1984). Mississippi is among a
minority of jurisdictions that do not extend the statute of repose to
construction defendants with multiple roles. See Slaughter & Mears, Rest
Easy: Latent Disease and the Construction Statute of Repose, 55 DRI For Def.
44, 46 (June 2013). “The majority of courts that have addressed how a statute
of repose applied to an entity that served a multifaceted role have held that
construction statutes of repose can bar a plaintiff’s claim.” Id.; see, e.g., Pfeifer
v. City of Bellingham, 772 P.2d 1018, 1022 (Wash. 1989) (en banc) (explaining
that statute of repose “bars actions against a builder/seller where a plaintiff
alleges only negligence against the defendant in his capacity as builder”); cf.
Sonin v. Massachusetts Turnpike Authority, 809 N.E.2d 1075, 1078 (Mass.
App. Ct. 2004) (holding that the Massachusetts statute of repose, which
contains no specific exclusion for owners, applies to anyone, including owners,
who participates in the design or construction of an improvement and who is
alleged to have committed negligence in said design or construction); MBA
Enterprises v. Northern Illinois Gas, 717 N.E.2d 849, 851-52 (Ill. App. Ct.
1999) (determining that claims related to defendant’s installation and
construction of gas piping system were barred by statute of repose, but claims
related to defendant’s operation and maintenance of that system were not
barred).
We agree with the majority of courts addressing the issue that, when a
builder-owner is sued for his construction-related activities, the statute of
repose applies. To interpret the statute of repose otherwise would be contrary
to the legislature’s intent in enacting it – which was to protect the building
industry. See Big League Entm’t v. Brox Indus., 149 N.H. 480, 484 (2003); see
also Laws 1990, 164:1. As one court reasoned, given that purpose, “[i]t would
be anomalous to say that a general contractor is protected by the statute but
that an owner of land who performs some or all of the functions of a general
contractor is not entitled to the same protection.” O’Connor v. Altus, 335 A.2d
545, 552 (N.J. 1975); see Magee v. Blue Ridge Professional Bldg., 821 S.W.2d
839, 844 (Mo. 1991) (en banc) (concluding that it would “defeat the statutory
purpose and lead to an absurd and unreasonable result” if Missouri’s statute of
repose were interpreted to exclude from its protection “a designer, planner or
builder who is also a former tenant, shareholder, employee or client of the
owner”); cf. Phaneuf Funeral Home, 163 N.H. at 731, 735 (declining “to adopt a
categorical rule excluding product liability actions” from the coverage of the
statute of repose and concluding that the statute protects product suppliers if
they “were involved, in some way, in the creation of an improvement”).
Alternatively, the plaintiffs assert that, even if the statute of repose
applies to their claims, their claims are timely because the statute did not
begin to run until either Drouin sold the home in 2005, or January 2011, when
5
they “knew of both the damage to the house . . . and that the defendants’
conduct proximately caused that damage.”
The plaintiffs’ argument that the statute of repose was tolled until Drouin
sold the home is based upon J. Criss Builder, Inc. v. White, 35 So. 3d 541
(Miss. Ct. App. 2009). In that case, the Mississippi court decided that, because
a prior decision had held that the statute of repose does not govern a builder-
owner, “it logically follows that it does not commence until the builder is no
longer in possession of the home.” White, 35 So. 3d at 544. This logic does not
apply because we, unlike Mississippi courts, have concluded that the statute of
repose can, and in this case does, apply to a builder-owner.
The plaintiffs’ argument that the statute of repose was tolled until 2011
is based, in part, upon their claim that the defendants fraudulently concealed
or misrepresented the home’s defects. See RSA 508:4-b, V(a). Pursuant to
RSA 508:4-b, V(a), the statute of repose does “not apply to actions involving
fraudulent misrepresentations, or to actions involving the fraudulent
concealment of material facts upon which a claim might be based.” Under RSA
508:4-b, V(a), “[s]uch actions shall be brought within 8 years after the date on
which all relevant facts are, or with due care ought to be, discovered by the
person bringing the action.”
The trial court determined that RSA 508:4-b, V(a) “does not apply here
because the plaintiffs have not pleaded facts to support . . . a claim” of
fraudulent misrepresentation. “‘Fraudulent concealment occurs when one
party to a transaction by concealment or other action intentionally prevents the
other from acquiring material information.’” Lamprey v. Britton Constr., 163
N.H. 252, 259 (2012) (brackets and ellipsis omitted) (quoting Restatement
(Second) of Torts § 550, at 118 (1977)). “It requires something affirmative in
nature designed or intended to prevent, and which does prevent, the discovery
of facts giving rise to a cause of action – some actual artifice to prevent
knowledge of the facts or some representation intended to exclude suspicion
and prevent inquiry.” Id. at 259-60 (quotation and brackets omitted).
“Concealment only by silence is not enough.” Id. at 263 (quotation and ellipsis
omitted). Here, the plaintiffs alleged only that Drouin failed to disclose the
home’s structural deficiencies. As a matter of law, such allegations fail to state
a claim for fraudulent concealment. See id. Accordingly, we agree with the
trial court that the fraudulent concealment exception provided by RSA 508:4-b,
V(a) does not apply.
The plaintiffs also argue that the statute of repose was tolled until 2011
pursuant to the discovery rule. See RSA 508:4, I (2010). The discovery rule
provides:
[W]hen the injury and its causal relationship to the act or omission
were not discovered and could not reasonably have been
6
discovered at the time of the act or omission, the action shall be
commenced within 3 years of the time the plaintiff discovers, or in
the exercise of reasonable diligence should have discovered, the
injury and its causal relationship to the act or omission
complained of.
Id.
The plaintiffs’ reliance upon the discovery rule is mistaken. We have
previously explained that a plaintiff “must satisfy both the statute of repose
and the applicable statute of limitations.” Big League Entm’t, 149 N.H. at 484.
Thus, we have held that a plaintiff’s claim “must have been filed within three
years of the accrual of the cause of action but no later than eight years after
substantial completion of the construction project.” Id. Here, although the
plaintiffs arguably satisfied the discovery rule, they did not satisfy the statute
of repose. Accordingly, the discovery rule does not save their claims.
For all of the reasons discussed above, we hold that the eight-year
statute of repose bars the plaintiffs’ claims against the defendants and, thus,
affirm the trial court’s grant of summary judgment to the defendants.
Affirmed.
CONBOY, LYNN, and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
7