THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2013-069
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
DAVID LANTAGNE
Argued: November 21, 2013
Opinion Issued: December 24, 2013
Joseph A. Foster, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
John A. Macoul, of Salem, by brief and orally, for the defendant.
DALIANIS, C.J. The defendant, David Lantagne, appeals a decision of the
Superior Court (Wageling, J.) denying his motion to suppress evidence that led to
his conviction on stipulated facts of three counts of possessing child sexual
abuse images. See RSA 649-A:3 (Supp. 2013). We reverse and remand.
The following facts either are drawn from the trial court’s order denying the
defendant’s motion to suppress or otherwise appear in the record. On July 6,
2011, a female patron at Canobie Lake Park informed a park security officer that
she had just left one of the park’s water attractions because she felt
uncomfortable seeing an adult male use his cellular telephone to take
photographs of young children. The security officer went to the attraction and
observed the defendant repeatedly moving his cell phone to the side of his leg,
aiming it toward other patrons (including juveniles), and then bringing it to a
position where he could view it. Most, if not all, of the patrons at the attraction
wore bathing suits.
Park security called a Salem police officer to the scene, asked the
defendant if he would agree to speak with the officer, and, when he agreed,
brought the defendant to the officer. As the park security officer accompanied
the defendant to the police officer, the security officer saw the defendant
“frantically” tapping the keys of his cell phone. Fearing that the defendant was
deleting photographs from his cell phone, the security officer asked the defendant
if he would agree to hand him the phone. When the defendant gave his phone to
the security officer, the security officer observed the “backsides” of young girls in
bathing suits on the phone’s screen.
Park security handed the phone to the police officer, who then asked the
defendant for his identification. Meanwhile, the security officer advised the
defendant of his observations, and the defendant admitted that he had been
using his phone to take photographs of girls eleven or twelve years old. Upon
further questioning by the security officer, the defendant admitted that he is
attracted to young girls, that he has a problem, and that he needs professional
help. The defendant further admitted that he had previously taken similar
photographs at the park and at a local mall. He also admitted that he downloads
photographs from his cell phone to his home computer. At that point, the police
officer arrested the defendant for disorderly conduct. See RSA 644:2 (2007).
The defendant was transported to the Salem Police Department, where
detectives interviewed him. After several hours, the defendant admitted that he
possessed child pornography on a computer and related equipment stored in his
bedroom. The detectives then obtained search warrants for the defendant’s
bedroom and computer equipment, seeking evidence of child pornography and
child sexual abuse images. Subsequent analysis of the computer equipment
seized from the defendant’s home pursuant to those warrants uncovered the
images that are the subject of the defendant’s conviction at issue in this appeal.
According to the defendant, and not disputed by the State, the original disorderly
conduct charge was never pursued.
Before trial, the defendant moved to suppress the evidence obtained
following his arrest for disorderly conduct, arguing, among other things, that the
arrest was unconstitutional because it lacked probable cause sufficient to satisfy
the State and Federal Constitutions. The trial court disagreed, finding that there
was probable cause for the defendant’s arrest because the police “had
information that Defendant had taken pictures of young girls” and had stored
those pictures on his cell phone and home computer. The trial court reasoned
that because “there had been complaints about Defendant by other Park patrons,
2
it was likely that if [he] was not arrested, further damage could occur.” The court
concluded that “these facts, taken as a whole, provided [the police] with probable
cause to arrest Defendant.” However, the trial court did not identify the crime for
which the police had probable cause to arrest.
On appeal, the defendant argues, among other things, that the trial court
erred when it found that the police had probable cause to arrest him for
disorderly conduct. He contends that his arrest without probable cause violated
the State and Federal Constitutions. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 19; U.S. CONST.
amend. IV. We first address the defendant’s claim under the State Constitution
and rely upon federal law only to aid in our analysis. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226,
231-33 (1983).
In reviewing a trial court decision on a motion to suppress, we accept the
trial court’s findings unless they lack support in the record or are clearly
erroneous, but review its legal conclusions de novo. State v. Newcomb, 161 N.H.
666, 670 (2011). On a motion to suppress, the State bears the burden of
establishing the legality of an arrest. See Super. Ct. R. 94 (State bears burden of
proof at suppression hearings); cf. State v. Martin, 145 N.H. 362, 364 (2000)
(State bears burden of establishing legality of search at suppression hearing);
State v. Maya, 126 N.H. 590, 595 (1985) (State had burden to justify defendant’s
detention as a legitimate investigatory stop).
An officer has probable cause to arrest when he has “sufficient,
trustworthy information to warrant a reasonable person to believe that the
arrestee has committed a crime.” Newcomb, 161 N.H. at 669 (quotation omitted).
“In determining whether the police had probable cause, we review reasonable
probabilities and not the amount of evidence required to sustain a conviction or
to make out a prima facie case.” Id. (quotation omitted). “We are not bound by
mathematical calculations in making this determination, but instead must
approach the issue with a concern for the factual and practical considerations of
everyday life on which reasonable and prudent men, not legal technicians, act.”
Id. (quotation omitted).
The State argues that we review a trial court’s determination of probable
cause deferentially, quoting State v. Vandebogart, 139 N.H. 145, 164 (1994), in
which we stated that we would not “overturn a trial court’s determination of
probable cause unless, when the evidence is viewed in the light most favorable to
the State, the decision is contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence.”
Because the defendant does not argue for a different standard, we assume,
without deciding, that the Vandebogart standard applies.
The State argues that the officer had probable cause to arrest the
defendant for violating RSA 644:2, II(a), which provides that a person is guilty of
disorderly conduct if he or she “[e]ngages in fighting or in violent, tumultuous or
3
threatening behavior in a public place.” Specifically, the State asserts that there
was probable cause to believe that the defendant engaged in “threatening”
behavior by surreptitiously photographing the backsides of children, causing at
least one patron discomfort.
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de
novo. State v. Mercier, 165 N.H. 83, 85 (2013). In matters of statutory
interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the intent of the legislature as
expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole. Id. When
examining the language of the statute, we construe that language according to its
plain and ordinary meaning. Id. We interpret legislative intent from the statute
as written and will not consider what the legislature might have said or add
language that the legislature did not see fit to include. Id. We construe the
Criminal Code “according to the fair import of [its] terms and to promote justice.”
RSA 625:3 (2007).
The plain meaning of “threaten” is “to utter threats against : promise
punishment, reprisal, or other distress . . . to promise as a threat : hold out by
way of menace or warning . . . to give signs of the approach of (something evil or
unpleasant) : indicate as impending.” Webster’s Third New International
Dictionary 2382 (unabridged ed. 2002); see Random House Webster’s
Unabridged Dictionary 1976 (2d ed. 2001) (“threatening” means “tending or
intended to menace[;] . . . causing alarm, as by being imminent; ominous;
sinister”). The synonym for threaten is “menace,” which means “to make a show
of intention to harm : make a threatening gesture, statement, or act against.”
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary, supra at 1409, 2382. We note that
each of the remaining terms in RSA 644:2, II(a) – “fighting,” or “violent” or
“tumultuous” behavior in public – involves conduct with immediate
consequences to other persons present. In context, therefore, we construe
“threatening behavior in a public place” to encompass conduct posing a threat of
imminent harm to other persons present, and not conduct that merely causes
discomfort. RSA 644:2, II(a); see Appeal of Thermo–Fisher Scientific, 160 N.H.
670, 672 (2010) (“We interpret a statute to lead to a reasonable result and review
a particular provision, not in isolation, but together with all associated
sections.”).
Photographing properly-attired children in an open and public portion of
Canobie Lake Park, regardless of whether the photographs were of the children’s
backsides, were taken surreptitiously, or would be uploaded to a computer,
would not have warranted a reasonable belief that the photographer posed a
threat of imminent harm to any patrons, including the children. See Newcomb,
161 N.H. at 669. The State articulates no other crime that a reasonable person
would have believed occurred, and we are aware of none. Accordingly, viewing
the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, we conclude that the officer
lacked probable cause to arrest the defendant. The trial court’s finding of
4
probable cause is contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. See
Vandebogart, 139 N.H. at 164.
If an arrest is unlawful, the fruit of the poisonous tree doctrine and the
exclusionary rule require the suppression of any evidence or statements
“derivatively obtained through a violation of Part I, Article 19 of the New
Hampshire Constitution.” State v. Orde, 161 N.H. 260, 268 (2010); see State v.
De La Cruz, 158 N.H. 564, 566 (2009). “If the evidence in question has been
obtained only through exploitation of an antecedent illegality, it must be
suppressed.” Orde, 161 N.H. at 268. Although there are exceptions to the
exclusionary rule, the State does not argue that any of them apply. See De La
Cruz, 158 N.H. at 566-68 (describing exceptions to exclusionary rule, including
exception under which State proves that the taint of the primary illegality is
purged).
Here, because the State does not argue otherwise, all of the evidence
acquired from the defendant following his unlawful arrest was obtained only as a
result of the unlawful arrest, and, therefore, was fruit of the poisonous tree. See
Orde, 161 N.H. at 268. Under these circumstances, the trial court erred by not
suppressing the statements and other evidence acquired from the defendant
while he was in custody following his arrest. See id. The trial court likewise
erred by not suppressing the evidence seized pursuant to the search warrants.
See id. at 268-69.
Therefore, we reverse the denial of the defendant’s motion to suppress.
Because we conclude that the defendant prevails under the State Constitution,
we need not undertake a separate federal analysis. See Mercier, 165 N.H. at 87.
In light of our holding that there was no probable cause for the defendant’s arrest
and that all of the evidence obtained as a result of the arrest must be excluded as
fruit of the poisonous tree, we do not reach the defendant’s remaining
arguments. We reverse the defendant’s conviction and remand.
Reversed and remanded.
HICKS, CONBOY, LYNN and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
5