THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Grafton
No. 2013-776
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
JASON J. MCGILL
Submitted: January 7, 2015
Opinion Issued: February 12, 2015
Joseph A. Foster, attorney general (Lisa Wolford, assistant attorney
general, on the brief), for the State.
Thomas Barnard, senior assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief, for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The defendant, Jason J. McGill, appeals his conviction by a
jury for felony delivery of an unlawful article to a prisoner. See RSA 30-B:9,
:10 (2000). On appeal, he argues that the Superior Court (Vaughan, J.)
erroneously instructed the jury that to convict, it had to find that he acted
“knowingly.” He contends that the proper mens rea for the crime was
“purposely.” We reverse and remand.
The record establishes the following facts. The defendant was charged
with knowingly delivering to an inmate at Grafton County House of Corrections
an article that was unlawful for the defendant to possess, namely, a pill
containing a certain prescription drug. Although the defendant is also an
inmate at the same facility, the indictment did not so allege. The defendant
moved to dismiss the indictment on the ground that it failed to allege that he
acted with the intent that the inmate receive or obtain the article, as required
by RSA 30-B:9. The trial court denied his motion.
Thereafter, the court distributed a draft jury instruction to the parties,
which stated that, to convict the defendant of the charged offense, the State
had to prove the following: (1) the defendant had in his possession a
prescription drug that was contrary to the prison’s rules and regulations; (2) he
“acted purposely, that is, with the intent to deliver said article” to a prisoner;
(3) he “acted purposely, that is, with the intent that [the] prisoner . . . shall
receive or retain such article”; and (4) he “did so without the knowledge or
permission of the Superintendent of the Grafton County House of Corrections.”
The State objected to the instruction, arguing that the mens rea for the
charged offense was not “purposely,” as set forth in the instructions, but was
“knowingly.” The State argued that when the charge alleges delivery of a
prohibited article from one inmate to another, the mental state is “simply
knowingly,” because “the purpose is self-evident.” The State also requested
that the word “intent” be eliminated from the instructions and that the phrase
“with the intent that a prisoner . . . shall receive or retain said article,” RSA 30-
B:9, be replaced with “knew that a prisoner shall receive or obtain the article.”
The trial court revised the jury instruction over the defendant’s objection and
delivered the following instruction to the jury:
[T]he Defendant is charged with the crime of delivery of
articles prohibited. The definition of this offense has five parts or
elements. The State must prove beyond a reasonable doubt each
of the five elements of the crime.
Thus, the State must prove 1) the Defendant had in his
possession an article contrary to the rules and regulations
established by the Superintendent of the Grafton County House of
Correction; 2) the article was a prescription drug for which he did
not have a valid prescription; 3) the Defendant acted to deliver the
article to a prisoner confined at the Grafton County House of
Correction; 4) the Defendant did so without the knowledge or
permission of the Superintendent of the Grafton County House of
Correction; and 5) the Defendant acted knowingly.
Now part of the definition of the crime of delivery of articles
in this case is that the Defendant acted knowingly. Th[is] means
the State must prove that he was aware that his acts would cause
the prohibited result. The State does not have to prove that he
2
specifically intended or desired a particular result. What the State
must prove is that the Defendant was aware or kn[e]w his conduct
would cause the result.
Now, as I’ve told you, to prove the Defendant has committed
a crime, the State must prove first, that the Defendant did certain
acts, and second, that the Defendant acted with a certain intent.
In this case, as I’ve just indicated to you, the State must
prove the Defendant committed certain acts and he did so
knowingly. Whether the Defendant acted knowingly is a question
of fact for you to decide.
Keep in mind, there’s often no direct evidence of intent
because there’s no way of examining the operation of a person’s
mind.
You should consider all the facts and circumstances in
evidence in deciding whether or not the State has proven the
Defendant acted knowingly.
The jury found the defendant guilty, and this appeal followed.
The sole issue on appeal is whether the trial court correctly instructed
the jury as to the mens rea for the charged offense. The defendant argues that
the correct mens rea is “purposely,” and the State contends that it is
“knowingly.”
“The purpose of a trial court’s jury instructions is to state and explain to
the jury, in clear and intelligible language, the rules of law applicable to the
case.” State v. Gribble, 165 N.H. 1, 29 (2013). “When reviewing jury
instructions, we determine whether the instructions adequately and accurately
explain each element of the offense and reverse only if the instructions did not
fairly cover the issues of law arising in the case.” Id. The scope and wording of
jury instructions is generally within the sound discretion of the trial court, and
any allegations of error will be evaluated by interpreting the disputed
instructions in their entirety, as a reasonable juror would have understood
them, and in light of all the evidence in the case. Id. We review the trial
court’s decisions on these matters for an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
Id.
To determine the correct mens rea for the charged offense, we must
interpret RSA 30-B:9. The construction of RSA 30-B:9 presents a question of
law, which we review de novo. See State v. Addison, 160 N.H. 732, 754 (2010).
We are the final arbiters of the legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of
the statute considered as a whole. Id. When interpreting statutes, we look to
3
the plain language of the statute itself, and, if possible, construe that language
according to its plain and ordinary meaning. Id. We interpret legislative intent
from the statute as written and will neither consider what the legislature might
have said nor add language it did not see fit to include. Id. Additionally, we
interpret a statute in the context of the overall statutory scheme and not in
isolation. Id.
RSA 30-B:9 provides:
No person shall deliver or procure to be delivered or have in
his possession with intent to deliver to a prisoner confined in a
county correctional facility, or deposit or conceal in any building or
upon any land appurtenant thereto, any article with intent that a
prisoner shall receive or obtain it, or receive from a prisoner any
article with intent to convey it out of said county correctional
facility without the knowledge of the superintendent of the county
department of corrections; nor shall any prisoner deliver or
procure to be delivered or have in his possession, or deposit or
conceal in any building or land appurtenant thereto, or convey out
of any county correctional facility, any article without the
knowledge of the superintendent of the county department of
corrections.
Although the defendant is a prison inmate, he was not charged as such.
Moreover, the defendant was charged with delivering an article to a prisoner,
not with receiving an article from one. Accordingly, it is the first part of RSA
30-B:9 that is at issue in this case -- “No person shall deliver or procure to be
delivered or have in his possession with intent to deliver to a prisoner confined
in a county correctional facility, or deposit or conceal in any building or upon
any land appurtenant thereto, any article with intent that a prisoner shall
receive or obtain it.” RSA 30-B:9.
The defendant argues that the phrase “with intent that a prisoner shall
receive or obtain it” modifies all of the means of committing the crime as set
forth in the first part of the statute (delivering, procuring to be delivered,
having in possession with intent to deliver, depositing or concealing in any
building or upon any land). The defendant correctly observes that the statute
uses the word “intent,” and “intentionally” is synonymous with “purposely.”
See State v. Brewer, 127 N.H. 799, 800 (1986); see also State v. Pond, 132 N.H.
472, 475 (1989) (holding that because felonious sexual assault requires
“intentional” touching, the applicable mental state is “purposely”). Thus, the
defendant contends, “purposely” is the proper mens rea in this case.
The State argues that the phrase “with intent that a prisoner shall
receive or obtain it” applies only when the article is delivered to a prisoner
indirectly such as “by placing it on the prison grounds or land appurtenant
4
thereto.” The State contends that when an article is directly delivered to a
prisoner, there is no need to prove the specific intent that the prisoner receive
or obtain it. The State contends that “to read the statute as the defendant
suggests requires proof of the defendant’s specific intent when his or her intent
is already apparent from the criminal act itself.”
The State’s statutory interpretation is contrary to the plain meaning of
the statute’s words, read as a whole. As the defendant cogently explains, “[n]o
person” and “any article” constitute the subject and object of the sentence,
and, as such, they apply to the entire sentence. RSA 30-B:9. The verbs
“deliver,” “procure to be delivered,” “have in his possession with intent to
deliver,” “deposit,” and “conceal” are joined by the disjunctive “or,” and, thus,
constitute the five variants of the offense. Id. The prepositional clause “with
intent that a prisoner shall receive or obtain it” applies to all five statutory
variants because it refers to “any article.” Id.
Although the State asserts that its interpretation is more logical than the
defendant’s interpretation, we disagree. We find nothing illogical about
requiring the State to prove that a defendant, who delivers an article directly to
a prisoner, acted with the specific intent that the prisoner receive or obtain the
delivered article.
Thus, because the first part of RSA 30-B:9 specifies that a defendant
must act with the “intent that a prisoner shall receive or obtain” the delivered
article, and because, “intentionally” and “purposely” are synonymous terms,
see Brewer, 127 N.H. at 800, the correct mens rea for the charged offense is
“purposely.” The trial court in this case erred by instructing the jury that the
mens rea was “knowingly.” This error constitutes reversible error because
“knowingly” is a lesser mental state than “purposely,” State v. Morabito, 153
N.H. 302, 306 (2006), and it was under this lesser standard that the defendant
was found guilty. We conclude, therefore, that the trial court committed
reversible error by interpreting the first part of RSA 30-B:9 to require a mens
rea of “knowingly.”
Reversed and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and CONBOY and BASSETT, JJ., concurred; LYNN, J.,
concurred specially.
LYNN, J., concurring specially. The State has a strong argument that,
under RSA 30-B:9 (2000), when a person, such as the defendant before us, is
accused of directly delivering a prohibited article to a prisoner, the requisite
mental state should be knowingly rather than purposely because imposing a
specific intent requirement in this circumstance adds little of substance to the
culpability of the conduct that the legislature sought to prohibit. However, our
task is not to construe the statute as the legislature might have drafted it, but
5
as it actually did. And on that score, the majority’s textual analysis of the
statute is unassailable. Because the plain language of the statute is clear, we
would be justified in looking beyond the text only if reliance on the text alone
would produce an absurd or illogical result. Although the conceptual
difference between one who acts knowingly and one who acts purposely in a
case such as this may be slight, the distinction is not so lacking in substance
that it could be properly characterized as absurd or illogical. Therefore, I
concur in the majority’s decision. If the statute is to be changed in the manner
that the State advocates, such change must come from the legislature.
6