THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2014-020
DOUG MELLIN & a.
v.
NORTHERN SECURITY INSURANCE COMPANY, INC.
Argued: October 15, 2014
Opinion Issued: April 24, 2015
Drummond Woodsum & MacMahon, of Portsmouth (Keriann Roman on
the brief and orally), for the plaintiffs.
Primmer Piper Eggleston & Cramer PC, of Manchester (Gary M. Burt on
the brief and orally), for the defendant.
CONBOY, J. The plaintiffs, Doug and Gayle Mellin, brought a
declaratory judgment action asserting, in relevant part, that their homeowner’s
insurance policy with the defendant, Northern Security Insurance Company,
Inc. (Northern), requires Northern to reimburse them for losses to their
condominium caused by cat urine odor. The plaintiffs appeal an order of the
Superior Court (Wageling, J.) granting summary judgment in favor of Northern.
We vacate in part, reverse in part, and remand.
I. Background
The record on summary judgment supports the following facts or they
are otherwise undisputed. The plaintiffs owned a condominium unit in Epping
(unit). Their downstairs neighbor kept two cats in her condominium. The
plaintiffs leased their unit to a tenant who was the first person to detect a cat
urine odor in the unit in 2009 or 2010. In November 2010, after their tenant
moved out due to the odor, the plaintiffs moved into the unit and also noticed
the odor. They surmised that it entered their unit from the downstairs
condominium through an open plumbing chase servicing the kitchen. In
December 2010, the plaintiffs filed a claim under their homeowner’s insurance
policy, which was denied.
Epping’s building/health inspector examined the unit and, on December
22, 2010, sent a letter to the plaintiffs stating that they “have a health problem
existing” and the odor “is such that [they] need to move out of[] the apartment
temporarily and have a company terminate the odor.” Remediation proved
unsuccessful. The plaintiffs continued to reside in the unit until February 1,
2011. They claimed that, after that time, they “could [not] have tenants,”
although they occasionally occupied the unit. Ultimately, they sold their
condominium. They assert, however, that the sale price for the unit was
significantly less than that for a comparable condominium in the area which
was unaffected by cat urine odor.
Section I of the plaintiffs’ homeowner’s insurance policy, addressing
property coverages, contains two disputed coverage provisions. The first
disputed provision, “Coverage A,” provides coverage, in relevant part, for
“alterations, appliances, fixtures and improvements which are part of the
building contained within the ‘residence premises’” and, through an
endorsement, “insure[s] against risk of direct loss to property . . . if that loss is
a physical loss to property” (Coverage A endorsement). (Emphasis added.) The
Coverage A endorsement also contains what is commonly referred to as a
“pollution exclusion clause,” which states, in part: “We do not insure, however,
for loss . . . [c]aused by . . . [d]ischarge, dispersal, seepage, migration, release
or escape of pollutants . . . .” The second disputed provision in Section I,
“Coverage D,” provides coverage for “Loss Of Use” of the “residence premises,”
including additional living expenses and lost rental income.
In their petition, the plaintiffs sought a declaration that they are entitled
to coverage because they “experienced a direct physical loss” to the unit as a
result of the cat urine odor. Northern moved for summary judgment, arguing
that the alleged cat urine odor “does not constitute a physical loss” within the
meaning of Coverage A and that the pollution exclusion clause “specifically
bars recovery.” Northern also argued that Coverage D did not apply because
the alleged cat urine odor was not caused by any of the enumerated perils
2
against which the policy insured. The trial court agreed with Northern and
granted its motion. This appeal followed.
II. Standard of Review
“We review de novo the trial court’s application of the law to the facts in
its summary judgment ruling.” Amica Mut. Ins. Co. v. Mutrie, 167 N.H. 108,
111 (2014) (quotation omitted). “We consider the affidavits and other evidence,
and all inferences properly drawn from them, in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party.” Id. (quotation and brackets omitted). “If our review of the
evidence does not reveal a genuine issue of material fact, and if the moving
party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, we will affirm the trial court’s
decision.” Id. (quotation omitted).
Resolving the issues in this case requires us to interpret the language of
the policy. The interpretation of insurance policy language, like any contract
language, is ultimately an issue of law for this court to decide. Id. “Policy
terms are construed objectively; where the terms are clear and unambiguous,
we accord the language its natural and ordinary meaning.” Barking Dog v.
Citizens Ins. Co. of America, 164 N.H. 80, 83 (2012) (quotation omitted).
“Where disputed terms are not defined in the policy, we construe them in
context, and in the light of what a more than casual reading of the policy would
reveal to an ordinarily intelligent insured.” Great Am. Dining v. Philadelphia
Indem. Ins. Co., 164 N.H. 612, 625 (2013) (quotation omitted). “Absent a
statutory provision or public policy to the contrary, an insurance company is
free to limit its liability through an exclusion written in clear and unambiguous
policy language.” Barking Dog, 164 N.H. at 83-84 (quotation omitted).
“However, for exclusionary language to be considered clear and unambiguous,
two parties cannot reasonably disagree about its meaning.” Id. at 84. “Thus,
when an insurance policy’s language is ambiguous and one reasonable
interpretation favors coverage, we construe the policy in the insured’s favor and
against the insurer.” Id. “In a declaratory judgment action to determine the
coverage of an insurance policy, the burden of proof is always on the insurer,
regardless of which party brings the petition.” Cogswell Farm Condo. Ass’n v.
Tower Group, Inc., 167 N.H. ___, ___ (decided January 13, 2015); see RSA
491:22-a (2010).
III. Coverage A
The plaintiffs argue that the trial court erred by concluding that they
were not entitled to coverage under the Coverage A endorsement because they
did not suffer a “physical loss” to the property. They further contend that the
trial court erred by finding that the pollution exclusion clause in the Coverage
A endorsement independently precluded coverage.
3
A. Physical Loss Under Coverage A Endorsement
The Coverage A endorsement states: “We insure against risk of direct
loss to property described in Coverage A, only if that loss is a physical loss to
property.” (Emphasis added.) The plaintiffs argue that they are entitled to
coverage under this endorsement because “physical loss” encompasses
pervasive odors.
Northern first argues that the plaintiffs’ objection to the motion for
summary judgment did not satisfy the statutory requirements for opposing
summary judgment. See RSA 491:8-a, IV (2010) (requiring party opposing
summary judgment to “set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine
issue for trial”); see also RSA 491:8-a, III (2010) (setting forth requirements for
granting summary judgment). However, because Northern has not
demonstrated that it raised this issue before the trial court, we decline to
address it. Mutrie, 167 N.H. at 114.
Northern next contends that, although “the words ‘direct’ and ‘physical
loss’ are undefined” in the Coverage A endorsement, “they are commonly
understood to require tangible change to the property,” and that the alleged cat
urine odor did not constitute a physical loss under the plain meaning of the
policy because it “did not cause[] a tangible alteration to the appearance, color,
or shape” of the unit. Because, as Northern notes, the policy does not define
the term “physical loss,” we give the words their ordinary meaning. See
Pawtucket Mut. Ins. Co. v. Hartford Ins. Co., 147 N.H. 369, 372 (2001). The
disputed term is “physical,” which is broadly defined and refers, in relevant
part, to things “[o]f or pertaining to matter, or the world as perceived by the
senses; material as [opposed] to mental or spiritual.” 2 Shorter Oxford English
Dictionary 2194 (6th ed. 2007). We are not persuaded that the common
understanding of the word “physical” requires the restricted reading Northern
proposes. Rather, we conclude that “physical loss” need not be read to include
only tangible changes to the property that can be seen or touched, but can also
encompass changes that are perceived by the sense of smell.
We recognize that some jurisdictions have adopted a more limited
interpretation of “physical loss.” See, e.g., Universal Image Productions, Inc. v.
Chubb Corp., 703 F. Supp. 2d 705, 709, 710 (E.D. Mich. 2010) (concluding
that allegations of what court deemed to be intangible harms, such as
pervasive odor, mold and bacterial contamination, and water damage, did not
constitute physical loss), aff’d sub nom. Universal Image Prod. v. Federal Ins.
Co., 475 Fed. Appx. 569 (6th Cir. 2012); Great Northern Ins. v. Benjamin
Franklin Fed. S & L, 793 F. Supp. 259, 263 (D. Or. 1990) (finding no “‘direct
physical loss’” from discovery of asbestos insulating material because building
“remained physically intact and undamaged”), aff’d, 953 F.2d 1387 (9th Cir.
1992). However, our interpretation that “physical loss” encompasses changes
to the insured property perceived by the sense of smell is supported by a
4
substantial body of case law in which a variety of contaminating conditions,
including odors, have been held to constitute a physical loss to property. See
Yale University v. Cigna Ins. Co., 224 F. Supp. 2d 402, 412-13 (D. Conn. 2002)
(citing cases and concluding plaintiff sustained its burden of demonstrating
that it suffered “‘physical loss of or damage to property’” as required under
policy by alleging presence of asbestos and lead contamination in buildings).
For example, a federal district court recently rejected an insurer’s
argument that, because “‘physical loss or damage’ necessarily involves ‘a
physical change or alteration to insured property requiring its repair or
replacement,’” the plaintiff’s policy did not cover losses sustained when an
ammonia spill temporarily incapacitated the plaintiff’s facility. See Gregory
Packaging, Inc. v. Travelers Prop. Cas. Co. of America, Civ. No. 2:12-cv-04418
(WHW), 2014 WL 6675934, at *2, *3, *8 (D.N.J. Nov. 25, 2014). The court
concluded, instead, that under New Jersey law the release of ammonia
“physically transformed the air” in the facility, rendering it “unfit for occupancy
until the ammonia could be dissipated.” Id. at *6. The court also concluded
that the ammonia discharge constituted physical loss under Georgia law
because it “physically changed the facility’s condition to an unsatisfactory state
needing repair.” Id. at *7. Similarly, the Colorado Supreme Court concluded
that gasoline and vapors that had infiltrated and contaminated the foundation,
halls, and rooms of a church, making it uninhabitable and its use dangerous,
constituted “direct physical loss” to the property. See Western Fire Ins. Co. v.
First Presbyterian Church, 437 P.2d 52, 54, 55 (Colo. 1968) (quotation
omitted); see also TRAVCO Ins. Co. v. Ward, 715 F. Supp. 2d 699, 709-10 (E.D.
Va. 2010) (determining that toxic gases released by drywall rendered home
uninhabitable and damage constituted a direct physical loss), aff’d, 504 Fed.
Appx. 251 (4th Cir. 2013); Farmers Ins. Co. v. Trutanich, 858 P.2d 1332, 1335
(Or. Ct. App. 1993) (concluding that pervasive odor from methamphetamine lab
that had infiltrated house “was ‘physical’ because it damaged the house”);
Murray v. State Farm Fire and Cas. Co., 509 S.E.2d 1, 17 (W. Va. 1998)
(recognizing that direct physical loss requires property to be damaged, not
destroyed, and may exist without structural damage to insured property).
These cases stand for the proposition that an insured may suffer “physical
loss” from a contaminant or condition that causes changes to the property that
cannot be seen or touched.
Nonetheless, as other courts have noted, the term “physical loss” should
not be interpreted overly broadly. See, e.g., Pentair v. American Guarantee and
Liability Ins., 400 F.3d 613, 616 (8th Cir. 2005) (recognizing that direct
physical loss or damage cannot be interpreted to apply “whenever property
cannot be used for its intended purpose” (emphasis omitted)). Northern
suggests that the definition of “physical injury” that we utilized in Webster v.
Acadia Insurance Co. is instructive. See Webster v. Acadia Ins. Co., 156 N.H.
317 (2007). Webster, however, is inapposite. In Webster, a third party liability
case in which we considered an insurer’s duty to defend, we interpreted the
5
term “‘property damage.’” Id. at 318, 320. Here, although the policy defines
“[p]roperty damage” as “physical injury to, destruction of or loss of use of
tangible property,” that term relates only to Coverage E, personal liability,
which is described in Section II of the policy (liability coverages). Because
Coverage E is not at issue in this case, the definition of “[p]roperty damage”
relevant in Webster does not control our interpretation of “physical loss” in
Coverage A.
We, instead, look to the type of loss courts in other jurisdictions have
considered sufficient to constitute a physical loss. Some courts have
recognized that physical loss “provisions require only that a covered property
be injured, not destroyed” and that physical loss “may exist in the absence of
structural damage to the insured property.” Sentinel v. New Hampshire Ins.,
563 N.W.2d 296, 300 (Minn. Ct. App. 1997); see also Murray, 509 S.E.2d at 17.
Others conclude that physical loss contemplates a change that causes the
insured property, which was “in a satisfactory state . . .[,] to become
unsatisfactory for future use or requiring that repairs be made to make it so.”
AFLAC Inc. v. Chubb & Sons, Inc., 581 S.E.2d 317, 319 (Ga. Ct. App. 2003).
Still others limit coverage to physical losses that are “distinct and
demonstrable,” Columbiaknit, Inc. v. Affiliated FM Ins. Co., No. Civ. 98–434–
HU, 1999 WL 619100, at *7 (D. Or. Aug. 4, 1999); that “seriously impair[] or
destroy[]” a building’s function, Sentinel, 563 N.W.2d at 300; or that render the
building unusable or uninhabitable, see Western Fire Ins. Co., 437 P.2d. at 55;
TRAVCO Ins. Co., 715 F. Supp. 2d at 709. We agree with these courts and
conclude that the term “physical loss” requires a distinct and demonstrable
alteration of the insured property.
Accordingly, we hold that physical loss may include not only tangible
changes to the insured property, but also changes that are perceived by the
sense of smell and that exist in the absence of structural damage. These
changes, however, must be distinct and demonstrable. Evidence that a change
rendered the insured property temporarily or permanently unusable or
uninhabitable may support a finding that the loss was a physical loss to the
insured property.
Here, the plaintiffs asserted that they “experienced a direct physical loss”
caused by “toxic odors originating outside of [the unit].” The trial court rejected
this assertion. It determined that “direct physical loss requires some tangible
alteration of property be proximately caused by a covered occurrence, event, or
peril,” and concluded that the cat urine odor did not result from a tangible
physical alteration of the unit. The trial court also concluded that, even if
tangible destruction of property was not required for physical loss, the unit was
not “functional[ly] destr[oyed]” because the plaintiffs occupied the unit
occasionally and eventually sold it, thus implying that physical loss requires
permanent uninhabitablity. Based upon these requirements, the trial court
concluded that the odor was not covered under Coverage A and granted
6
summary judgment for Northern on this issue. However, under our
construction of “physical loss,” the plaintiffs are not required to demonstrate a
“tangible physical alteration” to the unit or to prove that the unit was rendered
permanently uninhabitable. Rather, to demonstrate a physical loss under
Coverage A, they must establish a distinct and demonstrable alteration to the
unit. Accordingly, we vacate the trial court’s grant of summary judgment in
favor of Northern on this issue and remand. We express no opinion as to the
outcome of the analysis to be conducted under the legal standard we adopt
today; rather, we leave the application of the standard to the trial court in the
first instance. See Pedersen v. Brook, 151 N.H. 65, 69 (2004).
B. Pollution Exclusion Clause
The plaintiffs next argue that the trial court erred by concluding that the
pollution exclusion clause precludes coverage. The pollution exclusion clause
included in the Coverage A endorsement states that Northern does not insure
for loss caused by:
Discharge, dispersal, seepage, migration, release or escape of
pollutants unless the discharge, dispersal, seepage, migration,
release or escape is itself caused by a Peril Insured Against under
Coverage C of this policy.
Pollutants means any solid, liquid, gaseous or thermal irritant or
contaminant, including smoke, vapor, soot, fumes, acids, alkalis,
chemicals and waste. Waste includes materials to be recycled,
reconditioned or reclaimed.
The plaintiffs assert that their loss is not excluded by the pollution exclusion
clause because such exclusions are intended to “exclude coverage for
widespread environmental contamination” and “cat urine odor in a
condominium unit does not constitute environmental contamination.”
Northern argues that the policy language unambiguously defines
“pollutants.” It further argues that, in the context of this case, the cat urine
odor qualifies as a fume or vapor contaminant within the policy’s definition of
pollutant because the plaintiffs “described the condition as ‘a chemical smell
similar to ammonia;’ ‘a toxic odor;’ ‘noxious odor;’ and a ‘persistent, pervasive
odor,’ resulting in the ‘toxic contamination of [the unit].’”
The pollution exclusion clause defines “[p]ollutants,” in relevant part, as
“any . . . irritant or contaminant, including . . . vapor . . . [and] fumes.” We are
not persuaded that this definition is sufficient to render the term
unambiguous. “As other courts have observed, the terms ‘irritant’ and
‘contaminant’ are virtually boundless, for there is no substance or chemical in
existence that would not irritate or damage some person or property.” Nautilus
7
Ins. Co. v. Jabar, 188 F.3d 27, 30 (1st Cir. 1999) (quotation omitted); see also
American States Ins. Co. v. Koloms, 687 N.E.2d 72, 78 (Ill. 1997) (recognizing
that language of pollution exclusion clause is “quite specific on its face, and yet
a literal interpretation of that language results in an application of the clause
which is quite broad” (quotations omitted)). “[C]ontaminant,” although not
defined within the policy, when given its ordinary meaning, is “something
which contaminates”; “contaminate,” in turn, means to “[m]ake impure by
contact or mixture; pollute, corrupt, infect.” 1 Shorter Oxford English
Dictionary 502 (6th ed. 2007). Similarly, “irritant” means “[a]n irritant
substance, body, or agency; a poison etc. which produces irritation”;
“irritation,” in turn, means, in relevant part, “[t]he production of some active
response . . . in an organ, tissue, etc., by the application of a stimulus.” Id. at
1436.
Applying these definitions in a “purely literal interpretation . . . surely
stretch[es] the intended meaning of the policy exclusion,” Nautilus Ins. Co.,
188 F.3d at 30, and could lead to absurd results “contrary to any reasonable
policyholder’s expectations,” Century Sur. Co. v. Casino W., Inc., 329 P.3d 614,
617 (Nev. 2014). For example, “[t]aken at face value, the policy’s definition of a
pollutant is broad enough that it could be read to include items such as soap,
shampoo, rubbing alcohol, and bleach insofar as these items are capable of
reasonably being classified as contaminants or irritants.” Id.; see also
MacKinnon v. Truck Ins. Exchange, 73 P.3d 1205, 1216 (Cal. 2003) (declining
to adopt broad interpretation of pollution exclusion clause to exclude pesticides
sprayed for residential extermination, in part because such an interpretation
“leads to absurd results”). We, therefore, conclude that the definitional phrase
“any . . . irritant or contaminant” is too broad to meaningfully define
“pollutant,” and thus the word is effectively not defined in the policy.
“Where disputed terms are not defined in a policy or by State judicial
precedent, we apply an objective standard, construing the terms in context and
as would a reasonable person in the position of the insured, based upon more
than a casual reading of the policy as a whole.” Panciocco v. Lawyers Title Ins.
Corp., 147 N.H. 610, 613 (2002). Thus, we consider the overall policy,
including the entire pollution exclusion clause, in interpreting the term
“pollutants.”
We agree with the Koloms court, which interpreted similar language,
when it observed that the pollution exclusion clause
(i) identifies the types of injury-producing materials which
constitute a pollutant, i.e., smoke, vapor, soot, etc., (ii) sets forth
the physical or elemental states in which the materials may be said
to exist, i.e., solid, liquid, gaseous or thermal, and (iii) specifies the
various means by which the materials can be disseminated, i.e.,
discharge, dispersal, release or escape.
8
Koloms, 687 N.E.2d at 79. We note, however, that “the terms used in the
pollution exclusion [clause], such as ‘discharge,’ ‘dispersal,’ ‘release,’ and
‘escape,’ are terms of art in environmental law which generally are used with
reference to damage or injury caused by improper disposal or containment of
hazardous waste.” Western Alliance Ins. Co. v. Gill, 686 N.E.2d 997, 999
(Mass. 1997). Furthermore, in addition to these terms, “the exclusion’s
definition of ‘pollutants’ endeavors to particularize the more general words
‘irritant or contaminant’ by reference to ‘smoke, vapor, soot, fumes, acids,
alkalis, chemicals and waste.’” Id. “Each of the latter words brings to mind
products or byproducts of industrial production that may cause environmental
pollution or contamination.” Id. As other courts have noted, a reasonable
policyholder would not expect these terms to exclude injuries or damage
“resulting from everyday activities gone slightly, but not surprisingly, awry.”
Pipefitters Welfare Educ. Fund v. Westchester Fire, 976 F.2d 1037, 1044 (7th
Cir. 1992); see also Western Alliance Ins. Co., 686 N.E.2d at 1000.
Moreover, in Weaver v. Royal Insurance Co. of America, we found
ambiguous a pollution exclusion clause similar to the one at issue here. See
Weaver v. Royal Ins. Co. of America, 140 N.H. 780, 783 (1996). We held that
policy language excluding coverage for injury or damage “‘arising out of the
actual, alleged, or threatened discharge, dispersal, release or escape of
pollutants’” was ambiguous when applied to the facts of that case and,
therefore, did not preclude coverage for the plaintiffs’ claims arising from the
spread of lead paint chips. Id. at 782, 783. We reached this conclusion
because, although the policy broadly defined “‘pollutants,’” it did not define the
terms, “‘discharge, dispersal, release or escape,’” and the policy language was
subject to two reasonable interpretations. See id. at 782, 783.
Northern argues that Weaver is inapplicable because in that case we did
not interpret the term “pollutants” and because Weaver was decided in the
context of third-party liability insurance. We are not persuaded that these
distinctions render our analysis in Weaver inapplicable to this case. As noted
above, we consider the definition of “pollutants” within the context of the
overall policy, including in relation to the terms in the pollution exclusion
clause — “discharge, dispersal, release or escape” — that were at issue in
Weaver. Furthermore, our threshold inquiry — here and in Weaver, regardless
of the context of first or third party liability — is whether two parties can
reasonably disagree about the meaning of the pollution exclusion clause,
rendering it ambiguous. See id. at 783; Barking Dog, 164 N.H. at 84.
Pollution exclusion clauses are standard insurance provisions, that have
“been heavily litigated in numerous . . . jurisdictions, resulting in conflicting
outcomes.” Century Sur. Co., 329 P.3d at 617. Some courts interpret
pollution exclusion clauses, as the plaintiffs here propose, to bar “coverage for
only those injuries allegedly caused by traditional environmental pollution.”
State Farm Fire & Casualty Co. v. Dantzler, 852 N.W.2d 918, 923 & n.23 (Neb.
9
2014) (citing cases). “Other courts interpret pollution exclusions as excluding
coverage for all injuries allegedly caused by pollutants, because the exclusions
are unambiguous as a matter of law.” Id. at 923 & n.24 (citing cases). As we
concluded in Weaver, “[b]oth interpretations . . . are reasonable” and, therefore,
“[b]ecause there are two reasonable interpretations of the policy language, we
conclude that the pollution exclusion [clause] is ambiguous.” Weaver, 140
N.H. at 783.
“When policy language is ambiguous, the language subject to different
interpretations is construed in favor of the insured, and the insured’s
reasonable expectations of coverage are considered.” Titan Holdings Syndicate
v. City of Keene, N.H., 898 F.2d 265, 270 (1st Cir. 1990); see also Trombly v.
Blue Cross/Blue Shield, 120 N.H. 764, 770-72 (1980). Northern focuses on
the terms “fumes” and “vapor” in the definition of “pollutants” to argue that the
pollution exclusion clause contemplated cat urine odor and, therefore, that the
reasonable expectations of the insured exclude coverage. However, the cases it
cites to support this position deal with industrial or commercial facilities and
not “everyday activities gone slightly . . . awry.” Pipefitters, 976 F.2d at 1044.
For example, Travelers Property Casualty Co. of America v. Chubb Custom
involved a suit alleging “harmful and ill-smelling odors, hazardous substances
and contaminated wastewater” that “escape[d]” onto nearby properties from a
2,800-sow production facility in which pig excrement was collected and stored
in a large pit. Travelers Property Cas. Co. of Am. v. Chubb Custom, 864 F.
Supp. 2d 301, 305 (E.D. Pa. 2012) (quotation omitted). Similarly, Wakefield
Pork, Inc. v. Ram Mutual Insurance Co., dealt with allegations of “extremely
noxious and offensive odors and gases” from a nearby pig-feeding operation
that stored and spread more than one million gallons of manure. Wakefield
Pork, Inc. v. Ram Mut. Ins. Co., 731 N.W.2d 154, 157 (Minn. Ct. App. 2007)
(quotation omitted). In City of Spokane v. United National Insurance Co., the
court concluded that an average policy purchaser would have understood that
the pollution exclusion clauses at issue excluded coverage for liability arising
from odors that met the local regulatory definitions of “‘air contaminant’” and
were emitted by a compost facility that was registered as an “‘air contaminant
source.’” City of Spokane v. United Nat. Ins. Co., 190 F. Supp. 2d 1209, 1219-
20 (E.D. Wash. 2002); see also Kruger Commodities, Inc. v. U.S. Fidelity and
Guar., 923 F. Supp. 1474, 1476, 1479 (M.D. Ala. 1996) (concluding that
reasonable person would have understood that pollution exclusion clause
included odors produced by processing animal carcasses at nearby plant).
Although an insured may have reasonably understood that the pollution
exclusion clause precluded coverage for damages resulting from odors
emanating from large-scale farms, waste-processing facilities, or other
industrial settings, these circumstances are distinguishable from those before
us, which involve an odor created in a private residence by common domestic
animals. See Western Alliance Ins. Co., 686 N.E.2d at 999 (recognizing that
“an insured could reasonably have understood the provision at issue to exclude
10
coverage for injury caused by certain forms of industrial pollution, but not
coverage for injury allegedly caused by the presence of leaded materials in a
private residence” (quotation omitted)). In addition, although Northern
emphasizes that the plaintiffs referred to the cat urine odor as “‘a chemical
smell similar to ammonia,’” we do not believe that the reference to “ammonia”
in this context triggers the pollution exclusion clause. Admittedly, some courts
have concluded that ammonia is a pollutant within the meaning of similar
pollution exclusion clauses. See, e.g., Deni Associates v. State Farm Ins., 711
So. 2d 1135, 1136, 1140-41 (Fla. 1998) (concluding that pollution exclusion
clause was unambiguous and excluded from coverage ammonia spilled from
blueprint machine because ammonia is “a colorless, gaseous alkaline
compound which is extremely pungent in smell” and “an extremely hazardous
substance, the release of which is known to have serious adverse effects to
human health”); Union Ins. Co. v. Mendoza, 405 Fed. Appx. 270, 276 (10th Cir.
2010) (ammonia fertilizer). These cases, however, involved chemical spills that
may more readily be within the insured’s reasonable expectations of the
exclusion than is the ammonia-like smell of cat urine. Furthermore, not all
courts addressing ammonia spills have concluded that the pollution exclusion
clause precluded coverage. See SEMX Corp. v. Federal Ins. Co., 398 F. Supp.
2d 1103, 1121 (S.D. Cal. 2005) (denying summary judgment for insurer
regarding breach of contract cause of action with respect to third party claims
because pollution exclusion clause did not bar coverage for claims arising out
of accidental release of ammonia). Consequently, we hold that the pollution
exclusion clause is ambiguous when applied to the facts of this case and, as
such, does not preclude coverage for the plaintiffs’ claims. See Trombly, 120
N.H. at 770-72. Accordingly, the trial court’s decision regarding this issue is
reversed.
IV. Coverage D
Finally, the plaintiffs argue that the trial court misinterpreted the policy
and erroneously concluded that Coverage D provides coverage only when the
loss of use of the property results from an identified peril in the policy. They
argue that the plain language of the policy, including an endorsement
expanding the scope of coverage under Coverage D to include “‘loss[es] covered
under this Section,’” does not require that the alleged loss be attributable to
one of the sixteen enumerated perils in the main policy. Northern asserts that
the plaintiffs have waived their right to present this argument on appeal
because they did not first make it before the trial court in opposition to the
motion for summary judgment.
We generally do not consider issues raised on appeal that were not
presented to the trial court. In the Matter of Nassar & Nassar, 156 N.H. 769,
780 (2008). This preservation requirement recognizes that, ordinarily, trial
courts should have an opportunity to rule upon issues and to correct errors
before they are presented to the appellate court. Id. Here, Northern’s motion
11
for summary judgment asked the trial court to interpret Coverage D by
asserting that coverage under that provision was limited to losses caused by
the enumerated perils. The trial court ruled on this issue, concluding that
none of the perils includes odors. Thus, on Northern’s request, the trial court
interpreted the precise language that is before us. That the plaintiffs now posit
an interpretation not articulated before the trial court is of no consequence.
See Mutrie, 167 N.H. at 111 (recognizing that interpretation of insurance policy
language is question of law). We interpret insurance policy language de novo,
Cogswell Farm Condo. Ass’n, 167 N.H. at ___, and, therefore, are
unconstrained by the specific arguments presented to the trial court.
Accordingly, we conclude that the interpretation of Coverage D is properly
before us.
Coverage D, which insures against the loss of use of the covered
property, contains two provisions that are relevant here. The main policy
describes coverage under the first of these provisions as follows:
1. If a loss by a Peril Insured Against under this policy to
covered property or the building containing the property,
makes the “residence premises” not fit to live in, we cover
. . . either . . . Additional Living Expense . . . or . . . Fair
Rental Value.
(Emphasis added). However, an endorsement, which includes special
provisions for New Hampshire, modifies this provision, stating:
COVERAGE D — LOSS OF USE
Item 1. is deleted and replaced by the following:
1. If a loss covered under this Section [I] makes that part of the
“residence premises” where you reside not fit to live in, we
cover the Additional Living Expense . . . .
(Emphasis added.) The second relevant provision of Coverage D, included in
the main policy and not amended by the endorsement, states:
2. If a loss covered under this Section [I] makes that part of the
“residence premises” rented to others or held for rental by you
not fit to live in, we cover the: Fair Rental Value . . . .
(Emphasis added.) Thus, neither provision limits coverage to losses
attributable to one of the enumerated perils. Rather, they provide coverage for
losses “covered under this Section [I].” Because Coverage D is in Section I, as
is Coverage A, the plaintiffs are entitled to coverage under Coverage D if their
losses are covered under Coverage A.
12
To determine whether there is coverage for the plaintiffs’ alleged losses
under Coverage A, we look to the main policy as amended by the Coverage A
endorsement. The main policy limits losses covered under Section I to direct
physical loss caused by sixteen enumerated perils. However, the endorsement
to Coverage A eliminated the enumerated “Perils Insured Against” and
described coverage as:
Perils Insured Against
We insure against risk of direct loss to property described in
Coverage A, only if that loss is a physical loss to property.
Thus, coverage under Coverage A is dependent upon whether the loss is a
“physical loss.” Because we have vacated the trial court’s decision that the
plaintiffs did not suffer a “physical loss,” and were, therefore, not entitled to
coverage under Coverage A, we also vacate the trial court’s ruling that Northern
was entitled to judgment as a matter of law with regard to Coverage D, and
remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Vacated in part; reversed
in part; and remanded.
BASSETT, J., and ARNOLD, J., retired superior court justice, specially
assigned under RSA 490:3, concurred; LYNN, J., with whom DALIANIS, C.J.,
joined, dissented.
LYNN, J., dissenting. Because I believe that cat urine unambiguously
falls within the terms of the insurance policy’s pollution exclusion clause, I
would affirm the trial court’s ruling that this clause precludes coverage for the
plaintiffs’ claims. Therefore, I respectfully dissent.
The pollution exclusion clause states that Northern does not insure
against loss caused by:
Discharge, dispersal, seepage, migration, release or escape of
pollutants unless the discharge, dispersal, seepage, migration,
release or escape is itself caused by a Peril Insured Against under
Coverage C of this policy.1
The clause contains a specific definition of “pollutants”:
Pollutants means any solid, liquid, gaseous or thermal irritant or
contaminant, including smoke, vapor, soot, fumes, acids, alkalis,
chemicals and waste. Waste includes materials to be recycled,
reconditioned or reclaimed.
1 Neither party contends that cat urine is a Peril Insured Against under Coverage C of the policy.
13
The ordinary meaning of contaminant, as stated by the majority, is
“something which contaminates.” 1 Shorter Oxford English Dictionary 502
(6th ed. 2007). “Contaminate” means to “[m]ake impure by contact or mixture;
pollute, corrupt, infect.” Id. “Infect,” in turn, means to “[c]ontaminate (air,
water, etc.) with harmful organisms or noxious matter; make harmful to
health”; and to “affect or impregnate with a (freq. noxious) substance; taint.”
Id. at 1375. And finally, “taint” means to “[a]ffect, esp. to a slight degree;
imbue slightly with some bad or undesirable quality.” 2 Shorter Oxford
English Dictionary 3166 (6th ed. 2007).
The cat urine at issue in this case fits squarely within the plain and
ordinary meaning of contaminant, and is thus a “pollutant” as defined in the
pollution exclusion clause. The cat urine was described as “a chemical smell
similar to ammonia”; “a noxious odor”; and a “persistent, pervasive odor” that
resulted in the “toxic contamination” of the apartment. Based upon these
descriptions, it is clear that the cat urine, a noxious substance, imbued the
plaintiffs’ apartment with a bad or undesirable quality — the chemical-like,
noxious odor of cat urine. A health inspector also advised the plaintiffs to
vacate the apartment due to health risks, which shows that the cat urine
contaminated the air in the apartment to the extent that it made it harmful to
health. In short, the cat urine plainly qualifies as a pollutant as defined by the
pollution exclusion clause.
Because the term “pollutant” is unambiguously defined within the policy
in clear language, I would not look beyond the policy language in determining
that the plaintiffs’ claims are precluded by the pollution exclusion clause. See
Barking Dog, 164 N.H. at 83-84. This approach is in keeping with the rulings
of many courts, which likewise interpret pollution exclusion clauses by looking
to the plain meaning of the terms as defined in the text of such clauses. See,
e.g., United Fire & Cas. v. Titan Contractors Service, 751 F.3d 880, 884 (8th
Cir. 2014); American States Ins. Co. v. Nethery, 79 F.3d 473, 475-76 (5th Cir.
1996); Mountain States Mut. Cas. Co. v. Roinestad, 296 P.3d 1020, 1024-25
(Colo. 2013); Bituminous Cas. v. Sand Livestock Systems, 728 N.W.2d 216,
221 (Iowa 2007); Midwest Family Mut. Ins. Co. v. Wolters, 831 N.W.2d 628,
637 (Minn. 2013); State Farm Fire & Casualty Co. v. Dantzler, 852 N.W.2d 918,
925 (Neb. 2014); TravCo Ins. Co. v. Ward, 736 S.E.2d 321, 329-30 (Va. 2012);
Peace v. Northwestern Nat. Ins., 596 N.W.2d 429, 438-39 (Wis. 1999).
The majority, on the other hand, states that a “purely literal
interpretation” of pollutant, as defined within the exclusion clause, would
“stretch the intended meaning of the policy exclusion” and potentially lead to
absurd results. Supra at 8; see Century Sur. Co. v. Casino W., Inc., 329 P.3d
614, 617 (Nev. 2014). It points out that such everyday objects as “soap,
shampoo, rubbing alcohol, and bleach” could be considered pollutants under a
plain reading of the statutory language. Supra at 8; see Century Sur. Co., 329
P.3d at 617. Accordingly, the majority concludes that the “definitional phrase
14
‘any . . . irritant or contaminant’ is too broad to meaningfully define pollutant
within the policy.” Supra at 8.
But merely because the exclusion is broad does not mean that it eludes
definition and is thus ambiguous, and it is ambiguity, not breadth, that
provides the license for us to look beyond the policy’s text. “The pertinent
inquiry is not . . . whether the policy’s definition of ‘pollutant’ is so broad that
virtually any substance . . . could be said to come within its ambit.” Madison
Const. v. Harleysville Mut. Ins., 735 A.2d 100, 107 (Pa. 1999). “Rather, guided
by the principle that ambiguity (or the lack thereof) is to be determined by
reference to a particular set of facts, we focus on the specific product at issue.”
Id. That many items could satisfy the definition of “pollutant” does not change
the fact that this term is clearly defined in the policy, making it improper to set
aside the policy’s language in order to redefine the term using outside sources.
See Landshire Fast Foods v. Employers Mut. Cas., 676 N.W.2d 528, 532 (Wis.
Ct. App. 2004) (“[A]lthough various forms of matter can constitute
contamination, the term is not itself reasonably susceptible to multiple
meanings.” (quotation omitted)); see also Weaver v. Royal Ins. Co. of America,
140 N.H. 780, 782 (1996) (“Where disputed terms are not defined in the policy
. . . we construe them in context and in the light of what a more than casual
reading of the policy would reveal to an ordinarily intelligent insured.”
(quotation omitted; emphasis added)). Because “pollutant” is clearly defined in
the policy, and thus not ambiguous, this court’s analysis should be limited to
the terms of the policy. See White v. Vermont Mutual Insurance Co., 167 N.H.
153, 157 (2014).
Because the majority reaches the contrary conclusion that the term
“pollutant” is undefined, it relies upon case law which reasons that other terms
used in the pollution exclusion clause, “such as ‘discharge,’ ‘dispersal,’
‘release,’ and ‘escape,’ are terms of art in environmental law which generally
are used with reference to damage or injury caused by improper disposal or
containment of hazardous waste.” Western Alliance Ins. Co. v. Gill, 686 N.E.2d
997, 999 (Mass. 1997). The meaning of those same terms was at issue in
Weaver, the case upon which the majority relies to conclude that the term
“pollutant” is ambiguous. See Weaver, 140 N.H. at 782.
In Weaver, the court did not rely upon the plain and ordinary meaning of
“discharge,” “dispersal,” “release” and “escape” in its analysis, despite the fact
that these terms are in everyday usage in the English language and readily
susceptible of simple dictionary definitions.2 Instead, the court resorted to
2 “Discharge” is defined as follows: “release from”; “[t]he act of sending or pouring out; ejection;
(the rate or amount of) emission.” 1 Shorter Oxford English Dictionary 696-97 (6th ed. 2007).
“Dispersal” means “[t]he action of dispersing”; to “disperse,” in turn, means to “[d]rive, throw, or
send in different directions; scatter, rout”; “[c]ause (esp. something unpleasant) to disappear;
dispel, dissipate.” Id. at 710. “Escape” is to “leak or seep out; pass out. Of an object: come out
(as if) from confinement.” Id. at 861-62. And “release” means to “[s]et or make free”; “allow to
15
extraneous sources — specifically, its understanding of the historical genesis of
pollution exclusion clauses as a response to environmental litigation beginning
in the 1970s — as indicative of an intent to exclude from coverage only claims
of traditional environmental pollution. Id. at 782-83; see Century Sur. Co.,
329 P.3d at 617; Wolters, 831 N.W.2d at 635 (citing cases). Seemingly guided
by this history, it concluded that the terms “discharge,” “dispersal,” “release”
and “escape” were ambiguous.3 Weaver, 140 N.H. at 782-83. However, “the
mere fact that parties disagree on the meaning of terms does not establish
ambiguity.” Sand Livestock Systems, 728 N.W.2d at 221 (quotation omitted);
see also Landshire Fast Foods, 676 N.W.2d at 532. “An ambiguity exists only if
the language of the exclusion is susceptible to two interpretations.” Sand
Livestock Systems, 728 N.W.2d at 222 (quotation omitted). “We may not refer
to extrinsic evidence in order to create ambiguity. Instead, we must enforce
unambiguous exclusions as written.” Id. (citations omitted).
Nothing in the plain and unambiguous language of the pollution
exclusion clause supports the Weaver court’s conclusion that these terms are
meant to be defined as environmental terms of art. See Dantzler, 852 N.W.2d
at 925 (“The language of the policy does not specifically limit excluded claims to
traditional environmental damage; nor does the pollution exclusion purport to
limit materials that qualify as pollutants to those that cause traditional
environmental damage.” (quotation omitted)); Sand Livestock Systems, 728
N.W.2d at 221 (“[T]he plain language of the exclusions at issue here makes no
distinction between ‘traditional environmental pollution’ and injuries arising
from normal business operations.”). Thus, it is difficult to justify the Weaver
court’s conclusion that these terms are ambiguous and could be reasonably
read as so-called “environmental terms of art,” when the court itself created the
ambiguity by resorting to outside sources, rather than the plain language, to
define the terms. The majority extends Weaver’s dubious reasoning by
applying it to this case, in which the term at issue — “pollutant” — is
move, drop, or operate, by removing a restraining part; let go.” 2 Shorter Oxford English
Dictionary 2520 (6th ed. 2007).
3 Under the reasoning of the courts that find the pollution exclusion clause ambiguous, if the
plaintiffs’ residence had been contaminated by fumes from a leaking gasoline storage tank of a
commercial filling station located next door to their property, presumably this would constitute
traditional environmental pollution for which coverage would be barred under the pollution
exclusion clause. But if instead the fumes emanated from a leaking heating oil tank located in the
basement of the plaintiffs’ own property, or a leaking gas tank of a vehicle parked in the plaintiffs’
garage, coverage would be available. It is impossible to justify such disparate results based upon
the plain meaning of the language used in the pollution exclusion clause. The Supreme Court of
Minnesota has acknowledged this troubling potential for inconsistent results, stating, “as
attractive as it might be to use the ‘traditional environmental pollution’ definition as a route to
compensation for the injured parties, that formulation has its own risks and complications.”
Wolters, 831 N.W.2d at 638. The fact that the appellants did “not propose a definition of
‘traditional environmental pollution,’” combined with the “significant pressure on the . . .
government to expand the definition of what constitutes ‘pollution,’” led the court to conclude that
“[t]he likely result of adopting the formulation urged by appellants would be inconsistency in
determining when the absolute exclusion applies.” Id.
16
specifically defined in the policy. By relying upon Weaver’s analysis to
conclude that the term “pollutant” is ambiguous, the majority likewise ignores
the plain language of the policy and creates ambiguity where none exists.
Denying coverage here might be thought to produce an unfortunate
result, but in my view it is the result that a correct application of the law
demands. “Were we in a position to construe ambiguous policy language, we
would indeed prefer an interpretation that avoided harsh or unreasonable
results.” Catholic Med. Ctr. v. Executive Risk Indem., 151 N.H. 699, 702
(2005). “[W]hile we have the duty to construe an insurance contract in a
reasonable manner, we are not free to rewrite its terms by giving them a
meaning which they never had.” Id. (quotation and brackets omitted). “[W]hen
a policy’s meaning and intent are clear, it is not the prerogative of the courts to
create ambiguities where none exist or to rewrite the contract in attempting to
avoid harsh results.” Id. at 703 (quotation omitted). I share the view of the
Supreme Court of Minnesota that if the pollution exclusion clause is regarded
as overly broad, the remedy must be found in the market place or through
legislative action rather than through creative judicial construction of clear
policy language. See Wolters, 831 N.W.2d at 638.
For the reasons stated above, I respectfully dissent.
DALIANIS, C.J., joins in this dissent.
17