THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2014-0720, Gregg Blackstock v. Executive
Assistant, Adult Parole Board & a., the court on June 9, 2016,
issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties and the
record submitted on appeal, the court concludes that a formal written opinion
is unnecessary in the case. The petitioner, Gregg Blackstock, appeals an order
of the Superior Court (Wageling, J.) dismissing his writ of mandamus against
the respondents, the executive assistant to the Adult Parole Board (APB) and
the New Hampshire Department of Corrections (DOC). We affirm.
I. Background
The following facts are derived from the trial court’s order or appear in
the record. In 2001, the petitioner was sentenced to four sentences of five to
ten years of incarceration on four counts of aggravated felonious sexual
assault. Three sentences were to run consecutively and one sentence was to
run concurrently.
The petitioner began serving his initial sentence on January 12, 2001,
and received a 95-day credit based upon his pretrial confinement. On August
18, 2005, the APB held the petitioner’s first parole hearing, after which it
denied parole. On January 5, 2006, the APB held a second hearing, after
which it granted the petitioner parole from his initial sentence to his first
consecutive sentence.
Nearly five years later, on November 4, 2010, the APB conducted a third
hearing, after which the petitioner was denied parole. On October 10, 2011,
the APB conducted a fourth hearing, after which the petitioner was granted
parole to his final consecutive sentence. The petitioner remains incarcerated,
and is currently serving his final sentence. The maximum term of this
sentence is set to expire on October 9, 2021.
In May 2014, the petitioner filed a petition for writ of mandamus against
the APB, asserting that it impermissibly paroled him to consecutive sentences
and improperly conducted his parole hearings in advance of his minimum
parole eligibility date. He contended that, as a result, his minimum term of
incarceration was increased by at least one year. The petitioner requested,
among other things, that the court: (1) order the APB to “cease and desist” all
parole hearings until his aggregate minimum parole eligibility date, which he
asserted was governed by RSA 651:20, I(a)(2) (Supp. 2015); and (2) order the
DOC to re-calculate his minimum parole eligibility date based upon an
aggregate minimum term of 15 years.
The APB moved to dismiss, arguing that: (1) “the APB properly
considered [the petitioner] for administrative parole at the end of his first two
consecutive sentences, and properly calculated the minimum parole date for
his final sentence”; and (2) the petitioner erroneously relied upon RSA 651:20,
I(a)(2), which applies to suspended sentences, rather than RSA chapter 651-A
(2007 & Supp. 2015), which governs parole. The petitioner objected, arguing
that: (1) RSA 651-A:6, II (2007) (repealed 2008), which was the applicable
statute in effect at the time of his offenses, convictions, and sentencing,
governed the calculation of “the minimum parole eligibility date for an inmate
serving multiple consecutive sentences”; (2) pursuant to RSA 651-A:6, II, he
had to serve only the total of the minimum terms of his two longest sentences,
ten years, before becoming eligible for parole from prison; (3) application of the
current version of RSA 651-A:6, see RSA 651-A:6 (Supp. 2015), would violate
his federal constitutional guarantee against ex post facto laws; and (4) the APB
lacked the authority to parole him to consecutive sentences. The petitioner
requested, among other things, that the court: (1) order “the DOC to calculate
[his] sentence pursuant to RSA 651-A:6, [II] as it existed during the date of the
charged offense, making [him] time eligible for parole (to society) after he had
served the minimum portions of the two [longest] sentences imposed”; and (2)
order “the APB to conduct a parole hearing (to society) . . . forthwith for [him]
using only the mandated criteria pursuant to State statutes and promulgated
rules.”
The trial court held a hearing on the matter on July 11, 2014. After the
hearing, the petitioner filed a motion to amend, seeking to add the DOC as a
respondent, which the court granted. Also, after the hearing, the parties filed
supplemental briefs. In August 2014, the court issued an order granting the
respondents’ request for dismissal. The court ruled that: (1) the now repealed
RSA 651-A:6, II set forth the calculation of “the duration of parole once an
inmate was released, not the length of a minimum sentence required in order
for an inmate to be considered for parole”; (2) even assuming the petitioner’s
interpretation of RSA 651-A:6, II is correct, application of the current version of
RSA 651-A:6 “does not constitute an ex post facto law because it does not
increase [the petitioner’s] punishment”; (3) “the APB did not act outside its
jurisdiction in considering [the petitioner] for parole after each of his first two
minimum sentences”; and (4) the APB did not lack jurisdiction to consider the
petitioner for parole even though he would be paroled to a consecutive
sentence, rather than released from prison. The petitioner filed a motion for
reconsideration, which the court denied. This appeal followed.
2
II. Standard of Review
“In reviewing the trial court’s grant of a motion to dismiss, we consider
whether the allegations in the [petitioner’s] pleadings are reasonably
susceptible of a construction that would permit recovery.” England v. Brianas,
166 N.H. 369, 371 (2014). “We assume that the [petitioner’s] factual
allegations are true and construe all reasonable inferences in the light most
favorable to him.” Id. “We need not, however, assume the truth of statements
that are merely conclusions of law.” Id. “We then engage in a threshold
inquiry, testing the facts alleged in the pleadings against the applicable law.”
Id. (quotation omitted). “We will uphold the trial court’s grant of a motion to
dismiss if the facts pleaded do not constitute a basis for legal relief.” Id.
(quotation omitted).
III. Interpretation of RSA 651-A:6, II
The petitioner first argues that the trial court erred in ruling that RSA
651-A:6, II set forth the calculation of the duration of parole upon release from
prison, not the calculation of the minimum parole eligibility date for an inmate
serving multiple sentences. Specifically, he contends that: (1) legislative
history supports the conclusion that RSA 651-A:6, II concerned the minimum
parole eligibility date of an inmate serving multiple sentences; (2) inclusion of
RSA 651:3, III (1974) (repealed 1975) in RSA 651-A:6, II did not affect the
applicability of RSA 651-A:6, II; (3) the rule of lenity should apply in favor of his
interpretation of RSA 651-A:6, II; and (4) federal district court case law
supports the conclusion that RSA 651-A:6, II addressed parole eligibility. The
respondents assert that: (1) the trial court properly concluded that, based upon
the plain language of RSA 651-A:6 (2007) (amended 2008, 2010, 2011, 2013,
2014), RSA 651-A:6, II set forth the calculation of the duration of parole upon
release from prison, not the calculation of the minimum parole eligibility date
for an inmate serving multiple sentences; (2) legislative history supports the
trial court’s conclusion that RSA 651-A:6, II concerned the duration of parole,
not parole eligibility; (3) the longstanding practice of the APB of paroling an
inmate serving multiple sentences to society only after he or she has served all
of his or her minimum terms supports the conclusion that RSA 651-A:6, II did
not address parole eligibility; and (4) the petitioner’s interpretation of RSA
651-A:6, II produces an absurd result.
“Because resolution of this issue requires the interpretation of a statute,
our review is de novo.” State v. Gilley, 168 N.H. 188, 189 (2015). “In matters
of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the intent of the
legislature as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole.” Id.
“We construe provisions of the Criminal Code according to the fair import of
their terms and to promote justice.” Id. “We first look to the language of the
statute itself, and, if possible, construe that language according to its plain and
ordinary meaning.” Id. “Further, we interpret legislative intent from the
3