THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2014-0615, In the Matter of Robert Stack, Jr.
and Kerry Stack, the court on September 16, 2015, issued the
following order:
Having considered the briefs, memorandum of law, and oral arguments
of the parties, the court concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary
in this case. The petitioner, Robert Stack, Jr., appeals an order of the Circuit
Court (Moran, J.) in the petitioner’s divorce from the respondent, Kerry Stack.
We affirm.
The trial court found, or the record supports, the following facts. The
parties were married in 2000 and separated in 2012. Four children were born
of the marriage. In 2013, the petitioner filed a petition for divorce. Thereafter,
the parties agreed to a partial final decree of divorce, which awarded one of the
parties’ motor vehicles to the petitioner “free and clear of any interest of [the
respondent],” and awarded the respondent the remaining two vehicles “free and
clear of any interest of [the petitioner].”
Following a hearing, the court granted a decree of divorce to the parties
based upon irreconcilable differences, and issued an order adopting the parties’
stipulation and resolving the matters that remained in dispute. In that order,
the court provided that “neither party shall pay child support to the other.”
The court explained that, “[a]lthough [the respondent] earns approximately
$6,000.00 more per month than [the petitioner], and arguably could be
required to pay $1,223.00 a month in child support to [the petitioner],” the
parties had “approximately equal parenting time” and the child support
obligation was “off-set by [the respondent’s] agreement to provide health
insurance for the children” and “be 100% responsible” for many of the
children’s expenses. According to the court, the expenses that the respondent
agreed to be responsible for exceeded $1,800 per month, and, thus,
“compensate[d] for the discrepancy in income.”
Regarding the three motor vehicles, the court observed that the parties
agreed to allocate them pursuant to their stipulation. However, because the
court found that the vehicle awarded to the petitioner had a higher value than
the combined value of the two vehicles awarded to the respondent, the court
offset that additional value by allocating other assets to the respondent.
Further, the court ordered that, if the petitioner remained on the respondent’s
health insurance plan, the petitioner would be responsible for paying the
respondent approximately $123 per week.
Thereafter, each party filed a motion for reconsideration and clarification.
In response to the motions, the court ordered, in relevant part, that the
petitioner is “required to pay the premium payments associated with
maintaining health insurance coverage for him[] only if there is an out-of-
pocket cost to [the respondent] for the maintenance of said coverage.” This
appeal followed.
A trial court has broad discretion in fashioning a final decree of divorce.
In the Matter of Spenard & Spenard, 167 N.H. 1, 3 (2014). Its discretion
necessarily encompasses decisions concerning child support and property
distribution. Id. We will not overturn a trial court’s rulings absent an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. Id. This means that we review the record
only to determine whether it contains an objective basis to sustain the trial
court’s discretionary judgments. Id. If the court’s findings can reasonably be
made on the evidence presented, they will stand. Id.
The petitioner first argues that the trial court erred by failing to include a
benefit of the respondent’s employment — “Choice Pay” — in her gross income
for the purposes of calculating child support. See RSA 458-C:2, IV (2004)
(defining gross income for child support purposes). The respondent receives
approximately $1,900 worth of Choice Pay benefits each month, and has the
option to either receive such benefits as a taxable cash payment or use them to
purchase a wide variety of other benefits, including medical and dental plans,
life insurance, or retirement plans. According to the petitioner, because the
respondent has the option to receive her Choice Pay benefits as cash, the
$1,900 “is similar to [a] cash benefit” that should have been included in her
gross income when calculating child support. See In the Matter of Clark &
Clark, 154 N.H. 420, 423 (2006) (explaining that the items particularized in
RSA 458-C:2, IV “share two characteristics[:] First, they are payable in money,
and second, they are things that, as a general matter, the recipient has a legal
right to obtain and which the provider has a legal obligation to give”). The
petitioner asserts that, had the sum been included in the respondent’s gross
income for the purpose of calculating child support, the calculation would have
“result[ed] in a higher guidelines support figure.”
To the extent that this argument requires us to engage in statutory
interpretation, our review is de novo. In the Matter of Hampers & Hampers,
166 N.H. 422, 433 (2014). However, we need not decide whether the Choice
Pay benefits that the respondent receives each month should have been
included in her gross income for the purpose of calculating child support,
because: (1) this argument fails to account for the fact that the amount of
child support is calculated based upon the parents’ net income, not their gross
income; and (2) in light of the guidelines worksheet prepared by the petitioner,
the resolution of the issue has no material impact on the final child support
calculation. See RSA 458-C:2, I(e) (Supp. 2014) (defining adjusted gross
income for child support purposes to be, in relevant part, gross income less
2
medical support obligation for the children); RSA 458-C:2, VI (2004) (defining
net income for child support purposes to be the parents’ combined adjusted
gross income less various standard deductions); RSA 458-C:3 (Supp. 2014)
(explaining that the child support guidelines are generally based upon a
percentage of the parents’ net income).
In the child support guidelines worksheet that the petitioner submitted
to the trial court, after including the approximately $1,900 worth of Choice Pay
benefits in the respondent’s gross income, the petitioner deducted
approximately $1,900 for “[m]edical support for [the] children.” See RSA 458-
C:2, I(e). As a consequence of the medical support deduction, the petitioner
effectively nullified whatever impact including the Choice Pay amount may
have had upon the child support calculation, as that calculation is based upon
gross income less deductions such as for the children’s medical support. See
id.
Specifically, a comparison of the gross income figures used by each party
(less the respective deductions each party took for the children’s medical
support), reveals that the two net amounts differ by less than $10. This is so
because, although the respondent did not include the Choice Pay benefits in
her gross income on her guidelines worksheet, she deducted less than $60 for
the children’s medical support. Accordingly, including the respondent’s Choice
Pay benefits in her gross income — and utilizing the medical support deduction
in the petitioner’s worksheet — would have had a negligible impact on the
ultimate child support obligation.
The petitioner next argues that the trial court erred by failing to include,
in the respondent’s gross income for the purposes of calculating child support,
the $123 per week that he was ordered to pay the respondent should he wish
to remain on her health insurance plan. We disagree.
The trial court initially ordered the petitioner to pay the respondent $123
per week, and it subsequently clarified that it required the petitioner “to pay
the premium payments associated with maintaining health insurance coverage
for [the petitioner][] only if there is an out-of-pocket cost to [the respondent] for
the maintenance of said coverage.” (Emphasis added.) The court’s subsequent
order, thus, clarified that the respondent would receive a payment from the
petitioner only as a reimbursement for costs that she was required to pay to
maintain the petitioner on her health insurance plan. Accordingly, the
respondent’s receipt of this money from the petitioner would not increase the
respondent’s available income for child support. See In the Matter of Woolsey
& Woolsey, 164 N.H. 301, 305 (2012) (recognizing “the importance of the
availability of income to the obligor for child support”). Therefore, we conclude
that the trial court did not unsustainably exercise its discretion when it did not
include the reimbursement payments in the respondent’s gross income for
child support purposes.
3