THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2014-0729, Brentwood Distribution, LLC v.
Town of Exeter, the court on July 7, 2016, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
respondent, the Town of Exeter (Exeter), appeals orders of the Superior Court
(Delker, J.) in which the trial court concluded that Exeter’s posting of a weight
limit on Pine Road was unlawful, enjoined its enforcement, and ordered Exeter
to pay the attorney’s fees and costs incurred by three businesses which
challenged the posting. One of the intervenors in the case, the Town of
Brentwood, cross-appeals the trial court’s denial of its request for attorney’s
fees. We conclude that: (1) the trial court erred when it decided that the
posting was unlawful; and (2) none of the three businesses or the Town of
Brentwood is entitled to attorney’s fees. Therefore, we reverse in part and
affirm in part.
The trial court found, or the record supports, the following facts. Pine
Road begins at the intersection of Route 27 in Exeter, and continues into
Brentwood. Exeter’s section of Pine Road is sparsely populated, but there are
several businesses located on Pine Road in Brentwood, including the petitioner,
Brentwood Distribution, LLC (Brentwood Distribution), and The Quikrete
Companies, Inc. (Quikrete) and Northern Elastomeric, Inc. (NEI). These
businesses use heavy trucks that travel over Pine Road on a daily basis.
In the spring of 2010, the Exeter Highway Department Superintendent
recommended to the Exeter Board of Selectmen (Exeter Board) that Pine Road
be rebuilt and upgraded. In April and July 2010, town officials from Exeter
met with officials from the Town of Brentwood to discuss whether, because the
trucks from Brentwood businesses were damaging the road, the Town of
Brentwood would contribute to the upgrade. A Brentwood selectman said that
a warrant article would be submitted at the next town meeting to pay the Town
of Brentwood’s share of the cost of the road upgrade.
In July, the Exeter Board discussed various options regarding Pine Road,
including posting the road with a weight limit of eight tons in accordance with
RSA 231:191 (2009). RSA 231:191, I, provides, in pertinent part, that “[t]he
governing body of a municipality may establish maximum weight limits . . . for
any class IV, V, or VI highway,” which includes Pine Road, “when the highway
agent determines that such highway requires postings to prevent unreasonable
damage or extraordinary municipal maintenance expense.” The Exeter Board
decided to upgrade the road, and did not post the road with a weight limit. The
upgrade was completed in July 2010.
Following the upgrade, the Brentwood Board of Selectmen included an
article in the warrant for the 2011 town meeting authorizing the Town of
Brentwood to pay Exeter a portion of the cost of upgrading the road. The
warrant article did not pass. After learning that the warrant article failed,
Exeter town officials revisited the issue of posting a weight limit on Pine Road,
and renewed their request that the Town of Brentwood contribute to the
upgrade. The Town of Brentwood again refused. In June 2011, pursuant to
RSA 231:191, the Exeter Board unanimously voted to post a weight limit of
eight tons on Pine Road.
The following week, a selectman from the Town of Brentwood met with
the Exeter Board and requested that Pine Road not be posted. He stated that
several problems would be created by the posting, including the dangerous
rerouting of heavy trucks to roads in the Town of Brentwood. Exeter agreed to
delay posting the road.
On several occasions over the next few months, the Exeter Board
discussed Pine Road and met with officials from the Town of Brentwood.
Officials from both towns discussed damage to Pine Road that had occurred
after its reconstruction, as well as safety issues at and near the intersection of
Pine Road with Route 27 (Route 27 intersection) that had been caused by the
continuing use of the intersection by the heavy trucks from the Brentwood
businesses. The Exeter Board also continued its futile efforts to have the Town
of Brentwood share the cost of the road upgrade. The trial court found that
during this time the “Exeter selectmen’s primary concerns were recovering the
extra cost the town invested to upgrade the road . . . and the safety of the
intersection with Route 27,” observing that the “overwhelming majority of the
discussion” at meetings during the fall of 2011 “focused on the traffic safety
issues with the Route 27 intersection.” The trial court described the safety
concerns — which, it noted, had been “discussed at length in the Exeter Board
of Selectmen meetings” — as follows:
The record is replete with evidence that the large tractor trailers
entering and [exiting] Pine Road from Route 27 take wide turns
that encroach into oncoming traffic or off-track from the existing
pavement to make the wide turning radius. . . . These issues
create safety concerns regard[ing] the intersection and originate
almost exclusively as a result of the truck traffic from the
Brentwood businesses. But for these oversized trucks, the Route
27 intersection would be adequate for ordinary traffic in Exeter.
2
Further, the minutes of the Exeter Board’s meetings show that Exeter’s
highway agent informed the Exeter Board about the “wear and the tear of Pine
Road” that had been sustained after its reconstruction, stated his safety
concerns about the continuing use of the Route 27 intersection by the large
trucks, and predicted that, if the various safety issues at the intersection were
not addressed, there “w[ould] be a fatal accident out there some day.”
In November 2011, the Exeter Board voted to implement the posting of
Pine Road, and it was posted in December. Shortly thereafter, the attorney for
Brentwood Distribution sent two letters to the Exeter Board, asserting that the
posting was unlawful, and warning that “[l]itigation is the only alternative if the
posting is not removed forthwith.” The posting was not removed, and, in
January 2012, Brentwood Distribution filed a petition in Superior Court
seeking injunctive relief, damages, and attorney’s fees and costs. Brentwood
Distribution alleged that the posting of Pine Road was illegal. Exeter countered
that the request for preliminary relief should be denied because Brentwood
Distribution had failed to exhaust its administrative remedies under RSA
231:191. The trial court granted motions to intervene filed by the Town of
Brentwood, Quikrete, and NEI.
After a hearing, the trial court issued a preliminary injunction enjoining
Exeter from posting the road until after a final hearing on the merits. Soon
thereafter, Exeter filed a cross-claim against the Town of Brentwood, asserting
that the Town of Brentwood was liable for a share of the cost incurred to
upgrade Pine Road, and for a portion of the future costs associated with
upgrading the Route 27 intersection.
Prior to trial, the trial court granted summary judgment in favor of
Exeter on Brentwood Distribution’s claim for damages, concluding that the
actions of the Exeter Board regarding the posting of Pine Road qualified for
discretionary function immunity. See Appeal of N.H. Dep’t of Transp., 159 N.H.
72, 74 (2009) (“When the particular conduct which caused the injury is one
characterized by the high degree of discretion and judgment involved in
weighing alternatives and making choices with respect to public policy and
planning, governmental entities should remain immune from liability.”
(quotation omitted)). This ruling has not been appealed.
Following a bench trial, the trial court permanently enjoined Exeter from
posting the weight limit on Pine Road. The court concluded that Exeter had
failed to comply with RSA 231:191, I, rejecting Exeter’s argument that safety
concerns regarding the use — and impact — of heavy trucks from Brentwood
businesses at the Route 27 intersection provided a lawful basis for posting the
road. In finding that the posting was unlawful, the trial court explained that,
although RSA 231:191, V “suggests that public safety may play a role in [the]
decision” to post a road, the only public safety concerns that could justify the
posting of Pine Road are those attributable specifically to the damage to Pine
3