THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2014-0711, In the Matter of Elizabeth Obrey
and Thomas Obrey, Jr., the court on November 10, 2015,
issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs of the parties, the court concludes that a
formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. Elizabeth Obrey (Wife)
appeals orders of the Circuit Court (Patten, J.) that determined the date from
which Thomas Obrey, Jr. (Husband) was obligated to pay alimony pursuant to
the court’s final decree of divorce. The Husband cross-appeals the court’s
ruling regarding the starting date of his alimony obligation and also challenges
the court’s determination that the final decree imposed no obligation on the
Wife to seek employment during the alimony period. We affirm.
The following facts are derived from the record. The trial court issued a
divorce decree in September 2011. Among other matters addressed in the
decree, the court ordered the Husband to pay alimony for four years from the
first day of the month after issuance of the decree. The court awarded the Wife
monthly alimony of $7,500 “for the first two years following the issuance of this
Divorce Decree” and $3,500 monthly for the next two years. Prior to issuance
of the decree, the Husband had been paying alimony of $10,000 per month
under a previously-issued temporary order.
In deciding upon the alimony award, the trial court imputed income to
the Wife. Specifically, it found that for the third and fourth year after the
divorce, the Wife would have the ability to earn $50,000 annually and that,
thereafter, she would have the ability to earn $100,000 per year. The court
found that “allowing [the Wife] four years to reach her prior maximum earning
level is fair and appropriate.” The court also considered the Wife’s potential
future interest income earned from liquid assets received in the divorce, and
the parties’ marital lifestyle.
The Wife timely appealed the trial court’s final decree. In the appeal, she
raised several issues, some of which related to alimony. See In the Matter of
Elizabeth Obrey & Thomas Obrey, Jr., No. 2011-0825 (N.H. Nov. 9, 2012). The
appeal prevented the final decree from going into effect. Instead, the prior
temporary order remained in place, which had the effect of requiring the
Husband to pay a greater amount in monthly alimony while the appeal was
pending than he would have paid under the final decree.
While the appeal was pending, the Husband moved to have the terms of
the final decree regarding alimony take effect immediately as a temporary order
so that his monthly alimony payments would be lower. The Husband argued,
in part, that the final decree calculated his alimony obligation from the date of
its “issuance” rather than the date when the appeal period expired. The court
denied the Husband’s motion, and the Husband did not appeal that ruling.
On November 9, 2012, we affirmed the final decree in all respects except
one: we remanded on the single issue of the Husband’s obligation to contribute
to the Wife’s IRA account. Following remand, on January 8, 2013, the trial
court resolved the IRA contribution issue, and neither party appealed the
court’s ruling. Hence that ruling became final. A certificate of divorce was
issued on February 9, 2013.
In October 2013, the Husband reduced his alimony payments from
$7,500 per month to $3,500 per month. He contended that two years had
passed since the court issued its September 2011 final orders, thus triggering
the reduction in his alimony obligation. This prompted the Wife to move for a
finding of contempt against the Husband for not paying the full amount of
alimony. She argued that alimony payments were to begin on March 1, 2013,
which was the first day of the month after issuance of the February 2013
certificate of divorce. In turn, the Husband moved to find the Wife in contempt
for failing to seek employment during the period of alimony.
Following a series of hearings, the trial court held that the alimony order
“was issued and effective” on November 28, 2012, the date of this court’s
mandate affirming the alimony provisions of the final decree. The court also
denied the Husband’s motion, reasoning that the alimony award “was based on
imputed income to [the Wife], regardless of whether or not she became
employed and bettered herself. There is no prior order requiring [the Wife] to
do specific things or engage in particular activities, within specific time frames
regarding her employability and employment.” This appeal and cross-appeal
followed.
We first address the parties’ arguments as to the effective date of the
Husband’s alimony obligation. The trial court held that the effective date was
November 28, 2012, because this was the date that our mandate issued from
the first appeal. The Wife disputes the trial court’s interpretation of the
applicable rules and law, while the Husband finds error in the court’s
interpretation of the decree. Because the Wife “alleges an error of law, we . . .
review the trial court’s legal conclusions de novo.” Kelleher v. Marvin Lumber
& Cedar Co., 152 N.H. 813, 830 (2005). Likewise, “[t]he interpretation of a
divorce decree is a question of law which we review de novo.” Estate of
Tremaine v. Tremaine, 146 N.H. 674, 675 (2001).
2
We hold that the trial court correctly determined that November 28, 2012
— the date of this court’s mandate from the first appeal — was the starting
date for the Husband’s alimony obligation under the final decree. The relevant
circuit court rule states:
In contested cases or upon the default of either party, where no
post-decree motion has been filed, the decree will not become final
until the thirty-first (31st) day from the date of the Clerk’s notice of
decision. If a timely appeal is filed, the decree will not become final
until the expiration of the appeal period pursuant to Supreme
Court Rule 7. If a timely post-decree motion is filed, and there is
no appeal taken, the decree becomes final thirty (30) days from the
Court’s action on the post-decree motion.
Fam. Div. R. 2.29(B). The rule contemplates three possible scenarios after the
court issues a decree. The parties might not file any appeal or post-decree
motion; they might file an appeal; or they might file a post-decree motion.
Here, the Wife filed an appeal after the court issued its decree.
Therefore, the decree did “not become final until the expiration of the appeal
period pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 7.” Id. The appeal period did not
expire until this court issued its mandate. State v. Gubitosi, 153 N.H. 79, 82
(2005) (“The general rule is that the date of the mandate, not the date of the
issuance of the decision, is the effective date of an appellate court’s decision,
that the mandate is the order and that the court’s opinion merely gives the
reason supporting the order.” (quotation omitted)). Because we issued our
mandate on November 28, 2012, the trial court was correct in ruling that this
was the effective date of the decree as it related to alimony.
The Wife argues that the trial court erred when it “bifurcated” the divorce
decree by treating the alimony obligation as final as of the date of our mandate,
before the IRA issue had been resolved on remand. However, we have
recognized that the provisions of a divorce decree can take effect at different
times. See Rollins v. Rollins, 122 N.H. 6, 9 (1982). In Rollins, we held that
part of an appealed divorce decree would become final upon issuance of our
mandate, but that the property distribution portion of the decree would not
become final until the trial court resolved matters that were the subject of the
remand. Id. Similarly, here the parties’ divorce decree became final with
respect to the Husband’s alimony obligation when our mandate issued on
November 28, 2012, notwithstanding that we remanded for further proceedings
before the trial court with respect to the single issue of IRA contributions.
The Wife argues that a certificate of divorce that she obtained from the
New Hampshire Bureau of Vital Statistics establishes the effective date of the
decree. Line 23b of the form lists the “Date Decree Becomes Final” as
“2/9/2013.” The form apparently does not contemplate the possibility of
3