THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2014-0459, West Epping Water Company v.
New Hampshire Department of Treasury & a., the court on
September 24, 2015, issued the following order:
Having considered the brief, memorandum of law, and oral arguments of
the parties, the court concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in
this case. The petitioner, West Epping Water Company (West Epping Water),
appeals an order of the Circuit Court (Weaver, J.) finding it in default and
denying its motion for partial summary judgment on its petition to quiet title.
We reverse and remand.
The pertinent facts are as follows. In May 2012, West Epping Water
brought the instant petition to quiet title to approximately 10 acres of land in
Epping known as “Little Egypt.” Among the named respondents are four
decedents (Israel Francis Norris, Elizabeth Gertrude Norris, Irvin F. Norris, and
Dorothy Norris Kirkland), three alleged beneficiaries of Dorothy’s estate (Karen
M. Condylis, Joel R. Porter, Sr., and Joan F. Thompson), and the New
Hampshire Department of Treasury.
The petition alleges a chain of title that began with Israel Francis Norris.
According to the petition, upon Israel’s death, the property passed to Irvin
Norris. Irvin then deeded the property to Henry Thibeault in 1945, and
Thibeault deeded the property to David Elias in 1954. Upon his death, Mary
Elias inherited the property from David Elias. In 1965, she deeded the
property to Richard Mallouf and his father, although the deed was not recorded
until 1968. The petition alleges that Richard became the sole owner of the
property when his father died on February 9, 2004, and that, in August 2009,
West Epping Water purchased it from Richard for $60,000.
The quiet title petition further alleges that another probate action had
been brought by the Society for the Protection of New Hampshire Forests (the
Society). According to West Epping Water’s petition, the Society previously
opened probate proceedings for the estates of Israel, Elizabeth, Irvin, and
Dorothy (the Estates). It is alleged in other pleadings in this case that the
Society owns land that abuts “Little Egypt,” that its deed erroneously includes
“Little Egypt” in the property description, and that the probate proceedings
were commenced to correct the error in the Society’s deed. It is also alleged
that, before he retired, Michael Speltz was a Society employee and that he had
been appointed as the administrator of the Estates.
The Estates answered the petition in August 2012. With respect to the
chain of title alleged in West Epping Water’s petition, the Estates admit only
that the property was owned by Israel and passed to Irvin. In a December
2012 pleading, the Estates aver that, in fact, Irvin did not convey the property
to Thibeault. They allege that, when Irvin died intestate, “his only child,
Dorothy . . . , inherited the remainder interest in the subject property subject
to the life estate of Elizabeth . . . , her mother and the widow of Irvin[ ].” The
pleading asserts that, when Elizabeth died in 1963, her life estate was
extinguished and “the fee interest was then held by her daughter, Dorothy.”
The pleading further alleges that either Dorothy “devised the parcel to [her]
three neighbors (Condylis, Thompson, Porter) by [a] non-probated will,” or, if
the court did not accept that will, “the property . . . escheated to the State . . .
on [Dorothy’s] death in 2000, as she died without heirs within the statutory
degree of kinship.” Judgment pro confesso was entered against Condylis,
Porter, and Thompson because of their failure to appear in the quiet title action.
In January 2013, the probate proceedings involving the Estates were
consolidated with West Epping Water’s petition for quiet title for hearing
purposes only. In February 2013, West Epping Water’s original counsel
withdrew, and, until November 2013, West Epping Water was represented by
its president, Ricky F. St. Jean.
On July 26, 2013, the Estates moved for conditional default, alleging
that West Epping Water had failed to answer their second set of interrogatories
and document requests, which West Epping Water had received on June 19,
2013. On August 21, 2013, the court granted the conditional default and
allowed West Epping Water 10 days from its receipt of the court’s order either
to answer the interrogatories or to file a motion to strike. Although West
Epping Water prepared responses to the interrogatories, which St. Jean signed
before a notary on August 30, 2013, they were not provided to the Estates until
October 31, 2013. Moreover, West Epping Water did not move to strike the
conditional default until December 11, 2013.
The Estates moved for final default on September 9, 2013. On
September 17, 2013, West Epping Water objected to the motion, asserting that
it had already responded to the interrogatories and stating that such responses
were attached to its objection. However, the responses were not attached.
In February 2014, the trial court held a hearing on offers of proof on the
Estates’ motion for final default. The trial court found that West Epping Water
failed to timely answer the interrogatories at issue. The court found that St.
Jean’s proffered testimony that he provided the interrogatory responses to the
Estates in August 2013 was not credible. The court explained:
 Although this pleading, like numerous other pleadings in this case, was filed by “Michael Speltz
of the Society for the Protection of New Hampshire Forests,” the trial court found, and the record
supports its finding, that Speltz appeared in only his capacity as administrator of the Estates.
2
Although [West Epping Water] may have signed the
interrogatories on August 30, 2013, it is clear that it failed to
provide those answers to the [Estates] for several months. Over a
several month period, [West Epping Water] had opportunity after
opportunity to check its files and to provide the signed original
answers to the interrogatories to the [Estates], but it failed to do so
time and again.
The court also observed that, when it was self-represented, West Epping Water
had: (1) falsely certified the dates on which pleadings were mailed to the
respondents; (2) recorded with the county registry of deeds an affidavit that
supported its quiet title claims; (3) referred in pleadings to opposing counsel as
a “jerk”; and (4) cut trees on the subject property, despite the ongoing
litigation. Because of West Epping Water’s conduct, the court found that the
Estates had “been forced to file an emergency ex parte motion to deal with trees
being cut on the property, a motion to strike the filing of an affidavit at the
registry, and a motion to strike numerous pleadings.” For this conduct, the
court had twice awarded attorney’s fees and costs to the Estates in 2013, but
as of the February 2014 hearing, West Epping Water had failed to pay them.
Because this was not the first time that West Epping Water had engaged in
unacceptable litigation conduct, the court concluded that “any sanction less
than the entry of final default would be improper.” The court observed that the
prior “sanctions . . . appear to have had little effect on [West Epping Water]
given the continued nature, tenor and substance of its pleadings.”
Three days before the court issued its order finding West Epping Water in
final default, West Epping Water filed a motion for partial summary judgment,
asserting that the Society had proceeded as a party in the case and lacked
standing to do so. The court denied the motion because “Default Judgment
has [been] entered.”
In response to West Epping Water’s motions for reconsideration of both
the final default judgment and the denial of its partial summary judgment
motion, the court clarified that the Society is not a party to the quiet title action
and that Speltz had appeared in the case solely in his capacity as the
administrator of the Estates. With regard to the standing of the Estates, the
court concluded that, contrary to West Epping Water’s assertions, the Estates
had not disclaimed any interest in the property, and in fact, had alleged a
sufficient interest in the property to establish standing to defend against the
quiet title petition. This appeal followed.
West Epping Water first argues that the trial court should have
dismissed the Estates from its quiet title action pursuant to RSA 498:5-c
(2010). RSA 498:5-c requires a respondent in a quiet title action to state in
answer “whether or not he claims any estate or interest in, or encumbrance on,
such property, or any part thereof, and, if so, the nature and extent of the
estate, interest or encumbrance which he claims.” Under RSA 498:5-c, “the
3