THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2014-160
JILLIAN LENNARTZ
v.
OAK POINT ASSOCIATES, P.A. & a.
Argued: November 12, 2014
Opinion Issued: February 20, 2015
Bussiere & Bussiere, P.A., of Manchester (John P. Fagan on the brief and
orally), for the plaintiff.
Donovan Hatem LLP, of Boston, Massachusetts (Kelly Martin Malone and
Michael E. Coghlan on the brief, and Mr. Coghlan orally), for defendant Oak
Point Associates, P.A.
Desmarais, Ewing & Johnston, PLLC, of Manchester (Debra L. Mayotte
and Heather Silverstein on the brief, and Ms. Silverstein orally), for defendant
Ambient Temperature Corporation.
DALIANIS, C.J. The plaintiff, Jillian Lennartz, appeals a decision of the
Superior Court (Tucker, J.) granting summary judgment to the defendants,
Oak Point Associates, P.A. (Oak Point) and Ambient Temperature Corporation
(Ambient), on the ground that RSA 508:4-b, I (2010) barred the plaintiff’s
claims against them. We affirm.
The following facts were recited by the trial court or are otherwise
undisputed. The defendants were involved in various aspects of the design,
construction, and installation of a ventilation system in a research laboratory
at the University of New Hampshire (UNH). By November 2003, the project was
substantially complete. In November 2009, the plaintiff suffered injuries while
working in the laboratory due to a faulty vent pipe that exposed her to toxic
fumes.
In February 2012, the plaintiff filed a negligence action against Oak
Point, and in November 2012, she added Ambient as a defendant. The plaintiff
also sued UNH, which owned the laboratory where the plaintiff was injured,
but she eventually settled her claims with UNH.
The defendants subsequently filed motions for summary judgment,
arguing that the plaintiff’s claims were barred by the statute of repose found in
RSA 508:4-b, I. See Winnisquam Reg. Sch. Dist. v. Levine, 152 N.H. 537
(2005); Big League Entm’t v. Brox Indus., 149 N.H. 480 (2003). In response,
the plaintiff argued that, as applied to her, RSA 508:4-b, I, violated her rights
to a remedy, equal protection, and due process under the New Hampshire
Constitution. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, arts. 1, 2, 12, 14.
The trial court granted the summary judgment motions, concluding that
RSA 508:4-b, I, barred the plaintiff’s claims because she sued the defendants
more than eight years after the ventilation system was substantially completed.
The court also determined that, as applied, RSA 508:4-b, I, did not violate the
plaintiff’s constitutional rights. The plaintiff unsuccessfully sought
reconsideration, and this appeal followed.
In reviewing the trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider
the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from them,
in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Phaneuf Funeral Home v.
Little Giant Pump Co., 163 N.H. 727, 730 (2012). If our review of that evidence
discloses no genuine issue of material fact, and if the moving party is entitled
to judgment as a matter of law, we will affirm the grant of summary judgment.
Id. We review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de novo. Id.
On appeal, the plaintiff first asserts that the trial court erred in
concluding that RSA 508:4-b, I, did not violate her rights to equal protection
and to a remedy under the New Hampshire Constitution. We address these
2
arguments by engaging in a single analysis. See Huckins v. McSweeney, 166
N.H. 176, 181 (2014); see also N.H. CONST. pt. I, arts. 1, 2, 12, 14.
We also note the scope of the plaintiff’s constitutional challenge to RSA
508:4-b, I. “A party may challenge the constitutionality of a statute by
asserting a facial challenge, an as-applied challenge, or both.” Huckins, 166
N.H. at 179 (quotation omitted). Here, the plaintiff asserts only an as-applied
challenge. As such, her challenge “concedes that [RSA 508:4-b, I] may be
constitutional in many of its applications, but contends that it is not so under
the particular circumstances of the case.” Id. (quotation omitted).
The constitutionality of a statute involves a question of law, which we
review de novo. Alonzi v. Northeast Generation Servs. Co., 156 N.H. 656, 662
(2008). Further, we presume statutes to be constitutional and we will not
declare one invalid except upon inescapable grounds. Id.
RSA 508:4-b, I, provides:
Except as otherwise provided in this section, all actions to recover
damages for injury to property, injury to the person, wrongful death or
economic loss arising out of any deficiency in the creation of an
improvement to real property, including without limitation the design,
labor, materials, engineering, planning, surveying, construction,
observation, supervision or inspection of that improvement, shall be
brought within 8 years from the date of substantial completion of the
improvement, and not thereafter.
The plaintiff principally argues that RSA 508:4-b, I, violates principles of equal
protection because it barred her accrued cause of action without application of
the discovery rule contained within the limitations period found in RSA 508:4, I
(2010). We disagree.
The “equal protection guarantee is essentially a direction that all persons
similarly situated should be treated alike.” Alonzi, 156 N.H. at 662 (quotation
omitted). A classification cannot be arbitrary, but must reasonably promote
some proper object of public welfare or interest. Id. In considering an equal
protection challenge under our State Constitution, we must first determine the
standard of review by examining the purpose and scope of the State-created
classification and the individual rights affected. Id. The possible review
standards are commonly known as strict scrutiny, intermediate scrutiny, and
the rational basis test. Id. Because the right to recover for one’s injuries
implicates an important substantive right, see Winnisquam Reg. Sch. Dist.,
152 N.H. at 538, intermediate scrutiny applies in this case, see Cmty. Res. for
Justice v. City of Manchester, 154 N.H. 748, 758 (2007).
3
Under our prior articulation of the intermediate scrutiny test, we rejected
a nearly identical argument to the one the plaintiff now makes. See
Winnisquam Reg. Sch. Dist., 152 N.H. at 539-40. In Winnisquam Regional
School District, we explained that, based upon the legislative history of RSA
508:4-b, I, the purpose of the statute is to relieve the building industry from
potentially infinite liability under the discovery rule. Id. at 540. We then
concluded that, under our prior intermediate scrutiny test, the statute did not
violate equal protection under the State Constitution because the “legislature’s
rationale for conferring upon the building industry a limited period of time in
which a claim could be brought is reasonable, not arbitrary, and bears a fair
and substantial relationship to the legislative purpose.” Id.
After that decision, we clarified our intermediate scrutiny test. See Cmty.
Res. for Justice, 154 N.H. at 762. “[I]ntermediate scrutiny under the State
Constitution [now] requires that the challenged legislation be substantially
related to an important governmental objective.” Id. Additionally, the burden
to demonstrate that the challenged legislation meets this test now rests with
the party seeking to uphold the statute. Id. To meet the burden, that party
may not rely upon justifications that are hypothesized or invented post hoc in
response to litigation, nor upon overbroad generalizations. Id.
Although our test for intermediate scrutiny has changed, we reach the
same result here as we did in Winnisquam Regional School District. The
plaintiff concedes that the purpose of RSA 508:4-b, I, in preventing potentially
infinite liability in the building industry is an important government objective,
and we see no reason to modify our prior conclusion that the statute “bears a
. . . substantial relationship to . . . [this] purpose.” Winnisquam Reg. Sch.
Dist., 152 N.H. at 540. Accordingly, the statute does not violate principles of
equal protection under our State Constitution.
The plaintiff also argues that RSA 508:4-b, I, violates the equal
protection guarantee because: (1) the defendants did not face potentially
infinite liability given her date of injury; (2) her right to recover “outweigh[s] the
theoretical interests of the [defendants] in freedom from infinite liability”; (3)
she unsuccessfully attempted to identify and sue the defendants before the
expiration of the repose period; and (4) had she been injured earlier, she could
have sued before the repose period expired. We, however, are not persuaded by
any of these arguments. Having engaged in a single analysis to address the
plaintiff’s arguments regarding her rights to equal protection and to a remedy,
see Huckins, 166 N.H. at 181, we conclude that neither the plaintiff’s
constitutional right to equal protection nor her right to a remedy was violated
in this case.
The plaintiff next argues that applying RSA 508:4-b, I, to her claims
violates her right to procedural due process under the State Constitution
because without the discovery rule, the procedure was “fundamentally unfair.”
4
The plaintiff has failed to develop this argument sufficiently for our review.
“Judicial review is not warranted for complaints regarding adverse rulings
without developed legal argument, and neither passing reference to
constitutional claims nor off-hand invocations of constitutional rights without
support by legal argument or authority warrants extended consideration.”
Appeal of Omega Entm’t, 156 N.H. 282, 287 (2007).
The plaintiff also argues that she lacked adequate notice of the
application of the statute of repose to bar her claims. We reject this argument
because every person is presumed to know the law and, therefore, to organize
his or her conduct and affairs accordingly. See Petition of Lussier, 161 N.H.
153, 159 (2010). The plaintiff, then, is presumed to have known about both
the statute of repose and the statute of limitations prior to filing suit in this
case; she is also presumed to have known that claims “must satisfy both the
statute of repose and the applicable statute of limitations.” Big League Entm’t,
149 N.H. at 484. Any suggestion by the plaintiff to the contrary is, therefore,
unavailing.
To the extent that the plaintiff asserts any additional arguments, we
conclude that such arguments do not warrant further discussion. See Vogel v.
Vogel, 137 N.H. 321, 322 (1993).
Affirmed.
CONBOY, LYNN, and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
5