THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2014-0816, In the Matter of Richard Calvin
and Connie Calvin, the court on January 11, 2016, issued the
following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. We affirm
in part, vacate in part, and remand.
The petitioner, Richard Calvin, appeals the invalidation of his prenuptial
agreement by the Circuit Court (Cooper, M., approved by Gordon, J.) and the
final decree issued by that court (Geiger, M., approved by Leonard, J.) in his
divorce from the respondent, Connie Calvin, now Connie Lorette. He contends
that the trial court erred by: (1) invalidating the parties’ prenuptial agreement
solely on the grounds of timing; (2) inequitably distributing the marital estate
by failing to award him certain pre-marital assets that he did not commit to the
marriage; (3) improperly valuing his dental practice; and (4) identifying a loan
he made to his business as a marital asset subject to distribution.
I
We first address the petitioner’s argument that the trial court erred as a
matter of law by invalidating the parties’ prenuptial agreement on duress
grounds based solely upon the date that the final draft was executed. He
contends that there were “no additional aggravating factors, which when
combined with the timing of the agreement’s execution, created a situation of
undue influence or duress.”
“We will defer to the findings of fact made by the [trial] court unless they
are so plainly erroneous that such findings could not be reasonably made.” In
re Estate of Hollett, 150 N.H. 39, 42 (2003) (quotation omitted). RSA 460:2-a
(2004) permits parties to enter into a written contract “in contemplation of
marriage.” A prenuptial agreement is presumed valid unless the party seeking
the invalidation of the agreement proves that: (1) the agreement was obtained
through fraud, duress or mistake, or through misrepresentation or
nondisclosure of a material fact; (2) the agreement is unconscionable; or (3) the
facts and circumstances have so changed since the agreement was executed as
to make the agreement unenforceable. Id.
“As a practical matter, the claim of undue duress is essentially a claim
that the agreement was not signed voluntarily.” Id. (quotation omitted). To
establish duress, a party must ordinarily show that it “involuntarily accepted
the other party’s terms, that the coercive circumstances were the result of the
other party’s acts, that the other party exerted pressure wrongfully, and that
under the circumstances the party had no alternative but to accept the terms
set out by the other party.” Id. (quotation omitted). “However, the State has a
special interest in the subject matter of prenuptial agreements and courts tend
to scrutinize them more closely than ordinary commercial contracts.” Id.
(quotations and brackets omitted). “Moreover, because such agreements often
involve persons in a confidential relationship, the parties must exercise the
highest degree of good faith, candor and sincerity in all matters bearing on the
terms and execution of the proposed agreement, with fairness being the
ultimate measure.” Id. at 42-43 (quotation omitted).
“Under the heightened scrutiny afforded to prenuptial agreements, the
timing of the agreement is of paramount importance in assessing whether it
was voluntary.” Id. at 43. “Fairness demands that the party presented with
the agreement have an opportunity to seek independent advice and a
reasonable time to reflect on the proposed terms.” Id. (quotation omitted). “To
avoid invalidation on grounds of involuntariness, it has been recommended
that the contract should be presented well in advance of the ceremony, usually
thirty days.” Id. (quotation and brackets omitted). “Some states, in fact,
automatically invalidate any prenuptial agreement signed immediately before a
wedding.” Id.
“[I]n Yannalfo, [147 N.H. 597 (2002)], we rejected a per se invalidation of
agreements signed immediately before the wedding.” Hollett, 150 N.H. at 43.
“Instead, we established that each case must be decided upon the totality of its
own circumstances.” Id. “Citing cases from other jurisdictions, however, we
suggested that additional circumstances coupled with such timing may compel
a finding that a prenuptial agreement was involuntary.” Id. (quotation and
brackets omitted).
Here, the trial court relied upon various factors to conclude that the
prenuptial agreement was the product of duress. First among these was the
timing of the agreement. The petitioner had spoken to his attorney concerning
a prenuptial agreement in the spring of 1999, at which point he was given a
letter that read as follows: “you will then each need to sign this list (of assets)
indicating that each of you is aware of everything the other owns and earns
going into the marriage and have made a fully informed decision to forego an
interest in certain things in consideration of your marriage.” Despite the
conversation with, and letter from, his attorney in 1999 — neither of which the
respondent was made aware of at that time — the petitioner did not inform the
respondent that she would be required to sign a prenuptial agreement until
September 17, 2000, a week before the wedding. The court stressed that the
respondent did not sign the agreement until “a mere five days before the date of
the parties’ wedding.”
2
The petitioner contends that the trial court should have focused upon
the “parties’ course of conduct during the 30-40 days preceding the wedding,”
rather than upon the timing of the document’s execution. Although the court
noted that discussions about the reality of an agreement and exchange of
information “did not commence until the month before the wedding,” it
concluded that “there is no compelling evidence to suggest that serious and
frank discussions regarding material terms of the Agreement ever took place in
an environment outside of the moment of the wedding.” Given that timing is of
paramount importance in assessing the validity of an agreement, see id., it was
proper for the court to place great weight on this factor in its decision.
Further, because the court is tasked with determining whether the respondent
voluntarily entered into or signed the agreement, see id. at 42, it properly
narrowed its focus to “the events surrounding the ultimate execution of the
document.”
The court also focused upon the facts that, at the point at which she was
informed of the agreement, the respondent had already “made arrangements,
spent money, [and] sent out invitations to friends and most of [her] professional
colleagues.” The court further emphasized the petitioner’s testimony that “he
would not have married the Respondent if she had not signed” the agreement.
Finally, although the petitioner consulted with an attorney regarding the
prenuptial agreement well in advance of the wedding, there is no evidence that
the respondent had sufficient time either to seek legal advice or for personal
reflection before signing the agreement a “mere five days” before the wedding.
The petitioner also points out that the court generally noted that the
parties “had a discussion at various times regarding the Petitioner’s desire for
the parties to enter into a prenuptial agreement.” He argues that such
discussions likewise demonstrate that the respondent was not under duress
when she signed the agreement. There is a significant difference, however,
between a willingness to generally discuss a prenuptial agreement at various
points in a relationship and a willingness to sign a specific prenuptial
agreement, without advance notice thereof, days before a wedding. See Lutgert
v. Lutgert, 338 So. 2d 1111, 1116 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1976) (concluding that
husband’s statement that his wife was willing to discuss prenuptial agreements
generally was insufficient to show that she voluntarily signed the specific
prenuptial agreement in question).
Finally, we reject the petitioner’s argument that the respondent ratified
the agreement by not objecting to it and by acknowledging its existence in her
revocable trust agreement. The trial court was not compelled to find that these
circumstances demonstrated a ratification of an otherwise invalid agreement.
See Hollett, 150 N.H. at 45.
We agree with the trial court that prenuptial “[a]greements between
parties are to be negotiated with full disclosure, in good faith, and with
3