THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2014-0749, Robert Kindya v. Atrium Medical
Corporation, the court on June 9, 2015, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs, memorandum of law, and record submitted
on appeal, we conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See
Sup. Ct. R. 18(1). We affirm.
The plaintiff, Robert Kindya, appeals the order of the Superior Court
(Temple, J.) affirming the decision of the New Hampshire Commission for
Human Rights (commission) finding no probable cause to credit the allegations
of discrimination in his complaint against the defendant, Atrium Medical
Corporation. The plaintiff argues that the superior court erred in: (1) granting
the defendant’s motion to strike its default; and (2) affirming the commission’s
finding despite the defendant’s default in the administrative proceeding.
To prevail in the superior court, the plaintiff was required to establish by a
clear preponderance of the evidence that the commission’s decision was
unlawful or unreasonable. See RSA 354-A:21, II(a) (2009).
The plaintiff first argues that the superior court erred in granting the
defendant’s motion to strike its default for failing to timely answer the plaintiff’s
appeal petition. The superior court has broad discretion in managing the
proceedings before it. In the Matter of Conner & Conner, 156 N.H. 250, 252
(2007). Superior Court Civil Rule 42 provides that the court may strike a
default “upon such terms as justice may require.” We will not reverse the
court’s decision to strike a default unless the court unsustainably exercised its
discretion or erred as a matter of law. In the Matter of Jones and Jones, 146
N.H. 119, 121 (2001); State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001) (explaining
unsustainable exercise of discretion standard). To show that the court’s
decision is not sustainable, the plaintiff must demonstrate that its ruling was
clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. See Conner,
156 N.H. at 252.
The plaintiff argues that the court erred in striking the default because,
he asserts, the defendant demonstrated “gross negligence” in failing to notify its
counsel that it had been served with the petition and because its counsel
negligently failed to inquire as to whether the petition had been served after
receiving a copy of a letter from the commission to the court transferring a
certified copy of the record of the proceedings before the commission. The
defendant counters that it mistakenly believed that its counsel had received
notice that the petition had been served, and that while the commission’s letter
to the court may have notified its counsel that the plaintiff had filed his
petition, its counsel was unaware that the petition had been served until the
court issued its default