THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case Nos. 2014-0454 and 2015-0501, Bellevue
Properties, Inc. v. Settlers’ R1, Inc. & a., the court on January
12, 2017, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
plaintiff, Bellevue Properties, Inc. (Bellevue), appeals, and the defendants,
Settlers’ R1, Inc., Settlers’ R2, Inc., Settlers’ Tennis, Inc., Settlers’ 1, LLC,
Settlers’ Green Associates, L.P., Settlers’ Green Condo Associates, L.P.I.,
Settlers’ Green, Inc., Settlers’ Holding Company, Settlers’ J, LLC, Settlers’ Lot
12, Inc., and 13 Green Street Properties, LLC (collectively, Settlers), cross-
appeal orders of the Superior Court (Smukler, J.) related to Bellevue’s claims
and Settlers’ counterclaims, some of which were tried to a jury and others of
which were decided by the court.
In its appeal, Bellevue argues that the trial court erred by: (1) rejecting
Bellevue’s equitable claims for breach of easement duties and unjust
enrichment; (2) granting a directed verdict to Settlers upon Bellevue’s breach of
fiduciary duty claim; (3) denying Bellevue’s motion asking the trial court to set
aside the verdict on Settlers’ abuse of process counterclaim related to a
February 2014 planning board decision and to direct a verdict in favor of
Bellevue; (4) entering a directed verdict, and denying Bellevue’s motion for
judgment notwithstanding the verdict (JNOV), upon Bellevue’s slander of title
claim; and (5) denying Bellevue’s motion for remittitur upon Settlers’ breach of
contract counterclaim. In its cross-appeal, Settlers challenges the trial court’s
grant of Bellevue’s motion to set aside the verdict and to direct a verdict in
favor of Bellevue upon Settlers’ abuse of process counterclaim related to
Bellevue’s initiation of the instant action and its concomitant decision that
Settlers is not entitled to attorney’s fees for that claim. Settlers also argues
that the trial court erred by denying it prevailing party attorney’s fees because
of Bellevue’s alleged “bad faith.” We affirm.
I. Relevant Facts
The parties own property in “Settlers’ Green,” a mixed-use development
in North Conway that includes retail space, apartments that were once
condominiums, the North Conway Grand Hotel, and a recreation complex.
Bellevue owns lots formerly known as Lots 1 and 2 (the Hotel Property). The
hotel is located on one lot and hotel parking is located on the other lot.
Bellevue has owned the Hotel Property since November 1999.
The original developer acquired and then subdivided the land that now
comprises Settlers’ Green in 1986. Many of the parties’ claims in this case
derive from an October 1986 declaration of easements (1986 Declaration),
which: (1) identifies the roads to be constructed in Settlers’ Green; (2) creates
easements for the shared use of those roads as well as for shared use of
lighting, landscaping, a water system, a septic system, drainage, and parking;
and (3) allocates the costs for maintaining those facilities/systems.
Particularly at issue are provisions concerning the development’s roads
and parking. Section 1.0 of the 1986 Declaration governs the construction and
maintenance of the development’s roads. Section 1.1 obligates Settlers, as the
successor to the original developer, to “construct Settlers’ Green Drive,
Common Court and the Fairway,” which are roads shown on the 1986
subdivision plan “and any other roads [Settlers] deems necessary” to service
the development. Section 1.2 requires Settlers to “use its best efforts to have
the Town of Conway . . . accept the [private] roads” that service the
development “as public ways.” In the event that the Town of Conway does not
accept the roads as public ways, Settlers has the right “to transfer its title,
rights and obligations” with regard to those roads, in whole or in part, to the
owner of Lots 3 and 4. Until the roads become public ways or title is
transferred to the owner of Lots 3 and 4, Settlers is responsible for maintaining
the private roads and has the right “to charge and collect from the owner of
every lot a pro rata share on the basis of use of the expenses” of such
maintenance.
Section 3.0 of the declaration governs parking. Under Section 3.0, Lot 1
is subject to an easement “in favor of Lots 2 through 6, 17 and 18 for the
parking of vehicles of the owners, employees, guests and invitees of Lots 2
through 6 inclusive, 17 and 18.” Section 3.3 gives Settlers the right “to allocate
parking spaces” for the dominant estates (Lots 2-6, 17, and 18) and for the
servient estate (Lot 1) “on the basis of the number of spaces required for each
lot” pursuant to town ordinances or requirements or under contractual
arrangements between the owners of those lots and Settlers. Section 3.2
makes Settlers responsible for maintaining “the parking lot” and allows Settlers
to “charge and collect from the owners of . . . lots 1 through 6 inclusive, 17 and
18 a pro rata share determined on the basis of the number of parking spaces
allocated” to those lots.
In the 1980’s, Settlers constructed an outlet shopping mall on Lots 3 and
4, with approximately 90,000 square feet of retail space. At around that time,
Bellevue’s predecessor-in-title purchased Lots 1 and 2, building a hotel on one
lot and parking facilities on the other. The deed to Bellevue’s predecessor-in-
title provided that the conveyance was subject to the 1986 Declaration.
Pursuant to the 1986 Declaration, the owners of Lots 3 and 4 retained the right
to share the parking facilities constructed on Lot 1.
2
The deed also provided that the conveyance was subject to another
declaration of covenants “except to the extent modified by a certain Purchase
and Sale Agreement for Lots 1 and 2 dated January 25, 1988 between [Settlers]
and Robert Cowan, James Cough and Bernard Cough” (the 1988 P & S). The
1988 P & S provided, in pertinent part, that “Lot 1 contains the parking for lots
other than Lot 1 and specifically, but not limited to 500 spaces for Lots 3 and
4.” The 1988 P & S also provided that Settlers “is entitled to 500 spaces . . .
constructed upon Lot 1.”
Bellevue purchased Lots 1 and 2 in November 1999. Before doing so,
Bellevue obtained a surveyor’s report of the two lots. That report stated, in
pertinent part, that the property “is subject to a Declaration of Easements . . .
that allows roadway changes” and that “this Declaration has been used to
relocate some of the roads that access the subject premises.” The surveyor’s
report further stated that Lots 1 and 2 “share[ ] driveways, parking, and
walking areas with adjacent Lot 3 . . . on which . . . is located a retail complex”
and that “an access drive” in the “westerly corner of Lot 2 . . . provides access
to a parking area used primarily by retail patrons” as well as “some patrons of
the hotel located on Lot 2.” According to the surveyor’s report, at the time of
the survey (November 19, 1999), construction was “underway for new shops on
land west of” Lots 1 and 2; a “so-called ‘local connector’” already had been
constructed. The surveyor’s report noted that a “so-called ‘by pass’” had been
“proposed . . . , but construction ha[d] not yet begun.”
Bellevue’s deed to Lots 1 and 2 specified that the lots were conveyed with
the 1986 Declaration and pursuant to, among other items: (1) “[f]acts,
conditions, terms and restrictions” set forth in four recorded plans; and (2)
another declaration except as modified by “a certain Purchase and Sale
Agreement for Lots 1 and 2” between Settlers and Robert Cowan, James
Cough, and Bernard Cough. Bellevue’s deed mistakenly described the
purchase and sale agreement between Settlers and Cowan, James Cough, and
Bernard Cough as a January 25, 1986 agreement, instead of as a January 25,
1988 agreement, and misspelled Cowan’s name as “Cowman.”
The instant litigation concerns Settlers’ expansion of its retail
development in Settlers’ Green before Bellevue purchased Lots 1 and 2 in
November 1999. Between 1996 and December 1998, Settlers sought and
obtained approval from the Town of Conway Planning Board to increase the
size of its outlet shopping mall to approximately 240,000 square feet. To
accomplish this expansion, Settlers consolidated Lots 3 and 4 with several
other lots and with land located outside of Settlers’ Green. The consolidation
resulted in the creation of two new lots: Lots R1 and R2. Bellevue admits that
in November 1999, when it purchased the Hotel Property, Settlers’ expanded
retail development was substantially complete.
3