THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
6th Circuit Court - Concord District Division
No. 2014-158
NEW HAMPSHIRE FISH AND GAME DEPARTMENT
v.
EDWARD BACON
Argued: January 15, 2015
Opinion Issued: April 30, 2015
Joseph A. Foster, attorney general (Philip B. Bradley, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Seufert, Davis & Hunt, PLLC, of Franklin (Brad C. Davis on the brief and
orally), for the defendant.
LYNN, J. The defendant, Edward Bacon, appeals an order of the Circuit
Court (Boyle, J.), following a bench trial, finding that he violated RSA 206:26-
bb (2011) (amended 2014) by acting negligently while hiking, so as to require a
search and rescue effort by the plaintiff, the New Hampshire Fish and Game
Department (Department), and that he, thus, was responsible to the
Department for the reasonable costs associated with the search and rescue.
We affirm.
I
The following facts are established by the record. On September 16,
2012, the defendant began a five-day solo hiking trip in the White Mountains,
during which he planned to hike several mountains with summits over 5,000
feet. At the time of the hike, the defendant was fifty-nine years old, had
undergone four hip surgeries since 2005, and had an artificial hip that had
dislocated on five occasions, twice during the prior year. The defendant also
had a “bad back” and was taking a variety of medications for multiple ailments.
In preparation for his hike, the defendant trained in a city park in Michigan,
which had 250-foot hills and some “gravelly” spots. The conditions on the
Franconia Ridge Trail between Liberty and Little Haystack Mountains, on
which the rescuers eventually located the defendant, are rocky and steep in
various locations.
On September 18, the defendant left the Liberty Springs campsite to
begin a planned hike to the summits of Liberty, Little Haystack, Lincoln, and
Lafayette Mountains; he planned to end at the Greenleaf Hut, which provides
overnight accommodations to hikers. Days in advance, stormy weather had
been forecast for the morning the defendant began the hike, and rain began a
few hours after he departed the campsite. A bit later, the defendant’s pack
cover “on its own accord came off and flew away in the wind.” Sergeant Brad
Morse, a Conservation Officer with the Department who helped rescue the
defendant, testified that the winds were among the worst he had ever
experienced in that part of the Franconia Ridge Trail and had repeatedly blown
him to the ground. Sometime that morning, the defendant slipped on loose
gravel, slid down the trail, hit his pack on a rock, and lost his tent which fell
down a ravine. At noon time, the defendant took a photograph of two other
hikers he encountered on the trail, both of whom were wearing full rain gear
with their hoods over their heads.
At around 1:00 p.m., the defendant encountered a waist-high rock ledge
that he needed to traverse in order to continue on the trail. He attempted to
jump backward up onto the ledge and, in the process, fell and dislocated his
hip. Approximately one hour later, Morse received an alert that a hiker had
dislocated his hip and needed assistance. He responded immediately and
eventually located the defendant on the trail between Little Haystack and
Lincoln Mountains. Morse testified that when he found the defendant his left
leg was flexed and internally rotated, the very position that the defendant’s
orthopedic surgeon had warned him to avoid due to his hip replacement.
Approximately fifteen Department personnel and thirty-five volunteers
participated in the defendant’s rescue during the afternoon and evening of
September 18 and into the early morning hours of September 19. When
Lieutenant James Kneeland visited the defendant in the hospital after his
rescue, the defendant explained that he had misread the weather report: he
2
thought the forecast called for 30-40 mph winds with gusts up to 70 mph and
heavy rain, instead of the actual forecast of 30-40 mph winds increasing to 70
mph and heavy rain. The defendant also told Kneeland that he had caught his
left leg while attempting to jump backward up onto a rock ledge and dislocated
his artificial hip when he fell.
The defendant testified to a different version of events at trial. For
instance, he testified that he was unaware of the weather conditions on the day
of the hike because he did not have his reading glasses with him, and that he
did not encounter any significant rain or wind. Additionally, he testified that
when he dislocated his hip he had not fallen, as he told Kneeland, but instead
had jumped backward over a rock ledge and swung his legs up while perfectly
maintaining his left leg to avoid flexion and internal rotation.
At the close of the trial, the court accepted closing memoranda from both
parties. Thereafter, the court found for the Department “for all of the reasons
cited in the plaintiff’s closing memorandum,” and awarded the Department
$9,334.86 in damages. The defendant filed a motion to reconsider, to which
the Department objected. The court denied the defendant’s motion, stating
that “[t]he actions of the defendant were a gross deviation from those of a
reasonable person that surpasses the [negligence] standard required.” This
appeal followed.
II
The defendant raises three arguments on appeal. First, he argues that
the trial court erred by judging his conduct under an ordinary negligence
standard which, he asserts, is not the standard mandated by RSA 206:26-bb.
Second, he argues that there was insufficient evidence to support the court’s
finding that his actions while hiking were negligent, thus necessitating his
rescue by the Department. Third, he argues that the court’s damages award
was improper under RSA 206:26-bb because the award included recovery for
expenses that the Department would have incurred regardless of its effort to
rescue him. We address each argument in turn.
A
The defendant first argues that the court erred by applying the ordinary
negligence standard to determine his liability under RSA 206:26-bb. He
characterizes this standard as “incorrect,” and asserts that the court should
instead have applied “the full and complete” civil standard of negligence,
although he fails to articulate how this standard differs from the standard of
“ordinary negligence.”
To resolve this issue we must engage in statutory interpretation.
“Statutory interpretation is a question of law, which we review de novo.”
3
Appeal of Local Gov’t Ctr., 165 N.H. 790, 804 (2014). “In matters of statutory
interpretation, we are the final arbiter of the intent of the legislature as
expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole.” Id. “We first look
to the language of the statute itself, and, if possible, construe that language
according to its plain and ordinary meaning.” Id. “We interpret legislative
intent from the statute as written and will not consider what the legislature
might have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit to include.”
Id. “We construe all parts of a statute together to effectuate its overall purpose
and avoid an absurd or unjust result.” Id.
We have not previously had occasion to construe the search and rescue
response statute. It provides, in pertinent part:
I. [A]ny person determined by the department to have acted
negligently in requiring a search and rescue response by the
department shall be liable to the department for the reasonable
cost of the department’s expenses for such search and rescue
response. The executive director shall bill the responsible person
for such costs. Payment shall be made to the department within
30 days after the receipt of the bill, or by some other date
determined by the executive director. If any person shall fail or
refuse to pay the costs . . . the department may pursue payment by
legal action . . . .
RSA 206:26-bb. This statute plainly is intended to create a statutory cause of
action in favor of the Department to recover the costs it incurs in conducting a
search and rescue operation for a person whose negligent conduct required
such an operation. See Marquay v. Eno, 139 N.H. 708, 714 (1995) (“Whether
or not a common law duty exists, . . . a plaintiff may maintain an action
directly under [a] statute if a statutory cause of action is either expressed or
implied by the legislature.”). Also plain is that the statute imposes as the duty
of care the common law standard of negligence, which we have defined as how
a reasonable person would be expected to act under the same circumstances.
See Gelinas v. Metropolitan Prop. & Liability Ins. Co., 131 N.H. 154, 161
(1988). Thus, in order to avoid liability for search and rescue costs, the
defendant must have hiked in a manner that was reasonable under all of the
circumstances. Accordingly, we hold that the trial court did not err in using
the common law standard of negligence to evaluate the defendant’s conduct
under RSA 206:26-bb.
B
The defendant next argues that there was insufficient evidence upon
which to find that he acted negligently, resulting in his need for rescue by the
Department. In particular, the defendant takes issue with the fact that the
trial court’s order stated that it found for the Department “for all of the reasons
4
cited in the plaintiff’s closing memorandum.” He asserts that, in so doing, the
court improperly adopted as its findings the facts recited in the Department’s
memorandum — which facts, he claims, are not supported by the evidence.
We disagree.
We will uphold the trial court’s findings and rulings unless they lack
evidentiary support or are legally erroneous. Cook v. Sullivan, 149 N.H. 774,
780 (2003). “It is within the province of the trial court to accept or reject, in
whole or in part, whatever evidence was presented, including that of the expert
witnesses.” Id. “Our standard of review is not whether we would rule
differently than the trial court, but whether a reasonable person could have
reached the same decision as the trial court based upon the same evidence.”
Id. “Thus, we defer to the trial court’s judgment on such issues as resolving
conflicts in the testimony, measuring the credibility of witnesses, and
determining the weight to be given evidence.” Id.
We first consider the defendant’s argument that the trial court’s findings
are not supported by the evidence because the court adopted the Department’s
closing memorandum, which he claims relied upon findings that were also not
supported by the evidence. Having reviewed both the evidence presented at
trial and the Department’s closing memorandum, we reject the defendant’s
argument that the Department’s closing memorandum was not supported by
the evidence.
We next consider whether there was sufficient evidence to support the
trial court’s determination that the defendant acted negligently. As previously
stated, a person violates RSA 206:26-bb by not acting as a reasonable person
would have acted under the same circumstances. The defendant argues that
he did not act negligently because he was prepared for the conditions,
physically capable, had proper equipment, and had adequately planned his
hike. The trial court concluded to the contrary when it found that the
defendant did not act as a reasonably prudent hiker would have acted under
the same circumstances. The following facts, recited by the Department in its
memorandum and based upon the evidence, support the trial court’s
conclusion: the defendant had undergone multiple hip surgeries; he had an
artificial hip that had dislocated five times, twice within the year prior to his
hike; he had trained in a city park that did not remotely resemble the
challenging terrain he would experience in the White Mountains; he had
continued his hike despite the fact that bad weather had been forecast days in
advance and that he encountered high winds and rain early into his hike; and
he chose to jump backward over a rock ledge he was unable to pass, despite
his artificial hip and experience with hip dislocation.
To the extent that the defendant argues that his injury was not
foreseeable, we agree with the trial court’s conclusions that the defendant’s
injury was foreseeable and directly caused his need to be rescued by the
5
Department. See Estate of Joshua T. v. State, 150 N.H. 405, 408 (2003)
(stating that to establish proximate cause a plaintiff must show “that the
defendant’s conduct caused or contributed to cause the harm”). For the
foregoing reasons we conclude that the trial court’s determination that the
defendant acted negligently does not lack evidentiary support and is not legally
erroneous. See Cook, 149 N.H. at 780. Accordingly, we uphold the trial court’s
ruling.
C
Finally, the defendant argues that the court’s damages award was
improper because it included wages and mileage for on-duty Department
officers who would have been paid regardless of their participation in the
rescue operation. In essence, he claims that the damages provide a windfall to
the Department. We disagree.
“In reviewing damage awards, we will consider the evidence in the light
most favorable to the prevailing party.” Gallentine v. Geis, 145 N.H. 701, 703
(2001) (quotation and brackets omitted). “Furthermore, we will not disturb the
decision of the fact-finder unless it is clearly erroneous.” Id. (quotation
omitted). “The law does not require ‘absolute certainty’ for recovery of
damages.” Id. (quotation omitted). “We do, however, require an indication that
the award of damages was reasonable.” Id. RSA 206:26-bb states that “any
person determined by the department to have acted negligently in requiring a
search and rescue response by the department shall be liable to the
department for the reasonable cost of the department’s expenses for such
search and rescue response.” (Emphasis added.)
The trial court awarded $9,186.38 in damages to the Department, plus
costs and interest. At trial, Kneeland testified that this amount represented
the Department’s costs for the fifteen personnel who participated in the rescue,
and included overtime, mileage, and benefits. These figures were contained in
a document entitled “Search and Rescue Mission Report,” which was admitted
by stipulation as a full exhibit. This detailed, itemized report, when viewed in
the light most favorable to the Department, indicates that the trial court’s
damages award represented the “reasonable costs” associated with the rescue,
as required by RSA 206:26-bb.
We reject the defendant’s argument that this sum provides a windfall to
the Department because certain officers were on duty and thus would have
been paid regardless of their participation in his rescue. Not only does this
argument fail to take into account the overtime paid to Department employees
who would not have worked in the absence of the rescue, but it also ignores the
fact that, by being diverted to the rescue operation, Department employees
were unable to perform their other assigned duties. The statute specifically
states that the Department is to receive the “reasonable costs” associated with
6
the rescue. RSA 206:26-bb. Nothing in the statute otherwise limits the
Department’s recovery, and we will not add limiting language to the statute
that the legislature did not include. See Appeal of Local Gov’t Ctr., 165 N.H. at
804 (“We interpret legislative intent from the statute as written and will not
consider what the legislature might have said or add language that the
legislature did not see fit to include.”). Because the trial court’s damages
award of $9,186.38, plus costs and interest, is reasonable, and thus is not
clearly erroneous, we uphold it.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY, and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
7