THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2014-0693, State of New Hampshire v. Craig W.
Carter, the court on July 12, 2016, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
We affirm.
The defendant, Craig W. Carter, appeals his conviction, following a jury
trial in Superior Court (Temple, J.), on a charge of possession of cocaine. See
RSA 318-B:2, :26 (2011) (amended 2013, 2015). He argues that, because the
Nashua Police Department destroyed the cocaine that he was charged with
possessing, apparently without complying with RSA 318-B:17 (Supp. 2015),
the trial court erred by not dismissing the charge, or alternatively, by not
suppressing the report of the analyst who tested the drug.
At the outset, we reject the State’s contention that the defendant has not
preserved his argument that the trial court erred by not dismissing the charge
as a remedy for the State’s noncompliance with RSA 318-B:17. The record
reveals that, no less than three times at trial, the defendant moved to dismiss
on the basis that the State had violated RSA 318-B:17 in destroying the drug.
He subsequently moved to set the verdict aside on the same basis. The trial
court denied each motion. Under these circumstances, the argument is more
than adequately preserved. See Mellin v. N. Sec. Ins. Co., 167 N.H. 544, 556
(2015). Because, as discussed below, the defendant has not established that
he was entitled to any remedy under RSA 318-B:17, we need not address
whether his objection to the analyst’s report was sufficient to preserve his
alternative argument that the trial court erred by not suppressing the report.
We assume, without deciding, that the State’s destruction of the cocaine
violated RSA 318-B:17. The defendant’s arguments require that we first
analyze RSA 318-B:17 to determine whether the legislature intended to provide
a defendant, who has been charged with possessing drugs that have been
destroyed in violation of the statute, with a remedy. See State v. Smith, 154
N.H. 113, 115 (2006). In construing a statute, we will not consider what the
legislature might have said, or add words that it did not see fit to include. Id.
Absent a legislatively-intended remedy for the State’s violation of a statute or
the deprivation of the defendant’s constitutional rights, we will fashion a
remedy for a statutory violation only if the defendant can demonstrate
prejudice. See State v. Martel, 141 N.H. 599, 603 (1997); State v. Dushame,
136 N.H. 309, 315 (1992); State v. Reynolds, 131 N.H. 291, 295 (1988).
RSA 318-B:17 provides, in its entirety, as follows:
All controlled drugs, the lawful possession of which is not
established or the title to which cannot be ascertained, which have
come into the custody of a law enforcement officer shall be forfeited
and disposed of as follows:
I. The superior court shall order such controlled drugs
forfeited and destroyed. A record of the place where the drugs
were seized, of the kinds and quantities of drugs so destroyed, and
of the time, place and manner of destruction shall be kept, and
return under oath, reporting said destruction, shall be made to the
superior court and to the Drug Enforcement Administration, if
controlled drugs are involved, by the officer who destroys them.
I-a. The circuit court having jurisdiction over a
misdemeanor or violation controlled drug offense may order such
controlled drugs forfeited and destroyed upon written motion.
Such order shall not be entered until after the period for appeal of
the offense has expired.
I-b. The circuit court shall require the same record and
reporting of the officer who is destroying the controlled drugs as is
required under paragraph I for the superior court, with the
exception of notification to the Drug Enforcement Administration.
I-c. All unwanted or unused controlled drugs which have
come into the custody of a law enforcement officer, pursuant to a
pharmaceutical drug take-back program, shall be disposed of in
accordance with the disposal requirements for controlled drugs set
forth under RSA 318-E.
Nothing in the statute indicates that the legislature intended to provide any
remedy to a criminal defendant for the State’s failure to obtain a court order
prior to destroying a drug that is the subject of a felony prosecution, and we
decline to read a remedy into the statute’s silence. See Smith, 154 N.H. at 115.
Nor has the defendant demonstrated how he was prejudiced by the
statutory violation in this case. We have recently held that the State is not
required to introduce the subject drug at trial in order to prove its unlawful
possession. State v. Boutin, 168 N.H. ___, ___, 134 A.3d 947, 950-51 (2016).
Here, the record demonstrates that the trial court gave the defendant’s
proposed jury nullification instruction as a result of the statutory violation.
The record further shows that the defendant was allowed to cross-examine the
State’s witnesses regarding the statutory violation, and to urge the jury to
2
acquit him on that basis. Under these circumstances, we agree with the State
that the defendant was not prejudiced as a result of the statutory violation and,
thus, we conclude that the trial court did not err by declining to fashion an
additional remedy for it. See Martel, 141 N.H. at 603.
Affirmed.
Dalianis, C.J., and Hicks, Conboy, Lynn, and Bassett, JJ., concurred.
Eileen Fox,
Clerk
3