THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
9th Circuit Court - Nashua District Division
No. 2014-126
JP MORGAN CHASE BANK, NA
v.
HEILAN GRIMES
Submitted: November 12, 2014
Opinion Issued: April 7, 2015
Orlans Moran, PLLC, of Waltham, Massachusetts (David J. Rhein on the
brief), for the plaintiff.
Gawryl, MacAllister & O’Connor, of Nashua (Jared O’Connor on the
brief), for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The defendant, Heilan Grimes, appeals an order of the Circuit
Court (Ryan, J.) granting a writ of possession for property located at 54
Whitney Street in Nashua to the plaintiff, JP Morgan Chase Bank, NA. The
sole issue on appeal is whether, under RSA 540:2, II(e) (Supp. 2014), a
property owner’s desire to market, sell and/or convey property in a vacant
condition constituted “other good cause” for purposes of terminating a tenancy.
We affirm.
The trial court found and the record supports the following facts. The
plaintiff acquired the property in question on May 27, 2011, as the result of a
foreclosure on a mortgage. The property is “restricted property” as defined in
RSA 540:1-a, II (2014). On July 25, 2013, the plaintiff served the defendant
with a “Notice to Quit/Evict Notice” pursuant to RSA 540:2, giving the
defendant 90 days to vacate the property. In that notice, the plaintiff stated
the reason for eviction as being for “other good cause,” in that “the owner of the
premises . . . desires to market, sell and/or convey the property in a vacant
condition.” The defendant disputed that “other good cause” existed for her
eviction. The trial court ruled in favor of the plaintiff, finding the plaintiff’s
stated reason for eviction was sufficient to fall within the statutory definition of
“other good cause.”
On appeal, the defendant argues that the statutory language of “other
good cause” is ambiguous and that prior case law, as well as legislative intent,
demonstrate that good cause does not encompass the reason proffered by the
plaintiff.
The issue before us is the meaning of “other good cause” under RSA
540:2, II(e). In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of
the legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. Great Traditions Home Builders v. O’Connor, 157 N.H. 387, 388 (2008).
We first examine the language found in the statute, and, when possible, we
ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used. Id. If the
language of a statute is plain and unambiguous, we need not look beyond it for
further indication of legislative intent. Bedford Chapter-Citizens for a Sound
Economy v. Sch. Admin. Unit #25, 151 N.H. 612, 614 (2004). If a statute is
ambiguous, however, we consider legislative history to aid our analysis. State
v. Whittey, 149 N.H. 463, 467 (2003). Our goal is to apply statutes in light of
the legislature’s intent in enacting them, and in light of the policy sought to be
advanced by the entire statutory scheme. Id.
RSA 540:2, entitled “Termination of Tenancy,” provides, in pertinent part:
II. The lessor or owner of restricted property may terminate any
tenancy by giving to the tenant or occupant a notice in writing to
quit the premises in accordance with RSA 540:3 and 5, but only
for one of the following reasons:
. . . .
(e) Other good cause
. . . .
V. “Other good cause” as set forth in paragraph II(e) of this section
includes, but is not limited to, any legitimate business or economic
reason and need not be based on the action or inaction of the
tenant, members of his family, or guests.
2
RSA 540:2, II(e), V.
Whether a desire to market or convey property in a vacant condition
constitutes “other good cause” cannot be determined by merely looking to the
plain language of RSA 540:2, II. AIMCO Props. v. Dziewisz, 152 N.H. 587
(2005). As we stated in AIMCO, the term “other good cause” is ambiguous on
its face. Id. RSA 540:2, II was adopted in 1985 as part of House Bill 95. Laws
1985, 249:2. It was described as “giv[ing] . . . greater flexibility to landlords to
evict tenants for any good reason and at the same time protect[ing] tenants
from arbitrarily and/or ill motivated evictions.” N.H.S. Jour. 157 (1985).
The plaintiff’s stated reason for eviction — a desire to “market, sell
and/or convey the property in a vacant condition” — constitutes a legitimate
economic reason under the circumstances of this case. Other jurisdictions
have recognized that the desire of a landlord to sell restricted property free of
tenants may constitute a legitimate economic reason. See, e.g., 24 C.F.R.
§ 982.310 (2014) (stating, in section entitled “Owner termination of tenancy,”
“‘[o]ther good cause’ for termination of tenancy by the owner may include, but
is not limited to . . . [a] business or economic reason for termination of the
tenancy (such as sale of the property, renovation of the unit, or desire to lease
the unit at a higher rental)”). We accept this rationale here because the
plaintiff acquired the property by foreclosure and expressed the desire to sell
the property free and clear of tenants. We note that the plaintiff states in its
brief that the property was sold to a third party, a fact which the defendant
does not contest. Under these circumstances, we are satisfied that the eviction
was neither arbitrary nor ill-motivated. See N.H.S. Jour. 157.
Notably, these facts differ from those in AIMCO Properties v. Dziewisz,
152 N.H. 587 (2005), upon which the defendant heavily relies. In AIMCO we
held that the mere expiration of a lease did not constitute “other good cause,”
because “[r]eplacing one tenant upon the expiration of a lease with another
tenant who will pay the same rent and occupy the same premises as the tenant
being evicted does not . . . provide the landlord of restricted property with any
economic or business advantage.” AIMCO, 152 N.H. at 591. Here, however,
the plaintiff does not seek to replace one tenant with another tenant in the
same position. Instead, the plaintiff seeks to sell the property free of tenants.
In the absence of evidence of selective eviction or other acts of bad faith,
we hold, under these circumstances, that the plaintiff’s stated reason for
eviction satisfies the statute. Accordingly, we uphold the trial court’s ruling
and find that evicting the defendant for the purpose of marketing, selling, or
conveying the building in a vacant condition satisfies RSA 540:2, II(e).
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and CONBOY, LYNN, and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
3