THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2014-0747, In the Matter of Rebecca S. Ling
and Richard J. Schaffer, the court on September 22, 2015,
issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
We affirm.
The respondent, Richard J. Schaffer (father), appeals the final order of
the Circuit Court (Moore, J.) on the parenting petition filed by the petitioner,
Rebecca S. Ling (mother), arguing that the trial court erred in: (1) awarding the
mother sole decision-making responsibility for their child; (2) declining to adopt
the father’s proposed parenting plan; (3) ordering the father not to vacation
with the child outside New Hampshire until the summer of 2017; (4) not
requiring the mother to share his travel expenses; (5) ordering him to pay child
support; and (6) denying his request to introduce additional evidence to
support his petition to change the child’s name.
The father first argues that the trial court erred in awarding the mother
sole decision-making responsibility. In determining parental rights and
responsibilities, the trial court is guided by the best interest of the child. In the
Matter of Mannion & Mannion, 155 N.H. 52, 55 (2007); RSA 461-A:6, I (Supp.
2014). There is a presumption that joint decision-making responsibility is in
the child’s best interest, unless there has been a finding of abuse. Mannion,
155 N.H. at 55; RSA 461-A:5 (Supp. 2014). “[R]esolution of the best interests
of a child depends to a large extent upon the firsthand assessment of the
credibility of witnesses, and the findings of the trial court are binding upon this
court if supported by the evidence.” In the Matter of Kurowski & Kurowski,
161 N.H. 578, 585 (2011). When reviewing a trial court’s decision on parenting
rights and responsibilities, our role is limited to determining whether it clearly
appears that the trial court engaged in an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
Id. “We consider only whether the record establishes an objective basis
sufficient to sustain the discretionary judgment made, and we will not disturb
the trial court’s determination if it could reasonably have been made.” Id.
(quotation omitted).
The record shows that the parties met on a cruise that left from Florida
in 2008. There is no dispute that the parties were never in a committed
relationship with each other. The mother is a resident of New Hampshire, and
the father lives in Florida. Their child, who is not yet six years old, lives with
the mother. The parties have had a strained relationship ever since the mother
informed the father of her pregnancy. After a number of disputes regarding
parenting issues, their relationship deteriorated. As a result, the father had
little contact with the child for several years. The trial court found that the
presumption in favor of joint decision-making responsibility was rebutted in
this case based upon the following factors:
the parties[’] near complete recent inability to effectively
communicate with one another; the distance of their respective
residences; the fact that they did not develop any meaningful
personal relationship prior to the child’s birth and . . . the
substantial lack of contact between [the father] and [the] child.
The father argues that the trial court erred in rejecting the GAL’s
recommendation of joint decision-making responsibility. At the outset, we note
that “[t]he recommendations of a GAL do not, and should not, carry any greater
presumptive weight than the other evidence in a case.” In the Matter of
Heinrich & Curotto, 160 N.H. 650, 657 (2007) (brackets and quotation
omitted). The father argues that the court should have given more weight to
the GAL’s recommendation given its requirement that the mother consult with
the father on major decisions and the GAL’s report that the mother is unwilling
to include the father in major decisions involving the child. Moreover, the
father asserts, the mother’s testimony that his communications with her have
been “aggressive” and “harassing” was not corroborated by other evidence in
the record. “It is not our role to calculate how much weight the trial court
should afford specific evidence, second guess its decision on matters of witness
credibility, or substitute our judgment for that of the trial court on a
discretionary ruling.” Kurowski, 161 N.H. at 600. “Conflicts in the testimony,
questions about the credibility of witnesses, and the weight assigned to
testimony are matters for the trial court to resolve.” Id. at 585. Because there
is evidence in the record to support the trial court’s discretionary judgment
that awarding the mother sole decision-making responsibility is in the child’s
best interest, we cannot say that the court’s exercise of discretion was
unsustainable. See id.
The father next argues that the trial court erred in declining to adopt his
proposed parenting plan, which afforded him more time with the child than the
plan developed by the court. A parenting plan should support frequent and
continuing contact between the child and both parents, unless such contact is
detrimental to the child. RSA 461-A:2, I(a) (2014). We review the trial court’s
parenting plan for an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See Kurowski, 161
N.H. at 585. In this case, the trial court ordered, for the first six months, one
overnight visit during the father’s three-day visitation period each month. The
court also awarded the father two consecutive days of parenting time if he
travels to New Hampshire for additional periods. After the first six months, the
court ordered two overnight visits during each month’s three-day visitation
2
period. When the child is six years old, the father will have additional
parenting time in New Hampshire for one week. The father argues that the
trial court’s parenting plan affords him less parenting time than he had under
the temporary orders, and that it does not provide him with sufficient contact
with the child. He also argues that it requires him to incur substantial travel
costs for what he perceives to be minimal parenting time.
At the time of the final hearing, the child was not yet five years old. The
record supports the trial court’s finding that the father has had little contact
with the child after the first several months of her life. We conclude that the
record provides an objective basis sufficient to sustain the trial court’s exercise
of discretion in developing its parenting plan. See id.
The father next argues that the trial court erred in prohibiting him from
vacationing with the child outside New Hampshire until the summer of 2017,
while allowing parenting time to occur in Florida by the summer of 2015. The
trial court’s parenting plan provides for a gradually less restrictive, age-
appropriate, out-of-state visitation schedule. For the first parenting time in
Florida, which is to occur at least once before July 2015, when the child is five
years old, the mother must accompany her. Thereafter, the weekend parenting
time must occur in Florida in alternating months. When the child is six years
old, the father will have extended parenting time in New Hampshire for one
week. Starting in the summer of 2017, when the child is seven years old, the
father will have parenting time each summer for one week, which he may
exercise either in Florida or Michigan, where his family owns a lake house.
Based upon this record, we cannot conclude that the trial court unsustainably
exercised its discretion in determining that it is in the child’s best interest not
to vacation with the father outside New Hampshire until she is seven years old.
See id.
The father next argues that the trial court erred by not requiring the
mother to share his travel expenses in exercising his parenting time. The
record shows that the trial court reduced the father’s child support obligation
from the guideline amount of $355 per month to $100 per month, to
compensate him for his travel expenses. The father argues, however, that his
travel expenses exceed the guideline amount and that his child support should,
therefore, be reduced to zero. We will uphold the trial court’s decision with
respect to child support unless it is unsupported by the evidence or legally
erroneous. In the Matter of Hampers & Hampers, 154 N.H. 275, 283 (2006).
Based upon our review of the record, we conclude that the trial court’s
decisions regarding travel expenses and child support are supported by the
evidence. See id.
Finally, the father argues that the trial court erred in denying his request
to introduce additional evidence in support of his petition to change the child’s
name. The trial court has broad discretion in managing the proceedings before
3