THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2014-0548, In the Matter of Philip Wyzik and
Lisa Hayward-Wyzik, the court on June 15, 2015, issued the
following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we conclude
that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1). We affirm.
The respondent, Lisa Hayward-Wyzik, appeals the distribution of marital
assets in a final order issued by the Circuit Court (Yazinski, J.) in her divorce
from the petitioner, Philip Wyzik. See RSA 458:16-a (2004). She contends that
the trial court erroneously defined the marital estate by: (1) “failing to include
the full values of Petitioner’s retirement accounts”; (2) “adopting an out-of-date
real estate appraisal for the marital home”; (3) “reducing the value of the marital
estate by . . . the debts each party has incurred to send their respective children
(from their prior marriages) to college”; and (4) failing to “consider Petitioner’s
deliberate depletion of the marital estate.” She further contends that the trial
court erred by: (1) awarding a pet, for whose surgery she had paid, to the
petitioner; and (2) “relying on statutory factors insufficiently supported by
evidence and by failing to take into consideration factors for which credible
evidence had been provided.”
Marital property includes “all tangible and intangible property and assets,
real or personal, belonging to either or both parties, whether title to the property
is held in the name of either or both parties.” RSA 458:16–a, I. The trial court
first determines, as a matter of law, what assets are marital property under RSA
458:16–a, I, and thus subject to equitable distribution, and then exercises its
discretion to make an equitable distribution of those assets under RSA 458:16-a,
II. In the Matter of Goodlander & Tamposi, 161 N.H. 490, 495 (2011). Trial court
determinations under RSA 458:16–a, I, are reviewed de novo, while equitable
divisions of property pursuant to RSA 458:16–a, II are reviewed for an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. Id.
In reviewing the trial court’s distribution of marital property, our role is not
to reweigh the equities in the case and divide the property accordingly. In the
Matter of Heinrich & Heinrich, 164 N.H. 357, 365 (2012). “When we determine
whether a ruling made by a judge is a proper exercise of judicial discretion, we
are really deciding whether the record establishes an objective basis sufficient to
sustain the discretionary judgment made.” State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296
(2001). We will not disturb the trial court’s determination if it could reasonably
be made. Heinrich, 164 N.H. at 365.
“In a divorce proceeding, marital property is not to be divided by some
mechanical formula but in a manner deemed ‘just’ based upon the evidence
presented and the equities of the case.” In the Matter of Sarvela & Sarvela, 154
N.H. 426, 431 (2006) (quotation omitted). The trial judge is in the best position
to evaluate the evidence, measure its persuasiveness, and assess the credibility
of witnesses. In the Matter of Salesky & Salesky, 157 N.H. 698, 708 (2008).
Pursuant to RSA 458:16-a, II, a trial court may determine that an equal
division of marital property is not equitable after considering one or more
statutory factors, including: “[t]he duration of the marriage,” RSA 458:16-a, II(a);
“[t]he age, . . . occupation, . . . employability,. . . [and] needs and liabilities of each
party,” RSA 458:16-a, II(b); “[t]he opportunity of each party for future acquisition
of capital assets and income,” RSA 458:16-a, II(c); “[t]he expectation of . . .
retirement rights acquired prior to or during the marriage,” RSA 458:16-a, II(i);
“[t]he value of any property acquired prior to the marriage,” RSA 458:16-a, II(m);
and “[t]he value of any property acquired by gift,” RSA 458:16-a, II(n). In
addition, the court may consider “[a]ny other factor that [it] deems relevant” in
equitably distributing the parties’ assets. RSA 458:16-a, II(o); Heinrich, 164 N.H.
at 364.
We first address the trial court’s distribution of the petitioner’s retirement
accounts. The respondent argues that the trial court excluded the petitioner’s
pre-marital retirement savings from the marital estate. However, we interpret the
trial court’s order as including the petitioner’s pre-marital retirement savings in
the marital estate and awarding that portion of his retirement savings to the
petitioner. See Salesky, 157 N.H. at 702 (stating interpretation of trial court
order is question of law, which we review de novo). The trial court found that the
petitioner was fifty-eight years old, that his “earning capacity and ability to
acquire capital assets and income in the future” were limited, and that he
“entered the marriage with an expectation that the retirement assets he
accumulated prior to marriage would benefit him in his retirement.” It granted
the petitioner’s requested finding of fact, listed under the heading “Marital
Assets,” that “[a]s of the date of the parties’ marriage, [he] had retirement savings
of $108,344.80.” The trial court also adopted the petitioner’s requested finding
detailing the “Total Net Estate,” which identified the value of the petitioner’s
retirement assets as “value at separation less pre-marital value.”
The respondent argues that the trial court “used different methods for
valuing the parties’ respective . . . retirement accounts” by applying a “hybrid
value” for the petitioner’s account, which did not include his pre-marital
retirements savings, while including “the balance of her accounts as of the date
2
of the parties’ separation,” which presumably included her pre-marital savings.
However, we conclude that the trial court included all the petitioner’s retirement
assets in the marital estate and then awarded to him that portion of the
petitioner’s retirement assets attributable to his pre-marital savings. As a result,
we conclude that the trial court did not “improperly appl[y] the ‘Hodgins formula’”
as the respondent contends. See In the Matter of Nyhan and Nyhan, 147 N.H.
768, 770 (2002) (stating IRA and 401(k) accounts not subject to Hodgins rule); cf.
Hodgins v. Hodgins, 126 N.H. 711, 716 (1985) superseded on other grounds by
statute, RSA 458:16–a, as recognized in Nyhan, 147 N.H. at 770 (identifying
formula for equitably apportioning pension benefits when actual and contingent
benefits not ascertainable).
The respondent argues that “[h]ad [the petitioner] wished the trial court to
take into consideration the value of the parties’ respective retirement accounts as
of the date of the parties’ marriage, it was incumbent upon him to obtain and
supply this information [regarding her retirement accounts] to the court.”
However, the respondent knew that the petitioner had presented evidence of his
pre-marital retirement assets and that the trial court might consider that
evidence. If she wished the trial court to consider what portion of her retirement
assets were accumulated before the marriage, we conclude that it was incumbent
upon her to provide that information.
The respondent asserts, in a footnote, that “[t]here are mathematical
discrepancies between the numbers shown in the exhibits, Petitioner’s proposed
Findings 9-13 and the summary of assets Petitioner provided to the court in
proposed Finding 68, all granted by the court.” To the extent that the respondent
is challenging the order on the basis of the alleged mathematical discrepancies,
the record does not show that she brought these errors to the trial court’s
attention. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004) (holding
parties may not have judicial review of issues they did not raise in trial court).
We next address the trial court’s decision to accept the value placed upon
the marital home by the 2011 appraisal instead of by the 2014 appraisal. The
respondent notes that the trial court granted contradictory requests for findings
regarding which appraisal represented the fair market value of the house.
However, the record does not show that the respondent brought this conflict to
the trial court’s attention. See N.H. Dep’t of Corrections v. Butland, 147 N.H.
676, 679 (2002) (holding any issues that could not have been presented to trial
court prior to its decision must be presented to it in motion for reconsideration);
Fam. Div. R. 1.26(F). Furthermore, the trial court’s narrative order is clear. The
respondent agrees that the trial court adopted the 2011 appraisal: the trial court
found that the house had “equity of approximately $147,000,” which presumes a
fair market value of $307,000, the 2011 appraised value. Therefore, we conclude
3