THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2014-0751, In the Matter of Michael Kurland
and Jennifer Kurland, the court on July 14, 2015, issued the
following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
We affirm in part, vacate in part, and remand.
The petitioner, Michael Kurland (husband), appeals the final decree of
the Circuit Court (Moore, J.) in his divorce from the respondent, Jennifer
Kurland (wife). He argues that the trial court erred in: (1) denying his motion
for contempt; (2) granting the wife a fault-based divorce; and (3) dividing the
marital estate.
As an initial matter, we note that a number of the husband’s arguments
are based upon his assertion that the trial court gave undue weight to the
wife’s testimony and insufficient weight to his testimony. Accordingly, we note
at the outset that “it is not our role to calculate how much weight a trial court
should accord specific evidence.” In the Matter of Choy & Choy, 154 N.H. 707,
714 (2007). We defer to the trial court’s judgment on such issues as resolving
conflicts in testimony, measuring the credibility of witnesses, and determining
the weight to be given evidence. In the Matter of Aube & Aube, 158 N.H. 459,
465 (2009). The trial court as fact finder may accept or reject, in whole or in
part, the testimony of any witness or party, and is not required to believe even
uncontroverted evidence. Id. at 466. We will affirm the trial court’s findings if
a reasonable person could have made such findings based upon the evidence
presented. Cook v. Sullivan, 149 N.H. 774, 780 (2003).
With these principles in mind, we address the husband’s first argument,
which is that the trial court erred in denying his motion for contempt. He
asserts that the wife should have been found in contempt for violating the anti-
hypothecation order in the temporary decree. The contempt power is
discretionary, and the proper inquiry is whether the trial court unsustainably
exercised its discretion. In the Matter of Conner & Conner, 156 N.H. 250, 253
(2007) (quotation omitted). The wife testified that she sold four appliances for a
total of $1,100 and that she used the money to purchase propane to heat the
house. She argues that she did not violate the court’s order because the order
allowed the parties to sell marital property to pay for necessary living expenses.
She also testified that the sale was necessary because the husband failed to
comply with the court’s order requiring him to pay one-half of the mortgage,
taxes, insurance, and other assessments related to the property, and that she
was unable to obtain his compliance through counsel. The court concluded
that the husband failed to meet his burden to prove that a finding of contempt
was warranted. Based upon this record, we conclude that the trial court
sustainably exercised its discretion in denying the husband’s motion for
contempt. See id.
The husband next argues that the trial court erred in granting the wife a
fault-based divorce on the ground of conduct that seriously injured her health
or endangered her reason. See RSA 458:7, V (2004). First, the husband
asserts that prior to the hearing, the court articulated a standard that the wife
would need to meet in order to obtain a divorce on such grounds, which
entailed “more than just testimony from neighbors and friends that [the
husband] has acted inappropriately.” The court also advised the wife that she
would need third-party, corroborating evidence, “more than a he said/she
said.” The husband argues that the court abandoned this standard when it
granted the wife a divorce on fault grounds based primarily upon her
uncorroborated testimony.
We first note that the court made its comments in the context of a
discussion with the parties as to whether testimony from each of the numerous
persons identified on their witness lists as “character references” would be
required for trial. We are not persuaded that the court’s comments were meant
to set an evidentiary standard for proving fault grounds for divorce. Moreover,
even assuming, without deciding, that the trial court incorrectly articulated the
standard for proving fault grounds, the court applied the correct standard in its
final decree. See In the Matter of Stapleton & Stapleton, 159 N.H. 694, 696-97
(2010) (trial court has inherent authority to correct its prior orders). The
husband argues that he was prejudiced by the court’s pre-hearing statements
because he voluntarily dismissed a number of his witnesses in reliance upon
them. However, the record fails to show that he raised this issue with the trial
court; accordingly, we conclude that it is not preserved for review. See In the
Matter of Peirano & Larsen, 155 N.H. 738, 744 (2007) (appellant must
demonstrate that he preserved his issues for appellate review by first raising
them in trial court); see also State v. Porter, 144 N.H. 96, 100-01 (1999) (rules
of preservation are not relaxed for a self-represented party).
The husband’s primary contention is that the evidence was insufficient to
grant the wife a divorce based upon conduct that seriously injured her health
or endangered her reason. Whether the husband’s conduct was sufficient to
grant a divorce on this ground depends upon whether such conduct seriously
injured the wife’s health or endangered her reason. See In the Matter of Henry
& Henry, 163 N.H. 175, 178 (2012). This is a question of fact for the trial
court. Id. We review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a matter of law, and
2
uphold the findings and rulings of the trial court unless they are lacking in
evidentiary support or tainted by error of law. Knight v. Maher, 161 N.H. 742,
745 (2011) (brackets and quotation omitted). “[W]e accord considerable weight
to the trial court’s judgments on the credibility of witnesses and the weight to
be given testimony.” Id. (quotation omitted).
The wife testified that the husband had an explosive temper, misused
prescription drugs, and often yelled obscenities at her. She testified that on
one summer weekend toward the end of the marriage, she brought him lunch
at his office, which was located adjacent to the office of a woman with whom he
had been spending a considerable amount of time. When the wife arrived, the
husband became “explosively angry,” and told her to “[g]et the F out of here
and don’t ever come back.” The wife left, upset and crying. As she was
walking away, down a flight of stairs, the husband “start[ed] throwing wood
two-by-fours” at her, a few of which hit her.
The wife also testified that the husband would leave home for days at a
time, up to five nights per week, without informing her as to his whereabouts,
and that he sometimes would not answer his cell phone while he was away. As
a result, the wife developed sleep problems, for which she received medical
treatment. She testified that as a result of her husband’s behavior, she was
“always very nervous and anxious” and “had trouble eating.” She testified that
she lost approximately fifteen pounds, and that other teachers at her school
asked her why she was so thin. As a result, she avoided social contact with
people, a point that the wife’s neighbor corroborated.
In addition to this testimony, the trial court relied upon a domestic
violence final order of protection that had been issued to the wife. In the
protective order, the court found that the husband had abused the wife by
squeezing her foot, causing bruising, and by leaving a loaded ammunition
magazine on the garage floor with the purpose to terrorize her. The husband
argues that the trial court erred in taking judicial notice of this order. “The
general rule in this jurisdiction is that a contemporaneous and specific
objection is required to preserve an issue for appellate review.” In the Matter of
Mannion & Mannion, 155 N.H. 52, 54 (2007) (quotation omitted). Even
assuming, without deciding, that the husband’s passing reference to hearsay
evidence during his closing argument related to the protective order, we
conclude that it did not satisfy the contemporaneous and specific objection
requirement. See Milliken v. Dartmouth-Hitchcock Clinic, 154 N.H. 662, 668
(2006) (“An objection made later in the witness’s testimony, during cross-
examination by the defense, does not preserve this issue on appeal.”).
The husband also argues that the court allocated insufficient time at the
final hearing to address the wife’s fault ground claim. We decline to address
this issue because the record fails to show that he preserved it by raising it
3