THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
9th Circuit Court - Nashua Family Division
No. 2014-067
IN THE MATTER OF VALENTINA CONANT AND WILLIAM FALLER
Submitted: February 19, 2015
Opinion Issued: April 30, 2015
Law Offices of Randall E. Wilbert, PLLC, of Nashua (Randall E. Wilbert on
the brief), for the petitioner.
Bosen & Associates, PLLC, of Portsmouth (Albert Hansen on the brief),
for the respondent.
George R. LaRocque, Jr., guardian ad litem, of Hudson, by brief, for
himself.
DALIANIS, C.J. The petitioner, Valentina Conant, appeals, and the
respondent, William Faller, cross-appeals, the final parenting plan issued by
the Circuit Court (Introcaso, J.). The respondent also cross-appeals the trial
court’s order concerning child support arrearages and other expenses. See
RSA 168-A:1, :3-a (2014). We affirm in part and reverse in part.
I. Background
The following facts are drawn from the record. The parties are the
unmarried parents of a daughter born in March 2012. The petitioner lives in
Nashua with her teenage son from a prior marriage, and the respondent lives
in Massachusetts.
In May 2012, the petitioner filed a parenting petition. In August, the
petitioner filed a motion to establish paternity. In September, after the
respondent’s paternity of the child had been established by DNA testing, the
court dismissed the motion as moot.
In March 2013, the court issued a temporary parenting plan. The plan,
in pertinent part, directed that: (1) the petitioner had sole decision-making
responsibility for the child; (2) the child would reside primarily with the
petitioner; (3) the respondent would have regularly scheduled parenting time;
and (4) the exchanges of the child would take place in Nashua.
After the final hearing in October 2013, the court issued the final
parenting plan. Because both parties were “mature, well-educated, financially
stable . . . [and] capable of providing nurturing support and opportunities to
[the child],” the court awarded them joint decision-making responsibilities, as
this would “only serve to assure that the child’s best interests are met.” The
court awarded the petitioner primary residential responsibility, and provided
the respondent with parenting time during the first, second, and fourth
weekends of each month. As the court explained:
The Court seeks to maximize the parties[’] time with the minor
child, especially while she is young and creating significant bonds. The
parties live apart, creating difficult[y] in having frequent exchanges. The
child should have some consistency in a routine while she is young. At
this time, her primary bond is with the Petitioner. Both parents,
however, are capable of parenting, have strong family support, and can
provide love, nurturing and guidance for the child. This is the
Respondent’s only child at this time and his interest in parenting
appears sincere. He has considerable time to devote to the child’s care.
The Petitioner has a son, the step-sibling of [the child]. Along with the
observations and conclusions drawn by the Guardian ad litem, the Court
attaches significant weight [to] the presence of a sibling in the child’s life.
The Court finds that it is in the child’s best interest to be in the primary
physical custody of the Petitioner with . . . parenting times for the
Respondent [on the first, second, and fourth weekends of each month].
(Citations omitted.) The court additionally set forth a shared holiday and
vacation schedule, and noted that the exchange location of the child would be
Littleton, Massachusetts.
2
In a separate order, the court ordered the respondent to pay the
petitioner $4,587 in child support arrearages accrued from the date of the
child’s birth in March 2012 to June 2012 (when the respondent began paying
court-ordered child support). See RSA 168-A:1. The court further ordered the
respondent to reimburse the petitioner $2,303 for “70% of her lost time from
work incurred in her prenatal care and illness, as well as the delivery of the
parties’ child.” See id. Both parties unsuccessfully sought reconsideration of
the trial court’s decisions, and this appeal and cross-appeal followed.
II. Analysis
A. Child Support Arrearages and Payment of Other Expenses
The respondent argues that the trial court violated RSA 168-A:1 and :3-a
by ordering him to pay the petitioner: (1) $4,587 in child support arrearages,
accrued from the date of the child’s birth to June 2012 (two months before the
petitioner filed a motion to establish paternity); and (2) $2,303 for the
petitioner’s lost time from work because of prenatal care and illness and
delivery of the child. We observe that, on appeal, the respondent does not
challenge the child support that the court ordered him to pay after June 2012.
Because resolution of this issue requires statutory interpretation, which
is a matter of law, we review the trial court’s decision on this matter de novo.
Henderson Holdings at Sugar Hill v. Town of Sugar Hill, 164 N.H. 36, 38
(2012). In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of
legislative intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. Id. We first examine the language of the statute and ascribe the plain
and ordinary meanings to the words used. Id. Further, we interpret statutes
in the context of the overall statutory scheme and not in isolation. Id. at 38-
39. Our goal is to apply statutes in light of the legislature’s intent in enacting
them and in light of the policy sought to be advanced by the entire statutory
scheme. Id. at 39.
RSA 168-A:1 provides that the father of a child born of unwed parents “is
liable to the same extent as the father of a child born in wedlock . . . for the
reasonable expense of the mother’s pregnancy and confinement and for the
education and necessary support of the child.” RSA 168-A:3-a provides that if
the child is three months old or older, “the father’s liability for past education
and support under RSA 168-A:1 is limited to amounts accrued from the date of
service of the petition on the father,” unless the court finds that the father “is
willfully avoiding service.” If the child is younger than three months, “[t]here is
no limitation on retroactive support.” RSA 168-A:3-a.
The respondent contends that he is not liable for either amount ordered
by the trial court because, instead of filing a paternity “petition,” the petitioner
filed a “motion” to establish paternity. We are not persuaded and conclude
3
that this argument does not warrant further discussion. See Vogel v. Vogel,
137 N.H. 321, 322 (1993).
The respondent next asserts that he is not liable for either amount
because the petitioner filed her motion “late,” that is, after the child was older
than three months. This argument is contrary to the plain language of RSA
168-A:3-a, which clearly contemplates that actions to establish paternity may
be brought if a child is older than three months of age. It is also contrary to
RSA 168-A:12 (2014), which requires such actions to be brought within 18
years of a child’s birth.
To the extent that the respondent argues that the trial court erred by
requiring him to reimburse the petitioner for her lost time from work because
that amount also accrued before the petitioner filed her motion to establish
paternity, we disagree. The respondent’s argument is premised upon a
misinterpretation of the word “support” as used in RSA 168-A:3-a. He asserts
that “support” refers to both child support and to payment of prenatal and
related expenses. However, we cannot read the word “support” in RSA 168-
A:3-a in isolation. See Henderson Holdings at Sugar Hill, 164 N.H. at 38-39.
RSA 168-A:3-a refers to past “support under RSA 168-A:1,” and RSA 168-A:1
distinguishes between the “necessary support of the child” and “the reasonable
expense of the mother’s pregnancy and confinement.” Accordingly, we
construe the word “support” in RSA 168-A:3-a to refer to child support and not
to the mother’s pregnancy and confinement expenses. Therefore, we uphold
the trial court’s order requiring the respondent to pay the petitioner $2,303 for
her lost time from work.
However, we agree with the respondent that the trial court erred by
requiring him to pay child support arrearages dating from the child’s birth to
June 2012. RSA 168-A:3-a expressly provides that, if the child is three months
old or older, “the father’s liability for past education and support under RSA
168-A:1 is limited to amounts accrued from the date of service of the petition
on the father,” unless the father willfully avoided service. Here, the child was
older than three months of age when the petitioner filed, and served upon the
respondent, her motion to establish paternity in August 2012. Moreover, there
is no evidence that the respondent willfully avoided service. Accordingly,
pursuant to RSA 168-A:3-a, the respondent’s liability for support under RSA
168-A:1 is limited to amounts accrued after August 2012, when he was served
with the petitioner’s motion. Because the trial court ordered the respondent to
pay $4,587 in child support arrearages that accrued before August 2012, we
reverse that portion of the court’s order.
Although the petitioner argues that this result is not “equitable,” her
argument is unavailing because, as we have stated before, “[t]he wisdom and
reasonableness of the legislative scheme are for the legislature, not the courts,
to determine.” Blackthorne Group v. Pines of Newmarket, 150 N.H. 804, 810
4
(2004). Of course, if the legislature disagrees with our interpretation, it is free
to amend the statutes as it sees fit. Additionally, although the petitioner
asserts in a single sentence in her brief that the respondent “waived” or was
“estopped” from bringing his arguments based upon RSA 168-A:1 and :3-a,
this argument is insufficiently developed for our review. See Wyle v. Lees, 162
N.H. 406, 414 (2011).
B. Parenting Plan
Both parties challenge the details of the final parenting plan. For
instance, the petitioner argues that the parenting plan gives too much
parenting time to the respondent and does not allow her to spend certain
holidays with the child. She also argues that the plan is improper because it
requires her to drive to Massachusetts to exchange the child. Similarly, the
respondent argues that awarding the petitioner primary residential
responsibility is improper because the petitioner was primarily responsible for
the animosity between the parties and because the trial court gave too much
weight to the fact that the child’s step-brother also lives with the petitioner.
In effect, both parties ask us to substitute our judgment for that of the
trial court. However, that is not our role on appeal. Our role is merely to
determine whether the trial court sustainably exercised its discretion. In the
Matter of Bordalo & Carter, 164 N.H. 310, 313 (2012). We review only to
determine whether the record establishes an objective basis to sustain the trial
court’s discretionary decision. In the Matter of Kurowski & Kurowski, 161 N.H.
578, 585 (2011). We do not reweigh the evidence or substitute our judgment
for the trial court’s judgment, provided that the trial court’s decision could
reasonably have been made. See id. Based upon our review of the record
submitted on appeal, we cannot say that the final parenting plan constitutes
an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
Affirmed in part; and
reversed in part.
HICKS, CONBOY, LYNN, and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
5