THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2014-0364, State of New Hampshire v. William
Roy, the court on September 17, 2015, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. Following
a jury trial in Superior Court (MacLeod, J.), the defendant, William Roy, was
convicted on two counts of forgery arising out of his fraudulent issuance of
checks on his ex-wife’s account. See RSA 638:1, I, III (2007). On appeal, the
defendant argues that the trial court erred by: (1) refusing to admit into
evidence the terms of the divorce decree between the defendant and his ex-wife,
Mary Anne Holland; and (2) failing to declare a mistrial after Holland testified
that the defendant was “on the lam.” He also argues that the trial court
violated his right to travel under the New Hampshire and United States
Constitutions when it required him to reside in New Hampshire as a condition
of his suspended sentence. We affirm.
The record establishes the following facts. The defendant and Holland
divorced in 2011. In 2013, a neighbor reported to the police that she had
found a man — later identified as the defendant — in Holland’s apartment.
Holland had not given the defendant permission to be in her apartment and did
not know that he had been there. The police obtained a search warrant for the
defendant’s bank account and discovered that the defendant had deposited two
checks in his account that appeared to have been signed by Holland. Holland
denied that she had written the checks or authorized the defendant to write
them on her behalf. She later found that there were checks missing from the
checkbook she kept in her apartment.
A grand jury indicted the defendant on one count of burglary and two
counts of forgery. RSA 635:1 (2007) (amended 2014); RSA 638:1, I, III.
Following a jury trial, the defendant was acquitted of the burglary charge and
convicted of the forgery charges. The trial court sentenced him on one charge
to two-and-one-half to five years stand committed, and on the other, to three-
and-one-half to seven years, suspended for ten years from the date of his
release from incarceration on the first charge. This appeal followed.
I. Exclusion of Evidence of the Terms of the Divorce Decree
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred by excluding
evidence of his decree of divorce from Holland. Before trial, the State filed a
motion in limine to exclude “reference [to] or evidence [of the] divorce decree
. . . requiring [Holland] to pay funds to the Defendant.” The trial court granted
the State’s motion, in part, excluding the decree itself and reference to the
divorce proceeding, but allowing the defendant to present evidence that he and
Holland were divorced, and that the defendant believed that Holland owed him
money.
The trial court explained that, under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence
403, the probative value of the specific terms of the divorce decree was
substantially outweighed by the danger of confusing the issues and misleading
the jury. The trial court reasoned that, because the divorce decree
“represent[ed] a negotiated property division between the defendant and
[Holland], which [had] never been enforced or further litigated” after the decree
was issued in 2011, it would only confuse the jury as to whether Holland owed
the defendant money at the time that he forged the checks in 2013. The trial
court also observed that admitting evidence of the terms of the divorce could
have led to a trial within a trial as to the equities of the divorce.
On appeal, the defendant argues that “evidence of the [divorce] decree
and of the existence of an outstanding balance” had significant probative value
because it bolstered the credibility of his claim that Holland owed him money
and authorized him to write the checks. The State counters that the terms of
the divorce decree — issued in 2011 — had no tendency to show that Holland
owed the defendant money at the time that he forged the checks in 2013. The
State also contends that admitting evidence of the terms of the decree would
have created a trial within a trial as to the equities of the divorce, thus
misleading and confusing the jury.
We accord considerable deference to a trial court’s evidentiary rulings
and will intervene only when they demonstrate an unsustainable exercise of
discretion. State v. Pelletier, 149 N.H. 243, 249 (2003). In determining
whether a ruling is a proper exercise of discretion, we will consider whether the
record establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the discretionary
decision made. State v. Costella, 166 N.H. 705, 714 (2014). The defendant
bears the burden of demonstrating that the trial court’s ruling was clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Id.
Relevant evidence is “evidence having any tendency to make the
existence of any fact that is of consequence to the determination of the action
more probable or less probable than it would be without the evidence.” N.H. R.
Ev. 401. Rule 403 provides, however, that “[a]lthough relevant, evidence may
be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of
unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury.” N.H. R. Ev.
403.
2
We cannot say that the trial court’s decision to exclude evidence of the
terms of the divorce decree was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the
prejudice of the defendant’s case. We agree with the trial court that the terms
of the divorce decree cannot show whether Holland paid all sums that she was
ordered to pay, or whether she still owed the defendant money at the time that
he forged her checks. The decree provided that Holland would pay the
defendant $115,000, of which $64,000 had been paid prior to the issuance of
the decree, with the remaining $51,000 payable upon the issuance of the final
decree of divorce in June 2011. Thus, although the terms of the decree
establish the amount Holland was obligated to pay the defendant, they cannot
show whether Holland actually paid the full amount she owed.
Further, evidence of the specific terms of the divorce decree was not
necessary to prove that the defendant believed that Holland owed him money at
the time that he forged her checks. The trial court allowed the defendant to
testify that he believed that Holland owed him money and had authorized him
to write checks on her account. Given the defendant’s ability to provide the
jury with this information, we agree with the trial court that admitting evidence
of the original circumstances giving rise to the debt may have resulted in a trial
within a trial, which could have confused the jury. See State v. Weeks, 140
N.H. 463, 467 (1995). Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court sustainably
exercised its discretion when it granted the State’s motion in limine to exclude
evidence of the divorce decree.
The defendant next argues that, even if evidence of the divorce decree
was properly excluded by the trial court’s ruling before trial, Holland’s
testimony “opened the door” and made admissible evidence of Holland’s debt to
him pursuant to the divorce decree. At trial, Holland testified that she had
paid the defendant money “for the divorce” and had not agreed to pay him
anything more. The defendant objected, arguing that Holland’s testimony
created the misleading impression that she had paid the defendant everything
that she owed him under the divorce decree, and did not owe him money at the
time that he forged the checks. The defendant requested that he be allowed to
impeach Holland’s testimony by cross-examining her about the specifics of the
divorce decree. The trial court denied his request. Nonetheless, the trial court
allowed the defendant to cross-examine Holland as to whether she had “pa[id]
him everything under the divorce decree that [she was] ordered to pay.” The
defendant chose not to do so.
The defendant argues that the trial court erred by not allowing him to
introduce evidence of the divorce decree to correct the misleading impression
created by Holland’s testimony that she had paid everything she owed under
the divorce decree. The State counters that Holland’s testimony did not
mislead the jury and, therefore, it did not open the door. The State asserts
that, even if a misimpression were created, the terms of the divorce decree
would not correct it because they do not provide evidence of whether Holland
3