THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2014-0343, George C. Conkey, II v. Town of
Dorchester, the court on March 16, 2015, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in the case. The
petitioner, George C. Conkey, II, appeals an order of the Superior Court
(Bornstein, J.) granting summary judgment to the respondent, the Town of
Dorchester (Town). We affirm.
Viewed in the light most favorable to the petitioner, the record supports
the following facts. The petitioner is a resident of the Town, a municipality
governed by a board of selectmen (Board). The petitioner has served as the
Town’s highway agent for many years and most recently, in March 2012, was
elected to the position for a two-year term.
In April 2012, the petitioner supervised various projects on Jackson
Drive, a private Town road with emergency lane status. At a meeting in June
2012, the Board rescinded the emergency lane status of Jackson Drive, at
which point it became a private road. The petitioner was present at the
meeting. In October 2012, a resident of Jackson Drive spoke with the
petitioner about constructing a “pull-off” adjacent to the road on which to park
his vehicles because his driveway was difficult to navigate in the winter. The
petitioner delivered six yards of “ditch fill” to Jackson Drive to assist the
resident with the project. The pile of fill sat untouched for one to two weeks
until the petitioner returned to level it during Hurricane Sandy because he
considered it “an impediment to surface water drainage” and he “was
concerned about public safety.” The petitioner had delivered ditch fill to private
properties on other occasions with no repercussions or comments from the
Board.
On November 12, 2012, Board member Sherman Hallock complained to
the New Hampshire State Police that the petitioner had fraudulently used Town
resources, by dumping gravel and using town equipment for work on a private
road that was not maintained by the Town. New Hampshire State Police
Trooper Victor Muzzey investigated the complaint, but found that the alleged
conduct did not rise to the level of a violation of the criminal law. The Board
and the petitioner discussed the complaint at the Board’s November 20
meeting. The petitioner stated that he had dumped a load of ditch fill along the
edge of Jackson Drive and that he later pushed the pile over because it was
blocking water from running into a diversion ditch. The Board questioned the
petitioner about his conduct, and then decided to consult legal counsel about
the incident.
At its December 6, 2012 meeting, the Board voted to go into a nonpublic
session. When back in public session, Hallock directed the Board’s
administrative assistant to terminate the petitioner’s health benefits and stated
that the petitioner’s position would remain vacant until the following March,
when the Town would elect a new highway agent. The petitioner was present
during the public session of that meeting. On December 7, 2012, the petitioner
received a letter stating that the Board had removed him as highway agent
pursuant to RSA 231:65 (2009) because he had “provided materials to a
property owner on Jackson Drive and performed work on that property owner’s
property despite the fact that [he] had been informed, and acknowledged, that
no town materials or equipment were to be used on that private road.” The
letter also informed the petitioner that he could appeal his removal to the
Board.
On December 17, 2012, the petitioner submitted a Right-to-Know
request to the Board, pursuant to RSA chapter 91-A (2013 & Supp. 2014), in
which he sought ten categories of documents. The Board’s response, on
January 3, 2013, included documents that were responsive to six of the
categories of requested documents. As to the other four categories, the Board
responded “Not Applicable.”
On January 7, 2013, the petitioner filed suit against the Town in
superior court, asserting three claims for relief: (1) that the court conduct a de
novo hearing to determine whether his termination was arbitrary, illegal, or
done in bad faith and, if so, to reinstate him; (2) in the alternative, that the
court award him damages for wrongful discharge; and (3) that the court find
that the Board violated the Right-to-Know Law by not producing all documents
responsive to his request. The Town filed a motion for summary judgment as
to all of the claims, to which the petitioner objected. The superior court held a
hearing on the motion on January 30, 2014, after which the Town filed a
supplemental affidavit regarding its response to the petitioner’s Right-to-Know
request. Thereafter, the court granted the Town’s motion for summary
judgment, and this appeal followed. On appeal, the petitioner challenges the
court’s entry of summary judgment in favor of the Town on each of his claims.
We address his arguments in turn.
“In reviewing the trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider
the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from them,
in the light most favorable to the non-moving party.” Camire v. Gunstock Area
Comm’n, 166 N.H. 374, 376 (2014) (quotation omitted). “If our review of that
evidence discloses no genuine issue of material fact, and if the moving party is
2
entitled to judgment as a matter of law, we will affirm the grant of summary
judgment.” Id. (quotation omitted). We review the superior court’s application
of the law to the facts de novo. Id. Likewise, “[t]he interpretation of a statute is
a question of law, which we decide de novo.” State v. Etienne, 163 N.H. 57, 71
(2011) (quotation omitted).
The petitioner first argues that because the Board did not grant him a
pre-termination hearing, he is entitled to a de novo hearing in superior court to
review his claim that he was improperly dismissed. RSA 231:65 governs the
petitioner’s employment as highway agent. It states, in pertinent part:
If any highway agent shall intentionally or deliberately refuse or
neglect to comply with lawful instructions of the selectmen, or
shall intentionally or deliberately refuse or neglect to carry out the
duties prescribed by law for highway agents after written request
by the selectmen, the selectmen may remove such agent from
office. The selectmen shall file a copy of any such order of removal,
under their hands, with the town clerk.
RSA 231:65. By its plain language, RSA 231:65 does not provide for either a
pre-termination hearing before the Board or a de novo hearing in superior
court to review the Board’s termination decisions. See Appeal of Doherty, 123
N.H. 508, 509 (1983) (“[I]f the legislature desires a full de novo hearing on
appeal, it knows how to require it by using those words.”) (quotation omitted).
“When the language of a statute is clear on its face, its meaning is not subject
to modification.” Correia v. Town of Alton, 157 N.H. 716, 718 (2008). As there
is thus no genuine issue of material fact as to whether the petitioner has a
statutory right to a de novo hearing in superior court, we conclude that the
court did not err in granting summary judgment in favor of the Town on this
claim.
To the extent that the petitioner argues that he would have no avenue for
relief absent a de novo hearing in superior court, we note that the Board’s
removal letter specifically informed him that he could appeal his removal to the
Board. Because the statute, in effect, restricts the Board from discharging a
highway agent except for “cause,” we recognize that it would be strange if an
individual claiming he was discharged without cause were afforded no
mechanism of redress through which to obtain relief. Cf. Marquay v. Eno, 139
N.H. 708, 721-22 (1995) (“Where no established remedy exists . . . we will not
 We will not address the petitioner’s due process argument – mentioned only in passing in his
brief – for which he provided neither developed legal argument, nor citation to legal authority. See
Appeal of Omega Entm’t, 156 N.H. 282, 287 (2007) (“Judicial review is not warranted for
complaints regarding adverse rulings without developed legal argument, and neither passing
reference to constitutional claims nor off-hand invocations of constitutional rights without support
by legal argument or authority warrants extended consideration.”).
3