THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2014-0536, Bellevue Properties, Inc. v.
Settlers’ Tennis, Inc. & a., the court on July 26, 2016, issued
the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
plaintiff, Bellevue Properties, Inc. (Bellevue), appeals, and defendant New
Hampshire Department of Transportation (the State) and defendants, Settlers’
Tennis, Inc., Settlers’ R1, Inc., and 13 Green Street Properties, LLC (collectively
referred to in this order as Settlers), cross-appeal, orders of the Superior Court
(Smukler, J.) related to Bellevue’s right to access and use a swimming pool and
tennis courts located on property owned by Settlers. We affirm.
I. Background
The parties own property in “Settlers’ Green,” a mixed-use development
that includes retail space, apartments that were once condominiums, the North
Conway Grand Hotel, and the “Tennis Green Lot,” on which there is an outdoor
swimming pool and six tennis courts (four concrete and two clay). For ease of
reference we refer to the swimming pool and tennis courts as “the Tennis Green
Lot amenities.” The Tennis Green Lot, which Settlers owns, is across the street
from the “Hotel Property,” which Bellevue has owned since 1999.
The Hotel Property comprises two lots, one on which the hotel is located
and the other on which hotel parking is located. According to Bellevue, and
not apparently disputed by Settlers or the State, the hotel currently has 150
rooms and 50 privately-owned suites. There are three swimming pools on the
Hotel Property: an indoor pool and two outdoor pools (the Hotel Property
amenities).
The State owns lots that we refer to as the “Condominium Property.” In
1996, after the original developer of the Condominium Property had lost it to
foreclosure, the State took the Condominium Property by eminent domain in
order to build the North-South Road and the Conway Bypass. When the State
took the property, only 42 of a planned 168 condominiums had been built.
The State demolished 28 of the 42 condominiums and has since leased the
remaining 14 residential units as apartments. Thus, Settlers’ Green currently
has no condominium units.
For the past several years, the parties have disputed Bellevue’s right to
access and use the Tennis Green Lot amenities. In 2010, the trial court
determined that the parties had abandoned the claimed contract that
established Bellevue’s alleged right to use those amenities. As a result, the
trial court equitably distributed the recreational amenities at Settlers’ Green,
awarding Settlers the Tennis Green Lot amenities and awarding Bellevue the
Hotel Property amenities.
In 2011, we reversed that decision in an unpublished order. We held
that, to the extent that the trial court treated certain documents in the chain of
title as “simple contracts instead of as documents creating a servitude, [it]
erred.” We ruled that those documents reserved to Bellevue “a property right
in the nature of an easement, for the use of and access to the Tennis Green Lot
by the owner of the Hotel Property.” We also concluded that the deeds of
record demonstrated that this property right was conveyed to Bellevue’s
predecessors-in-interest. We remanded the case to the trial court “to consider
whether Bellevue’s easement-like property right was abandoned or otherwise
extinguished.”
On remand, in an April 2012 order, the trial court denied summary
judgment to Bellevue and granted summary judgment to Settlers on Settlers’
claim that Bellevue’s easement should be extinguished under the impossibility
of purpose doctrine. In that order, the trial court also granted Bellevue’s
motion for an evidentiary hearing on damages. Before the evidentiary hearing
occurred, the court decided that cumulative evidence could not be introduced
at the hearing, but that the court would, instead, take judicial notice of the
prior record established in the 2010 proceedings. The court also denied most
of the numerous motions in limine filed by the parties in advance of the
damages hearing.
The damages hearing was held in May 2014. In a June 2014 order, the
trial court awarded damages to Bellevue based upon the difference in value of
the Hotel Property both with the easement to use and access the Tennis Green
Lot amenities and without it. Based upon Bellevue’s “limited” evidence relevant
to that measure, the trial court awarded Bellevue $44,000 in damages to
compensate for the loss of its easement-like right.
The instant appeal and cross-appeals concern the trial court proceedings
on remand. Specifically, Bellevue appeals the trial court’s order on summary
judgment, the damage award, certain of the trial court’s evidentiary decisions
during the damages hearing, and its denial of Bellevue’s request for attorney’s
fees. The State and Settlers have both filed cross-appeals challenging the trial
court’s decision to award any damages to Bellevue.
2
II. Analysis
A. Termination of Bellevue’s Easement
In its ruling on the parties’ cross-motions for summary judgment, the
trial court determined that Bellevue’s easement “must be terminated” pursuant
to the “impossibility of purpose” doctrine. See Restatement (Third) of Property
(Servitudes) § 7.10 (2000) (setting forth the impossibility of purpose doctrine);
see also Boissy v. Chevion, 162 N.H. 388, 393 (2011) (adopting the doctrine).
Under the impossibility of purpose doctrine, “[w]hen a change has taken place
since the creation of a servitude that makes it impossible as a practical matter
to accomplish the purpose for which the servitude was created,” and
modification of the servitude “is not practicable, or would not be effective, a
court may terminate the servitude.” Restatement (Third) of Property
(Servitudes), supra § 7.10(1), at 394. The impossibility of purpose doctrine is
“designed to eliminate meaningless burdens on land and is based on the notion
that parties that create an easement for a specific purpose intend the servitude
to expire upon cessation of that purpose.” Boissy, 162 N.H. at 394 (quotation
omitted).
Inquiry in an impossibility of purpose case “begins with determining the
particular purpose of the easement in question.” Id. (quotation omitted). “A
provision in the easement instrument often indicates the parties’ intent in this
regard. When an easement purpose provision is ambiguous, courts examine
the surrounding circumstances to ascertain the parties’ intent and tend to
favor the grantee with a broad interpretation.” J.W. Bruce & J.W. Ely, Jr., The
Law of Easements and Licenses in Land § 10:8, at 10-17 to 10-18 (2011).
“Next, one must decide whether the contemplated purpose still exists. If not,
the easement is considered to have expired.” Boissy, 162 N.H. at 394
(quotation omitted).
Examining a 1987 declaration executed by the original developer (the
1987 Declaration), and a 1986 “AMENITY AGREEMENT” between the original
developer and the entity to which the original developer conveyed the
Condominium Property (the 1986 Amenity Agreement), the trial court
determined that “the purpose of the easement was to create an equally-shared
property right to access the amenities on the Tennis Green Lot while
simultaneously assigning equal obligations to maintain the same.” The trial
court found that underlying this purpose was the expectation that “[t]he
condominium owners . . . [would] be roughly equivalent to the hotel occupants
in number and desired use.” However, the court found, “the condominiums
never reached the expected size envisioned by the creators of the rights and
obligations tied to the recreation amenities,” because of “the economic
downturn in the 1990s and the State’s taking by eminent domain.” Thus, the
court concluded, “[w]ithout nearly the same number of condominium units and
hotel rooms, it is impossible” for the Hotel Property owner (Bellevue) and the
3