THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2014-0815, New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services v. Robert C. Brown, the court on July
27, 2015, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case.
In this interlocutory appeal from an order of the Superior Court (O’Neill,
J.), the respondent, Robert C. Brown, challenges the court’s ruling granting a
motion by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services (DES) for
discovery of attorney-client material. We affirm and remand.
The following facts are derived from the trial court’s order or the record.
DES asserts that on or around January 31, 2014, both parties and their
respective counsel entered into a settlement agreement that was designed to
resolve a dispute that had originated when DES filed suit against the
respondent on September 11, 2009. After January 31, 2014, however, the
respondent obtained new counsel and subsequently challenged the validity of
the settlement agreement on numerous grounds, including the respondent’s
mental capacity to enter into the settlement agreement.
DES moved for discovery of attorney-client material from the
respondent’s former counsel relevant to the respondent’s capacity to enter into
the agreement. DES argued that the respondent waived the attorney-client
privilege by making a claim of incapacity, because materials normally protected
by the attorney-client privilege were needed in order for DES to adequately
defend against the claim.
The trial court granted DES’s motion, ruling that the respondent’s claim
of incapacity constituted an “at-issue” waiver of the attorney-client privilege
because the respondent had “injected privileged material into the present
matter” that was “required in order for the enforceability of the settlement
agreement to be resolved.” The trial court limited the scope of its order to
material relating to the respondent’s capacity to enter into the settlement
agreement, including the respondent’s former attorneys’ “personal observations
and impressions of the respondent at this time and the time leading up to and
following the settlement agreement, as well as documents and other materials
that shed light on the respondent’s capacity.” This interlocutory appeal
followed.
We note that “[d]ecisions concerning pretrial discovery are within the
sound discretion of the trial judge,” and we will uphold the trial judge’s
decision unless it is an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See N.H. Ball
Bearings v. Jackson, 158 N.H. 421, 429 (2009).
In addition to New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 502, which generally
governs the parameters of the attorney-client privilege, see N.H. R. Ev. 502, we
have recognized a narrow “at issue” waiver of the attorney-client privilege.
Bennett v. ITT Hartford Group, 150 N.H. 753, 761 (2004). As we noted in
Bennett:
An “at-issue” waiver of the attorney-client privilege is limited to
circumstances in which the privilege-holder injects the privileged
material itself into the case, such that the information is actually
required for resolution of the issue. We have applied this narrow
exception to the attorney-client privilege in the case of ineffective
assistance of counsel, because such claims went to the “core of
attorney-client communications.”
Id. (citations omitted).
The respondent argues that the “at issue” waiver should not apply in this
case because the trial court’s ruling is inconsistent with our narrow application
of the “at issue” waiver. We disagree. We have held that claims of ineffective
assistance of counsel constitute an “at issue” waiver because they necessarily
inject privileged material into the case. See Petition of Dean, 142 N.H. 889,
890-91 (1998). We agree with the trial court that the respondent’s claim of
incapacity is implicitly based upon the proposition that his former attorneys
allowed him to enter into an agreement at a time when he was incapacitated.
Therefore, the at-issue waiver doctrine is applicable in this case.
The respondent further argues that the material sought is not necessary
to the resolution of the case because an analysis of the respondent’s capacity
can be conducted only by a psychiatrist or a medical doctor. Alternatively, the
respondent contends that there were other non-medical persons who observed
the respondent’s behavior on January 31, 2014, which the trial court could
consider. We find neither of these arguments to be persuasive.
First, expert medical testimony is not a prerequisite in determining a
party’s mental capacity. The mental capacity of the respondent is a matter of
evidence to be determined by the trial court. See generally State v. Plante, 134
N.H. 456, 461 (1991) (“[A]ny test which measures the capacity of the defendant
is a matter of evidence, which falls within the province of the [trier of fact] to be
considered like any other factual issue.”). Accordingly, “[i]t is within the
province of the trial court to accept or reject, in whole or in part, whatever
2
evidence was presented, including that of the expert witnesses.” Town of
Newbury v. Landrigan, 165 N.H. 236, 240 (quotation omitted).
Second, while there may have been others who observed the respondent,
the trial court found that the record would be so incomplete as to make an
informed determination unattainable without the requested material. It was
reasonable for the trial court to assume that the respondent’s former counsel
had information required for the resolution of this issue, because they
presumably advised the respondent on whether or not to enter the settlement
agreement and because they witnessed his behavior leading up to and following
the agreement.
Having affirmed the trial court’s ruling that the respondent’s claim of
incapacity constituted an “at-issue” waiver of the attorney-client privilege, we
need not address the State’s alternative arguments that the respondent waived
the attorney-client privilege by providing his own experts with privileged
information or by failing to provide a privilege log.
Affirmed and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY, and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
Eileen Fox,
Clerk
3