THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2014-0572, Paul T. Marino v. Christopher Muro,
the court on April 27, 2015, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
We affirm in part, vacate in part, and remand.
The respondent, Christopher Muro, appeals orders of the Superior Court
(McHugh, J. and Delker, J.) granting declaratory and injunctive relief relative to
a deeded right-of-way that both burdens and benefits his property and the
adjoining property of the petitioner, Paul T. Marino, along the parties’ shared
boundary. The respondent contends that the trial court erred by: (1)
expanding the scope of the right-of-way by granting the petitioner a right to
pass over portions of the respondent’s property that are not subject to the
right-of-way grant; (2) failing to clearly define the scope of the right-of-way; (3)
considering the petitioner’s needs, and ignoring the respondent’s needs, in
construing the parties’ rights; (4) not terminating the right-of-way on grounds
of abandonment or cessation of purpose; (5) overlooking certain evidence, and
finding that the evidence was insufficient to rule on certain of the respondent’s
requested findings of fact; (6) not applying the doctrines of unclean hands and
laches to bar the petitioner’s claims; and (7) rendering inconsistent rulings
regarding the right-of-way. The respondent further contends that the presiding
judicial officer, Justice McHugh, was impermissibly biased against him.
At the outset, we note that the parties’ arguments are premised upon
differing interpretations of the trial court’s order relative to the scope of the
right-of-way. Because a proper understanding of the trial court’s order is
essential to resolving the issues on appeal, we begin by interpreting the trial
court’s order regarding the scope of the right-of-way. The interpretation of a
trial court order is a question of law, which we review de novo. In the Matter of
Salesky & Salesky, 157 N.H. 698, 702 (2008). We construe the order with
reference to the issues it was intended to decide, and construe its subsidiary
findings so as not to conflict with the order’s primary purpose. Id. at 703.
The record reflects that both properties have frontage on Marcy Street in
Portsmouth, and contain houses occupying most of their respective lots. The
record further reflects that the houses are irregularly shaped, such that the
distance between the building envelopes along the properties’ shared boundary
is not uniform, but changes at various points along the boundary. The houses
are also not equidistant from the shared boundary. At its narrowest, in an
area where both houses “bump out” toward each other, the distance between
the “bump outs” is approximately sixty-five or sixty-six inches. Although both
houses have multiple exterior walls in L-shaped configurations that are parallel
to the rear lot line, the rear wall in each house that is closest to the rear lot line
forms a line that is perpendicular to the same point on the shared boundary.
The present matter began as a request for declaratory and injunctive
relief relative to a fence that the respondent erected along the boundary
between the two lots. The petitioner sought an order requiring the fence’s
removal, asserting that it violated his easement rights pursuant to the right-of-
way. The right-of-way was created by deed in 1946, when the parties’ common
predecessor-in-title conveyed the respondent’s property. That deed provided:
A right of way from said Marcy Street for all usual and
customary purposes, and affording access to the rear of the
granted premises and the premises of the grantor adjoining the
same on the North is hereby granted and reserved by the grantor
for the common use of the grantees and grantor and their heirs
and assigns, the median line of which is the division line between
the premises of the grantor and grantee as herein defined.
The respondent pleaded various affirmative defenses seeking to have the right-
of-way extinguished. He further counterclaimed, asserting that the petitioner
had himself violated the right-of-way by planting certain shrubs within it, and
that he had further sought municipal approval to park a car within it. The
respondent requested that the trial court limit the right-of-way to foot traffic
and enjoin the petitioner from parking or planting shrubbery within it.
Following a bench trial, the trial court found:
As created in the 1940’s [the right-of-way] still exists today and a
reasonable use of that right of way requires passage over the entire
width of it which the Court finds to be the space between both
parties[’] houses. “Customary uses” include the passage of
bicycles, lawn and garden equipment etc., [but] does not include
motor vehicles.
The trial court determined that the respondent’s fence “interfere[d] with
Petitioner’s ability to carry items from Marcy Street to the backyard or back
door of his house, and prevent[ed] the ability to move equipment or objects
such as Petitioner’s baby stroller from the front yard to the back yard.” The
court ordered the respondent to remove that portion of his fence “extend[ing]
from Marcy Street to the end of the parties’ houses,” but otherwise allowed the
2
portion of the fence in the respondent’s backyard to remain, finding that the
right-of-way “terminates at the end of the parties[’] houses.” The trial court did
not otherwise describe the location of the right-of-way with precision.
On appeal, the respondent construes the trial court’s order as finding
that the right-of-way occupies the entire space between the two houses at any
given point. He argues, however, that because the properties have multiple
rear-facing walls, the trial court’s determination that the right-of-way
“terminates at the end of the parties[’] houses” renders the order ambiguous.
According to the respondent, the petitioner made various improvements behind
his “bump out” that are necessarily within the right-of-way, and the trial
court’s failure to specify which “end of the parties[’] houses” it meant makes it
impossible to determine the extent of the respondent’s easement rights and the
petitioner’s violations. The petitioner counters that, because the trial court
granted his requested finding of fact, which was based upon the parties’ joint
stipulation, that the shared boundary is “the midline of the right-of-way,” and
because the parties’ houses are not equidistant from that boundary, the width
of the right-of-way is necessarily limited by whichever house is closest to the
boundary at any given point. Thus, according to the petitioner, the trial court’s
order defines the right-of-way as consisting of twice the amount of space
between the boundary and the house closest to it at any point. Under his
interpretation, the petitioner contends that “all or most of” his improvements to
the rear of his “bump out” are outside the right-of-way. Under either party’s
interpretation, the width of the right-of-way fluctuates along its entire length.
We conclude that neither party has correctly interpreted the trial court’s
order. In finding that “reasonable use” of the right-of-way required “passage
over the entire width of it,” and that “the entire width of it” constituted “the
space between” both houses, the trial court was applying the common law “rule
of reason” to interpret the scope of the right-of-way left undefined by the
deeded grant, and to determine whether the fence interfered with the
petitioner’s use of the right-of-way. See Heartz v. City of Concord, 148 N.H.
325, 331 (2002). “The rule of reason requires the court to give a meaning to
words which the parties or their predecessors in title have actually used or else
to give a detailed definition to rights created by general words either actually
used or, whose existence is implied by law.” Id. (quotation and ellipsis
omitted). Although reasonableness is not a static concept, see id. at 332, it
generally limits easement rights to those rights that are reasonably necessary
for the enjoyment of the easement, see Thurston Enterprises, Inc. v. Baldi, 128
N.H. 760, 766 (1986); Sakansky v. Wein, 86 N.H. 337, 339-40 (1933); Bean v.
Coleman, 44 N.H. 539, 544 (1863).
Here, the trial court found that passage over the entire width of the space
between the two houses was reasonably necessary in order to access the
backyard of either property. Because the distance between the houses is not
3