THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2014-0327, State of New Hampshire v. Jeffrey
Guyette, the court on June 19, 2015, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. Following
a jury trial in Superior Court (Delker, J.), the defendant was convicted on one
count of felony-level reckless conduct with a deadly weapon, RSA 631:3, I, II
(2007). On appeal, the defendant argues that the evidence at trial was
insufficient to prove that he: (1) acted recklessly; and (2) “used” a firearm as a
deadly weapon. We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. On December 11, 2012,
Hampton Falls Police Officer Lister went to the defendant’s home to serve a
restraining order on the defendant and his wife. The restraining order, issued
in Massachusetts, related to a dispute between the defendant’s wife and her
family. The order required the defendant to relinquish all firearms and
ammunition in his possession.
Upon arriving at the defendant’s residence, Lister knocked on the front
door. The defendant answered, and the two had a conversation in the
breezeway of the residence. As Lister explained the purpose of his visit, he
described the defendant as calm, relaxed, and attentive. After Lister told the
defendant that he would require the defendant to hand over his firearms and
ammunition, the defendant’s “mood changed a little bit.” The defendant said:
“Oh, no. That’s going to be a problem.” The defendant stated that Lister was
violating the defendant’s “civil rights,” and that he did not need to comply with
an order from another state. Lister then requested that Hampton Falls Police
Chief Dirsa come to the defendant’s residence, because Dirsa knew the
defendant.
Once Dirsa arrived, he reiterated what Lister had told the defendant.
However, the defendant continued to resist complying with the order. Shortly
thereafter, the defendant’s wife arrived home and invited the officers inside.
After about thirty minutes of discussion, the defendant agreed to give the
officers his firearms. The defendant told them that the firearms were in the
basement. Lister informed the defendant that he was going to go to the
basement with the defendant, to which the defendant replied, “No, you won’t.”
Dirsa explained to the defendant that Lister must accompany him “because I
don’t want you to go downstairs and bring a gun back up and shoot me.” In
response, the defendant “smirk[ed],” but said nothing.
The defendant went down into the basement, followed by Lister and
Dirsa. Once downstairs, the defendant walked over to three storage containers
stacked on top of one another. As the defendant removed the lid of one
container, Lister saw several knives and three handgun cases.
The defendant reached for one of the cases. Lister then instructed the
defendant not to touch the case. Both the defendant and Lister placed their
hands on the case, and the defendant opened it. As the defendant reached into
the case, Lister said, “[D]on’t touch the gun.” The defendant picked up the
firearm. Several times, Lister told the defendant to “put the gun down,” but the
defendant did not comply. A struggle ensued, with both Lister and Dirsa
“grabbing” the defendant. The defendant eventually released the firearm, and
was handcuffed. It was later determined that the firearm was loaded and did
not have a safety mechanism.
The defendant was charged with one count of reckless conduct with a
deadly weapon and one count of criminal threatening. At the close of the
State’s case, the defendant moved to dismiss, arguing that the evidence
presented was insufficient to find him guilty of either charge. The trial court
denied the motion. The jury acquitted the defendant of criminal threatening
but found him guilty of reckless conduct with a deadly weapon. This appeal
followed.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the evidence was insufficient to
find him guilty of felony-level reckless conduct with a deadly weapon.
Specifically, he argues that the evidence was insufficient to support a finding
by the jury either that he acted recklessly or that he “use[d]” a deadly weapon
as defined in RSA 625:11, V (2007). The State counters that the officers’
testimony was sufficient to prove reckless conduct with a deadly weapon.
“To prevail upon his challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, the
defendant must demonstrate that no rational trier of fact, viewing all of the
evidence and all reasonable inferences from it in the light most favorable to the
State, could have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.” State v. Belleville,
166 N.H. 58, 61 (2014). “Because persons rarely explain to others the inner
workings of their minds or mental processes, a culpable mental state must, in
most cases, be proven by circumstantial evidence.” Id. at 62 (quotation and
brackets omitted). “When the evidence as to one or more of the elements of the
charged offense is solely circumstantial, it must exclude all reasonable
conclusions except guilt.” Id. “Under this standard, however, we still consider
the evidence in the light most favorable to the State and examine each
evidentiary item in context, not in isolation.” Id. Further, “[w]e review the
entire trial record because, even though the defendant is not required to
2
present a case, if [he] chooses to do so, [he] takes the chance that evidence
presented in [his] case may assist in proving the State’s case.” State v. Dion,
164 N.H. 544, 548 (2013).
We first turn to the defendant’s argument that the evidence was
insufficient for the jury to find that he acted recklessly. Under RSA 631:3, I,
“[a] person is guilty of reckless conduct if he recklessly engages in conduct
which places or may place another in danger of serious bodily injury.”
A person acts recklessly with respect to a material element of an
offense when he is aware of and consciously disregards a
substantial and unjustifiable risk that the material element exists
or will result from his conduct. The risk must be of such a nature
and degree that, considering the circumstances known to him, its
disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the conduct that a
law-abiding person would observe in the situation.
RSA 626:2, II(c) (2007). Thus, “[t]o prove the defendant acted in a reckless
manner, the State had to show that the defendant was aware of but
consciously disregarded a substantial, unjustifiable risk that serious bodily
injury would result from his conduct.” State v. Hull, 149 N.H. 706, 713 (2003).
“In addition, the State had to show that the defendant’s disregard for the risk
of injury to another was a gross deviation from the regard that would be given
by a law-abiding citizen.” Id. Whether a defendant acted recklessly “does not
“depend upon whether the defendant anticipated the precise risk or injury that
resulted.” Id.
Here, the defendant did not comply with Lister’s instructions not to
touch the gun case — in fact, the defendant opened the case. Lister then
commanded the defendant not to touch the weapon, but the defendant picked
up the firearm by its grip. Lister testified that he witnessed the defendant’s
finger on the trigger and that the defendant’s “hand came roughly in [the]
fashion like he was going to shoot [the gun].” The defendant then “raised his
hands up . . . towards [Lister’s] face.” Dirsa testified that the defendant raised
the firearm “close to shoulder level.” Both officers “grabb[ed]” the defendant,
yet the defendant still did not surrender the weapon. The officers struggled
with the defendant, and had to shake his arm several times before he finally let
go of the weapon.
Based upon this evidence, the jury could have found that the defendant’s
actions created “a substantial, unjustifiable risk that serious bodily injury
would result from his conduct.” Id. A rational jury could reasonably have
concluded that picking up a loaded firearm, which did not have a safety
mechanism, and raising it toward two police officers after being instructed not
to touch the weapon, created a substantial, unjustifiable risk that the
3