THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2014-120
CAREMARKPCS HEALTH, LLC
v.
NEW HAMPSHIRE DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES
Argued: October 15, 2014
Opinion Issued: April 30, 2015
Ransmeier & Spellman, P.C., of Concord (Daniel J. Mullen on the brief),
and Foley & Lardner LLP, of Chicago, Illinois (John F. Zabriskie on the brief
and orally), for the petitioner.
Joseph A. Foster, attorney general (Richard W. Head, associate attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the respondent.
BASSETT, J. The respondent, the New Hampshire Department of
Administrative Services (Department), appeals an order of the Superior Court
(Smukler, J.) granting summary judgment in favor of the petitioner,
CaremarkPCS Health, LLC (Caremark). The trial court ruled that certain
information constituting trade secrets under the New Hampshire Uniform
Trade Secrets Acts (UTSA), RSA ch. 350-B (2009), is exempt from disclosure
under the Right-to-Know Law, RSA ch. 91-A (2013 & Supp. 2014). Specifically,
the trial court ruled that disclosure of Caremark’s trade secrets by the
Department would constitute a “misappropriation” under the UTSA and,
therefore, that the subject information is exempt from disclosure under the
Right-to-Know Law. See RSA 91-A:4, I (2013). On appeal, the Department
argues that the trial court erred in finding that the UTSA prohibits the
Department from disclosing Caremark’s trade secrets under the “otherwise
prohibited by statute” exemption in RSA 91-A:4, I. We affirm.
The following facts are undisputed. In 2010, the Department issued a
Request for Proposals (RFP) for pharmacy benefit management services for the
State of New Hampshire’s health plan. The RFP, in pertinent part, provided
that:
If a request is made to the State to view portions of a proposal that
the Vendor has properly and clearly marked confidential, the State
will notify Vendor of the request and of the date the State plans to
release the records. By submitting a proposal, Vendor agrees that
unless the Vendor obtains a court order, at its sole expense,
enjoining the release of the requested information, the State may
release the requested information on the date specified in the
State’s notice without any liability to Vendor.
In response to the RFP, Caremark submitted a bid, which ultimately led to a
final negotiated contract with the Department. The Governor and Executive
Council approved the contract on November 17, 2010. Both the bid and final
contract included statements to the effect that certain information set forth in
those documents is proprietary and constitutes trade secrets of Caremark.
In 2011, the Department received multiple requests to inspect and copy
Caremark’s bid and the final contract. Two of the requests were made by
Caremark’s competitors. Caremark, after being informed by the Department of
the requests, responded that certain confidential information contained in the
bid and final contract was exempt from disclosure under the Right-to-Know
Law. The parties disputed whether certain information was subject to
disclosure.
Caremark filed a petition for declaratory and injunctive relief seeking to
enjoin the Department from disclosing certain information. Thereafter, the
parties filed pleadings that the trial court treated as cross-motions for
summary judgment. As part of the summary judgment proceedings, the
parties filed a joint stipulation of facts, identified the information as to which
they continued to disagree (designated information), and stipulated that the
designated information constitutes “trade secrets” as defined in the UTSA, RSA
350-B:1, IV, and constitutes “confidential, commercial, or financial
information” within the meaning of the Right-to-Know Law, RSA 91-A:5, IV
(Supp. 2014). The parties also agreed that disclosure of the designated
information “could have a chilling effect on the willingness of potential bidders
2
to submit proposals for [pharmacy benefit management] services to a
government entity . . . .”
Following a non-evidentiary hearing, the trial court entered summary
judgment in favor of Caremark and granted its request for injunctive relief.
The trial court ruled that RSA 91-A:4, I, which exempts from disclosure
information that is “otherwise prohibited by statute,” did not require a
balancing of interests. The court further found that Caremark “provided the
[D]epartment with the information under the duty of confidentiality.” The court
concluded that, pursuant to RSA 350-B:1, II(b)(2), the UTSA “prohibits
disclosure of the designated information” by the Department and, therefore, the
designated information was exempt from disclosure under RSA 91-A:4, I. This
appeal followed.
On appeal, the Department asserts that the trial court erred in ruling
that the designated information was exempt from disclosure. Although the
Department acknowledges that RSA 91-A:4, I, does not require the trial court
to engage in the same balancing test required under RSA 91-A:5, IV, see Goode
v. N.H. Legislative Budget Assistant, 148 N.H. 551, 554 (2002), it argues that
the UTSA “does not contain sufficient explicit language prohibiting disclosure
to fall under RSA 91-A:4.” Rather, the Department contends that the trial
court should have engaged in the balancing test applicable to “confidential,
commercial, or financial information” under RSA 91-A:5, IV. See Goode, 148
N.H. at 554. Caremark counters that the trial court correctly ruled that the
UTSA prohibits the disclosure of trade secrets and that, therefore, the
designated information is exempt from disclosure under RSA 91-A:4, I.
Alternatively, Caremark argues that the designated information is exempt from
disclosure under RSA 91-A:5, IV.
In reviewing the trial court’s rulings on cross-motions for summary
judgment, “we consider the evidence in the light most favorable to each party in
its capacity as the nonmoving party and, if no genuine issue of material fact
exists, we determine whether the moving party is entitled to judgment as a
matter of law.” Bovaird v. N.H. Dep’t of Admin. Servs., 166 N.H. 755, 758
(2014). “On appeal, we review the trial court’s application of law to the
stipulated facts de novo.” Nash Family Inv. Properties v. Town of Hudson, 147
N.H. 233, 234 (2001). This case presents the legal question of whether the
UTSA prohibits disclosure of trade secrets and, therefore, whether the
designated information falls under the exemption in RSA 91-A:4, I, for
information the disclosure of which is “otherwise prohibited by statute.”
“Resolution of this case requires us to interpret several statutory
provisions, including certain provisions of the Right-to-Know Law.” Lambert v.
Belknap County Convention, 157 N.H. 375, 378 (2008). “The ordinary rules of
statutory construction apply to our review of the Right-to-Know Law.” Id.
“Thus, we are the final arbiter of the legislature’s intent as expressed in the
3
words of the statute considered as a whole.” Id. “When examining the
language of a statute, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meaning to the words
used.” Id. “We interpret legislative intent from the statute as written and will
not consider what the legislature might have said or add language that the
legislature did not see fit to include.” Id. “We also interpret a statute in the
context of the overall statutory scheme and not in isolation.” Id.
“The purpose of the Right-to-Know Law is to ensure both the greatest
possible public access to the actions, discussions and records of all public
bodies, and their accountability to the people.” 38 Endicott St. N. v. State Fire
Marshal, 163 N.H. 656, 660 (2012) (quotation omitted). “Although the statute
does not provide for unrestricted access to public records, we resolve questions
regarding the Right-to-Know Law with a view to providing the utmost
information in order to best effectuate these statutory and constitutional
objectives.” Id.; see also N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 8. “As a result, we broadly
construe provisions favoring disclosure and interpret the exemptions
restrictively.” Ettinger v. Town of Madison Planning Bd., 162 N.H. 785, 788
(2011). “The party seeking nondisclosure has the burden of proof.” N.H. Civil
Liberties Union v. City of Manchester, 149 N.H. 437, 439 (2003). Therefore,
Caremark has the burden of demonstrating that the designated information is
exempt from disclosure under the Right-to-Know Law.
RSA 91-A:4, I, in relevant part, states:
Every citizen during the regular or business hours of all public
bodies or agencies, and on the regular business premises of such
public bodies or agencies, has the right to inspect all governmental
records in the possession, custody, or control of such public bodies
or agencies, . . . except as otherwise prohibited by statute or RSA
91-A:5.
(Emphasis added.) Caremark argues that, because the UTSA precludes
disclosure of the designated information under the circumstances here, that
information is exempt from disclosure under RSA 91-A:4, I.
The UTSA does not prohibit the disclosure of trade secrets under all
circumstances; rather, it provides remedies for the “[a]ctual or threatened
misappropriation” of trade secrets. RSA 350-B:2, I. The UTSA defines
misappropriation as:
(a) Acquisition of a trade secret of another by a person who knows
or has reason to know that the trade secret was acquired by
improper means; or
(b) Disclosure or use of a trade secret of another without express or
implied consent by a person who:
4
(1) Used improper means to acquire knowledge of the trade
secret; or
(2) At the time of disclosure or use, knew or had reason to know
that his knowledge of the trade secret was derived from or
through a person who had utilized improper means to
acquire it; or acquired under circumstances giving rise to a
duty to maintain its secrecy or limit its use; or derived from
or through a person who owed a duty to the person seeking
relief to maintain its secrecy or limit its use; or
(3) Before a material change of his position, knew or had reason
to know that it was a trade secret and that knowledge of it
had been acquired by accident or mistake.
RSA 350-B:1, II (emphases added).
Caremark argues that, under RSA 350-B:1, II(b)(2), disclosure of its trade
secrets by the Department would constitute a “misappropriation” because the
Department “knew or had reason to know” that it acquired the trade secrets
“under circumstances giving rise to a duty to maintain [their] secrecy or limit
[their] use” and Caremark does not consent to their disclosure. Although the
Department agrees with Caremark “that a misappropriation occurs under the
[UTSA] when (1) a direct commitment is made to maintain the confidentiality of
a trade secret, and (2) the trade secret is disclosed without consent,” it
maintains that there has been no actual or threatened misappropriation of the
designated information because, here, it “did neither of those things.”
Turning to the first prong of the Department’s argument, we note that a
direct commitment to maintain the secrecy of a trade secret is not required for
the disclosure of a trade secret to constitute a misappropriation. Rather, a
misappropriation occurs if a person discloses a trade secret without the
owner’s consent when the person “knew or had reason to know that his
knowledge of the trade secret” was “acquired under circumstances giving rise
to a duty to maintain its secrecy or limit its use.” RSA 350-B:1, II(b)(2). Here,
it is undisputed that the RFP specifically provided that, “to the extent
consistent with applicable state and federal law[,] . . . the State will endeavor to
maintain the confidentiality of portions of the proposal that [are] clearly and
properly marked confidential.” Notably, Caremark specifically marked the
designated information as confidential and proprietary. Moreover, the contract
provides that both parties are under a duty of confidentiality not to disclose
trade secrets. Accordingly, we conclude that the Department “knew or had
reason to know that [its] knowledge of the trade secret was . . . acquired under
circumstances giving rise to a duty to maintain its secrecy or limit its use.” Id.
5
The undisputed facts establish that Caremark did not expressly or
impliedly consent to disclosure of the designated information. Although the
Department contends that submitting a bid constituted “consent” to the
disclosure of the designated information, the language of the RFP contradicts
this assertion. Caremark marked the information as “confidential,” objected to
its disclosure, and sought an injunction to prevent disclosure. Disclosure of
Caremark’s trade secrets under these circumstances would constitute a
“misappropriation” as defined by the UTSA.
However, our conclusion that the disclosure would constitute a
misappropriation does not end the analysis because the Department next
argues that the UTSA does not contain “sufficient explicit language prohibiting”
the misappropriation of trade secrets such that the misappropriation falls
within the “otherwise prohibited by statute” exemption in RSA 91-A:4, I. We
disagree.
The purpose of the UTSA is to protect trade secrets from being
misappropriated and to provide redress in the event of a misappropriation. See
generally RSA ch. 350-B. The UTSA grants courts broad authority to protect
trade secrets, specifically stating that a court may enjoin an “[a]ctual or
threatened misappropriation,” and that “affirmative acts to protect a trade
secret may be compelled by court order.” RSA 350-B:2, I, III. In the event of a
misappropriation, the UTSA provides that the complainant may be entitled to
recover damages. RSA 350-B:3, I. If the misappropriation is “willful and
malicious” the trial court may award “exemplary damages” up to twice the
amount of the actual damage award. RSA 350-B:3, II. Moreover, the UTSA
expressly provides that it does not displace existing “[c]riminal remedies,
whether or not based upon misappropriation of a trade secret.” RSA 350-B:7,
II(c). Notably, the definition of “property” in the theft chapter of the Criminal
Code includes “trade secrets, . . . which the owner thereof intends to be
available only to persons selected by him.” RSA 637:2, I (Supp. 2014).
Given the plain language of the UTSA, the broad remedial powers vested
in the courts under the UTSA, as well as the express statement that criminal
liability may arise from acts within the scope of the statute, we hold that a
“misappropriation” of a trade secret is “prohibited” by the UTSA. Accordingly,
because disclosure of the designated information by the Department would be
a misappropriation of Caremark’s trade secrets under the UTSA, we conclude
that disclosure of that information is “prohibited by statute” under RSA 91-A:4,
I, and, therefore, we hold that the designated information is exempt from
disclosure under RSA 91-A:4, I. Accordingly, we need not address Caremark’s
argument that RSA 91-A:5 exempts trade secrets from disclosure.
We note that our holding is in accord with cases in other jurisdictions, in
which courts have held that, if the disclosure of trade secrets would constitute
a misappropriation, such information is exempt from disclosure under public
6
record laws. We agree with the Supreme Court of Washington, which held that
Washington’s public record law “is simply an improper means to acquire
knowledge of a trade secret.” Animal Welfare Soc. v. Univ. of Wash., 884 P.2d
592, 603 (Wash. 1994) (en banc); see also State ex rel. Besser v. Ohio State
Univ., 721 N.E.2d 1044, 1049 (Ohio 2000) (“[W]e hold that trade secrets [are]
exempt from disclosure under the ‘state or federal law’ exemption of [Ohio’s
Public Records Act].”); Pfizer Inc. v. Oregon Dept. of Justice, 294 P.3d 496, 510
(Or. Ct. App. 2012) (concluding that the Oregon Uniform Trade Secrets Act
exempts trade secrets from disclosure under the Oregon Public Records Law);
American Family Mut. Ins. v. Missouri Dept., 169 S.W.3d 905, 913-14 (Mo. Ct.
App. 2005) (affirming the trial court’s conclusion that the Missouri Uniform
Trade Secrets Act protects trade secrets from disclosure under Missouri’s
public record laws).
Finally, the Department argues that there are overriding public policy
reasons that favor disclosure of the designated information. However, the
Department makes “[its] argument in the wrong forum.” Petition of Kilton, 156
N.H. 632, 645 (2007). With the enactment of the UTSA, the legislature made
the policy determination to prohibit the misappropriation of trade secrets.
Accordingly, misappropriated trade secrets fall squarely within the exemption
in the Right-to-Know Law for information the disclosure of which is “otherwise
prohibited by statute.” RSA 91-A:4, I. To the extent that the Department
argues that the legislature improperly balanced policy considerations, we
observe that “[m]atters of public policy are reserved for the legislature, and we
therefore leave to it the task of addressing the [Department’s] concerns.”
Petition of Kilton, 156 N.H. at 645.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY, and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
7