THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2015-0538, Ohio Mutual Insurance Group & a.
v. Merle Wilbur, III, Administrator of the Estate of Merle
Wilbur, IV & a., the court on April 25, 2016, issued the
following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
defendant, Merle Wilbur, III (Wilbur), administrator of the estate of Merle
Wilbur, IV, appeals an order of the Superior Court (Delker, J.) granting
summary judgment in favor of the plaintiffs, Ohio Mutual Insurance Group and
Casco Indemnity Company (collectively, Ohio Mutual). On appeal, Wilbur
argues that the trial court erred when it determined that: (1) the failure of the
driver to cooperate with Ohio Mutual was reason to deny liability coverage
under Wilbur’s policy; and (2) the estate was not entitled to uninsured motorist
coverage due to the delay in providing notice of the incident to Ohio Mutual.
We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand.
The summary judgment record reflects the following pertinent facts. On
December 24, 2012, Merle Wilbur, IV (the decedent) and Ken Plante were in
Haverhill, Massachusetts, removing a tree. At some point during this process,
a rope was tied to the tree and attached to a pickup truck owned by Wilbur and
insured by Ohio Mutual. Plante, operating the truck, pulled down the tree,
which the decedent was in at the time. The decedent sustained fatal injuries.
On December 26, Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
investigators visited the site. Additionally, the Haverhill Police Department
investigated the decedent’s death. Within a few weeks after the accident, both
OSHA and the Haverhill Police Department spoke to Wilbur about what had
occurred. Around this time, Wilbur learned that Plante had been driving
Wilbur’s truck at the time of the incident. In February 2013, Wilbur retained
an attorney, who began attempts to contact Plante.
OSHA issued its report in the spring of 2013, concluding that it did not
have jurisdiction over the matter. On June 18, 2013, Ohio Mutual received
notice of the incident from Wilbur’s attorney and learned of Plante’s possible
negligence in causing the decedent’s death. Afterward, Ohio Mutual began its
own investigation.
Ohio Mutual later filed a declaratory judgment action in superior court
against Wilbur and Plante. Ohio Mutual requested a declaration that it was
not required to defend or indemnify Plante for the decedent’s injuries and that
it was not required to provide uninsured motorist coverage to Wilbur, as the
executor of the decedent’s estate. After attempts to serve Plante with notice of
the lawsuit failed, the trial court granted Ohio Mutual’s motion to serve Plante
by publication. The trial court eventually entered a default judgment against
Plante for failing to appear.
Ohio Mutual moved for summary judgment against Wilbur. It argued,
among other things, that Plante’s failure to respond to Ohio Mutual’s efforts to
contact him was a material breach of Wilbur’s insurance policy, which resulted
in Plante forfeiting liability coverage. Ohio Mutual also argued that the
decedent was not entitled to coverage under the policy because Wilbur failed to
“promptly” notify Ohio Mutual of the incident. Wilbur objected, and also
moved for summary judgment. The trial court agreed with Ohio Mutual on
both issues, and granted summary judgment in its favor. This appeal followed.
As an initial matter, we address Ohio Mutual’s motion to dismiss this
appeal as moot, which was filed in this court after the parties had submitted
their briefs but before oral argument. See Sup. Ct. R. 25(7). Ohio Mutual
argues that because the decedent’s accident occurred on December 24, 2012,
and Wilbur failed to file a lawsuit by December 24, 2015, the applicable statute
of limitations bars any recovery. See Mass. Gen. Laws Ann. ch. 260 § 2A (West
2004) (“[A]ctions of tort [and] actions of contract to recover for personal injuries
. . . shall be commenced only within three years next after the cause of action
accrues.”). However, this issue was not raised in the trial court, and because
we cannot say as a matter of law that there are no circumstances under which
the statute might have been tolled, Ohio Mutual’s motion to dismiss is denied.
Turning to the merits, in reviewing the trial court’s rulings on cross-
motions for summary judgment, “we consider the evidence in the light most
favorable to each party in its capacity as the nonmoving party and, if no
genuine issue of material fact exists, we determine whether the moving party is
entitled to judgment as a matter of law.” Granite State Mgmt. & Res. v. City of
Concord, 165 N.H. 277, 282 (2013) (quotation omitted). “If our review of that
evidence discloses no genuine issue of material fact and if the moving party is
entitled to judgment as a matter of law, then we will affirm the grant of
summary judgment.” Id. (quotation omitted). “We review the trial court’s
application of the law to the facts de novo.” Bovaird v. N.H. Dep’t of Admin.
Servs., 166 N.H. 755, 758 (2014) (quotation omitted).
Wilbur originally raised two issues on appeal. First, he argued that the
trial court erred in finding that Plante was not entitled to liability coverage for
failing to cooperate with Ohio Mutual. However, at oral argument, Wilbur
waived this issue, and, therefore, we affirm the trial court’s grant of summary
judgment in this regard. Wilbur’s remaining argument concerns uninsured
motorist coverage under the policy. Specifically, Wilbur argues that the trial
court erred when it determined that Wilbur did not notify Ohio Mutual of the
2
claim “promptly,” as required by the policy, and that Ohio Mutual was
prejudiced by the delay.
Resolution of this matter requires the interpretation of the insurance
policy at issue. “Interpretation of the language in an insurance policy is a
question of law.” Wilson v. Progressive N. Ins. Co., 151 N.H. 782, 788 (2005).
“We construe the language of an insurance policy as would a reasonable
person in the position of the insured based on a more than casual reading of
the policy as a whole.” Id. “Where the terms of a policy are clear and
unambiguous, we accord the language its natural and ordinary meaning.” Id.
Part E of the policy, entitled “DUTIES AFTER AN ACCIDENT OR LOSS,”
contains a list of obligations that a person seeking coverage must perform.
Included is the requirement that Ohio Mutual “must be notified promptly of
how, when and where the accident or loss happened.” (Emphasis added.) The
policy provides that Ohio Mutual has “no duty to provide coverage under this
policy if the failure to comply with the . . . duties [listed] is prejudicial to [it].”
The policy does not define the term “promptly.” Both parties rely upon
our case law interpreting insurance policies requiring that notice be given to
the insurer “as soon as practicable,” and neither side argues that there is a
meaningful distinction between notice given “promptly” and “as soon as
practicable.” Therefore, we assume, without deciding, that the two are the
same.
“[W]hether there has been a breach of the policy provisions requiring
notice to be given ‘as soon as practicable’ does not depend on the length of the
delay alone but also upon the reasons for the delay and whether the delay
resulted in prejudice to the insurer.” Id. at 785 (quotation omitted). “It is a
combination of these three factors that determines whether there has been a
substantial breach of the notice requirements of the policy so as to relieve the
insurer of its obligation to defend and pay any judgments.” Id. (quotation
omitted). “The relative weight to be given these factors is for the trial court to
determine.” Id. (quotation omitted). “Unless no reasonable person could find
that notice was given as soon as was reasonably possible, the question whether
the notice requirement has been met is one of fact for the trial court.” Id.
(quotation omitted).
The trial court concluded that “the three factors all weigh in favor of
finding that [Wilbur] breached the policy.” With regard to the length of the
delay, it is undisputed that the incident occurred on December 24, 2012, and
that Wilbur’s attorney sent notice of the claim to Ohio Mutual on June 14,
2013, resulting in a delay of approximately six months. The trial court found
this delay to be “substantial.” The trial court also stated that Wilbur’s reason
— that he wanted to wait until after the OSHA report was issued — did “not
justify his delay.” The trial court pointed to Wilbur’s recorded statement to
Ohio Mutual, in which he stated that he knew Plante was driving the truck a
3