THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2015-0303, Darlene Forshee & a. v. Joseph
Brown, the court on December 4, 2015, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
We affirm.
The defendant, Joseph Brown (landlord), appeals a decision of the Circuit
Court (Bamberger, J.) following a bench trial, ruling in favor of the plaintiffs,
Darlene Forshee and Jennifer Berman (tenants), on their small claim complaint
seeking the return of a security deposit. In ruling for the tenants, the trial
court found, in part, that there was no enforceable lease. On appeal, the
landlord argues that the evidence at trial compelled findings that the parties
had entered into an enforceable oral lease for a shared facility, see RSA 540-
B:1, :2 (2007), and that the tenants failed to provide timely notice that they
were terminating the tenancy, see RSA 540-B:4 (2007), thereby entitling the
landlord to retain the security deposit to cover the tenants’ unpaid rent.
We will uphold the trial court’s findings and rulings unless they are
unsupported by the evidence or erroneous as a matter of law. See Vincent v.
MacLean, 166 N.H. 132, 134 (2014). We assume that the trial court made all
subsidiary findings necessary to support its general findings. See Nordic Inn
Condo. Owners’ Assoc. v. Ventullo, 151 N.H. 571, 586 (2004). We defer to the
trial court’s judgment on issues such as resolving conflicts in the testimony,
assessing the credibility of witnesses, and evaluating the weight of the evidence
submitted at trial. See Vincent, 166 N.H. at 134.
The evidence at trial establishes that, in late February or early March of
2014, the parties began negotiating the rental of the upstairs of the landlord’s
home. The space that the tenants would rent consisted of two bedrooms, a
living area, and a half bathroom; the parties would share use of the kitchen.
On March 18, the landlord emailed the tenants a lease; the tenants, however,
never signed a written lease. At some point in March, the tenants paid $825
for the first month’s rent, and toward the end of March, they paid a security
deposit of $825. The tenants moved into the landlord’s home on March 31.
At 5:50 p.m. on March 31, the date that the tenants moved into the
landlord’s home, the landlord sent the tenants an email telling them that they
would be responsible for sharing several household chores, such as washing
dishes, vacuuming common areas of the house, doing laundry, gardening,
cooking meals, shopping for groceries, and providing childcare for his children.
Although the tenants had agreed to assist the landlord in caring for his
children under certain limited circumstances, the parties had otherwise never
discussed the chores that the landlord expected them to perform. The landlord
further stated that clothing was optional in the house, and that the tenants
should “pay attention to site lines and avoid shocking the neighbors.” As with
the expected chores, the parties had never before discussed whether clothing
would be “optional” in the common areas of the home.
The tenants responded to the landlord’s email on April 7, advising him
that they had not been aware that clothing would be “optional,” and requesting
that he remain clothed in their presence. The tenants further requested that
neither the landlord nor his children enter the upstairs portion of the house
except by invitation or to make necessary repairs. According to the tenants,
the landlord’s children had not been respecting their privacy, and were
persistently entering the upstairs area of the house without permission.
On April 10, the landlord responded to the tenants’ email, asserting that
he was “not sure how clothing optional could be any source of confusion,” and
that he “had mentioned that as one reason that [he] wouldn’t have rented [the
space] to just anyone” when the parties had earlier met to discuss the
possibility of a lease. Realizing that they disagreed with the landlord as to the
terms of the rental agreement, the tenants began to look for a new place to live.
On the morning of April 15, five days after the landlord’s email claiming that
the parties had discussed the clothing arrangement during their negotiations,
the tenants advised the landlord that they were moving; they moved later that
day. The landlord subsequently refused to return their security deposit.
RSA chapter 540-B governs the rental of “shared facilities.” A “shared
facility” is defined as “real property rented for residential purposes which has
separate sleeping areas for each occupant and in which each occupant has
access to and shares with the owner of the facility one or more significant
portions of the facility in common, such as kitchen, dining area, bathroom, or
bathing area, for which the occupant has no rented right of sole personal use.”
RSA 540-B:1, I. A verbal rental agreement is enforceable under RSA chapter
540-B, and unless otherwise provided for by a written rental agreement, every
shared facility “tenancy shall be deemed to be at will.” RSA 540-B:2. Absent
any different notice requirement in a written rental agreement, terminating an
at-will tenancy under RSA chapter 540-B requires the tenant to provide a
written thirty-day