THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2015-0368, Elizabeth Skrekas & a. v. State
Farm Fire and Casualty Company & a., the court on May 12,
2017, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
plaintiffs, Elizabeth Skrekas, Thomas Skrekas, and the Estate of Virginia
Martin, appeal two decisions of the superior court dismissing their action
against the defendants, State Farm Fire and Casualty Company (State Farm)
and New England Fire Cause & Origin, Inc. (NEFCO), alleging various causes of
action related to their insurance claim and the handling of a fire investigation
at a residence, co-owned at the time by Elizabeth, Thomas, and Virginia
Martin. NEFCO cross-appeals the trial court’s decision to apply an objective
standard when it determined that NEFCO had a “reason to suspect” that a fire
at the subject residence was not accidentally caused. RSA 153:13-a, II (2014).
We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand.
I. Facts
The record reflects the following facts. The residence was insured by
State Farm against fire loss. In less than a week, two fires occurred in the
kitchen. On September 29, 2010, the first fire damaged the refrigerator.
Several days later, on October 4, 2010, before the refrigerator could be
replaced, a second fire ignited in the kitchen.
State Farm hired NEFCO to investigate the second fire. NEFCO, in turn,
sent its employee, David Wheeler, an expert in determining the cause and
origin of fires, to investigate. After a two-day investigation at the scene,
Wheeler produced a report concluding that the fire had been intentionally set.
Thereafter, he conveyed his findings to the Hudson fire prevention officer, the
state fire marshal’s office, and State Farm. The Hudson police conducted a
criminal investigation and charged Elizabeth with felony arson. The State
subsequently entered a nolle prosequi on the charge.
In February 2012, the plaintiffs brought an action claiming breach of
contract, breach of implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing, negligence,
and vicarious liability against State Farm, and claiming negligence against
NEFCO.
State Farm moved to dismiss, arguing that all of the plaintiffs’ claims
were time-barred by the relevant 12-month limitations period. Alternatively,
they argued that the plaintiffs’ tort claims were impermissible in the context of
disputes between insureds and their insurer. The Superior Court (Nicolosi, J.)
granted the motion on the pleadings and dismissed all claims against State
Farm. NEFCO filed a separate motion to dismiss arguing that it was entitled to
immunity. After an evidentiary hearing, the Superior Court (Temple, J.)
dismissed the negligence claim against NEFCO. The plaintiffs appealed, and
NEFCO cross-appealed.
II. Claims Against State Farm
We first address the parties’ arguments with respect to the dismissal of
the plaintiffs’ claims against State Farm. In reviewing the trial court’s grant of
a motion to dismiss, we determine whether the allegations in the plaintiffs’
pleadings are reasonably susceptible of a construction that would permit
recovery. Kilnwood on Kanasatka Condo. Unit Assoc. v. Smith, 163 N.H. 751,
752 (2012). We assume the plaintiffs’ pleadings to be true and construe all
reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to them. Id. We then engage
in a threshold inquiry that tests the facts in the petition against the applicable
law, and if the allegations constitute a basis for legal relief, we must hold that it
was improper to grant the motion to dismiss. Id.
A. Contract Claims
The plaintiffs first argue that the trial court erred when it found that,
under RSA 407:15 (2006) (amended 2014) and RSA 407:22 (Supp. 2016), their
contract claims against State Farm are time-barred. The standard policy form
required by RSA 407:22 provides, in pertinent part: “No suit or action on this
policy for the recovery of any claim shall be sustainable in any court of law or
equity unless the requirements of this policy shall have been complied with,
and unless commenced within 12 months next after inception of the loss.”
RSA 407:15 provides: “Unless the [insurance] company shall notify the insured
that any action will be forever barred by law if his writ is not served on the
company within 12 months next after such notification, he may bring his
action at any time.” (Emphasis added.) We have construed RSA 407:22 as
setting forth a 12-month limitations period and have construed RSA 407:15 as
requiring an insurer to give notice of this period before it may rely upon it.
Kierstead v. State Farm Fire & Cas. Co., 160 N.H. 681, 686 (2010). We have
explained that the “obvious purpose of RSA 407:15 is to allow the insurer to
place a twelve[-]month limitation on actions against it only if it gives the
insured specific notice of the limitation.” Id. (quotation and ellipsis omitted).
We have also held that the 12-month period begins to run from the date of
notice, and not from the date of the insured’s loss as set forth in RSA 407:22.
Id. The issue, here, is whether the plaintiffs were so notified.
2
In its reply to the plaintiffs’ objection to its motion to dismiss, State Farm
attached an October 11, 2010 notice, which it represented had complied with
RSA 407:15. The plaintiffs countered that State Farm was estopped from
relying upon that notice because it subsequently sent a conflicting notice on
July 25, 2011. The trial court rejected the plaintiffs’ estoppel argument
concluding, based upon the October 11 notice, that “State Farm properly
notified plaintiffs of the twelve-month limitations period.”
The plaintiffs asked the trial court to clarify and reconsider. In its
objection, State Farm acknowledged, for the first time, that, actually, it had not
sent the October 11