THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2015-0588, In the Matter of Caren Logan and
James Logan, the court on March 10, 2017, issued the
following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
respondent, James Logan, appeals, and the petitioner, Caren Logan, cross-
appeals, a final divorce decree of the Circuit Court (Foley, J.). We affirm in part
and reverse in part.
The trial court found, or the record supports, the following facts. The
parties married in May 2004 and have two minor children. Prior to their
marriage, the parties signed a prenuptial agreement, which they agree is valid
and enforceable. The prenuptial agreement prescribes the manner in which
the parties’ property is to be divided in the event that they divorce. As is
relevant here, the prenuptial agreement provides that property that is classified
as the “separate property” of the husband must be divided according to a
formula: the wife is entitled to one percent of the husband’s separate property
for every full year of marriage, up to a maximum of thirteen percent. The
prenuptial agreement defines the “separate property” of the husband to be “all
the property . . . which [the husband] now has or may hereafter acquire,
together with the income earnings, [and] appreciation and depreciation
thereof.” In contrast, the prenuptial agreement states that property titled in
the names of both parties as joint tenants with rights of survivorship is to be
“divided equally between the parties” in the event that they divorce.
The wife filed for divorce in 2013. At the final hearing, the parties
disputed, among other things, the length of their marriage for purposes of the
prenuptial agreement’s distribution formula: the husband argued that the
marriage ended when divorce proceedings were instituted, while the wife
contended that the marriage continued until a final judgment of divorce was
entered. After the final hearing, the trial court issued a final decree, in which it
granted a divorce on fault grounds, and addressed issues relating to the
division of property, child support, and the allocation of parenting time and
decision-making authority. Regarding the distribution formula, the trial court
concluded that, for purposes of the prenuptial agreement, the wife had been
married to the husband for eleven years, and was therefore entitled to an
award equal to 11% of the value of the husband’s separate property. Each
party filed a motion for reconsideration, which the trial court denied. This
appeal and cross-appeal followed.
I. Percentage Interest of the Husband’s Separate Patent Assets
We begin by addressing the husband’s claims on appeal. He first argues
that the trial court erred by awarding the wife 50% of his interest in certain
patent assets, including limited liability companies that owned various patents.
We agree.
By way of background, on the first day of the final hearing, the parties
filed a stipulation in the court relating to certain patent assets that the
husband owned either directly or through limited liability companies. The
stipulation is titled “STIPULATION REGARDING INTERESTS IN CERTAIN
PROPERTY PURSUANT TO PRENUPTIAL AGREEMENT,” and provides:
1. Certain of the assets that might be valued under the parties’
Prenuptial Agreement formula present significant valuation
difficulties. . . . .
3. Patents Owned by Limited Liability Companies:
A. In order to avoid valuation problems, [the wife] is awarded
a certain percentage, as determined by the Court, of [the
husband’s] percentage ownership of the following LLCs:
Personal Audio, Bringrr, and True Mail.
B. [The wife’s] interest shall be as a member of each of these
LLCs equal to her resulting percentage of [the husband’s]
membership interest. By way of example only, if [the
husband] has a 10% membership interest and [the wife]
is awarded a 10% interest in [the husband’s]
membership, [the wife] would have a 1% membership
interest in that LLC.
4. Patents Owned by [the Husband]:
A. There are three patents applications . . . owned directly
. . . by [the husband] as of the date of this Stipulation
. . . . [One] application may eventually issue in a useable
form. If and when it does it will be . . . placed in an
LLC. . . . [The wife] will then be issued a membership
interest in the LLC equal to the relative value of the
[patent] within the portfolio times the certain percentage
of assets, as determined by the court.
(Emphases added and omitted.)
2
The trial court interpreted the stipulation to modify the terms of the
prenuptial agreement in two material respects. First, the court concluded that
the stipulation authorized it to award the wife ownership interests in the LLCs
in lieu of a monetary award. Second, the court ruled that the stipulation
placed the patent assets “completely out of the process defined by the
[p]renuptial [a]greement,” such that the trial court was authorized to award the
wife a percentage interest exceeding the percentage set by the terms of the
prenuptial agreement. As a result, the trial court deemed the patent assets to
be marital property, and awarded the wife 50% of the husband’s interest in the
LLCs.
On appeal, neither party disputes that the stipulation authorized the
trial court to award the wife ownership interests in lieu of a monetary award.
Nor does either party contest that, at the time that it issued the final decree,
the trial court properly concluded that the wife was generally entitled to 11% of
the husband’s separate property under the prenuptial agreement. Rather, the
husband argues that the trial court erred when it concluded that the
stipulation superseded the general formula in the prenuptial agreement and,
therefore, authorized the court to award the wife a percentage interest in
excess of 11%. He contends that the clauses stating that the trial court would
“determine[]” the wife’s percentage interest are mere references to the trial
court’s responsibility to determine the length of the parties’ marriage for
purposes of the prenuptial agreement’s formula.
The wife counters that the trial court correctly interpreted the
stipulation. Relying upon the language in the stipulation that her percentage
interest was to be “determined by the court,” the wife argues that the
stipulation granted the trial court the “unfettered discretion to chose [sic] a
percentage of [the husband’s] patent interests to award [to the wife].” The wife
asserts that she was able to secure this concession from the husband because,
had he not agreed to it, the husband faced “the potential devaluation of [the
patent] assets” when the trial court valued them.
We agree with the husband and conclude that the stipulation did not
supersede the formula set forth in the prenuptial agreement. The stipulation
authorized the trial court merely to award ownership interests in lieu of
monetary awards—it did not authorize the court to disregard the formula in the
prenuptial agreement and award the wife 50% of the husband’s interest in the
patent assets.
“A stipulated agreement is contractual in nature and therefore is
governed by contract rules.” Public Serv. Co. of N.H. v. Town of Seabrook, 133
N.H. 365, 370 (1990). The interpretation of a contract is a question of law,
which we review de novo. Czumak v. N.H. Div. of Developmental Servs., 155
N.H. 368, 373 (2007). When interpreting a written agreement, we give the
language used by the parties its reasonable meaning, “considering the
3