THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2015-0162, State of New Hampshire v. Justin
Cassidy, the court on March 18, 2016, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
We affirm.
Following a jury trial in Superior Court (Abramson, J.), the defendant,
Justin Cassidy, was convicted on a charge of acting in concert with another in
the sale of a controlled drug. See RSA 318-B:2, :26 (Supp. 2015). He argues
that the evidence was insufficient to sustain his conviction, and that the trial
court erred by not assuring that the jurors would begin deliberations anew
after substituting an alternate juror during jury deliberations.
We first address whether the evidence was sufficient to sustain the
defendant’s conviction. The indictment on which the defendant was convicted
alleged that on or about May 20, 2014, “in concert with Taylor Bacon, . . . [he]
did knowingly sell a quantity of a controlled drug, to wit, heroin, in a quantity
of less than one gram, including any adulterants or dilutants, to an
[informant], in exchange for United States Currency.” On appeal, the
defendant argues that this language charged him with being an accomplice to a
drug sale. He further argues that the evidence established only that he sold
heroin to Ms. Bacon, who in turn sold it to the informant; there was no
evidence, according to the defendant, that he knew the heroin he sold to Ms.
Bacon would be distributed to anyone else. Thus, he argues that the evidence
was legally insufficient to establish “that he knowingly ‘solicited, aided or
attempted to aid another’ to sell drugs” so as to give rise to accomplice liability.
We assume, without deciding, that this argument is preserved.
The defendant’s argument is built upon the faulty premise that he was
charged solely as an accomplice. Under New Hampshire law, however,
language in a charging document alleging that a defendant acted “in concert
with” another ordinarily charges the defendant both as a principal and as an
accomplice. State v. Brooks, 164 N.H. 272, 289 (2012); State v. Sinbandith,
143 N.H. 579, 584 (1999) (finding that language in an indictment charging the
defendant with knowingly selling a controlled drug “in concert with and aided
by another” provided sufficient notice that the defendant was being charged as
a principal). Moreover, the identity of the purchaser of a drug is not an
element of the crime of sale of a controlled drug under RSA 318-B:2. See State
v. Bell, 125 N.H. 425, 429 (1984).
Consistent with these principles, the trial court instructed the jury in
this case, without objection, as follows:
Now in this case the Defendant has been charged with sale
of a controlled drug, acting in concert with Taylor Bacon. The
definition of this crime has four parts or elements. The State must
prove each element beyond a reasonable doubt. Understand the
State is not required to prove beyond a reasonable doubt each and
every fact upon which it relies. The State is required to prove
beyond a reasonable doubt the four elements of the crime. Thus,
the State must prove:
First, the Defendant sold a substance to another;
And, second, the Defendant knew the substance was heroin;
And, third, the amount of the controlled drug was less than
one gram, including any adulterants or diluents;
And, fourth, the Defendant acted knowingly.
. . . .
Now as a matter of law, the Defendant is charged here as
both a principal and an accomplice in sale of a controlled drug. A
defendant may be convicted of a crime although he did not
personally perform all of the conduct which constitutes the offense.
In other words, the law recognizes that there may be a division of
labor in criminal activity, just as there is in business or many
other activities of daily life.
Thus, if you find the crime of sale of a controlled drug
occurred, then the State may prove the Defendant’s guilt of that
crime in either one of two ways. First, by proving beyond a
reasonable doubt that the offense was committed by the Defendant
himself as described above; or, second, by proving beyond a
reasonable doubt that the Defendant is accountable for the
conduct of someone else, namely, Taylor Bacon, and that the
offense was committed by a combination of the Defendant’s own
acts and the actions of Taylor Bacon.
2
(Emphases added.) Thus, the trial court properly instructed the jury that it
could convict the defendant if it found that he knowingly sold less than one
gram of a substance he knew to be heroin to another. The jury was not
required to find in addition that he knew the heroin would be distributed to the
informant. See id. at 430 (because identity of purchaser is not an element, it
made no difference that the person to whom the defendant sold drugs was not
the state trooper named in the indictment, but was an informant). In his brief,
the defendant acknowledges that “[t]he State’s evidence is that Ms. Bacon said
she bought a baggie of heroin from [the defendant], and in turn sold it to [the
informant]. . . . The amount of drugs Ms. Bacon bought and sold was 0.843
grams – roughly the amount of her daily habit.”
We conclude, therefore, that the evidence was sufficient to sustain the
defendant’s conviction.
We next address whether the trial court erred by not assuring that the
jurors would begin deliberations anew after substituting an alternate juror
during jury deliberations. After the trial court was required to substitute an
alternate juror for a juror who had become ill, the trial court specifically
instructed the jurors to “start [their deliberations] all over again,” to share with
the new juror their positions and viewpoints as to the evidence and the law, to
listen to the new juror’s positions and viewpoints, and not to consider or refer
to any viewpoints that may have previously been expressed by the excused
juror. The defendant argues that these instructions were not sufficient to
assure that the jurors would in fact begin deliberations anew; rather, the
defendant argues that the trial judge was obligated to ask each juror
individually whether the juror could begin deliberations anew, and to obtain
each juror’s affirmative statement on the record that the juror would begin
deliberations anew. See State v. Sullivan, 157 N.H. 124, 142-43 (2008).
The record does not reflect that the defendant raised this issue in the
trial court. To the contrary, it shows that, after the trial court instructed the
jurors to begin their deliberations anew, it asked counsel whether there was
“anything else [to address] before the jury’s excused,” to which the defendant’s
counsel responded, “No, Your Honor.” However, the defendant asserts that “if
it appears [that he] did not contemporaneously object to the trial judge’s
abbreviated procedure, this Court should nonetheless reverse for plain error.”
Under the plain error rule, we have discretion to correct errors that were
not raised in the trial court. State v. Mueller, 166 N.H. 65, 68 (2014). The rule
“is used sparingly, however, and is limited to those circumstances in which a
miscarriage of justice would otherwise result.” Id. (quotation omitted). Among
other requirements, for there to be plain error, the error at issue must affect
substantial rights. Id. That is, it must affect the outcome of the case. Id. at
70. This analysis “is similar to the harmless error analysis we use to evaluate
3