THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2015-0185, State of New Hampshire v.
Jonathan Dodge a/k/a Brian Smith, the court on November 14,
2016, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
defendant, Jonathan Dodge, appeals his felony conviction on one count of
issuing a bad check. See RSA 638:4 (2007) (amended 2010). He argues that
the evidence was insufficient to prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, that he
issued a bad check in violation of RSA 638:4, I. He also argues that the
Superior Court (Abramson, J.) erred when it declined to retroactively apply an
amendment to RSA 638:4 that would have resulted in a lesser sentence. We
affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. On Saturday, March 29,
2008, the defendant cashed a check at Service Credit Union (SCU) in
Manchester. The defendant was not a member of SCU. The check was dated
March 29, 2008, and was made payable to the defendant in the amount of
$749.78. The check showed the purported issuer and account holder to be an
Ohio company named Ellison Construction Inc.—spelled “Ellison Constrution
Inc.” on the check (emphasis added). The check appeared to be drawn on a
Citizens Bank in Ohio. The check appeared to have been signed by “Michael
Eaton.” The defendant endorsed the back of the check before cashing it.
The next business day, SCU sent the check to Citizens Bank for
payment. However, Citizens Bank returned the check to SCU without making
payment because the check had been drawn on an invalid account. SCU
thereafter attempted to collect the $749.78, plus fees, from the defendant, but
SCU’s efforts to contact the defendant were unsuccessful. SCU never received
any payment from the defendant.
In November 2008, the defendant was arrested and charged with issuing
a bad check. As he was being transported to the police station, the defendant
stated that he had “never been to Manchester” and that he “had no idea what
[the arresting officer] was talking about.” However, after reviewing the arrest
warrant affidavit at the police station, the defendant told the arresting officer
that he had received a check as payment for cabinets that he had built, and
that he had not known that the check was “no good.”
A second officer conducted a post-arrest interview with the defendant,
during which the defendant acknowledged that he had endorsed and cashed
the check. The defendant claimed that a company had responded to his online
advertisement for cabinets, and that he had received the check in the mail once
the cabinets had been completed. The defendant told the officer that he had
cashed the check on the day that he had received it, and that the next day, a
person driving a truck marked with an “Ellison Construction” logo had picked
up the cabinets. Despite the officer’s offer to investigate this third party, the
defendant never provided the officer any supporting information or
documentation about the alleged transaction, such as an invoice or purchase
order.
The interviewing officer conducted a general Google search for Ellison
Construction and examined the Ohio Secretary of State’s online archive of
registered companies. At trial, the officer testified that the company could not
be found using Google, and that his search of the Ohio Secretary of State’s
records showed that no company named “Ellison Construction Inc.” had ever
been incorporated or registered to do business in the state.
The defendant’s case went to trial in May 2010. The State proceeded on
the theory that the defendant had issued the check and concocted the story
about the cabinets. At the close of the State’s case, the defendant moved to
dismiss the charge, challenging the sufficiency of the evidence. The Superior
Court (Mohl, J.) denied the motion. The jury found the defendant guilty.
Although the defendant was originally scheduled for sentencing in January
2011, because he absconded, he was not sentenced until 2015. This appeal
followed.
On appeal, the defendant first argues that the State presented
insufficient evidence on three elements of the offense: (1) that he issued—as
opposed to passed—a bad check; (2) that he issued the check knowingly; and
(3) that the statutory exceptions did not apply. He further contends that he
should have been sentenced under the amended version of RSA 638:4. We first
address the defendant’s sufficiency argument.
Because a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence raises a claim of
legal error, our standard of review is de novo. State v. Houghton, 168 N.H.
269, 271 (2015). When considering a challenge to the sufficiency of the
evidence, we objectively review the record to determine whether any rational
trier of fact could have found the essential elements of the crime beyond a
reasonable doubt. Id. We consider all of the evidence, and all reasonable
inferences therefrom, in the light most favorable to the State. Id. We assume
“all credibility resolutions in favor of the State.” State v. Saunders, 164 N.H.
342, 351 (2012).
2
The parties agree that the evidence presented at trial was circumstantial.
“When the evidence is solely circumstantial, it must exclude all reasonable
conclusions except guilt.” Houghton, 168 N.H. at 271 (quotation omitted).
“Thus, we evaluate the evidence in the light most favorable to the State and
determine whether the alternative conclusion is sufficiently reasonable that a
rational juror could not have found proof of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.”
Id. “The proper analysis is not whether every possible conclusion consistent
with innocence has been excluded, but, rather, whether all reasonable
conclusions based upon the evidence have been excluded.” State v. Sanborn,
168 N.H. 400, 413 (2015) (quotation omitted).
RSA 638:4, I, provides that:
A person is guilty of issuing a bad check if he issues or passes a
check for the payment of money and payment is refused by the
drawee, except in cases where a legal stop payment order has been
issued or where the drawee refuses payment for any other reason
through no fault of the person who issued or passed the check.
(Emphasis added.) As to the first element, the defendant argues, and the State
does not dispute, that the State proceeded against the defendant solely on the
theory that he had issued, rather than passed, a bad check. Accordingly, we
consider only whether the State presented sufficient evidence to prove that the
defendant “issued” the check. Id.
The term “issue” is not defined in the statute or elsewhere in the
Criminal Code. Relying upon the Uniform Commercial Code, see RSA 382-A:3-
105(a) (2011), the trial court defined “issue” in the jury instructions as “the
first delivery of an instrument by the maker or drawer of a check; that is, by
the party who first issues the check.” Because the defendant did not object to
that instruction and does not challenge the instruction on appeal, we assume
without deciding that the jury instruction was correct. See State v. Marshall,
162 N.H. 657, 670 (2011). Thus, the jury could conclude that the defendant
issued the check if it determined that the defendant signed the check as the
drawer—i.e., as the person undertaking to pay—and made the first delivery of
the check to another. See State v. Tyler, 158 N.H. 776, 778 (2009) (stating that
we “interpret jury instructions as a reasonable juror would have understood
them”); see also RSA 382-A:3-103(a)(3), (5) (2011) (defining “[d]rawer” as “a
person who signs or is identified in a draft as a person ordering payment” and
“[m]aker” as “a person who signs or is identified in a note as a person
undertaking to pay”).
Viewing the evidence and the reasonable inferences therefrom in the light
most favorable to the State, we conclude that the State presented sufficient
evidence to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant issued the
check. The only reasonable inference from the evidence was that the check
3