THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2015-0727, Nicole Gulleson v. Hector Cote, Jr.,
the court on June 23, 2016, issued the following order:
Having considered the brief and record submitted on appeal, we conclude
that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1). We
affirm in part, vacate in part, and remand.
The defendant, Hector Cote, Jr., appeals an order of the Circuit Court
(Cyr, R., approved by Kelly, J.) granting a domestic violence final order of
protection to the plaintiff, Nicole Gulleson. See RSA 173-B:5 (Supp. 2015). We
construe his brief to argue that: (1) the evidence was insufficient to support
the protective order; and (2) the court erred to the extent that it required him to
vacate his apartment.
We review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a matter of law and
uphold the findings and rulings of the trial court unless they are lacking in
evidentiary support or legally erroneous. Achille v. Achille, 167 N.H. 706, 715
(2015). We accord considerable weight to the trial court’s judgments on the
credibility of witnesses and the weight to be given testimony. Id. at 715-16.
We view the evidence in the light most favorable to the prevailing party – in this
case, the plaintiff. See id. at 716.
To obtain relief under RSA chapter 173-B, the plaintiff must show
“abuse” by a preponderance of the evidence. Id.; see RSA 173-B:5, I (Supp.
2015). “Abuse” is defined in RSA 173-B:1 to include the commission or
attempted commission of one or more of several enumerated criminal acts
constituting a credible present threat to the plaintiff’s safety. See 173-B:1, I
(Supp. 2015); Achille, 167 N.H. at 716.
The trial court found that the defendant committed acts of “abuse” by
interfering with the plaintiff’s freedom, as defined in RSA 633:1 through RSA
633:3-a, and by engaging in unauthorized entry, as defined in RSA 635:1 and
RSA 635:2. Specifically, the court found that the defendant entered the
plaintiff’s apartment without her consent on several occasions. On one
occasion, he broke a screen and entered the apartment through a window. The
court also found that the defendant repeatedly stationed himself outside the
entry to the plaintiff’s apartment, where she must confront him on entering or
leaving.
The plaintiff testified that the defendant routinely enters her apartment
without knocking and without her consent. The defendant admitted that, at a
prior hearing, he testified that he sneaked into the plaintiff’s apartment,
ascended her stairway, and allegedly witnessed the plaintiff spanking her child.
The plaintiff testified that on one occasion, the defendant broke the screen on
her window to gain entry to her apartment when she was not home.
The plaintiff testified that the defendant loiters outside her apartment
and yells at her in the presence of friends and neighbors about the man she
dates and the persons caring for her daughter. The plaintiff testified that, as a
result, she is afraid to leave her apartment.
Although the defendant disputed the plaintiff’s testimony, we defer to a
trial court’s judgment on such issues as resolving conflicts in testimony,
measuring the credibility of witnesses, and determining the weight to be given
evidence. In the Matter of Aube & Aube, 158 N.H. 459, 465 (2009). We
conclude that the evidence is sufficient to support the court’s findings. See
Achille, 167 N.H. at 715.
The defendant next argues that the court erred to the extent that it
required him to vacate his apartment. The defendant asserts that his
apartment is located approximately 100 feet from the plaintiff’s apartment.
The court’s order on appeal prohibits the defendant from coming within 300
feet of the plaintiff, but it does not specifically address whether he must vacate
his apartment. Accordingly, we vacate the protective order to the extent that
the 300-foot buffer implicitly requires the defendant to vacate his apartment,
and remand for the trial court to make findings and rulings as to whether such
relief is necessary for the plaintiff’s protection.
Affirmed in part; vacated in
part; and remanded.
Dalianis, C.J., and Hicks, Conboy, Lynn, and Bassett, JJ., concurred.
Eileen Fox,
Clerk
2