THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2015-0271, State of New Hampshire v. James
Robarge, the court on July 28, 2017, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
defendant, James Robarge, appeals his conviction following a jury trial in
Superior Court (Tucker, J.) for reckless second degree murder, see RSA 630:1-
b, I(b) (2016). On appeal, he argues that the trial court erred by admitting: (1)
location evidence derived from cellular telephone records; (2) a photograph of
his torso depicting a tattoo that says “LOVE Kills Slowly”; and (3) testimony
that, approximately one or two years before the victim was killed, the defendant
threatened to kill her because her hair was too short. We affirm because we
conclude that, even if the trial court erred in those respects, the State has met
its burden of proving that these errors were harmless beyond a reasonable
doubt.
I
The jury could have found, or the record establishes, the following facts.
The victim was the defendant’s wife. The defendant and the victim began
dating when they were approximately 12 years old. They married in the early
1990’s, when they were approximately 22 years old.
The defendant and the victim had a volatile relationship. In 2012, the
victim told her primary care provider that her relationship with the defendant
was “abusive,” but that she was not yet ready to leave him. In the spring of
2013, she told her provider that she was separating from the defendant, that
she was worried “about what [he] might do when he became angry,” and that
they had recently gotten into a “pushing contest.”
The couple’s adult daughters testified that their parents frequently
fought and that their fights sometimes became physical. One daughter
testified that she heard the defendant say, on occasion, that if he could not
have the victim, “nobody can.” That daughter also testified that she once saw
the defendant “shove[ ]” the victim “into [a] wall.”
The defendant and the victim separated in approximately April 2013.
While separated, the victim lived at the marital home with one of the couple’s
daughters and the defendant stayed with his father in Vermont. The defendant
frequently came to the marital home to drop off his dog and to do work around
the house. The victim often communicated with the defendant by leaving him
notes.
On June 26, 2013, the victim left the following note:
Jim, I have a proposal for you. I want a divorce, and this is
what I’m offering so we don’t have to go to court. This way we can
just sign papers. Everything can still stay here, you can still come
here to get and use your stuff. [The dog] is always welcome in and
out. It’s a piece of paper that changes the same piece of paper that
got us here.
I still love you, always will. I do miss you, but I can’t live
with the drinking and pot anymore. The anger is too much for me.
I still want you in my life if you want to be.
The note included a proposal for dividing the parties’ property. The defendant
put the note in a lockbox he kept at his father’s Vermont property. Also in
June 2013, he told a friend about his separation from the victim and said that
the victim had “kicked him out and he wanted to kill her.”
On the morning of June 27, 2013, the victim saw her primary care
provider and told her that she planned to file for divorce later that day. The
victim traveled from her provider’s office to the circuit court in Claremont,
where she filed for divorce at approximately 10:44 a.m. While at the
courthouse, she sent electronic messages to her friends, Lori Laird and Richard
Wayne Lucius, Jr. about having filed for divorce.
At approximately 11:00 a.m., she texted Laird and messaged Lucius
through Facebook that she had arrived at her home in Charlestown and that
the defendant was there. The victim texted Laird that the defendant did not
know yet that she had filed divorce papers, but that she was “going to tell him.”
Laird did not hear from the victim again. At approximately 1:30 p.m., the
victim’s neighbor heard a man and a woman yelling at each other at the
victim’s property. The neighbor described the yelling as “arguing” and said that
it continued for the entire 10 minutes that he was outside.
At approximately 2:45 p.m., the defendant texted one of the couple’s
adult daughters, asking whether she knew the victim’s whereabouts. The
daughter arrived at the victim’s home at approximately 3:45 p.m. She saw the
defendant sitting on the porch with her toddler nephew, the victim’s and the
defendant’s grandson. The victim’s car was still at the home, along with her
purse and car keys. The victim regularly cared for her grandson, and at trial,
her family agreed that she would not have left him alone.
2
While the daughter was still at the victim’s home, the defendant departed
in his car, saying that he was going to look for the victim. The daughter
contacted the victim’s family and friends, and one of them contacted the police.
The daughter noticed that the railing of the staircase banister and a light
fixture were broken and testified that neither had been broken when she left for
work that morning. When the daughter’s grandmother and great-grandmother
arrived, the daughter went into the bathroom and discovered that the toilet was
“drenched” in blood. When the victim’s and the defendant’s other daughter
arrived at the home, she smelled a “cleaning product.”
At approximately 5:50 p.m., which was after the police had arrived, the
defendant called one of his daughters and told her that his car had “broke[n]
down” near Unity. Soon thereafter, a Claremont police officer saw the
defendant walking on Second New Hampshire Turnpike. The officer stopped
the defendant and identified him. A State trooper arrived soon thereafter.
Both the police officer and the trooper smelled alcohol on the defendant’s
breath. The trooper described the defendant as “very nervous”; the trooper
noticed that the defendant’s eyes were “bloodshot and glossy.”
Both the police officer and the trooper noticed that the defendant had
scratches on his body and hands. The police officer testified that the scratches
“looked red and appeared fresh.” The trooper testified that one scratch, in
particular, “was very aggravated and inflamed looking.” The trooper also
testified that he saw “a significant amount of blood” on the inner right side of
one of the defendant’s sneakers and “fresh” blood on the defendant’s shorts.
The defendant told the police that his car “had broken down further up
the road.” The defendant did not tell the police that he was out looking for his
wife. The trooper testified that the defendant “didn’t really have much to say.”
After locating the car, the trooper peered inside and saw that the driver’s
seat “appeared very wet” and that there was a green t-shirt on the rear seat
that was “soaking wet.” The trooper smelled “a very strong odor of burnt motor
oil emanating from the vehicle.”
The defendant agreed to be interviewed at the Claremont Police
Department. While there, he appeared to be “very nervous and fidgety.” The
trooper noticed that “all the knuckles” on the defendant’s right hand were
“swollen and red.” The trooper also observed that, after the defendant used the
restroom and was heard “trying to clean something,” the blood that previously
had been on the inside sole of his right sneaker was gone. The trooper saw
more blood, however, on the back of both of the defendant’s sneakers.
In his police interview on June 27, the defendant said that he last saw
the victim the day before when he installed a door at the marital home. He told
the police that he had no idea where the victim was and that he had returned
to the home on the afternoon of June 27 to find his grandson alone and two
3