THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2015-0514, New Hampshire Housing Finance
Authority v. Pinewood Estates Condominium Association, the
court on November 10, 2016, issued the following order:
Supreme Court Rule 22(2) provides that a party filing a motion for
rehearing or reconsideration shall state with particularity the points of law or fact
that it claims the court has overlooked or misapprehended.
After review of the respondent’s motion to reconsider, the court modifies
its September 20, 2016 slip opinion as set forth below. In all other respects,
the respondent’s motion to reconsider is denied.
The slip opinion is modified by deleting the last sentence of the first
paragraph on page 5. The modified paragraph reads as follows:
The Act provides that a lien for condominium assessments is
generally junior to a first mortgage:
The unit owners’ association shall have a lien on
every condominium unit for unpaid assessments levied
against that condominium unit in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and all lawful provisions of
the condominium instruments, if perfected as
hereinafter provided. The said lien, once perfected,
shall be prior to all other liens and encumbrances
except (1) real estate tax liens on that condominium
unit, (2) liens and encumbrances recorded prior to the
recordation of the declaration, and (3) sums unpaid on
any first mortgages or first deeds of trust encumbering
that condominium unit and securing institutional
lenders.
RSA 356-B:46, I(a) (emphases added). A condominium association
may, however, gain limited priority over a first mortgage for six
months of unpaid assessments if the association follows the
procedure provided in RSA 356-B:46, I(c). If that procedure is not
followed, the association’s lien for assessments will be junior to the
first mortgage. See RSA 356-B:46, I(a). This provision encourages
associations to promptly act upon unpaid assessments and
protects first mortgagees by ensuring that no more than six
months of unpaid assessments can receive priority. See Boyack,
supra at 283 (observing that “modern statutes typically balance
lender and association interests” by “creat[ing] a limited and
capped super-priority-association lien for a certain amount of
months’ worth of unpaid assessments”). The Act limits
associations to “one priority lien.” See RSA 356-B:46, I(d).
Relief requested in motion for
reconsideration denied; slip
opinion modified.
Dalianis, C.J., and Hicks, Conboy, Lynn, and Bassett, JJ., concurred.
Eileen Fox,
Clerk
2