THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2015-0054, State of New Hampshire v. Nickolas
Micucci, the court on August 22, 2016, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we conclude
that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1). We affirm.
The defendant, Nickolas Micucci, appeals his conviction, following a jury
trial in Superior Court (Smukler, J.) on charges of second degree assault and
simple assault on his girlfriend. See RSA 631:2, :2-a (2007 & Supp. 2015). He
contends that she was the initial aggressor. He argues that the trial court erred
by: (1) applying an incorrect standard in denying his motion for in camera review
of the victim’s mental health records; (2) denying the motion for in camera review;
and (3) admitting a recording of the victim’s 911 call.
We first address whether the trial court applied the correct standard when
it denied the defendant’s motion for in camera review of the victim’s seven-year-
old mental health records. The decision to review confidential records in camera
is governed by State v. Gagne, 136 N.H. 101 (1992). State v. Eaton, 162 N.H.
190, 193 (2011). To trigger such review, a defendant must meaningfully
articulate how the information sought is relevant and material to his defense. Id.
At a minimum, a defendant must present some specific concern, based upon
more than bare conjecture, that, with reasonable probability, will be explained by
the information sought. Id. Although a defendant is not required to state the
“precise nature” of the information sought, he must provide the court with a
logical factual basis for his request, based upon information independently
obtained, that the information sought may yield relevant evidence. Id. If the
defendant makes this showing, then the trial court must review the requested
information in camera to see if the records actually contain information that is
“essential and reasonably necessary to the defense at trial.” State v. Sargent, 148
N.H. 571, 573 (2002).
In this case, the trial court held a hearing on the defendant’s motion for in
camera review and a hearing on his motion to reconsider its denial. The
defendant’s motion for in camera review cited Gagne as the controlling law and
recited its test, as did the State’s objection. At the hearings, the defendant and
the State reiterated that Gagne controlled.
The defendant argues that the trial court’s questions at the hearings
indicate that it erroneously “focused upon whether the mental health records
would be ‘exculpatory.’” However, at the hearing, the defendant agreed with the
trial court’s characterization of Gagne as requiring “the reasonable probability
that [information in the records will] lead to exculpatory admissible evidence.”
Furthermore, the defendant characterized the test as “whether or not [the records
are] material and relevant and whether or not there’s a reasonable probability
that it is exculpatory material contained in those files.” We note that we have
characterized the test similarly, as requiring the defendant “to establish that
there is a realistic and substantial likelihood that evidence helpful to [the]
defense would be obtained from” the records. State v. Ainsworth, 151 N.H. 691,
694-95 (2005); State v. Gaffney, 147 N.H. 550, 556-57 (2002). Upon our review
of the hearing transcripts, we cannot conclude that the trial court’s questions
regarding the exculpatory nature of the evidence indicated that it applied an
erroneous test.
The defendant argues that the trial court’s questions erroneously focused
upon whether the seven-year-old records would be admissible. However, the trial
court agreed that admissibility of the records was not a factor in the Gagne test,
but noted that “the reasonable probability that it’ll lead to exculpatory admissible
evidence . . . is a factor.”
The trial court was concerned that the evidence the defendant conjectured
was in the records – past incidents of self-abuse – was simply evidence of
character or propensity. The trial court pressed the defendant regarding the
admissibility of such past incidents, particularly under Rule 405 of the New
Hampshire Rules of Evidence, to compel him to articulate how his “specific
concern” – that the victim was self-abusive on the night in question – would “be
explained by the information sought.” Eaton, 162 N.H. at 193. The trial court’s
questions illustrated that, even if the records reflected that the victim had abused
herself seven years earlier, such information would not be relevant to her
conduct on the night in question. See State v. Porter, 144 N.H. 96, 99-100
(1999) (affirming denial of in camera review because victim’s alleged emotional
instability, alcoholism, and failure to follow treatment recommendations had no
bearing on her character for truthfulness at trial).
The defendant contends that he “cannot cogently argue whether the
records are admissible or exculpatory without seeing them.” However, in this
case, the trial court assumed that the records contained the information he
sought, but concluded that such evidence would not be relevant or material. Cf.
State v. Hoag, 145 N.H. 47, 50 (2000) (remanded for determination as to whether
victim attended counseling when defendant established reasonable belief that she
did). Accordingly, although the trial court did not explicitly recite the Gagne test,
we cannot conclude that it applied an incorrect standard. Cf. State v. Graham,
142 N.H. 357, 364 (1997) (vacating and remanding when record was unclear
whether trial court applied Gagne).
2
We next address the trial court’s decision not to review the victim’s mental
health records in camera. We review the trial court’s decision under our
unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. Eaton, 162 N.H. at 193. To
prevail, the defendant must show that the trial court’s ruling was clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. State v. King, 162 N.H.
629, 631 (2011). The trial court rested its decision to deny the motion on three
grounds, that: (1) the records were old; (2) the defendant knew that the victim
had been treated for depression and was aware of the medication she was
currently taking; and (3) depression is “a common diagnosis.”
The defendant argues that the records were material and relevant because
“they could contain information about triggers for violent or self-abusive
behavior.” However, he offered no evidence that the victim had ever engaged in
such behavior. To trigger in camera review, the defendant must assert some
factual basis beyond the mere existence of counseling records. Hoag, 145 N.H. at
50. Without a basis to believe the records contain the references sought by the
defendant, he is not entitled to in camera review. Id. Any such basis must be
supported by a “putative nexus to the records.” Id.
We disagree with the defendant that his testimony that the victim stopped
taking her medication and was self-abusive on the night in question “supported
. . . a reasonable probability that [her] mental health records could shed light on
her behavior that evening.” The defendant does not identify any reason to believe
that the victim was self-abusive seven years earlier, other than her diagnosis for
depression. As the defendant concedes, “depression is ‘one of the most common
presenting symptoms . . . and is a component of many psychiatric conditions.’”
Thus, a diagnosis for depression, alone, does not establish a reasonable
probability that the victim was self-abusive.
Accordingly, we cannot conclude that the trial court erred by determining
that merely identifying the victim as having been diagnosed with depression
failed to create an adequate nexus to violent and self-abusive behavior. See id.
Furthermore, the trial court could have concluded that, even if the records
contained such information, the likelihood that they would identify triggers for
such behavior or that any such triggers would remain constant over more than
seven years was speculative.
The defendant argues that the records could have been “used by an expert
to opine about whether the behavior [the defendant] described was consistent
with [the victim’s] illness.” However, the defendant knew that the victim was
diagnosed with depression. As discussed above, the trial court could have
reasonably determined that he failed to establish an adequate nexus between the
diagnosis and alleged self-abuse to justify in camera review of the records. To the
extent that the defendant argues that he needed the records to “know which
[depressive] disorder [the victim] was managing,” the trial court could have
reasonably concluded that he had failed to establish that this information was
3