THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2015-0510, Liberty Utilities (EnergyNorth
Natural Gas) Corporation v. City of Concord; EnergyNorth
Natural Gas, Inc. d/b/a Liberty Utilities v. City of Manchester,
the court on June 16, 2017, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
plaintiff, Liberty Utilities Corporation (Liberty), appeals a decision of the
Superior Court (Smukler, J.) in favor of the defendants, the City of Concord
(Concord) and the City of Manchester (Manchester), in Liberty’s action seeking
declaratory and injunctive relief relating to the defendants’ respective
excavation ordinances. Liberty argues that the trial court erred by: (1)
concluding that its claim that the ordinances are preempted by state law was
resolved in a prior appeal; (2) misapprehending the nature and scope of the
factual inquiry on remand from this court; and (3) upholding the provisions of
the defendants’ excavation ordinances imposing $5.00 per square foot roadway
damage fees. The defendants cross-appeal, arguing that the trial court erred
by: (1) ruling unlawful the provisions of the defendants’ excavation ordinances
imposing enhanced roadway damage fees for excavation on recently
constructed or rehabilitated roads; and (2) denying the defendants’ motion to
strike the testimony of Liberty’s expert. We affirm in part and reverse in part.
I. Factual Background
The record reflects the following facts. Liberty is a natural gas
distribution company that owns and maintains underground gas distribution
pipes throughout New Hampshire. Liberty must periodically excavate public
roadways to install, maintain, and replace these pipes.
Before any entity excavates a public roadway in either Concord or
Manchester, it must obtain an excavation permit pursuant to the defendants’
respective excavation ordinances. The issuance of these permits is conditioned
upon payment of certain fees. Although the fee provisions of the defendants’
excavation ordinances differ in some respects, both impose: (1) a damage fee of
$5.00 per square foot of excavation occurring within paved roadways
(hereinafter referred to collectively as “damage fees”); and (2) enhanced fees
ranging from $10.00 to $15.00 per square foot for excavation occurring on
paved roadways within five years of that road’s construction, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, or overlay (hereinafter referred to collectively as “enhanced
fees”). Both excavation ordinances permit, but do not require, municipal
officials to waive these fees under certain circumstances.
In 2010, Liberty filed separate petitions seeking declaratory and
injunctive relief from the defendants’ excavation ordinances, alleging that the
fee provisions are preempted by state law, and that the fees constitute unlawful
taxes. In the action between Liberty and Concord, both parties filed cross-
motions for summary judgment. The Superior Court (McNamara, J.) entered
summary judgment for Liberty. The trial court concluded that RSA 231:185
(2009) and RSA 236:11 (2009) — which require any entity that excavates a
public road to restore the road to the condition it was in prior to the excavation
— preempted the fee provisions of Concord’s excavation ordinance because the
fee provisions and the statutes actually conflicted. Because the trial court
found that state law preempted the ordinance, it did not reach the question of
whether the fees constituted illegal taxes. Concord appealed. While that
appeal was pending, the suit against Manchester was held in abeyance.
We reversed and remanded. See EnergyNorth Natural Gas, Inc. v. City of
Concord, 164 N.H. 14, 17-18 (2012). On remand, the trial court consolidated
the cases and held a six-day bench trial. In its order, the trial court ruled that
our decision in EnergyNorth had definitively resolved Liberty’s preemption
claim in the defendants’ favor. After making extensive factual findings, the trial
court further concluded that the defendants’ damage fees were valid fees, and
that the enhanced fees constituted unlawful taxes. The parties’ appeals
followed.
II. Standard of Review
“We will affirm the trial court’s factual findings unless they are
unsupported by the evidence and will affirm the trial court’s legal rulings
unless they are erroneous as a matter of law.” Hayes v. S. N.H. Med. Ctr., 162
N.H. 756, 759 (2011).
III. Liberty’s Appeal
A. Preemption
Liberty first argues that the trial court erred by interpreting EnergyNorth
as definitively resolving its preemption claim. It further argues that the factual
question remanded by the trial court would directly determine the outcome of
its preemption claim. Specifically, Liberty contends that, had the trial court
resolved the remanded factual question by finding that excavation and
patching of roadways always diminishes the roadway’s life expectancy, this
would have shown that the defendants incur costs that cannot be recovered
under the state statutes, and therefore that the municipal ordinances are not
in conflict with the statutes and not preempted. Put differently, Liberty asserts
2
that a factual finding that excavation and patching inherently damages
roadway life expectancy would demonstrate that excavation inflicts a discrete
and separate injury not recoverable under the existing statutory scheme, and
that the statutes do not provide a complete and exclusive remedy. On the
other hand, Liberty argues that, if the trial court had made a factual finding
that excavation and utility patching does not inherently diminish roadway life
expectancy, this fact would demonstrate that the defendants already have a
complete remedy under the existing statutory scheme.
The defendants respond that the trial court correctly interpreted
EnergyNorth as conclusively resolving Liberty’s preemption claim.
Alternatively, Concord argues that, even if this court were to conclude that
resolution of the preemption issue required fact finding by the trial court, the
defendants would still prevail given the trial court’s factual finding on remand
that “utility excavation and patching of paved roadways with new pavement
generally diminishes the roadway’s life expectancy.”
As the appealing party, Liberty has the burden of demonstrating
reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014). Based upon our
review of the trial court’s order, Liberty’s challenges to it, the relevant law, and
the record submitted on appeal, we conclude that Liberty has not
demonstrated reversible error. See id.
B. Misapprehension of Remanded Factual Inquiry
Liberty next argues that the trial court erroneously recast the factual
inquiry on remand from this court, and thereby imposed an “impossible”
burden of proof upon Liberty. Specifically, Liberty claims that the court
transformed the remanded question from “whether patching an excavated
paved roadway with new pavement diminishes or restores its original life
expectancy” to whether “patching an excavated paved roadway with new
pavement never diminishes the original life expectancy of that road.”
(Emphasis added.) In Liberty’s view, this “change” infected the trial court’s
analysis of Liberty’s preemption and illegal tax claims, rendering the trial
court’s analysis and conclusions fatally flawed. We disagree.
Although it is true that the trial court stated that Liberty “ha[d] not
sustained its burden of proving that patching an excavated paved roadway with
new pavement never diminishes the original life expectancy of that road,”
(emphasis added), we conclude that, reading the trial court order in its entirety,
the trial court’s assessment did not impact its analysis of Liberty’s claims. The
trial court rejected Liberty’s preemption claim based upon its interpretation of
EnergyNorth, not Liberty’s failure to prove that patching an excavated roadway
never diminishes its life expectancy. It upheld the defendants’ damage fees
because Liberty “failed to prove a lack of rational relationship between the
defendants’ roadway fees and legitimate government interests,” again, not
3