THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2015-0488, State of New Hampshire v. Wilfred
Bergeron, the court on September 16, 2016, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
We affirm.
The defendant, Wilfred Bergeron, appeals his convictions on ten counts
of possession of child pornography. See RSA 649-A:3 (Supp. 2015). He argues
that the Superior Court (Brown, J.) erred in: (1) denying his motion to
suppress evidence seized from his computer, and granting the State’s motion to
reexamine the computer, in violation of his rights under the State and Federal
Constitutions; and (2) finding the evidence supporting two of the convictions to
be sufficient to prove that the images were of a child engaged in sexually
explicit conduct. We first address the defendant’s constitutional arguments
under the State Constitution and rely upon federal law only to aid in our
analysis. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred in denying his
motion to suppress evidence taken from his computer because, he asserts, the
police entered his home and seized the computer without a warrant or
voluntary consent. “When reviewing a trial court’s ruling on a motion to
suppress, we accept the trial court’s factual findings unless they lack support
in the record or are clearly erroneous.” State v. Mouser, 168 N.H. 19, 22
(2015).
“A voluntary consent free of duress and coercion is a recognized
exception to the need of both a warrant and probable cause.” State v. Socci,
166 N.H. 464, 473 (2014) (quotation omitted). “The burden is on the State to
prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the consent was free, knowing
and voluntary.” Id. (quotation omitted). “The validity of the consent is
determined by examining the totality of the circumstances.” Id. (quotation
omitted). “We will disturb the trial court’s finding of consent only if it is not
supported by the record.” Id. (quotation omitted).
The record shows that on March 16, 1989, the defendant was convicted
of felonious sexual assault and aggravated felonious sexual assault against a
boy under thirteen years of age. As a result of his conviction, the defendant
was required to register all online identifiers and meet with his local police
department’s sex offender compliance unit four times a year. See RSA ch.
651-B (2007 & Supp. 2015). On July 31, 2013, Manchester police detective
Craig received seven “cyber tips” suggesting that the defendant was collecting
child pornography on his computer using an e-mail account that he had
reported to police he no longer used. On November 15, 2013, at approximately
10:00 a.m., Craig and Manchester police detective Caldwell visited the
defendant’s apartment. Craig was dressed in plain clothes, and Caldwell was
in his uniform. Before entering the defendant’s apartment, the detectives
identified themselves as Manchester police officers and explained that they
wished to discuss his possible registration violations and possible possession of
child pornography. The defendant invited the detectives into his apartment.
The detectives spoke with him in his kitchen. When they asked to see his
computer, the defendant led them upstairs. After some further conversation,
Craig asked the defendant if he could take the computer, and the defendant
agreed. The detectives left the apartment with the computer and without
incident.
The defendant argues that based upon the totality of the circumstances,
he did not voluntarily consent to the detectives’ entry into his apartment or to
the seizure of his computer. He asserts that the consent was not voluntary
because the detectives confronted him with a number of accusations, including
failure to register an online identifier and possession of child pornography, and
that they pursued their questioning believing that he was guilty and that they
already had enough information for a warrant. He asserts that the officers
stood in close physical proximity to him within the confines of his small
kitchen, and that they never advised him of his Miranda rights, see Miranda v.
Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966), or obtained a written consent to seize the
computer.
The trial court found, however, that the detectives “did not make any
outright accusations or assumptions of guilt.” “Rather,” the court found, the
detectives “spoke in a conversational tone” and “simply explained why they
were present.” The court found that, “[o]nce inside his apartment, [the]
defendant was able to move without interference,” and that he “sat and stood
as he pleased.” The court found that the defendant was not in custody, and
thus not entitled to Miranda warnings, and that while “the better practice
would have been to obtain a written consent” to seize the computer, the failure
to do so did not “invalidate [the] defendant’s consent.” We conclude that,
considering the totality of the circumstances, the trial court’s findings that the
defendant voluntarily consented to the detectives’ entry into his apartment and
to the seizure of his computer were supported by the record and not clearly
erroneous. See Mouser, 168 N.H. at 22; Socci, 166 N.H. at 473.
Alternatively, the defendant argues, the trial court erred in crediting the
offers’ testimony, and in rejecting his conflicting testimony, to find that he
voluntarily consented to the search. The defendant testified that the detectives
2
entered his apartment without being invited. He testified that Caldwell stood
only one foot away from him, backed him into his living room, yelled at him,
and accused him of looking at “dirty pictures” and lying about his registration
information. The defendant testified that he felt threatened and did not believe
that he could refuse to show the detectives his computer. The defendant
testified that Craig told him that if he did not allow him to seize the computer,
he would return with “a piece of paper” and “trash” the apartment.
The trial court found, however, that the defendant’s testimony “appeared
rehearsed,” and that on cross examination, he “would frequently provide
evasive responses.” The court also found that the defendant’s testimony was
inconsistent with his earlier e-mails. The court concluded that the defendant’s
testimony was “not credible.” By contrast, the court found the detectives’
testimony to be “much more consistent, cohesive, and credible.” “We will not
overturn the credibility ruling of the factfinder, who is in the best position to
make such a determination.” State v. Seymour, 140 N.H. 736, 748 (1996)
(quotation omitted). Based upon this record, we conclude that the trial court
was not compelled to reject the detectives’ testimony or to accept the
defendant’s testimony. See Mouser, 168 N.H. at 22.
Accordingly, we conclude that the seizure of the defendant’s computer
did not violate Part I, Article 19 of the State Constitution. Because the Federal
Constitution provides no greater protection than the State Constitution under
these circumstances, see United States v. Nishnianidze, 342 F.3d 6, 14 (1st Cir.
2003); State v. Johnston, 150 N.H. 448, 454 (2004), we reach the same result
under the Federal Constitution.
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred in granting the
State’s motion to reexamine his computer because, he asserts, the State lacked
probable cause. Part I, Article 19 of the State Constitution requires that search
warrants be issued only upon a finding of probable cause. See State v. Letoile,
166 N.H. 269, 272 (2014). “Probable cause exists if a person of ordinary
caution would justifiably believe that what is sought will be found through the
search and will aid in a particular apprehension or conviction.” Id. (quotation
omitted). The record shows that the detectives obtained a warrant to search
the defendant’s computer based upon the information contained in the seven
cyber tips and from their November 15, 2013 encounter with the defendant.
The defendant filed a motion to suppress, and the State, in response, filed its
objection and a motion to reexamine the defendant’s computer. See State v.
Gubitosi, 151 N.H. 764, 767 (2005) (noting preferred method of obtaining
evidence against a defendant already before superior court is by motion to that
court). On appeal, the defendant argues that he was in custody during his
November 15, 2013 encounter with the police and that statements he made to
the detectives without Miranda warnings should have been excised from the
State’s motion to reexamine the computer. See State v. Orde, 161 N.H. 260,
3