THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2015-0717, In re Alice Stedman 1989 Trust
2013 Restatement, the court on November 10, 2016, issued the
following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we conclude
that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
Accordingly, the petitioners’ motion for assignment to a 3JX panel is moot. We
affirm.
The respondent, Claire Donahue (daughter), Trustee of the Alice Stedman
1989 Trust, appeals an order of the Circuit Court (Cassavechia, J.), in favor of
the petitioners, Stanley Stedman (son) and Tammy Soper, declaring that a
purported “restatement” of the trust by the settlor, Alice Stedman (mother), in
2013, was the product of undue influence. She contends that the trial court
erred by: (1) ruling that she had the burden to establish the absence of undue
influence and finding that she failed to do so; and (2) applying an incorrect
standard of proof.
We first address whether the trial court erred by ruling that the daughter
had the burden to establish the absence of undue influence. Whether undue
influence exists is a question of fact to be determined based upon the
surrounding facts and circumstances. In re Estate of Cass, 143 N.H. 57, 61
(1998). “The findings of fact of the judge of probate are final unless they are so
plainly erroneous that such findings could not be reasonably made.” RSA 567–
A:4 (2007). Consequently, we will not disturb the trial court’s decree unless it is
unsupported by the evidence or plainly erroneous as a matter of law. In re
Estate of Couture, 166 N.H. 101, 105 (2014).
We defer to the judgment of the trial court to resolve conflicts in testimony,
measure the credibility of witnesses, and determine the weight to be given to
testimony, recognizing that, as the trier of fact, it is in the best position to
measure the persuasiveness and credibility of evidence. In re Guardianship of
E.L., 154 N.H. 292, 296 (2006). The trial court may accept or reject, in whole or
in part, whatever evidence was presented. Id. Indeed, the trial court is free to
reject even uncontested testimony. In re Guardianship of Luong, 157 N.H. 429,
439 (2008). Thus, we do not reweigh the evidence to determine whether we
would have ruled differently. Guardianship of E.L., 154 N.H. at 296. Rather, we
review the record to determine if the trial court’s findings could be reasonably
made given the testimony and the evidence before it. Id.
To support a finding of undue influence, the influence that a donee exerts
over a donor must amount to force or coercion that alters the donor’s will and
must be more than the mere influence of affection. Estate of Cass, 143 N.H. at
61. Among the factors that the trial court considers when determining the
existence of undue influence are: the relationship between the parties, the
physical and mental condition of the donor, the reasonableness and nature of the
disposition, and the personalities of the parties. Id.
When a donee acts in a confidential or fiduciary capacity to the donor, the
donee has the burden of proving an absence of undue influence. Id. at 60-61. A
confidential relationship exists if there is a personal relationship that justifies the
donor in believing that the donee will act in her interest. Archer v. Dow, 126 N.H.
24, 27-28 (1985). When the donor is dependent upon the donee for
transportation, banking, and payment of bills, a confidential relationship exists.
Id. at 28.
In this case, the daughter argues that, “[a]s a matter of law, the petitioners
did not meet their initial burden of showing ‘substantial evidence’ of undue
influence.” (Capitalization omitted.) However, the daughter acknowledged to the
trial court that “she ha[d] the burden of persuasion to demonstrate that the
[restatement] was duly executed.” Moreover, in her motion for reconsideration,
she conceded that “the close confidential relationship between [her] and [the
mother]” created a “rebuttable presumption that [she] can overcome” that there
was “undue influence.” Accordingly, we conclude that the daughter waived her
argument that she did not bear the burden of proof under the circumstances of
the case. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004) (stating
parties may not have judicial review of issues they did not raise in trial court).
The daughter complains that “a child who was in any way depended upon
by . . . her elderly parent [ ] will have to prove absence of undue influence in every
case.” However, the trial court noted, and the daughter did not contest, that she
did not assert that her status as the mother’s child should defeat the existence of
a confidential relationship. See Bean, 151 N.H. at 250. To the extent that the
daughter argues that the trial court violated the mother’s “fundamental freedom
of testation and basic privacy rights” under the New Hampshire constitution, the
record does not establish that she made this argument to the trial court. See id.
We next address whether the trial court erred in finding that the daughter
failed to meet her burden to show the absence of undue influence. The daughter
contends that “[t]his finding is based purely on speculation.” To the contrary, we
conclude that it was properly based upon the trial court’s evaluation of the
evidence and assessment of the parties’ credibility.
The trial court found that: (1) the mother’s “relative isolation, extremely
weakened physical state, uncertain mentation, and broken spirit,” due to the
untimely death of her favorite grandson in her home, “rendered her susceptible to
2
[the daughter’s] influence during at least the last month of her life, if not earlier”;
(2) the mother’s “long-held estate plan was rewritten nineteen days before her
death . . . in [relative] secrecy”; and (3) disinterested witnesses who knew the
mother well were “surprised” by her new estate plan. Furthermore, we note that
the daughter testified that she took over management of the mother’s finances,
pursuant to a power of attorney, two weeks before the mother executed the
restatement.
The daughter argues that “[g]iven the time of year, geography, and her
medical issues, [the mother] had, as a matter of law, a healthy and appropriate
amount of contact with the outside world,” and that “[t]here was absolutely no
evidence that [the daughter] ever interfered with [the mother’s] ability to receive
. . . visitors during the final months of her life.” However, although there was
testimony that the mother had some visitors during her last months, there was
also testimony that the recreational vehicle (RV) park, in which she and the
daughter lived, was closed for the winter, the son was in Florida, the mother had
difficulty placing phone calls, and the mother could not leave the house without
assistance. Accordingly, we cannot conclude that the trial court’s finding – that,
by the time she executed the restatement, the mother was “to a large extent
housebound and relatively isolated from everyone but [the daughter] and various
paid care providers” – was unsupported by the evidence. See Estate of Couture,
166 N.H. at 105.
The daughter argues that the mother’s mentation was not uncertain
because some medical records state that “she was oriented and able to make her
own medical decisions throughout the relevant time period, and that as of [one
week prior to executing the restatement], she had recovered from the
hallucination episode.” The trial court, however, observed that the medical
evidence regarding the decline in the mother’s cognitive abilities was, “even at
best, contradictory.”
The court determined that the records from the visiting nurse and home
health agencies (VNA), which saw the mother regularly during the period prior to
her execution of the restatement, presented the “most accurate picture” of her
mental health. The daughter complains that the trial court elevated “selected
elements of the VNA records . . . over the live testimony of [the mother’s] primary
care physician.” However, the trial court’s decision was supported by the fact
that, during the months immediately preceding the restatement’s execution, the
VNA staff saw the mother more frequently than her physician did. We note that
the daughter does not challenge the admissibility of the VNA records. The trial
court was well within the bounds of its discretion to assign greater weight to the
VNA records than it did to the physician’s testimony. See Guardianship of E.L.,
154 N.H. at 296.
The VNA records described the mother as “forgetful” and exhibiting
“impaired decision-making.” The trial court placed “particular importance” upon
3