THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2015-0247
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
AMADOU DIALLO
Argued: May 3, 2016
Opinion Issued: September 20, 2016
Joseph A. Foster, attorney general (Elizabeth C. Woodcock, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Stephanie Hausman, deputy chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
CONBOY, J. The defendant, Amadou Diallo, appeals the extended term
of imprisonment imposed by the Superior Court (Abramson, J.) following his
conviction for felonious sexual assault. He argues that the trial court erred in
ruling that the State provided sufficient notice of its intent to seek an extended
sentence. See RSA 651:6 (2016). Accordingly, he requests that we vacate his
sentence and remand this case to the trial court for resentencing. We deny his
request and affirm the trial court’s ruling.
We briefly set forth the facts necessary to decide the issue before us. In
2014, the defendant was charged with two counts of aggravated felonious
sexual assault. On the first day of trial, prior to jury selection, the State
amended one of the indictments to charge the defendant with the lesser crime
of felonious sexual assault. The amendment was hand-written on the face of
the indictment. Prior to the amendment, the indictment contained the
following notation in the upper right-hand corner:
RSA Ch. 632-A:2, II
Aggravated Felonious Sexual Assault
Felony
10-30 years, $4000
The only change in this notation as a result of the amendment was a hand-
written line through the word “Aggravated.” At the close of the State’s case, the
trial court dismissed the other indictment, which had not been amended. The
defendant was convicted on the amended indictment alleging felonious sexual
assault.
At the sentencing hearing, the State recommended a sentence of ten to
twenty years. The defendant objected, arguing that the State’s proposed
sentence constituted an impermissible extended term of imprisonment. The
defendant argued that, because the State had failed to provide notice of its
intent to seek an extended term of imprisonment pursuant to RSA 651:6 as to
the amended indictment, he could not be sentenced to more than seven years
of imprisonment. The trial court then ordered both parties to brief the issue.
After considering the parties’ arguments, the facts of the case and the
applicable law, the trial court ruled that, under RSA 651:6, III, the notice
requirement for imposition of an extended sentence could be satisfied by
language in an indictment. The court further ruled that, in this case, the
language in the indictment provided the requisite notice, and that it was not
voided by the amendment.
On appeal, we are asked to determine whether an indictment can serve
as the vehicle to provide the notice required under RSA 651:6, III. This statute
provides that if “authorized by paragraph I or II, and if written notice of the
possible application of this section is given the defendant at least 21 days prior
to the commencement of jury selection for his or her trial, a defendant may be
sentenced to an extended term of imprisonment.” RSA 651:6, III. Paragraph I
of RSA 651:6 sets forth a list of factors, any one of which can support an
extended sentence if found by a jury. See RSA 651:6, I. Paragraph II sets forth
a list of factors, any one of which can support an extended sentence if found by
a trial court and if the record includes those findings. See RSA 651:6, II.
Whether an indictment can satisfy the notice requirement set forth in
RSA 651:6, III presents a question of statutory interpretation. Statutory
interpretation is a question of law, which we review de novo. Appeal of THI of
NH at Derry, LLC, 168 N.H. 504, 508 (2016). We are the final arbiters of the
2
legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute. Id. To determine
the legislature’s intent, we look first to the language of the statute itself, and if
possible, construe that language according to its plain and ordinary meaning.
Id. We construe the provisions of the Criminal Code “according to the fair
import of their terms and to promote justice.” RSA 625:3 (2016). We interpret
legislative intent from the statute as written and will not consider what the
legislature might have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit
to include. Appeal of THI, 168 N.H. at 508. We do not consider words and
phrases in isolation, but rather within the context of the statute as a whole. Id.
at 508-09. This enables us to better discern the legislature’s intent and to
interpret statutory language in light of the policy or purpose sought to be
advanced by the statutory scheme. Id. at 509.
We note at the outset that RSA 651:6, III does not prescribe the form of
the written notice that must be provided to the defendant when the State
intends to request imposition of an extended sentence. We have previously
observed that the objective to be served by the pretrial notice requirement
established in RSA 651:6, III is to provide the defendant with an opportunity to
offer evidence to refute the findings required by the statute. State v. Russo,
164 N.H. 585, 597 (2013).
The defendant argues that because the statute sets a deadline of no later
than twenty-one days before jury selection, it “contemplates notice given in a
form other than the charging document.” We decline to construe the statute’s
language so narrowly. Rather, the statute provides only that written notice
must be given no later than twenty-one days before jury selection. Here, the
defendant was indicted more than twenty-one days prior to jury selection. We
note that, if the legislature wanted to prescribe how the statutorily-required
written notice is to be given, it has demonstrated its ability to do so. See RSA
625:9, IV(c)(2) (2016) (State may seek class A misdemeanor penalties for crimes
that are designated as misdemeanors without specification of classification if it
files a notice of its intent to do so on or before the date of arraignment “on a
form approved in accordance with RSA 490:26-d”).
Nor do we find controlling former Superior Court Criminal Rule 99-A,
which was in effect at the time of the defendant’s indictment and sentencing.
Super. Ct. Crim. R. 99-A (repealed eff. Mar. 1, 2016). The rule provided: “In
every case where there may be a possible extended term of imprisonment
under RSA 651:6, the prosecuting attorney shall give notice of same to the
defendant prior to the commencement of trial and file a copy of such notice
with the Clerk.” Id. This rule did not impose an obligation upon the State to
give more than one form of notice to the defendant.
Accordingly, we conclude that an indictment may satisfy the statutory
written notice requirement imposed by RSA 651:6, III.
3
The defendant also argues that, even if an indictment may satisfy the
RSA 651:6, III notice requirement, it failed to do so in this case because it did
not give him “‘written notice of the possible application of [RSA 651:6].’” He
notes that “[n]owhere on the indictment did the State refer to RSA 651:6.” He
contends that “where the State does not advise the defendant which factual
predicate it relies upon in requesting an extended term, the notice may not
sufficiently advise the defendant so as to satisfy the purpose of the notice
requirement.” The defendant notes that the “single notation in the upper right
hand corner of the indictment did not identify [the] enhancing element upon
which the State intended to rely in seeking an extended term of imprisonment.”
The defendant concedes that this omission might be of no import if the
indictment contained only “one possible basis for the application of an
extended term.” He argues, however, that because the original indictment
contained two bases upon which an extended term might be imposed ― either
that the victim was under the age of thirteen, see RSA 651:6, I(e), or that the
victim was under the age of thirteen and the defendant was at least eighteen
years old, see RSA 651:6, I(m) ― it did not provide him with sufficient