THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2015-0537, Terry Ann Bartlett v. The
Commerce Insurance Company & a., the court on December 22,
2016, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
Commerce Insurance Company (Commerce) appeals an order of the Superior
Court (Garfunkel, J.) denying its motion for summary judgment and granting
the cross-motion for summary judgment of the petitioner, Terry Ann Bartlett,
as to when coverage is “triggered” under a personal umbrella endorsement to
the petitioner’s homeowner’s insurance policy issued by Commerce (the UIM
Umbrella Policy). Commerce also appeals the trial court’s ruling partially
granting and partially denying its motion for summary judgment as to whether
the excess uninsured/underinsured motorist (UIM) coverage in a separate
Commerce policy insuring the petitioner’s vehicles (the Auto Policy) applies
proportionately with certain other UIM coverage. We affirm the trial court’s
ruling with respect to the amount at which coverage is triggered under the UIM
Umbrella Policy and, as a result, we need not address whether the trial court
erred in its ruling regarding the excess UIM coverage under the Auto Policy.
This is the second time this case has reached us on appeal. See Bartlett
v. Commerce Ins. Co., 167 N.H. 521 (2015). The following pertinent facts are
taken from the summary judgment record or our prior decision. The petitioner
was injured in New York in August 2004 when the motorcycle on which she
was a passenger was struck by a motor vehicle. Id. at 523-24. The operator of
the motor vehicle was insured by Allstate Insurance Company (Allstate). Id. at
524. In July 2009, the petitioner received the policy limit of $100,000 from
Allstate. Id. The owner and operator of the motorcycle was insured by
Foremost Insurance Company (Foremost). Id. The Foremost policy was issued
in New Jersey and provided UIM coverage of up to $250,000 per person. Id.
The petitioner owned a motorcycle, which was registered and garaged in
New Hampshire, and was insured by Progressive Northern Insurance Company
(Progressive) under a policy that also provided UIM coverage of up to $250,000
per person. Id. The petitioner owned other vehicles, which were registered and
garaged in New Hampshire, and were insured by Commerce under the Auto
Policy that provided UIM coverage of up to $250,000 per person. Id. The
petitioner’s home was also insured through Commerce under a homeowner’s
insurance policy, modified by the UIM Umbrella Policy, which provided
$1,000,000 of single limit UIM coverage. Id.
The parties agree that each policy provides UIM coverage and that the
accident and the petitioner’s injuries fall within the UIM provisions of each
policy. Id. In addition, it is undisputed that Foremost is the primary insurer of
UIM coverage, that Progressive and Commerce (through the Auto Policy) are the
“excess” or secondary insurers, and that Commerce (through the UIM Umbrella
Policy) provides umbrella coverage. Id. at 524-25. It is also undisputed that, if
all policies are available to the petitioner, each layer of coverage must be
exhausted before a subsequent layer of coverage is triggered. Id. at 525.
In 2012, the petitioner filed the instant petition for declaratory judgment.
She moved, and Foremost, Progressive, and Commerce cross-moved, for
summary judgment. Id. at 524. The trial court addressed the claims involving
each insurer, determining that: (1) the petitioner was precluded from suing
Foremost because her declaratory judgment petition was untimely pursuant to
the New Jersey statute of limitations for UIM claims, which the court
determined applied; (2) although Commerce was an excess insurer under the
Auto Policy, it was required to “drop down” and provide primary coverage to the
petitioner—that is, to provide coverage for her first $250,000 of damages; (3)
Progressive was not required to “drop down” to provide primary coverage, and
the petitioner had forfeited her entitlement to excess insurance coverage by
Progressive when she settled with Allstate without Progressive’s prior consent;
and (4) Commerce, under the UIM Umbrella Policy, was required to provide
coverage once the petitioner’s damages exceeded the limits of all underlying or
primary coverage that was actually available. Id. at 525.
Commerce appealed, and the petitioner cross-appealed. Id. at 523. We
upheld the trial court’s rulings regarding the petitioner’s claims against
Foremost and Progressive. Id. at 525-29. With regard to Commerce, we
concluded that the “other insurance” provision of the UIM part of the Auto
Policy did not require Commerce to “drop down” to provide primary coverage.
Id. at 529-35. Rather, we determined that Commerce continues to be an
excess insurer and has no obligation to pay UIM benefits under the Auto Policy
until the petitioner’s damages exceed $250,000. Id. at 535. We declined to
address, in the first instance, whether the coverage available under the Auto
Policy applies proportionately with the coverage that would have been available
to the petitioner under the Progressive policy had she not forfeited her rights to
coverage. Id. We further declined to decide when coverage under the UIM
Umbrella Policy is triggered. Id.
Upon remand, Commerce moved, and the petitioner cross-moved, for
summary judgment as to: (1) whether the excess UIM coverage available to the
petitioner under the Auto Policy applies proportionately with the forfeited
Progressive UIM coverage; and (2) when coverage under the UIM Umbrella
Policy is triggered. The trial court determined that, pursuant to the Auto
Policy, Commerce is proportionately responsible with Progressive “for 50
percent of the damages that must be paid on an excess basis, up to its limit of
liability of $250,000.” The court further determined that coverage is triggered
2
under the “insuring agreement” in the UIM Umbrella Policy when the
petitioner’s damages exceed $250,000. Commerce appeals these rulings.
“In reviewing the trial court’s rulings on cross-motions for summary
judgment, we consider the evidence in the light most favorable to each party in
its capacity as the nonmoving party and, if no genuine issue of material fact
exists, we determine whether the moving party is entitled to judgment as a
matter of law.” Todd v. Vt. Mut. Ins. Co., 168 N.H. 754, 758 (2016) (quotation
omitted); see RSA 491:8-a, III (2010). If our review of that evidence discloses
no genuine issue of material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law, we will affirm the grant of summary judgment.
Todd, 168 N.H. at 758. We review the trial court’s application of the law to the
facts de novo. Id.
“In a declaratory judgment action to determine the coverage of an
insurance policy, the burden of proof is always on the insurer, regardless of
which party brings the petition.” Cogswell Farm Condo. Ass’n v. Tower Group,
Inc., 167 N.H. 245, 248 (2015) (quotation omitted); see RSA 491:22-a (2010).
The interpretation of insurance policy language is a question of law for this
court to decide. Bartlett, 167 N.H. at 530. “We review questions of law de
novo.” Cogswell Farm Condo. Ass’n, 167 N.H. at 248 (quotation omitted). “The
fundamental goal of interpreting an insurance policy, as in all contracts, is to
carry out the intent of the contracting parties.” Bartlett, 167 N.H. at 530
(quotation omitted).
Our analysis “begins with an examination of the insurance policy
language rather than upon the general purpose of a certain type of insurance
policy.” Cogswell Farm Condo. Ass’n, 167 N.H. at 251 (quotation and citation
omitted). We look to the plain and ordinary meaning of the policy’s words in
context, “and we construe the terms of the policy as would a reasonable person
in the position of the insured based upon more than a casual reading of the
policy as a whole.” Id. at 248 (quotation omitted). Policy terms are construed
objectively, and where the terms of a policy are clear and unambiguous, we
need not examine the parties’ reasonable expectations of coverage; absent
ambiguity, our search for the parties’ intent is limited to the words of the
policy. Bartlett, 167 N.H. at 531. The fact that the parties may disagree on the
interpretation of a term or clause in an insurance policy does not necessarily
create an ambiguity. Id. For an ambiguity to exist, the disagreement must be
reasonable. Id.
“In determining whether an ambiguity exists, we will look to the claimed
ambiguity, consider it in its appropriate context, and construe the words used
according to their plain, ordinary, and popular definitions.” Id. (quotation
omitted). “If one of the reasonable meanings of the language favors the
policyholder, the ambiguity will be construed against the insurer in order to
honor the insured’s reasonable expectations.” Id. (quotation and citation
omitted).
3