THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2015-0655, Soren Pfeffer & a. v. Douglas
Brackett, the court on August 24, 2016, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
We affirm.
The defendant, Douglas Brackett, appeals the order of the Circuit Court
(Kelly, J.) granting a writ of possession to the plaintiffs, Maple Ridge Road, LLC
(owner), and its manager, Soren Pfeffer (manager). The defendant argues that
the trial court erred in: (1) restricting his cross-examination of the manager;
and (2) ruling that he failed to raise a plea of title.
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred in restricting his
cross-examination of the manager. The trial court has broad discretion to
determine the admissibility of evidence, and we will not disturb its ruling
absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. N.H. Dep’t of Transp. v.
Franchi, 163 N.H. 797, 803 (2012). To show that the trial court’s decision is
unsustainable, the defendant must demonstrate that the court’s ruling was
clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. State v.
Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001).
At the hearing on the merits, the manager, who was self-represented,
testified that the defendant refused to vacate a prior residence, and that the
defendant sued his prior landlord, claiming an ownership interest in the
property. Defense counsel, after conceding that the prior history is “not too
terribly relevant,” nevertheless sought to cross-examine the manager on this
topic. The trial court, after allowing some limited cross-examination, explained
that although on direct examination it had given the manager “an opportunity
to say everything that he needed to say,” as he was “obviously not familiar with
the process,” it did not consider “any of the previous activities relevant to this
case.” The trial court did not explicitly prevent defense counsel from
continuing his cross-examination on this topic. Nor did defense counsel advise
the court that such examination was necessary to test the manager’s
credibility. Rather, defense counsel thanked the court “for the instruction” and
moved on to a different topic.
On appeal, the defendant argues that such cross-examination “was a
vital opportunity for [defense] counsel to test [the manager’s] credibility and
truthfulness.” He concedes that he did not raise this issue in the trial court
and seeks review under our plain error rule. See Sup. Ct. R. 16-A. Even
assuming, without deciding, that the trial court’s instruction implicitly
restricted defense counsel’s cross-examination, we cannot conclude that the
court unsustainably exercised its discretion, given the defendant’s failure to
explain that he was seeking to test the manager’s credibility. See Lambert, 147
N.H. at 296. Accordingly, we find no plain error. See Randall v. Abounaja, 164
N.H. 506, 510 (2013) (for plain error, there must be error).
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred in ruling that he
failed to raise a plea of title requiring the action to be entered in the superior
court. The circuit court does not have jurisdiction to resolve title issues. See
Friedline v. Roe, 166 N.H. 264, 266 (2014). The scope of the circuit court’s
jurisdiction is an issue of law, which we review de novo. Id. RSA 540:17
(2007) states:
If the defendant shall plead a plea which may bring in question the
title to the demanded premises he shall forthwith recognize to the
plaintiff, with sufficient sureties, in such sum as the court shall
order, to enter his action in the superior court for the county at the
next return day, and to prosecute his action in said court, and to
pay all rent then due or which shall become due pending the
action, and the damages and costs which may be awarded against
him.
The record shows that the defendant, who was then self-represented, filed an
appearance in which he asserted, “they can’t force me to vacate, I am part
owner.” Nothing in the record shows that the defendant filed any other
pleading in the circuit court prior to the hearing on the merits. Nor did he
enter or promise to enter an action in the superior court. At the hearing, the
defendant testified that he had “discussions” with the manager about an
agreement in which the defendant would “do improvements and renovations on
the house” in exchange for an “equity” interest in the property, and that the
parties “would split the profit 50/50” upon sale of the residence.
We conclude that the defendant failed to raise a plea of title in
accordance with RSA 540:17 requiring the action to be entered in the superior
court. The defendant did not allege that his “equity” interest included a
possessory claim. Cf. Friedline, 166 N.H. at 266 (defendant raised plea of title
by claiming life estate in property). Rather, as the trial court found, “taking the
evidence in the light most favorable to the defendant, at the very best, he has
stated a claim for reimbursement in some amount, at some point in time, for
2
the work he performed on the property.” This does not raise an issue of title.
See id. Accordingly, we find no error in the trial court’s ruling.
Affirmed.
Dalianis, C.J., and Hicks, Conboy, Lynn, and Bassett, JJ., concurred.
Eileen Fox,
Clerk
3