THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2015-0270, Wayne Perreault v. Town of
Goffstown & a., the court on April 14, 2016, issued the
following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
plaintiff, Wayne Perreault, appeals several rulings of the Superior Court
(Brown, J.) affirming the decision of the zoning board of adjustment (ZBA) for
defendant Town of Goffstown (Town), which upheld the determinations of the
town administrative officer regarding a driveway located on the property of
defendants Tristram and Marcella Gordon. On appeal, Perreault argues that
the trial court erred when it determined that: (1) our decision in Fisher v. City
of Dover, 120 N.H. 187 (1980), prevented him from relitigating the modification
of the driveway; (2) collateral estoppel applied, preventing him from arguing the
driveway could not be modified; and (3) the interpretation of the zoning
ordinance regarding the width of the driveway by the subsequent
administrative officer was lawful and reasonable. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. At issue in this appeal is a
driveway located on the Gordons’ property in Goffstown. The Gordons’
property is comprised of two parcels of land, each of which historically had its
own driveway. The northern parcel’s driveway was approximately six-to-ten
feet wide, and originally consisted of two concrete strips (the northern
driveway). The Gordons’ residence is on the southern parcel where there is
another driveway (the southern driveway). Perreault and the Town agree that
the parcels were merged into a single lot, but there is some disagreement in the
record as to when this merger occurred.
In August 2010, the Town’s zoning code enforcement officer, Derek
Horne, sent the Gordons a letter stating that he had learned that they had
“begun construction of a second driveway” on their property and that they
would need to seek a conditional use permit to do so. After speaking with the
Gordons and conducting his own research, Horne issued a subsequent letter
stating that “[i]t is evident the concrete blocks were used as a second driveway
by the previous owner to park vehicles here,” and that it was his determination
that “there have been two driveways at this location and a driveway
modification permit from the Department of Public Works is appropriate.”
In September, the Department of Public Works and Highways issued the
Gordons a driveway modification permit. The permit allowed the Gordons to
pave the existing northern driveway to a maximum width of “22 feet (incl. 5 foot
flares[]).” Horne formalized his administrative determinations in a letter dated
October 19. Perreault, who resides across the street from the Gordons,
appealed Horne’s determinations to the ZBA.
The minutes reflect that, at the ZBA hearing, Perreault’s attorney stated
that he did not agree with the determination that the driveway was “historical”
but that he did not “have the information to dispute it.” Rather, he argued that
the zoning ordinance did not allow the Gordons to “impermissibly expand a
non[-]conforming use.” He argued that a “three fold” expansion of the northern
driveway to 22 feet was impermissible and in contravention of the ordinance.
The ZBA ultimately voted to uphold Horne’s determinations. After
unsuccessfully seeking a rehearing, Perreault did not appeal the ZBA’s decision
to the superior court.
In August 2011, Perreault emailed a public works employee stating that
the Gordons’ driveway was incomplete and the permit had expired, and that
the portion that was completed was wider than 22 feet. The employee
responded that she had extended the permit due to road construction on the
public street that impacted the completion of the Gordon’s driveway. She also
stated that the 22-foot-width limitation applied only at the town right-of-way
line.
On September 21, 2011, Brian Rose, the planning and zoning
administrator responsible for zoning code enforcement, sent a letter to the
Gordons. In the letter, Rose stated that, after further complaints from
Perreault, he had made several administrative decisions “in an attempt to
clarify [the Gordons’] rights.” In relevant part, Rose determined that “the
driveway entrance at the [town] right-of-way line is the only part of the
driveway that is limited to twenty-two (22) feet” and that the remainder of the
driveway “is limited by Zoning Ordinance to 28 feet.” Rose also determined
that, because the Gordons’ “lot is only permitted one driveway based on [the]
Zoning Ordinance” and “[s]ince the property had two driveways existing at the
time this regulation was enacted,” by expanding the northern driveway, the
Gordons “have chosen that driveway as the conforming driveway on [their]
property.” Therefore, Rose stated, “the southern driveway becomes the legal
non-conforming driveway” as to which no expansion will be allowed without a
variance.
Perreault appealed Rose’s determinations to the ZBA, which held a
hearing on December 6, 2011. Perreault did not appear at the hearing but
submitted a statement for the ZBA’s consideration. The hearing minutes
indicate that Rose stated that the reference to the 22-foot width of driveways is
found in the development regulations, but the “Zoning Ordinance says no
driveway shall be wider than 28 feet. That is the maximum width of the
driveway.” Rose also stated that, because the properties were merged into one
2
lot with two existing driveways, there was no way of telling which driveway was
“grandfathered.” Therefore, Rose determined that, because the Gordons chose
to expand the northern driveway, the southern driveway was “the
grandfathered driveway” and could not be expanded further without a variance.
The ZBA continued the appeal to the next month’s meeting, during which it
voted to uphold Rose’s determinations. Following the denial of Perreault’s
request for rehearing, he appealed to the superior court.
In his appeal, Perreault argued, among other things, that the ZBA acted
unlawfully by allowing “an illegal expansion . . . of a non-conforming driveway”
and by improperly upholding Rose’s determination “that the Northern Driveway
was the conforming driveway.” The Town moved for “an order directing that
the issue of the right . . . of the Gordons to modify and alter the north
driveway . . . has been foreclosed by the unappealed decision of the ZBA in the
earlier ZBA case.”
In its order, the trial court remanded the matter for the ZBA to
determine, in the first instance, whether the rule articulated in Fisher v. City of
Dover barred Perreault from arguing that the northern driveway could not be
expanded. Additionally, the trial court determined that the ZBA did not err
when it upheld Rose’s determination that the maximum width of the driveway
pursuant to the ordinance was 28 feet, and the 22-foot width applied only at
the town right-of-way line. After remand, the ZBA determined that Fisher
barred Perreault’s current appeal. After the denial of a request for rehearing,
the parties had a final hearing in the superior court.
The trial court’s final order affirmed the ZBA’s decision. The trial court
ruled that Fisher applied to this case and that Perreault was foreclosed from
arguing that the Gordons could not modify the northern driveway. The trial
court also found that collateral estoppel prevented Perreault from raising the
issue of modification of the northern driveway. This appeal followed.
“Judicial review in zoning cases is limited.” Merriam Farm, Inc. v. Town
of Surry, 168 N.H. 197, 199 (2015). “Factual findings of the ZBA are deemed
prima facie lawful and reasonable, and the ZBA’s decision will not be set aside
by the superior court absent errors of law unless it is persuaded by the balance
of probabilities, on the evidence before it, that the ZBA decision is unlawful or
unreasonable.” Id.; see also RSA 677:6 (2008). “We will uphold the superior
court’s decision unless the evidence does not support it or it is legally
erroneous.” Merriam Farm, Inc., 168 N.H. at 199. “The interpretation and
application of a statute or ordinance is a question of law, and we review the
trial court’s ruling on such issues de novo.” Id.
We first address Perreault’s argument that the trial court erred when it
determined that collateral estoppel prevented him from challenging the
Gordons’ right to expand the northern driveway. Initially, Perreault argues
3