THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2015-0209, State of New Hampshire v. Jason
Nolan, the court on March 17, 2016, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
We affirm.
The defendant, Jason Nolan, appeals his conviction, following a jury trial
in Superior Court (Anderson, J.), on charges of aggravated felonious sexual
assault. See RSA 632-A:2 (Supp. 2015). He argues that the trial court erred
by: (1) allowing a physician to testify that he had no concerns that the victim, a
child, may have been “coached”; (2) not striking the physician’s “impression”
that the victim had been sexually abused; (3) excluding the physician’s
testimony that he could not say whether the victim had been vaginally
penetrated; and (4) denying the defendant’s motion to set the verdict aside.
We first address whether the trial court erred by admitting testimony
concerning whether the victim may have been “coached.” At trial, the State
introduced testimony from the physician concerning the signs he looks for to
determine whether a child may have been “coached” to disclose an assault,
over the defendant’s objection that such testimony was an impermissible
comment on the victim’s credibility. The physician then testified, without
objection, that he had no “specific concerns of coaching in this case.” On
appeal, the defendant argues that this testimony invaded the jury’s province to
assess the victim’s credibility, and that, because he had not “opened the door”
to it, its admission was erroneous. The State counters, in part, that any such
error was harmless. We agree with the State that, even if the evidence was
inadmissible, its admission here amounted to harmless error.
The erroneous admission of evidence is harmless only if the State proves,
beyond a reasonable doubt, that the verdict was not affected by it. State v.
Cooper, 168 N.H. 161, 165 (2015). “An error may be harmless beyond a
reasonable doubt if the alternative evidence of the defendant’s guilt is of an
overwhelming nature, quantity, or weight, and if the inadmissible evidence is
merely cumulative or inconsequential in relation to the strength of the State’s
evidence of guilt.” Id. (quotation omitted). “The State bears the burden of
proving that an error is harmless.” Id. (quotation omitted).
In this case, the defendant was charged with penetrating the victim’s
genital opening, both digitally and with his penis. The victim testified in detail
concerning the assaults, which occurred on November 27, 2010. On November
28, the victim disclosed the assaults and was examined by the physician. She
had discomfort during urination, and had an area of “redness that looked to be
traumatic in origin” around the urinary opening and “on either side of [it], but
inside the labia minora.” According to the physician, the redness appeared to
have been caused by “something rubbing, causing friction on that area,” and
was the kind of injury that typically heals within twelve to forty-eight hours.
The physician testified that the injury was “very consistent with” the victim’s
description of the assaults.
The victim also described feeling “wetness” during the assaults.
Consistent with this testimony, the State introduced evidence that a fitted
sheet that it had seized from the twin bed, on which the assaults had occurred,
four days after they had occurred contained the defendant’s semen. The bed
was used by children. Although the defendant testified at trial that he and his
then-girlfriend had engaged in sex on that bed, that testimony was impeached
by statements that he made during an interview with the detective. He initially
denied to the detective, when she confronted him with this evidence, that he
and his girlfriend had had sex on that bed or that the semen was his.
Although at some point during that interview, the defendant told the detective
that he and his girlfriend had had sex “everywhere in that house,” he denied
that they had done so during the weekend that the assaults occurred.
Moreover, he never told the detective that he and his girlfriend had had sex on
the twin bed, and he denied throughout the interview that there was any way
his semen could have gotten on the sheet.
We conclude that the evidence of the defendant’s guilt was overwhelming,
and that the physician’s testimony concerning whether the victim showed signs
that she had been coached was inconsequential in relation to the overwhelming
strength of the State’s evidence of guilt. Id.
We next address whether the trial court erred by not striking the
physician’s testimony that his “impression” was that the victim had been
sexually abused. After the physician testified that he had no specific concerns
that the victim had been “coached,” he testified that his “impression was that
the [victim] had been sexually abused.” On appeal, the defendant argues that
this testimony constituted impermissible vouching for the victim’s credibility.
He raises this issue as plain error. See Sup. Ct. R. 16-A.
Under the plain error rule, we have discretion to correct errors that were
not raised in the trial court. State v. Mueller, 166 N.H. 65, 68 (2014). The rule
“is used sparingly, however, and is limited to those circumstances in which a
miscarriage of justice would otherwise result.” Id. (quotation omitted). For
there to be plain error: (1) there must be an error; (2) the error must be plain;
2
(3) the error must affect substantial rights; and (4) the error must seriously
affect the fairness, integrity, or reputation of judicial proceedings. Id.
The third prong of the plain error test – whether the error affects
substantial rights – concerns whether the error affected the outcome of the
case. Id. at 70. It “is similar to the harmless error analysis we use to evaluate
preserved claims of error, with one important distinction: whereas the State
bears the burden under harmless error analysis, the defendant bears the
burden under the plain error test.” Id. We will find that an error affected
substantial rights “when we cannot confidently state that the jury would have
returned the same verdict in the absence of the error.” Id.
In this case, even if we were to assume that the trial court plainly erred
by not striking the physician’s testimony concerning his “impression” that the
victim had been sexually abused, the defendant has not established that the
error affected the outcome of the case. The defendant argues that the evidence
of guilt was not overwhelming because he disputed the allegations both to the
police and at trial, and because he explained how his semen could have gotten
on the fitted sheet. However, as noted above, the defendant’s explanation how
his semen could have been on the fitted sheet was inconsistent with what he
initially told the detective. Moreover, the presence of the defendant’s semen on
the fitted sheet and the evidence of injury to the victim’s genital area were
consistent with the victim’s description of the assaults. Because the evidence
of the defendant’s guilt was overwhelming, we are confident that the jury would
have returned the same verdict even if the physician had not testified to his
“impression” that the victim had been sexually abused. Id.
We next address whether the trial court erred by excluding the
physician’s testimony that he could not say whether the victim had been
vaginally penetrated. We defer to the trial court’s evidentiary rulings, and will
not overturn such a ruling absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
State v. Lisasuain, 167 N.H. 719, 725 (2015). To establish that the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion, the defendant must show that its ruling
was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Id.
The defendant was charged with penetrating the victim’s “genital
openings.” “Genital openings” is defined for purposes of RSA 632-A:2 to
include “the internal or external genitalia including, but not limited to, the
vagina, labia majora, labia minora, vulva, urethra or perineum.” RSA 632-A:1,
I-b (Supp. 2015). “Sexual penetration” encompasses “[a]ny intrusion, however
slight, of any part of the actor’s body . . . into genital . . . openings of the
victim’s body.” RSA 632-A:1, V(a)(5) (Supp. 2015).
At trial, the victim testified that the defendant placed his finger and penis
in her “ladybug,” which she described as the part of her body that she uses
3