THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2015-0485
THE BANK OF NEW YORK MELLON, AS TRUSTEE
v.
EUGENE DOWGIERT
Argued: March 8, 2016
Opinion Issued: June 28, 2016
Haughey, Philpot & Laurent, P.A., of Laconia (Christopher J. Fischer on
the brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
The Law Offices of Martin & Hipple, PLLC, of Concord (Stephen T. Martin
on the brief and orally), for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The defendant, Eugene Dowgiert, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Delker, J.) dismissing his plea of title, which he filed in
response to a possessory action brought in the circuit court by the plaintiff, the
Bank of New York Mellon (bank), as Trustee. We consider whether the court
erred in ruling that the plea is time-barred under RSA 479:25, II (Supp. 2015)
and RSA 479:25, II-a (2013). We hold that it did not, and, accordingly, affirm.
Dowgiert’s pleadings include, or the record supports, the following facts.
In 2005, Dowgiert refinanced a mortgage loan on his home with Decision One
Mortgage Company, LLC (Decision One). Dowgiert gave a promissory note to
Decision One and a mortgage to Mortgage Electronic Registration Systems
(MERS) as nominee of Decision One. In 2007, Decision One ceased to exist. In
2011, MERS assigned the mortgage to the bank. Dowgiert defaulted on the
mortgage, and, on or around September 3, 2013, the bank foreclosed on the
mortgage and purchased Dowgiert’s property at the foreclosure sale. On or
around September 25, 2013, the bank filed the foreclosure deed with the
Rockingham County Registry of Deeds. During this time, Dowgiert was
incarcerated and did not receive notice of the foreclosure. Accordingly, he
failed to petition the superior court for an order enjoining the foreclosure prior
to the sale.
In July 2014, the bank filed a possessory action in the circuit court to
remove Dowgiert from the property. Dowgiert, as a self-represented party, filed a
plea of title asserting that the bank did not have the authority to foreclose on the
mortgage and that, therefore, the foreclosure was invalid. Pursuant to RSA
540:17 (2007), the court ordered Dowgiert to file his plea in the superior court
“by the first Tuesday in October, 2014.” From the record, it appears that
Dowgiert failed to do so. More than a week after the deadline, on October 16, the
bank moved in the circuit court for judgment in its favor. Dowgiert failed to
object, and the court granted the motion.
More than a month later, on November 21, Dowgiert, represented by
counsel, moved in the circuit court for an order vacating the judgment and
allowing him two weeks to file his plea of title in the superior court. The court
held a hearing on the motion and determined that, “[u]nder a totality of the
circumstances, and after consideration of all arguments,” the motion should be
granted. The court ordered Dowgiert to file his plea in the superior court by
the “first Tuesday in May 2015.”
Dowgiert filed his plea of title in the superior court on April 24, 2015. In
it, he alleged that the bank did not have the authority to foreclose on his
property. Specifically, he asserted that the bank had lacked legal title to the
mortgage because: (1) “Decision One ceased to exist prior to the assignment
and purported negotiation of the Note”; (2) “the Mortgage assignment was three
years late, thereby not conforming with” certain deadlines in the Pooling and
Service Agreement (PSA); (3) the “Note [was not] transferred through [the]
specific assignment chain” required by the PSA; and (4) there was no evidence
that the bank possessed the “original ‘blue-ink’ note at the time of foreclosure.”
Dowgiert also alleged that he had not received notice of the foreclosure because
he had been incarcerated; thus, “he could not [have filed] a petition to enjoin
the [foreclosure] prior to the [sale].” When Dowgiert filed his plea in the
superior court, nearly one year and eight months had elapsed since the bank
purchased the property at the foreclosure sale, and nearly one year and seven
months had elapsed since the bank recorded the foreclosure deed. The bank
moved to dismiss Dowgiert’s plea, arguing that it was time-barred.
2
The court granted the bank’s motion. It ruled that the claims in the plea
concerning the bank’s title to the mortgage are barred under RSA 479:25, II
because Dowgiert failed to bring them prior to the foreclosure sale. The court
also ruled that, because Dowgiert did not bring his claim about the foreclosure
notice “within a year and a day of the recording of the foreclosure deed,” it is
barred under RSA 479:25, II-a. Dowgiert appealed.
In reviewing the court’s grant of the motion to dismiss, our standard of
review is whether the allegations in Dowgiert’s pleadings are reasonably
susceptible of a construction that would permit recovery. See Plaisted v.
LaBrie, 165 N.H. 194, 195 (2013). We assume that Dowgiert’s pleadings are
true and construe all reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to him.
See id. We then engage in a threshold inquiry that tests the facts in the
pleadings against the applicable law, and if the allegations constitute a basis
for legal relief, we must hold that it was improper to grant the motion to
dismiss. Id.
To resolve the issues before us, we must engage in statutory
interpretation. The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we
review de novo. Favazza v. Braley, 160 N.H. 349, 351 (2010). In matters of
statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the legislature’s intent as
expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole. Id. In construing
its meaning, we first examine the language found in the statute, and when
possible, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used. Id.
We interpret legislative intent from the statute as written and will not consider
what the legislature might have said or add language that the legislature did
not see fit to include. Strike Four v. Nissan N. Am., 164 N.H. 729, 735 (2013).
We interpret statutory provisions in the context of the overall statutory scheme.
Favazza, 160 N.H. at 351. Absent an ambiguity, we will not look beyond the
language of the statute to discern legislative intent. See New Hampshire Health
Care Assoc. v. Governor, 161 N.H. 378, 385 (2011).
Dowgiert’s principal argument is that RSA 479:25, II and II-a do not
apply to his plea of title. RSA 479:25 sets forth the procedures for mortgage
foreclosure through the power of sale. See RSA 479:25 (Supp. 2015). Those
procedures require, among other things, that the foreclosing party give notice
of the foreclosure to the mortgagor. See RSA 479:25, I. RSA 479:25, II
requires that notice be “served upon the mortgagor or sent by registered or
certified mail to his last known address . . . at least 25 days before the
[foreclosure] sale.” RSA 479:25, II. The statute also requires that, in the
notice, the foreclosing party advise the mortgagor of his right to “petition the
superior court . . . to enjoin the scheduled foreclosure sale.” Id. (quotation
omitted).
The statute establishes a timeframe for the mortgagor to exercise his
right to petition the superior court. The mortgagor must “institute such
3
petition . . . prior to sale.” Id. (emphasis added). Failure to do so “shall
thereafter bar any action or right of action of the mortgagor based on the
validity of the foreclosure.” Id. (emphasis added). A separate time limitation
applies to any challenge to the foreclosure