THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0084, State of New Hampshire v. Andrew
Tulley, the court on April 26, 2017, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we conclude
that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1). We affirm.
The defendant, Andrew Tulley, appeals his conviction, following a bench
trial in Circuit Court (Stephen, J.), on charges of conduct after an accident, see
RSA 264:25 (2014), and transportation of alcoholic beverages by a minor, see
RSA 265-A:45 (2014). He likewise appeals the suspension of his driver’s license.
See RSA 263:57 (2014); RSA 265-A:45, I.
The record supports the following facts. On a clear evening when the
pavement was dry, the defendant drove his vehicle onto the sidewalk and into a
utility pole, damaging his vehicle and the pole and leaving the back end of the
vehicle in the roadway. He immediately stepped out from the driver’s side door,
and his passenger got out from the passenger’s door. They ignored another
vehicle that stopped near them. After they conferred briefly, the passenger
walked swiftly across a parking lot adjacent to the sidewalk to a Target store,
while the defendant walked to the store more slowly. In the store, the passenger
used the store’s telephone at the customer service desk. When the defendant
arrived at the customer service desk, he and the passenger did not acknowledge
each other. When the passenger finished using the store’s phone, the defendant
used it. While the defendant was talking on the phone, the defendant wandered
away from the customer service counter. When the defendant saw police officers
enter the store, the defendant walked away from them back to the customer
service counter. The officers commanded him to stop. As the first officer reached
the defendant, the defendant said that he had been in a car accident. The officer
took the defendant’s arm, at which time the trial court concluded the defendant
was arrested.
The defendant contends that the trial court erred by: (1) not suppressing
his statement to the police that he had been in a car accident (statement), the
store surveillance videos showing his activities (videos), and unopened bottles of
beer found in his vehicle (bottles); (2) not finding that “he had been seized when
given verbal commands to stop”; (3) finding that the police had probable cause to
arrest him; (4) finding that the bottles had been properly seized because they
were in plain view; (5) finding that there was sufficient evidence to convict him of
conduct after an accident and of transporting alcohol; (6) not “making
particularized findings as to either suspension [of his driver’s license] or why the
suspensions should run consecutively”; (7) unsustainably exercising its
discretion by suspending his license on each conviction and ordering the second
suspension to run consecutive to the first; and (8) finding that his motion to
reconsider was untimely as to issues regarding his convictions.
To the extent that the defendant makes constitutional arguments other
than those arguments specifically addressed below, they are not sufficiently
developed for review. See State v. Chick, 141 N.H. 503, 504 (1996). We assume,
without deciding, that the defendant’s arguments are preserved.
The defendant argues that: (1) he was arrested before he stated to the
police that he had been in a car accident; (2) he was arrested without probable
cause; and (3) as a result, the bottles, the store videos, and his statement must
be suppressed. However, we need not dwell upon the underlying arguments
regarding the timing of, and grounds for, the arrest because, even if we were to
assume that the defendant was arrested illegally prior to his statement, his
arguments — that the statement, the bottles, and the videos must be suppressed
— fail.
When reviewing a trial court’s order on a motion to suppress, we accept the
trial court’s factual findings unless they lack support in the record or are clearly
erroneous and review its legal conclusions de novo. State v. Sullivan, 157 N.H.
124, 129 (2008). Evidence that has been obtained only through exploitation of
an antecedent illegality must be suppressed, State v. Socci, 166 N.H. 464, 471
(2014), but if a source independent of the alleged police misconduct leads to the
discovery of the evidence, then such evidence may be admissible, State v. Holler,
123 N.H. 195, 199-200 (1983).
In this case, the bottles were seized by an officer when he checked the
defendant’s abandoned crashed vehicle for occupants. The officer who seized the
bottles did not enter the store, and the defendant acknowledges that the officer
did not know “anything at all about actions otherwise taken by other police
officers.” Furthermore, the same officer broadcast the description of the driver,
which the arresting officer testified he received prior to the arrest. From this, the
trial court could have reasonably inferred that the officer found the bottles before
the defendant was arrested. Accordingly, we conclude that the bottles were
discovered independent of the defendant’s arrest. See id.
Similarly, the videos were made by a third party prior to, and
contemporaneous with, the defendant’s arrest. The trial court could reasonably
infer that the police knew that the store made such recordings and that they
were obtained directly from the store. Accordingly, we conclude that they, too,
were “discovered” independent of the defendant’s arrest. See id.
2
The defendant’s brief is unclear as to whether he is arguing that his
statement should have been suppressed because it resulted from a custodial
interrogation in the absence of Miranda warnings, see State v. Thelusma, 167
N.H. 481, 484 (2015), or because it was the fruit of his allegedly illegal arrest, see
State v. Gotsch, 143 N.H. 88, 90 (1998). To the extent that he is arguing that his
statement was the product of an improper custodial interrogation, the trial court
found that his statement was volunteered. See State v. Cloutier, 167 N.H. 254,
258 (2015) (stating whether statement voluntary is question of fact). This finding
is supported by the video showing the defendant making a statement to a police
officer as the officer approached him. Volunteered statements of any kind are not
affected by Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 478 (1966). Thelusma, 167 N.H. at
485. Furthermore, the trial court could have reasonably found, based upon the
video and the testimony of an officer, that the defendant did not make his
statement in response to a question. See State v. Graca, 142 N.H. 670, 675
(1998) (stating interrogation required for Miranda to apply).
To the extent that the defendant is arguing that his statement was the fruit
of his allegedly illegal arrest, we must determine whether the statement was a
product of his free will. See Gotsch, 143 N.H. at 90. Because the defendant does
not address the four factor test that we employ to make this determination, see
id., we decline to engage in this analysis. See State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 49
(2003). Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court did not err by not
suppressing the defendant’s statement.
In light of these conclusions, we need not decide when the defendant was
arrested, or address whether the officer had probable cause for the arrest.
We next consider whether the trial court erred in finding that the bottles
were in plain view. To validate a seizure under this exception, unless the items
seized are “dangerous in themselves,” the State must prove, by a preponderance
of the evidence, that: (1) the initial intrusion that afforded the view was lawful;
(2) the evidence was discovered inadvertently; and (3) the incriminating nature of
the evidence was immediately apparent. State v. Nieves, 160 N.H. 245, 247
(2010).
The “immediately apparent” requirement is met if, at the time of the
seizure, the officer has probable cause to believe that the object seized is
incriminating evidence. Id. at 701. Absolute certainty of illegality is not required.
Id. at 703. Officers are entitled to draw reasonable inferences from the facts
available to them in light of their knowledge and prior experience. Id. at 701-02.
Thus, in some situations, a trained officer’s observations of certain types of
contraband will be deemed sufficient to meet the requirements of the plain view
doctrine. Id. at 702.
3