THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0463, Kishan, Inc. & a. v. Margaret L.
Jalbert & a., the court on March 24, 2017, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
We affirm.
The plaintiffs, Kishan, Inc. (Kishan), Shreya Corporation, and Chankya
Investment, LLC, appeal a verdict, entered following a jury trial in Superior
Court (Tucker, J.), awarding them $10,000 for breach of contract by the
defendants, Margaret Jalbert (Margaret) and Joseph Jalbert, and awarding the
defendants $65,000 for Kishan’s breach of the same contract. The plaintiffs
argue that the trial court erred by: (1) not utilizing their proposed special
verdict form which, they assert, would have directed the jury to rule upon the
defendants’ counterclaims only if it first rejected the plaintiffs’ claims; (2) not
granting their motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict on the basis
that, pursuant to the material breach doctrine, the record compelled a finding
that the defendants were in material breach of the contract and, thus, that
Kishan’s performance thereunder was excused; (3) not ruling on their request
for a declaratory judgment that Kishan’s performance was excused as a matter
of law; and (4) awarding the defendants attorney’s fees under the contract.
“A breach of contract occurs when there is a failure without legal excuse
to perform any promise which forms the whole or part of a contract.” Lassonde
v. Stanton, 157 N.H. 582, 588 (2008) (quotation and brackets omitted). Under
the material breach doctrine, a breach that is sufficiently material and
important to justify ending the whole transaction constitutes a total breach
that discharges the injured party’s contractual obligation to perform. Fitz v.
Coutinho, 136 N.H. 721, 725 (1993); see 14 Richard A. Lord, Williston on
Contracts § 43.5, at 614-25 (4th ed. 2013). A breach that is not material will
not discharge the injured party’s obligation to perform; however, the injured
party may still recover damages for the breach. See Fitz, 136 N.H. at 724-25;
14 Williston on Contracts, supra § 43.5, at 617-24; cf. Robinson v.
Crowinshield, 1 N.H. 76, 79 (1817) (holding that, although the defendant had
already recovered against the plaintiffs for breach of contract, the plaintiffs
were entitled to recover against the defendant for breach of a different
obligation under the same contract so long as they substantially performed).
“For a breach of contract to be material, it must go to the root or essence
of the agreement between the parties, or be one which touches the
fundamental purpose of the contract and defeats the object of the parties in
entering into the contract.” Found. For Seacoast Health v. Hosp. Corp. of
America, 165 N.H. 169, 181-82 (2013) (quotation and brackets omitted).
A breach is “material” if: (1) a party fails to perform a substantial
part of the contract or one or more of its essential terms or
conditions; (2) the breach substantially defeats the contract’s
purpose; or (3) the breach is such that upon a reasonable
interpretation of the contract, the parties considered the breach as
vital to the existence of the contract.
Id. at 182 (quotations omitted). Whether a particular breach constitutes a
material breach is a question of fact for the trier of fact to resolve. Id. at 181;
see also Fitz, 136 N.H. at 725.
Because the material breach doctrine excuses a party’s performance
under a contract, it constitutes an affirmative defense when asserted in
response to a claim for breach of contract. See Meaney v. Rubega, 142 N.H.
530, 532 (1997) (defining “affirmative defense” to mean any matter raised by a
defendant that admits the plaintiff’s allegations but provides an excuse or
justification for the allegations or otherwise defeats the plaintiff’s claim); Favor
v. Philbrick, 7 N.H. 326, 335 (1834) (stating that any legal excuse for non-
performance of a contract was a matter for the defendant to raise and did not
impose any burden of proof upon the plaintiff); cf. Veino v. Bedell, 99 N.H. 274,
276 (1954) (holding that lack of consideration and illegal consideration are
affirmative defenses to an action on a promissory note). As such, any party
claiming that its contractual performance is excused due to the other party’s
material breach bears the burdens of production and persuasion as to the
defense, and is obligated to timely raise it. See Akwa Vista v. NRT, 160 N.H.
594, 600 (2010); Goudreault v. Kleeman, 158 N.H. 236, 256 (2009).
The contract at issue in this case was a lease for real property owned by
the defendants consisting of two first-floor commercial units and an un-
insulated garage used for storage; residential units, which were not subject to
the lease, were located above the leased space. An interior wall separated the
commercial units, and a structural wall separated one of the commercial units
from the garage. In total, the leased property comprised approximately 4,000
square feet, 1,500 square feet of which was the garage. Kishan planned to
renovate the leased space and utilize it for a convenience store.
Under the terms of the lease, the defendants were responsible for
removing the wall that separated the two commercial units and replacing some
damaged ceiling tiles. Kishan was responsible for making all other alterations
and improvements, and was obligated to obtain the defendants’ prior written
2
consent for any such improvements or alterations. The lease provided that, if
the property were partially destroyed, but could still be occupied, rent would be
abated until the defendants could repair the property, and that if they could
not repair it within sixty days, Kishan had the option to terminate the lease.
Upon termination of the lease “for any reason,” Kishan was required to “return
the Leased Premises to [the defendants] in substantially the same state of
repair as existing upon the date set for the commencement of the initial term,
or as such may have been subsequently improved . . . .”
The lease was for an initial seven-year term beginning on March 1, 2014,
and was renewable for up to three additional seven-year terms. The rent was
set at $3,250 per month for the first year of the lease, with the exception of the
first four months of the lease term when Kishan was obligated to pay only
$1,625 per month. The parties anticipated that Kishan would be renovating
the property during the initial four-month period, and would open the
convenience store by July 1. In negotiating the initial rent of $3,250 per
month, the parties agreed upon a rate of $12 per square foot for the
commercial space and $6 per square foot for the storage space.
In early March 2014, a motorist crashed into the exterior wall of one of
the commercial units. After a municipal building inspector examined the
damage and ensured that the building was secure and structurally-sound,
Margaret negotiated with the contractor who was going to perform Kishan’s
renovation work to also repair the damage caused by the crash.
Kishan did not perform any renovation work until May 2014. On May 2,
Margaret provided written approval for detailed renovation plans submitted by
Kishan’s contractor. The plans did not indicate that any changes would be
made to the structural wall separating the garage from the commercial units.
Around the end of June or early July, Margaret discovered that the contractor
had removed the sheetrock, insulation, and support boards from the structural
wall separating the commercial space from the garage, leaving only the framing
in place. She then learned that Kishan’s plan was to remove a portion of that
wall in order to install a “beer cave”—a walk-in cooler, accessible to customers,
holding beer and other cold beverages—inside the garage. Although the
plaintiffs claimed that Margaret had verbally approved their plan to remove
that wall, Margaret denied that she had ever granted such approval, and there
is no dispute that she had not provided prior written approval for the wall’s
demolition.
Margaret testified that, because Kishan planned to use a portion of the
garage for the “beer cave,” and because the parties had negotiated a lower
rental rate for the garage as storage space, she told Kishan’s representatives
that she thought an increase in rent would be fair. She acknowledged at trial,
however, that under the terms of the lease, she could not insist upon an
increase in rent. Kishan’s representatives, by contrast, testified that Margaret
3