THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0024, State of New Hampshire v. Richard
Harris, the court on November 15, 2016, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
We affirm.
The defendant, Richard Harris, appeals his conviction, following a jury
trial in Superior Court (Bornstein, J.), on three charges of simple assault. See
RSA 631:2-a (2016). He argues that he was subjected to multiplicitous charges
in violation of the Double Jeopardy Clauses of the State and Federal
Constitutions. We address these arguments first under the State Constitution
and rely on federal law only to aid in our analysis. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226,
231-33 (1983). He further argues that the trial court erred by denying his
motion for in camera review of the victim’s medical and counseling records,
and by instructing the jury on flight.
We first address the defendant’s double jeopardy arguments. Part I,
Article 16 of the State Constitution protects against successive prosecutions for
the same offense after either an acquittal or a conviction, and against multiple
punishments for the same offense. State v. Glenn, 160 N.H. 480, 486 (2010).
We have stated that the State may prosecute multiple charges that constitute
the same offense in a single proceeding, consistent with Part I, Article 16, so
long as it alleges distinct, alternative methods of committing the offense, and
does not seek multiple sentences. State v. Nickles, 144 N.H. 673, 676 (2000);
see also State v. Sanborn, 168 N.H. 400, 424 (2015) (finding no double
jeopardy violation where defendant was convicted of manslaughter and a lesser
including offense because he was sentenced only for manslaughter). We have
also stated, however, that the State “cannot simultaneously pursue multiple
charges that are entirely identical in fact as well as in law.” Nickles, 144 N.H.
at 676 (quotation omitted). “Two offenses will be considered the same unless
each requires proof of an element that the other does not.” Id. at 677
(quotation and brackets omitted). In applying this test, “our focus is upon
whether proof of the elements of the crimes as charged will in actuality require
a difference in evidence.” Glenn, 160 N.H. at 486 (quotation omitted).
The criminal charges in this case arise out of an altercation between the
defendant and the victim that occurred in the defendant’s home during the
night of October 20, 2014. The victim testified that, during the course of an
argument in the defendant’s home office, the defendant leapt from his chair,
grabbed her wrists with one hand, grabbed her throat and jaw with the other
hand, and squeezed her jaw and throat while pressing her against the office
door. He then released her, opened the office door, and pushed her into an
adjoining workshop. The altercation continued, and at one point, the
defendant grabbed the victim’s wrists with each of his hands and “pinned” her
against the workshop door that led into the house. The defendant then opened
the workshop door, and threw the victim into a hallway. The victim then
slammed the door and yelled at the defendant to leave her alone. After
watching the defendant go back into his office, she turned around and began to
walk down the hallway. At that point, she testified that the defendant came up
from behind her, wrapped his arm around her throat so that his elbow was in
front of her in a “chokehold” position, and began to “crush” her throat to the
point that she could not breathe and saw “flashes of light.” The altercation
ended when one of the defendant’s children appeared in the hallway.
Based upon these allegations, the State brought six separate charges.
First, it brought two second degree assault indictments alleging that the
defendant knowingly engaged in strangulation by actually applying pressure to
the victim’s throat or neck in a manner that impeded her breathing or blood
flow; one indictment alleged that he committed the crime by grabbing or
pushing the victim’s throat, while the other alleged that he did so by putting
his arm around her neck. See RSA 631:2, I(f), II(c) (2016). It also brought four
simple assault charges, each alleging that the defendant knowingly caused
unprivileged physical contact to the victim, see RSA 631:2-a, I(a), by: (1)
grabbing the victim’s jaw or throat in the office (grabbing charge); (2) putting
his arm around her neck in a “chokehold” in the hallway (chokehold charge);
(3) pushing the victim (pushing charge); and (4) pinning the victim against the
workshop door (pinning charge). In opposing the defendant’s motion to dismiss
on double jeopardy grounds, the State represented, and the trial court agreed,
that the grabbing and chokehold charges alleged alternative theories to the two
second degree assault charges, and that if the jury were to convict on all four of
those charges, it would withdraw the grabbing and chokehold charges. With
respect to the pushing charge, the State clarified in its closing argument that
that charge concerned the victim’s testimony that the defendant had pushed
her from the office into the workshop. Ultimately, the jury acquitted the
defendant of the two second degree assault charges and the grabbing charge,
and convicted him of the remaining three simple assault charges.
On appeal, the defendant first argues that, as charged, proof of the
second degree assault charges and the grabbing and chokehold charges did not
in actuality require a difference in evidence. Rather, he contends that the
elements of simple assault, as charged, were subsumed by the elements of
second degree assault, and that, therefore, the grabbing and chokehold
charges constituted “lesser included offenses” of the second degree assault
charges. Under the circumstances, he argues that the simple assault charges
were “entirely identical in fact as well as in the law” to the second degree
assault charges, Nickles, 144 N.H. at 676 (quotation omitted), and that,
2
therefore, they were not “alternative” charges that the State was permitted to
pursue in a single proceeding. We disagree.
At the outset, we note that the State does not question the continuing
validity of the “same evidence” test articulated and applied in cases such as
Nickles. Accordingly, we will assume, without deciding, that the same evidence
test governs the analysis of whether the criminal charges in this case alleged
the same or different crimes. But see State v. Locke, 166 N.H. 344, 352-53
(2014) (expressing doubt as to whether cases applying the same evidence test
can be reconciled, and inviting parties in future cases to ask us to reconsider
our double jeopardy jurisprudence consistent with principles of stare decisis).
Contrary to the defendant’s argument, the grabbing and chokehold
charges did not allege a lesser included offense of second degree assault. As
charged, the second degree assault indictments each required proof that the
defendant knowingly engaged in strangulation by actually applying pressure to
the victim’s throat or neck in a manner that impeded her breathing or blood
flow, one by putting his arm around her neck, and the other by grabbing or
pushing her throat. See RSA 631:2, I(f), II(c). By contrast, the simple assault
charges each required proof that the defendant knowingly caused unprivileged
physical contact to the victim, one by grabbing the victim’s jaw or throat in the
office, and the other by putting his arm around her neck in a chokehold in the
hallway. See RSA 631:2-a, I(a). Thus, to prevail upon the second degree
assault charges, the State was required to introduce evidence that the
defendant applied sufficient pressure to the victim’s throat or neck to impede
her breathing or blood flow, an element not required to convict him of simple
assault. To prevail upon the simple assault charges, the State was required to
introduce evidence that the defendant’s physical contact with the victim’s
throat was unprivileged, an element not required to prove second degree
assault. See In re Nathan L., 146 N.H. 614, 620-21 (2001) (holding that
simple assault is not a lesser included offense of second degree assault
because the latter crime does not require proof of lack of privilege or physical
contact). Accordingly, the second degree assault and simple assault charges
alleged distinct offenses for purposes of Part I, Article 16. See Glenn, 160 N.H.
at 486-87; Nickles, 144 N.H. at 678-80.
Even if the grabbing and chokehold charges alleged lesser included
offenses of second degree assault, however, we agree with the State that any
double jeopardy violation was in fact resolved by the jury’s acquittal of the
defendant on the second degree assault charges and the grabbing charge. See
State v. Flynn, 151 N.H. 378, 386 (2004). Thus, the defendant was in fact
subjected to only a single punishment for the chokehold charge. See Sanborn,
168 N.H. at 424; see also United States v. Webber, 255 F.3d 523, 527 (8th Cir.
2001); United States v. Nguyen, 28 F.3d 477, 482 (5th Cir. 1994).
The Federal Constitution offers the defendant no greater protection than
does the State Constitution under these circumstances. See Glenn, 160 N.H.
3