THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0554, Jeffrey Cogswell d/b/a Berry Hill
Construction v. Brian Dove, the court on March 24, 2017, issued
the following order:
Having considered the memorandum of law filed by the defendant, Brian
Dove, and the record submitted on appeal, we conclude that oral argument is
unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1). The defendant, Brian Dove,
appeals an order of the Circuit Court (Rappa, J.) granting judgment in the
amount of $1,870 to the plaintiff, Jeffrey Cogswell d/b/a Berry Hill
Construction, on the plaintiff’s small claims action against the defendant. The
trial court entered judgment in favor of the plaintiff after having found the
defendant in default for failing to appear at a pretrial conference. The
defendant also appeals the trial court’s denial of his motion to strike the
default judgment. We affirm.
The relevant facts, as set forth in the record submitted on appeal, are as
follows. Although the defendant has not provided a copy of the plaintiff’s small
claims action, it appears that the plaintiff sought payment for renovations the
plaintiff made to the defendant’s home. The defendant responded to the
plaintiff’s small claims action by requesting an evidentiary hearing and by
asserting that the plaintiff had damaged his property, billed him for insulation
and wallboard that the plaintiff did not use, and billed him for hours in which
the plaintiff did not work on the defendant’s property.
In May 2016, the trial court notified the parties that it would hold a
pretrial conference on July 13. On the day of the conference, the defendant did
not appear. Instead, he filed a motion to continue the conference in which he
alleged that he could not appear because his employer had scheduled him to
work in Buffalo, New York that day. On August 8, the trial court entered a
default judgment against the defendant. The notice of the default judgment
informed the defendant that, if he contested the judgment, he had to file a
motion within 10 days from the date of the