THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0015, Geri Hunter v. Oneta Bobbett, the
court on September 20, 2016, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
We affirm.
The defendant, Oneta Bobbett, appeals an order of the Superior Court
(Anderson, J.), following a three-day bench trial, requiring that she pay the
plaintiff, Geri Hunter, $225,867.14, for losses related to a partnership into
which the parties had entered for the purpose of owning and operating a
restaurant. She argues that the trial court erred by: (1) requiring that she
reimburse the plaintiff for losses incurred prior to when the parties executed a
written partnership agreement; (2) ruling that the existence of a limited liability
company, in which the defendant had no ownership interest, but through
which the restaurant was owned and operated so as to conceal the defendant’s
partnership interest during her divorce, did not invalidate the partnership; and
(3) not finding that the plaintiff breached the partnership agreement and
forfeited her right to reimbursement for losses by retaining certain tangible
partnership assets that the trial court found had no fair market value.
Whether a partnership exists is a mixed question of law and fact. Cadle
Co. v. Bourgeois, 149 N.H. 410, 415 (2003). We will not overturn the trial
court’s ruling on such a question unless it is clearly erroneous. Id. If,
however, the trial court misapplies the law to its findings, we review the matter
independently for plain error. Id. We review the trial court’s interpretation of
an unambiguous written partnership agreement de novo. See Found. for
Seacoast Health v. Hosp. Corp. of America, 165 N.H. 169, 172 (2013).
In this case, the parties do not dispute that in November 2013, they
executed a written partnership agreement for the purpose of owning and
operating a restaurant two days after the restaurant opened. Among other
provisions, the written agreement contained terms requiring that: (1) the
parties not disclose its existence or the defendant’s interest in it to any third
party; (2) the plaintiff act at all times as the owner of the restaurant with
respect to third parties, pay all taxes on all partnership profits, and take
control of all partnership property and debts; (3) the defendant manage all
aspects of the partnership and restaurant; and (4) the parties share all profits
and losses in accordance with their partnership interests. Although the parties
executed the agreement in November 2013, the evidence establishes that they
had planned to open and operate the restaurant as equal partners as early as
the spring of 2013, and had worked together to bring their plan to fruition
throughout the ensuing summer and fall. The defendant insisted on
maintaining the partnership’s secrecy, however, in order to conceal her interest
in her then-pending divorce.
Based upon the evidence, the trial court found that, although the parties
had executed the written agreement in November 2013, it memorialized a
partnership that had existed since at least June 2013, when the parties
engaged a consultant to assist in opening the restaurant. The trial court also
found that, although the restaurant was operated through a limited liability
company owned by the plaintiff and the consultant, who also had an interest in
the partnership, that company “was created to further the partnership’s
purpose of owning and operating a restaurant without publically naming [the
defendant] as the owner” and, thus, its existence did not invalidate the
partnership. Finally, although the plaintiff, after the restaurant failed, did not
sell much of the partnership’s tangible personal property, the trial court
credited her testimony that there was no market for such property. The trial
court ordered the defendant to pay the plaintiff $225,867.14, representing her
share of partnership losses after accounting for benefits the plaintiff received
by being entitled to deduct partnership losses on her taxes, and by effectively
owning the real property that the partnership improved for the restaurant.
As the appealing party, the defendant has the burden of demonstrating
reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014). Based upon our
review of the trial court’s well-reasoned order, the defendant’s challenges to it,
the relevant law, and the record submitted on appeal, we conclude that the
defendant has not demonstrated reversible error. See id.
Affirmed.
Dalianis, C.J., and Hicks, Conboy, Lynn, and Bassett, JJ., concurred.
Eileen Fox,
Clerk
2