THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0328, David Eldridge & a. v. Ocwen Loan
Servicing, LLC & a., the court on October 12, 2017, issued the
following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case.
The plaintiffs, David Eldridge and Mary Ellen McNeill, appeal orders of
the Superior Court (Colburn, J.) granting summary judgment to defendant
Ocwen Loan Servicing, LLC (Ocwen) and denying their motion to amend their
complaint to add claims against defendants The Rolling Green at Whip-Poor-
Will Condominium Owners’ Association (COA) and The Rolling Green at Whip-
Poor-Will Condominium Townhouse Owners’ Association (TOA) (collectively, the
Associations). The Associations cross-appeal, asserting that the trial court
should have granted them summary judgment on the basis of res judicata and
should have awarded them attorney’s fees. We affirm in part, reverse in part,
and remand for further proceedings.
The following facts are recited in the trial court’s orders or appear on the
record before us. On September 25, 2004, the plaintiffs granted a mortgage to
New Century Mortgage Corporation (New Century) on a townhouse unit (the
Unit) they owned in the Whip-Poor-Will Condominium complex. New Century
later assigned the mortgage to U.S. Bank N.A., for which Ocwen was the loan
servicer. Section 9 of the mortgage provides, in part, that if the borrower fails
to perform the covenants or agreements contained therein or if “there is a legal
proceeding that might significantly affect Lender’s interest in the Property
and/or rights under” the mortgage, “then Lender may do and pay for whatever
is reasonable or appropriate to protect Lender’s interest in the Property and
rights under” the mortgage.
From 2001 through 2009, the plaintiffs failed to pay all mandatory
Association fees, and the Associations successfully sued them for the
outstanding dues (the Assessment Action). Thereafter, the COA’s board of
directors voted to cancel the plaintiffs’ common area privileges, and sought an
injunction to enforce the cancellation of privileges. Meanwhile, a writ of
execution issued in the Assessment Action and, on November 3, 2011, a
sheriff’s sale was conducted, at which the COA purchased the Unit, subject to
the plaintiffs’ one-year right of redemption.
On January 6, 2012, the Associations informed Ocwen that the COA had
purchased the Unit and had terminated the plaintiffs’ common area privileges.
Ocwen expressed interest in paying off the outstanding assessments and
inquired as to the amount owed. The Associations provided Ocwen with a
quote, consisting of unpaid dues and late fees, plus attorney’s fees the
Associations had incurred to date, that totaled $43,443.08 (the Quoted
Amount).
Simultaneously, however, the Associations were also negotiating with the
plaintiffs to reach what the trial court termed a “global resolution.” On March
21, 2012, the plaintiffs and the Associations executed a stipulated agreement
(Stipulated Agreement) that obligated the plaintiffs to pay outstanding
condominium fees totaling $3,204.52. The trial court approved the Stipulated
Agreement on March 30, 2012.
Two days prior to approval of the Stipulated Agreement, Ocwen sent the
Associations full payment of the Quoted Amount, thereby redeeming the Unit
from the sheriff’s sale. The mortgage provides that “[a]ny amounts disbursed
by Lender” to protect its security interest as set forth in Section 9 “shall
become additional debt of Borrower secured by this Security Instrument” and
“shall bear interest at the Note rate from the date of disbursement and shall be
payable, with such interest, upon notice from Lender to Borrower requesting
payment.” Thus, the trial court presumed, and neither party now disputes,
that “[a]t some point thereafter, Ocwen . . . added $43,443.08 to the plaintiffs’
outstanding mortgage balance.” A quitclaim deed to the plaintiffs, and a
discharge and/or release of various liens, were executed on the Associations’
behalf on April 16, 2012, and were recorded by the plaintiffs on May 7, 2012.
The plaintiffs suspected “that the $43,443.08 figure was grossly inflated,”
and, on May 16, 2012, they requested, through their attorney, “a breakdown of
the $43,443.08 amount.” They “were told that the Associations would address
their request at [the Associations’] July meeting.”
The plaintiffs subsequently filed a motion for contempt on the basis that
the payment of $43,443.08 violated the Stipulated Agreement. On August 29,
2012, the Trial Court (Nicolosi, J.) denied the motion, apparently without
prejudice, indicating that while the plaintiffs might have a separate cause of
action if there had been an overpayment, she considered the case before her to
be concluded.
On February 25, 2013, the plaintiffs’ counsel reviewed accounting
documents supplied by the Associations and concluded that the amount
required to redeem the Unit “from the sheriff’s sale should only have been
about $13,000, which, when added with the $3,204.52 from the Stipulated
Agreement, would only total $16,204.52, and not the $43,443.08 quoted by the
Associations and subsequently paid by Ocwen.” (Quotation and citations
2
omitted.) He notified the Associations of the discrepancy, but “received no
substantive response.”
The plaintiffs brought this action against the defendants alleging
breaches of fiduciary duty by both Ocwen and the Associations, and seeking
both enforcement of the Stipulated Agreement and an accounting from the
Associations. Ocwen and the Associations moved separately for summary
judgment. The trial court granted summary judgment in favor of Ocwen, and
in favor of the Associations with respect to the fiduciary duty and accounting
claims, and dismissed, for failure to state a claim, the count seeking
enforcement of the Stipulated Agreement. On March 14, 2016, the plaintiffs
moved to amend their complaint, which the trial court denied. The trial court
also denied the plaintiffs’ motion for reconsideration.
On appeal, the plaintiffs argue that the trial court erred in: (1) finding, as
a matter of law, that Ocwen did not owe the plaintiffs a fiduciary duty; (2)
finding that the statute of limitations had run on new claims against the
Associations that the plaintiffs sought to add, by amendment, to their
complaint; and (3) denying their motion to amend “when the case was still
open.” The Associations, on cross-appeal, contend that: (1) summary judgment
in their favor should have been granted on the basis of res judicata; and (2) the
trial court erred in denying their claim for attorneys’ fees.
We first address the plaintiffs’ challenge to the grant of summary
judgment in Ocwen’s favor, and we begin with our standard of review:
In reviewing the trial court's grant of summary judgment, we
consider the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences
properly drawn from them, in the light most favorable to the non-
moving party. If our review of that evidence discloses no genuine
issue of material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law, we will affirm the grant of summary
judgment. We review the trial court’s application of the law to the
facts de novo.
Pike v. Deutsche Bank Nat’l Trust Co., 168 N.H. 40, 42 (2015) (citations
omitted).
The plaintiffs concede that, “ordinarily[,] . . . [t]he relationship between
lender and borrower” is not a fiduciary one, but “is contractual under New
Hampshire law.” Thus, as the trial court recognized, a tort claim “for purely
economic or commercial losses associated with the contract relationship” is
generally barred under the economic loss doctrine. Wyle v. Lees, 162 N.H. 406,
410 (2011) (quotation omitted). The plaintiffs contend, however, that they fall
within a recognized exception to the economic loss doctrine. Specifically, they
“argue that there existed a special relationship between the plaintiffs and
3