THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0569, In the Matter of Liquidation of The
Home Insurance Company, the court on October 27, 2017,
issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. Roger A.
Sevigny, Commissioner of Insurance of the State of New Hampshire, as
Liquidator (the Liquidator) of The Home Insurance Company (Home), appeals
the determination of the Superior Court (Nicolosi, J.) that the Liquidator is not
authorized to deduct legal expenses incurred by the California Insurance
Guarantee Association (CIGA) in defending a suit brought by the Western
Asbestos Settlement Trust (Western Trust), under Home insurance policies.
We reverse.
The relevant facts follow. Home is an insurance company, organized
under the laws of New Hampshire, which was declared insolvent and placed in
liquidation in 2003. In the Matter of Liquidation of Home Ins. Co., 166 N.H.
84, 86 (2014). The Liquidator is vested with title to, and charged with
administering and collecting, Home’s assets for distribution to Home’s
creditors. Id.
Western Trust was created in 2004 as a result of a bankruptcy
reorganization of Western Asbestos Company, Western MacArthur Company
and MacArthur Company (the Western Companies). As part of that
reorganization, Western Trust holds the Western Companies’ rights and
responsibilities under numerous Home insurance policies. Western Trust
exists solely to compensate asbestos-related victims of the Western Companies
and is funded by the proceeds from the Western Companies’ insurance
settlements.
CIGA is a statutory entity that was created “to establish a fund from
which insureds could obtain financial and legal assistance in the event their
insurers became insolvent.” Isaacson v. California Ins. Guar. Ass’n, 750 P.2d
297, 303 (Cal. 1988). “All insurers transacting insurance business in
California are involuntary members of CIGA, unless specifically exempted by
statute.” Id. “The statutory purpose of CIGA is to provide for each insurer
member insolvency insurance to pay the claims arising out of policies issued by
an insurer who becomes insolvent.” Id. at 304 (quotation and brackets
omitted).
After Home was placed in liquidation, Western Trust claimed entitlement
to approximately $1 billion under Home policies issued to the Western
Companies. In February 2011, the Liquidator entered into a Settlement
Agreement and Mutual Release (Settlement Agreement) with Western Trust.
The Settlement Agreement provided for a “Recommended Amount” of
$242,500,000 to be allowed as a Class II priority claim of Western Trust in the
Home liquidation. See RSA 402-C:44, II (2006). In May 2011, the trial court
approved the Settlement Agreement.
In February 2013, Western Trust sued CIGA in California, seeking a
declaration that Western Trust “is entitled to obtain payments from [CIGA] for
asbestos bodily injury liabilities . . . that are covered” by the Home policies (the
so-called Snyder action). The Snyder action is pending and Western Trust and
CIGA have agreed upon a phased litigation.
The Liquidator determined that, pursuant to the Settlement Agreement,
CIGA’s legal expenses incurred in defending the Snyder action are expenses
that CIGA is entitled to recover in the Home liquidation and are, therefore,
properly deducted from the Recommended Amount. Western Trust objected
and moved for an order “disallowing CIGA’s Expenses and/or directing the
Liquidator to pay the Western Trust’s Allowed Claim without any reduction for
CIGA’s Expenses.” Following a hearing, the trial court ruled that the
Liquidator is not entitled under the Settlement Agreement to deduct CIGA’s
legal expenses incurred in defending the Snyder action from the Recommended
Amount. This appeal followed.
Resolving this appeal requires us to interpret the Settlement Agreement
between the parties. Our review of the Settlement Agreement is de novo
“because the proper interpretation of a written agreement is ultimately a
question of law for this court.” Signal Aviation Servs. v. City of Lebanon, 169
N.H. 162, 166 (2016) (quotation and brackets omitted). Our standards
regarding contract interpretation are well-established.
It is axiomatic that we give an agreement the meaning intended by
the parties when they wrote it. When interpreting a written
agreement, we give the language used by the parties its reasonable
meaning, considering the circumstances and context in which the
agreement was negotiated, when reading the document as a whole.
Absent ambiguity, the parties’ intent will be determined from the
plain meaning of the language used. Only when the parties
reasonably disagree as to its meaning will the agreement’s
language be deemed ambiguous.
Id. (quotation omitted).
2
The dispute between the parties centers around Paragraph 9B(1) of the
Settlement Agreement, titled “Resolution of Matters and Indemnification,”
which states:
[Western Trust] acknowledge[s] that, in the event [it]
pursue[s] any claim under the Policies against any Insurance
Guaranty Association, the Insurance Guaranty Association’s
expenses of addressing the claim and any recovery may become a
claim by the Insurance Guaranty Association in the Home
liquidation. [Western Trust] agree[s] that any judgments,
settlements, or other recoveries by [Western Trust] from any
Insurance Guaranty Association with respect to the Policies
(“Recovery” or “Recoveries”) and the Insurance Guaranty
Association’s Policies-related expenses incurred after the Effective
Date of this Agreement (“Expenses”) shall be deducted from the
Recommended Amount. In the event of such Expenses or
Recovery, the amount allowed as a Class II claim in the Home
liquidation shall be the Recommended Amount minus both (i) the
Expenses, and (ii) any Recoveries.
(Underlining omitted.)
The Liquidator argues that Paragraph 9B(1) “expressly provides for
CIGA’s expenses to be deducted from the Recommended Amount.” The
Liquidator asserts that the first sentence of Paragraph 9B(1) “acknowledges the
existence of a problem: the Western Trust’s . . . pursuit of a guaranty
association may result in additional liability and expenses for the Home estate.”
According to the Liquidator, the second sentence of Paragraph 9B(1) addresses
that problem “by providing for the deduction of any recovery and the guaranty
association’s expenses from the Recommended Amount.” The third sentence,
the Liquidator contends, “states the consequence of the deduction.”
Western Trust counters that “[e]ven if the first sentence of Paragraph
9B(1) of the [Settlement] Agreement did control the scope of the authorized
deductions to the Allowed Claim (it does not), the Declaratory Judgment Action
is not a ‘claim under the Policies’ within the meaning of the [Settlement]
Agreement,” and, thus, “CIGA’s expenses incurred in those proceedings . . . are
not ‘expenses of addressing [a] claim.’” Relying upon California law, Western
Trust contends that “a cause of action for declaratory relief does not involve the
prosecution of a ‘claim’ against the defendant,” but, rather, “seeks simply to
‘declare’ rights between the parties.” Thus, Western Trust asserts, “[u]nless
and until the Trust submits a claim for payment to CIGA[,] . . . there will be no
‘claim under the Policies’ and consequently, no ‘expenses of addressing [a]
claim.’”
3