THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0369, In the Matter of Susan Drew and
James Drew, the court on August 3, 2017, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs of the parties and the record submitted on
appeal, the court concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this
case. The husband, James Drew, appeals, and the wife, Susan Drew, cross-
appeals, a decision of the Circuit Court (Foley, J.) concerning the division of the
husband’s retirement assets, which consist of five defined contribution
retirement accounts and two traditional pensions. The husband challenges the
trial court’s division of his traditional pensions, and the wife challenges its
division of his defined contribution retirement accounts. The husband asserts
that the trial court’s division of his traditional pensions is erroneous because the
trial court accepted apportionment orders drafted by an actuary, instead of those
drafted by the husband. The wife contends that the trial court erred when, in
December 2013, it changed the date upon which the husband’s defined
contribution retirement accounts would be valued from “the date of division” to
the date on which the divorce proceeding was filed. She further contends that
the court erred in the order now on appeal by declining to “correct” its December
2013 orders. We affirm.
I. The Husband’s Appeal
A. Relevant Facts
The parties divorced in April 2013, after having been married for
approximately 16 years. The parties’ divorce decree provided that the husband’s
traditional pensions, which comprise a military pension from the United States
Army and a civil service pension from the Internal Revenue Service, would be
divided pursuant to the Hodgins formula. See Hodgins v. Hodgins, 126 N.H. 711,
716 (1985), superseded on other grounds by RSA 458:16-a, II (2004). The
Hodgins formula is a default formula that applies when the nature of a
retirement benefit makes it impossible to ascertain, at the time of divorce, the
benefit’s actual and contingent values. See id. at 715; see also In the Matter of
Taber-McCarthy & McCarthy, 160 N.H. 112, 117 (2010); Rothbart v. Rothbart,
141 N.H. 71, 76 (1996).
“[T]he Hodgins formula limits distribution of pension benefits only to those
attributable to employment during the marriage.” In the Matter of White &
White, 148 N.H. 531, 533 (2002). The Hodgins formula is (1) the number of
months employed while married and before the divorce proceedings commenced
divided by the total number of months of credits the employee will have earned
toward his pension as of the date benefits commence (2) multiplied by the actual,
monthly pension benefit that the employee receives upon retirement (3)
multiplied by the former spouse’s share of the marital assets. See Rothbart, 141
N.H. at 77; Hodgins, 126 N.H. at 716.
In the instant case, although the parties’ divorce decree stated that an
unequal division of the parties’ assets was equitable, it failed to specify whether
the husband’s traditional pensions were to be divided unequally. In a December
5, 2013 order, the court clarified that the husband’s traditional pensions were to
be “divided 55%/45% in favor of [the wife] . . . , based upon the so-called
Hodgins Formula.” The order stated elsewhere: “The date of valuation is the
date of filing the petition for divorce, not the date of divorce or any other more
current date.” The order also stated that “[i]f for any reason the Plan
Administrator of any pension account does not accept” the order’s explanation
of the Hodgins formula “for purposes of dividing a retirement account, the
parties shall submit a stipulated value of such asset as of the date of the filing
of the Petition for Divorce.”
In a December 27, 2013 order, the court reiterated that, as to the
husband’s military pension, the wife “is awarded 55%” of the husband’s
“disposable retired/retainer pay, based upon application of the Hodgins
formula.” The order stated that “[i]f this language does not satisfy” the federal
authorities, “then the parties shall provide the Court with the necessary
information so that the Court may calculate the value as of the date of filing
the petition for divorce.”
Subsequently, because the parties were unable to agree upon the terms
and conditions of the orders necessary to divide the husband’s traditional
pensions, and, apparently, could not stipulate to the value of those pensions,
the court appointed Attorney Steven Shadallah to draft the orders. Because of
his “limited knowledge” about drafting such orders, Shadallah identified an
actuary with “expertise in the distribution of government and military pensions.”
The trial court ordered the parties to enlist that actuary’s assistance, and, in
October 2015, he submitted draft orders for the court’s review.
The draft order dividing the husband’s military pension provides that the
wife is entitled to a portion of his gross retired pay calculated as follows:
(i) take the [husband’s] gross retired pay; (ii) Reduce the amount in
Step (i) by the full amount of any Survivor Benefit premium; (iii)
Multiply the amount developed in Step (ii) by 55.0%; and (iv)
Multiply the amount developed in Step (iii) by a fraction whose
denominator is the number of “retirement benefit points” used to
compute the [husband’s] gross retired pay when he retires and
2
whose numerator is the number of “retirement benefit points”
associated with the time period beginning on and including
November 12, 1995 and ending on but not including November 28,
2011.
The draft order provides that the wife will receive “a proportionate share of any
post-retirement benefit adjustment.” It also states that the husband and the wife
“have . . . agreed that the [wife] shall be named as a former spouse irrevocable
beneficiary for the full amount of the available Survivor Benefits” and then,
consistent with that agreement, designates the wife, irrevocably, as the
husband’s beneficiary under the “Reserve Component Survivor Benefit Plan with
respect to the maximum survivor benefits.” Additionally, the order precludes the
husband from making “any future election which shall reduce the amount or the
percentage of disposable retirement pay and/or survivor benefits” payable to the
wife.
The draft order dividing the husband’s civil service pension similarly
provides that the husband and the wife “have . . . agreed that the [wife] shall be
named as an irrevocable beneficiary for the maximum possible Former Spouse
Survivor Annuity that the Former Spouse can be awarded based upon the
Survivor Benefits that are associated with the noted annuity.” Consistent with
that agreement, the draft order provides that, if the husband dies before or
during his retirement and the wife is still alive when he dies, then she is
“awarded a Former Spouse Survivor Annuity,” the amount of which “will be equal
to the maximum possible Former Spouse Survivor Annuity that . . . can be
awarded.” See 5 C.F.R. 838.711 (2017) (defining the phrase “maximum former
spouse survivor annuity”).
The draft order also provides that, if the husband retires and the wife is
alive when he does so, then she is entitled to “110% of a PRORATA share of [the
husband’s] gross monthly annuity under [the Federal Employee Retirement
System] after such total gross annuity has been reduced by the cost for any
associated survivor benefits” and that she “shall receive a proportionate share of
any post-retirement benefit adjustment.” See 5 C.F.R. § 838.922(a) (2017)
(defining the term “prorata share”).
In November 2015, the wife filed a motion asking the court to approve
the actuary’s draft orders. The husband filed a motion to “dismiss” them and
to approve orders that he drafted. The husband’s draft apportionment orders
purported to calculate his monthly retirement benefits as of November 28,
2011, the date on which the divorce action was filed.
The trial court held a hearing on these and other motions in March 2016
at which the actuary and the husband testified. Thereafter, the trial court held
a telephone hearing at which the court questioned the actuary about his draft
orders. Based upon the actuary’s testimony and offer of proof, which the trial
3