THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0565, Mary Wright v. Mask Construction,
LLC; Mary Wright & a. v. Hubert Clifford Mask, III & a., the court
on November 8, 2017, issued the following order:
Having considered the parties’ briefs and the record submitted on appeal,
we conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R.
18(1). Defendant Hubert Clifford Mask, III appeals the determinations by the
Superior Court (McNamara, J.), following a bench trial, that: (1) plaintiff Mary
Wright and Mask entered into a partnership to create plaintiff M & W Homes,
LLC (the LLC); and (2) Mask is liable to Wright for $223,753.33, which
represents one-half of the net losses incurred when he withdrew from the
partnership in June 2012. We affirm.
The trial court recited the following facts in its order on the merits. This
case arises from a failed real estate venture. In August 2010, Wright, a former
lawyer and now an interior designer, and Mask, agreed to go forward with a
business transaction in which Wright would buy land and Mask would build
houses on speculation in Plymouth. Wright and Mask consulted an attorney,
John R. McKinnon, because they wanted to form a business venture of some
kind to go into the business of buying and selling homes. McKinnon testified
that he believed that Wright and Mask had created a partnership and that he
told them that, as partners, they were jointly liable for the finances, profits,
and losses of the partnership.
McKinnon created the LLC and drafted its operating agreement. The
operating agreement states: “Both . . . Wright and . . . Mask . . . are equal
partners in the LLC.” McKinnon testified that this sentence was intended to
explain that there was a partnership that was separate from the LLC. He
testified that the LLC was created simply to allow the partnership to operate as
an LLC for the purpose of this single project. As McKinnon explained in his
deposition, “The intent was to temper [Wright’s and Mask’s] personal liability
from outside sources, not from each other. So if there was liability for a
construction failure, injuries or something like that, they wouldn’t be
personally liable,” but, as between the two of them, “they would share equally
in profits and losses.”
The relationship between the parties apparently deteriorated in 2012. In
June 2012, Mask filed a stalking petition against Wright and withdrew from
their partnership. Eventually, Wright and the LLC sued Mask, seeking
dissolution of the LLC and an accounting with respect to the partnership.
Following a four-day bench trial, the trial court found Mask liable to Wright for
one-half of the net losses incurred when he withdrew from the partnership in
June 2012.
On appeal, Mask first argues that the trial court erred when it denied his
motion in limine to exclude evidence relating to the partnership’s losses. In
that motion, Mask argued that, because the trial court had earlier denied the
plaintiffs’ motion to amend to add claims for losses they allegedly suffered
under the alleged partnership agreement, partnership losses are not at issue in
the case and any evidence about them should be excluded.
The trial court denied Mask’s motion explaining that, because the
plaintiffs’ original complaint had alleged that Mask is responsible for 50% of
the losses of the LLC and that the LLC’s operating agreement states that he
and Wright are equal partners in the LLC and are to divide profits equally,
Wright had raised “partnership claims in her original complaint.” Therefore,
the trial court reasoned, “evidence of the alleged partnership is relevant” to her
claims.
We review the trial court’s decision under our unsustainable exercise of
discretion standard. See Petition of Stompor, 165 N.H. 735, 738 (2013)
(explaining that our unsustainable exercise of discretion standard governs our
review of trial court decisions about the admissibility of evidence). To meet this
standard, Mask must show that the trial court’s decision was clearly untenable
or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Id.
Mask argues that the in limine ruling constitutes an unsustainable
exercise of discretion because it is premised upon the court’s misconstruction
of the plaintiffs’ original complaint. We disagree. The original complaint
alleged that Wright and Mask formed the LLC “to develop, model, and construct
custom residential homes in New Hampshire,” and that they were “equal
partners in the LLC.” The original complaint further alleged that, under the
operating agreement, “upon the completion of each house M & W Homes was to
build, the profit from that sale would [be] divided equally between Wright and
Mask unless the parties agreed to use the profits to finance another project.”
The original complaint alleged that, in June 2012, Mask voluntarily terminated
his interest in the LLC and that, because Wright and Mask were “equal
partners” in the LLC, Wright sought a declaratory judgment “that Mask is 50%
responsible for the losses of the LLC.” In light of these allegations, we conclude
that the trial court did not err when it determined that Wright had raised
“partnership claims” in the original complaint.
Mask asserts that he was “prejudiced” by the trial court’s decision
because he “never propounded any written discovery relative to what assets
Wright claimed were the assets of the Partnership outside of the LLC.” Mask’s
failure to propound such discovery does not constitute “prejudice” within the
2
meaning of our unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. Moreover, the
trial court found that “[b]oth parties had extensive discovery in the case,” and
that, with respect to the assets and liabilities of the partnership, Wright’s
expert “produced her summary sheet from documents long available to Mask.”
Contrary to Mask’s assertions, the trial court in this case did not allow
Wright to pursue a “new” cause of action at trial. Rather, the claim pursued at
trial was the same claim as alleged in the plaintiffs’ original complaint, the
same claim that was argued in response to Mask’s motion for partial summary
judgment, and the same claim that was argued in response to his motion in
limine.
Mask next asserts that the trial court erred when it determined that he
and Wright formed a partnership. By statute, a partnership is “an association
of two or more persons to carry on as co-owners a business for profit.” RSA
304-A:6, I (2015). Such an association must be voluntary and based upon an
agreement between the parties. Hilco Property Services, Inc. v. United States,
929 F. Supp. 526, 536 (D.N.H. 1996). However, the agreement need not be an
express, written agreement, but may be implied by the conduct of the parties
and the circumstances surrounding their relationship. Id.; see Higgins v.
Higgins, 125 N.H. 806, 809 (1984) (explaining that “the requisite intent” to
form a partnership “may be implied by the parties’ actions”). Whether the
parties’ actions imply their intent to form a partnership is a question of fact.
See Higgins, 125 N.H. at 808-09; see also Hilco Property Services, Inc., 929 F.
Supp. at 536-37.
We interpret Mask’s argument to be that the evidence was insufficient to
support the trial court’s finding that his and Wright’s conduct and the
circumstances surrounding their relationship implied their intent to create a
partnership. We review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a matter of law
and uphold the findings and rulings of the trial court unless they lack
evidentiary support or are tainted by error of law. Guyotte v. O’Neill, 157 N.H.
616, 623 (2008). We accord considerable weight to the trial court’s judgments
on the credibility of witnesses and the weight to be given testimony. Id.
On this factual question, Mask has failed to provide a complete record for
the court’s review. As the appealing party, Mask has the burden of providing a
record sufficient to decide his issues on appeal. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop.
Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004); see also Sup. Ct. R. 13(2). For us to review
Mask’s assertion that the evidence was insufficient to support the trial court’s
finding that his and Wright’s conduct and the circumstances surrounding their
relationship implied their intent to create a partnership, we must have before
us the same factual record as the trial court had before it. However, Mask has
provided transcripts of only three days of the four-day bench trial and has not
provided all of the exhibits entered into evidence at trial. Absent a complete
record of the trial court proceedings, we must assume that the evidence
3