THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0088, State of New Hampshire v. Wilfred
Bergeron, the court on June 30, 2017, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties and the
record submitted on appeal, the court concludes that a formal written opinion
is unnecessary in this case. The defendant, Wilfred Bergeron, appeals his
convictions, following a bench trial upon stipulated facts, on 21 counts of
distribution of child sexual abuse images (commonly referred to as child
pornography). See RSA 649-A:3-a (2016). He argues, under both the State
and Federal Constitutions, that the Superior Court (Brown, J.) erred by
denying his motion to suppress evidence derived from the search of his
America Online Inc. (AOL) user account because the search warrant failed to
describe with particularity the locations to be searched and the items to be
seized. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 19; U.S. CONST. amend. IV. He also
argues, under our plain error rule, see Sup. Ct. R. 16-A, that the evidence was
insufficient to prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the images associated
with five of the indictments depict sexually explicit conduct. See RSA 649-A:2,
III, :3, I (2016). He further challenges, under our plain error rule, one of those
five indictments on the ground that the image associated with that indictment
does not depict a child. See RSA 649-A:2, I (2016), :3, I. We affirm in part,
reverse in part, and remand.
I. Motion to Suppress
The search warrant in this case sought the following from the Virginia
headquarters of AOL:
Subscriber and account information and history, payment
history, detailed billing, Buddy Lists, profiles, address books, ANI
information, IP connection log data, all photos, files, data or
information created or stored, any read and/or unread and/or sent
and/or deleted e-mail and any files attached to e-mail, and any
other information maintained by or within the databases of AOL
Inc. and/or AIM and any accounts associated with [the
defendant’s] screen name.
The search warrant was issued in relation to the offense of possessing child
sexual abuse images. The affidavit submitted in support of the police
application for the search warrant requested “a search of the AOL, INC[.] or
America Online servers or storage location(s) related to” the defendant’s AOL e-
mail address and averred that the evidence for which the police sought
permission to search “all constitute evidence of violations of . . . RSA 649-A.”
The defendant moved to suppress evidence obtained from the warrant on
the ground that the warrant failed to describe, with particularity, the place to
be searched, because “[i]t did not limit the search to records created close in
time to July 2013,” when the police received several “cyber tips,” and because it
did not limit “the search to the 8 year time frame (2007 – 2015) requested in
the affidavit.” At the hearing on the motion to suppress, defense counsel
similarly asserted that the search was a “blanket search” of the defendant’s
“entire email account” because the warrant “place[d] absolutely no limit in
terms of a time period for what records were to be seized.”
The trial court denied the defendant’s motion, determining that “given
the tendencies of those engaged in child pornography possession and
distribution” to hoard child sexual abuse images for significant periods of time,
“it would have been unreasonable to place a restrictive temporal limitation on
the search and risk never recovering” the e-mail messages sought. The trial
court also found that “the scope of the search warrant, which authorized a
search of [the] defendant’s entire email account,” described “with particularity
the place to be searched and the objects to be seized—any emails on [his] AOL
account containing material contrary to RSA 649-A:3.”
On appeal, the defendant argues, under the State and Federal
Constitutions, that the trial court erred by denying his motion to suppress
evidence obtained from this warrant “because the warrant does not reasonably
limit the files to be seized nor does it limit the search to a sufficiently particular
place.” See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 19; U.S. CONST. amend. IV. Specifically, he
contends that the search warrant failed to “describe in which data locations the
police could subsequently search,” and, in authorizing “the police to seize all of
the data associated with [his] user name[,] [i]t did not limit the seizure to files
constituting evidence of a crime.”
The State asserts that the defendant did not preserve these arguments
for our review. The State contends that, in the trial court, the defendant only
“challenged the time frame of the e-mails to be provided.”
The defendant counters that his argument is preserved because,
although his motion to suppress “focused on the lack of a temporal limitation,”
his “overarching argument concerned the general nature of the place to be
searched,” and because the trial court specifically ruled that the warrant
described with particularity the location to be searched and the items to be
seized.
2
“The defendant, as the appealing party, bears the burden of
demonstrating that he specifically raised the arguments articulated in [his
appellate] brief before the trial court.” State v. McInnis, 169 N.H. 565, 573
(2017) (quotation omitted). “Generally, the failure to do so bars a party from
raising such claims on appeal.” Id. at 573-74 (quotation omitted). “The
purpose underlying our preservation rule is to afford the trial court an
opportunity to correct any error it may have made before those issues are
presented for appellate review.” Id. at 574 (quotation and brackets omitted).
We agree with the State that the defendant’s appellate arguments are not
preserved. The defendant never argued in the trial court, as he argues on
appeal, that the search warrant was invalid because: (1) it “authorized the
police to search AOL headquarters, a building in Dulles, Virginia, for the data
associated with [his] user account” and, thus, “did not describe in which data
locations the police could subsequently search”; and (2) it authorized “the
police to seize all of the data associated with [his] user name,” and, thus, “did
not limit the seizure to files constituting evidence of a crime.” Accordingly, the
trial court never had an opportunity to consider those issues. See id.
We acknowledge that the trial court determined that the warrant
“described with particularity the place to be searched and the objects to be
seized” by seeking “any emails on [the] defendant’s AOL account containing
material contrary to RSA 649-A:3.” To the extent that the defendant believed
that this determination was erroneous, it was incumbent upon him to move for
reconsideration. See id.; see also N.H. Dep’t of Corrections v. Butland, 147 N.H.
676, 679 (2002). The record on appeal does not demonstrate that the defendant
sought reconsideration of the trial court’s ruling. Thus, we conclude that the
defendant has failed to demonstrate that he preserved these arguments for our
review, and we decline to consider them. See McInnis, 169 N.H. at 574.
II. Sufficiency of the Evidence
The defendant next argues, under our plain error rule, see Sup. Ct. R.
16-A, that the evidence was insufficient to prove, beyond a reasonable doubt,
that the images associated with five of the indictments depicted a child engaged
in sexually explicit conduct. See RSA 649-A:2, I, III, :3, I. “For us to find plain
error: (1) there must be error; (2) the error must be plain; and (3) the error must
affect substantial rights.” State v. Mueller, 166 N.H. 65, 68 (2014) (quotation
omitted). “If all three of these conditions are met, we may then exercise our
discretion to correct a forfeited error only if the error meets a fourth criterion: the
error must seriously affect the fairness, integrity or public reputation of judicial
proceedings.” Id. (quotation omitted). The plain error rule “is used sparingly,
however, and is limited to those circumstances in which a miscarriage of justice
would otherwise result.” Id. (quotation omitted). “We have looked to the federal
plain error analysis in applying our plain error rule.” State v. Rawnsley, 167 N.H.
8, 11 (2014) (quotation omitted).
3