THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0572, In the Matter of Giovanni Santiago
and Meghan Morrissey, the court on August 16, 2017, issued the
following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we conclude
that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1). We affirm.
The respondent, Meghan Morrissey (mother), appeals an order of the
Circuit Court (Chabot, J.) approving a parenting plan granting primary
residential responsibility to the petitioner, Giovanni Santiago (father), for their
two children. See RSA 461-A:6 (Supp. 2016). She contends that the trial court
erred, in applying RSA 461-A:12 (Supp. 2016), by finding that: (1) the father had
a legitimate purpose for relocating to New York State prior to the issuance of any
parenting orders; (2) the father’s relocation was reasonable in light of that
purpose; and (3) the relocation was in the children’s best interest. We assume,
without deciding, that RSA 461-A:12 applies in this case and that the mother’s
arguments are preserved. See In the Matter of Heinrich & Curotto, 160 N.H. 650,
654-55 (2010) (stating applicability of RSA 461-A:12 is not limited to cases in
which final parenting orders have already been issued).
The mother further contends that the trial court committed plain error and
violated her constitutional rights by not “properly” ruling on her motion that it
appoint a guardian ad litem (GAL). See RSA 461-A:16, I (2004).
We first address the mother’s arguments challenging the trial court’s
application of RSA 461-A:12. In this case, the father moved to Cohoes, New York
after he filed his parenting petition, but before the trial court had issued
temporary orders. He had been living there for a year prior to the final hearing.
Pursuant to a temporary order, the parents had approximately equal parenting
time, while the mother had primary residential responsibility. At the final
hearing, the father sought, and the trial court granted, primary residential
responsibility, thereby relocating the children from the residence where they had
spent at least 150 days a year. See RSA 461-A:12, II (providing that RSA 461-
A:12 applies “to the relocation of any residence in which the child resides at least
150 days a year”).
Pursuant to RSA 461-A:12, a parent seeking to relocate has the initial
burden of demonstrating, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the relocation
is for a legitimate purpose and is reasonable in light of that purpose. RSA 461-
A:12, V; In the Matter of Pfeuffer & Pfeuffer, 150 N.H. 257, 259-60 (2003). If the
parent meets this burden, the burden shifts to the parent opposing the relocation
to prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that relocating is not in the child’s
best interest. RSA 461-A:12, VI; Pfeuffer, 150 N.H. at 260.
When determining residential responsibility for children, the trial court’s
overriding concern is the child’s best interest. In the Matter of Martin & Martin,
160 N.H. 645, 647 (2010). In reaching such a decision, the trial court has wide
discretion, and we will not overturn its determination unless it has unsustainably
exercised its discretion. Id. This means that we review the record only to
determine whether it contains an objective basis to sustain the trial court’s
judgment. Id. The trial court’s determination depends to a large extent upon the
firsthand assessment of the witnesses’ credibility, as well as the parents’
character and temperament, and its findings are binding upon this court if
supported by the evidence. Id.
We first address whether the trial court erred by finding that the father
carried his prima facie burden. The father testified that his purpose in relocating
was to obtain support from the family of his current domestic partner, who is the
mother of his youngest child, to find work, and to make a better life for his
children than he had had in New Hampshire. The trial court found, and the
record supports, that: (1) the support the father receives from his partner’s
family “differs greatly from what his mother and brother could provide in New
Hampshire”; (2) he had found “full-time employment with health insurance
benefits” that “affords him flexibility which has helped with his parenting time”;
and (3) he had researched the schools in New York “and compared them to those
in Manchester” where the mother lives. The father further testified that he
moved because he saw “a lot of potential” in New York and he was “going
nowhere” in New Hampshire.
The mother argues that, in determining the legitimacy of the father’s
purpose in moving, the trial court should have focused exclusively upon what he
knew prior to his move, rather than upon his circumstances at the time of the
final hearing. However, she does not explain why, given the particular facts of
this case, the trial court should have ignored the benefits resulting from the
father’s move.
The mother argues that being close to his partner’s family and its support
was not a legitimate purpose because they “are [third] parties without significant
ties to the . . . children.” However, she does not cite, nor are we aware of, any
authority that a legitimate purpose must be related to the children. Cf. Tomasko
v. DuBuc, 145 N.H. 169, 171 (2000) (identifying a significant employment
opportunity as a legitimate purpose).
The mother next argues that relocating to New York was not reasonable in
light of the father’s purposes. She contends that he could have found a
comparable job in, or closer to, New Hampshire. However, the father testified
2
that he anticipated “multiple job opportunities that might happen through [his
partner’s] family.” Thus, the trial court could have reasonably inferred that he
obtained his job through his partner’s family’s influence, which would not have
been available in another location. To the extent that the mother argues that
moving to New York did not place the father closer to his own extended family,
this was not his purpose. We note that the father testified that his mother
receives substance abuse treatment.
To the extent that the mother argues that the father did not obtain the trial
court’s approval for, or her consent to, his move and did not notify her well in
advance, she does not explain why he was required to do so. See RSA 461-A:12,
II. To the extent that she argues that the trial court did not make findings to
support its conclusion that New York was a reasonable location for the father’s
purpose, we assume that the trial court made all subsidiary findings necessary to
support its general ruling. See Nordic Inn Condo. Owners’ Assoc. v. Ventullo,
151 N.H. 571, 586 (2004).
Accordingly, we conclude that the record contains an objective basis to
sustain the trial court’s judgment that the father relocated for a legitimate
purpose and to a location that was reasonable in light of that purpose. See
Martin, 160 N.H. at 647.
We next address whether the trial court erred by finding that the mother
did not sustain her burden to show that relocating the children was not in their
best interest. In determining what is in a child’s best interest, the trial court
considers the following factors: (1) each parent’s reasons for seeking or opposing
the move; (2) the quality of the relationships between the child and each parent;
(3) the impact of the move on the quantity and quality of the child’s future
contact with the noncustodial parent; (4) the degree to which the custodial
parent’s and child’s life may be enhanced economically, emotionally, and
educationally by the move; (5) the feasibility of preserving the relationship
between the noncustodial parent and child through suitable visitation
arrangements; (6) any negative impact from continued or exacerbated hostility
between the parents; and (7) the effect that the move may have on any extended
family relations. Tomasko, 145 N.H. at 172. The trial court should also consider
the interests of the new family unit as a whole. Id.
No one factor is dispositive, nor are these the exclusive factors bearing
upon a determination of a child’s best interest. Pfeuffer, 150 N.H. at 260. While
a trial court is not required to consider each factor individually or to make
specific findings on each factor, it should not rely upon one factor to the
exclusion of the others. See id. We decline the mother’s request that we review
the trial court’s determinations regarding these factors de novo. See id. at 259
(stating that we review trial court findings on Tomasko factors for unsustainable
exercise of discretion).
3