THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0289, State of New Hampshire v. Peter A.
Dauphin, the court on December 13, 2017, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The State
appeals an order of the Superior Court (Fauver, J.) granting the motion of the
defendant, Peter A. Dauphin, to suppress all evidence obtained as a result of a
warrantless inventory search of his vehicle. We reverse and remand.
The following facts are taken from the trial court’s order granting the
defendant’s motion to suppress, or are otherwise undisputed. On April 25,
2015, Officer Carlson and Field Training Officer Black of the Laconia Police
Department observed a Pontiac sedan speeding through an intersection. The
officers followed the vehicle, which continued to travel above the speed limit,
and initiated a traffic stop. Carlson approached the vehicle and made contact
with the defendant, who was driving. After running an inquiry on the vehicle’s
license plate and speaking with the defendant, Carlson and Black determined
that the vehicle was not properly registered. On that basis, the officers decided
that the car would have to be towed. As a result, Black contacted dispatch to
request a tow truck.
Carlson informed the defendant that he was being cited for failure to
display plates and violating the speed limit. He also told the defendant that he
would have to seize the vehicle’s license plates and that a tow truck had been
summoned. The defendant asked that the vehicle be towed to his residence,
which was approximately 200 feet from the site of the traffic stop. Neither
officer objected to the vehicle being towed to the defendant’s residence. The
defendant was directed to speak with the tow truck driver to make the
arrangements. At about this same time, Carlson informed the defendant that
he would be conducting an inventory search of the vehicle pursuant to the
Laconia Police Department inventory of towed vehicles policy (LPD inventory
search policy).
Carlson began the inventory search just after the tow truck arrived.
Carlson testified at the suppression hearing that he thought the defendant
spoke with the tow truck driver, but that his focus was on the inventory of the
vehicle so he could not offer any specifics regarding their conversation.
Carlson began his inventory search at the front of the vehicle on the
passenger side and then proceeded to the rear seat, where he pulled down the
center armrest to look into the trunk. Carlson then moved to the driver’s side
of the vehicle, where, he discovered that the front driver’s side door was locked.
He returned to the passenger’s side door, and discovered that it, too, was
locked, so he reached into the open window and unlocked the vehicle from the
inside. This triggered the vehicle’s alarm. Carlson called to the defendant, who
was walking toward a nearby intersection, and asked him to return to the
vehicle and deactivate the alarm. The defendant did so and also unlocked the
door. Carlson informed the defendant that it was customary to provide the tow
truck driver with a key to the vehicle in order to aid in loading the vehicle onto
the tow truck.
As Carlson resumed his inventory, the defendant approached the vehicle.
Carlson asked the defendant to step back, citing officer safety. The defendant
responded that Carlson did not have to continue searching the vehicle.
Carlson told the defendant that he was not conducting a “search,” but, rather,
an “inventory” of the contents of the vehicle, noting that he had to do so before
the vehicle was towed. (Quotations omitted.) While conducting the inventory,
Carlson found a bag under the driver’s seat with a clear plastic sandwich style
bag sticking out of it, which he believed contained crystal methamphetamine.
The defendant was arrested and transported to the Laconia Police Department.
Following his arrest, the officers determined that the defendant’s vehicle would
be seized for further investigation and they instructed the tow truck driver to
tow the vehicle to the Laconia Police Department impound lot.
The defendant was thereafter questioned at the police department and
made statements regarding additional contraband located at his residence.
Based upon these statements, a search warrant was obtained to search the
defendant’s residence, where law enforcement officers found additional
contraband. The defendant was charged with two counts of possession of a
controlled drug with the intent to sell, subsequent offense, and one count of
possession of a controlled drug, subsequent offense. See RSA 318-B:2, :26
(Supp. 2015).
The defendant moved to suppress all of the evidence obtained as a result
of the inventory search of his vehicle, arguing that it violated his rights under
the State and Federal Constitutions. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 19; U.S.
CONST. amends. IV, XIV. He further argued that, because the officers would
not have arrested him and, thereafter, obtained the warrant to search his home
but for their unlawful search of his vehicle, the evidence later found in his
home should be suppressed as fruit of the illegal search. See State v. Morrill,
169 N.H. 709, 717 (2017) (“The fruit of the poisonous tree doctrine requires the
exclusion from trial of evidence derivatively obtained through a violation of Part
I, Article 19 of the New Hampshire Constitution.” (quotation omitted)). The
State objected, arguing that the inventory search was lawful. At the hearing,
however, the State agreed that if the inventory search was not valid, then the
evidence later found in the defendant’s home should be suppressed as fruit of
the illegal search.
2
The trial court found that the inventory search was invalid because, at
the time that the search occurred, the vehicle was neither in the custody of the
police, nor was it impounded and, therefore, the officers did not have authority
to conduct the search. The court further found that the inventory search was
otherwise unreasonable because it did not serve any of the important non-
investigative government interests underlying the inventory search exception to
the warrant requirement. The State moved for reconsideration, which the court
denied, and this appeal followed.
On appeal, the State argues that the trial court erred by determining that
Carlson’s inventory search of the vehicle did not fall within the inventory
search exception to the warrant requirement. The State contends that “[a]n
inventory search of a lawfully impounded vehicle done pursuant to a neutral
police policy is a reasonable search under Part I, Article 19 of the New
Hampshire Constitution and the Fourth Amendment to the United States
Constitution.” It maintains that, here, the inventory search of the vehicle was
reasonable because Carlson lawfully ordered that the vehicle be towed, and
performed the inventory search pursuant to a neutral policy. We first address
the State’s argument under the State Constitution and rely upon federal law
only to aid our analysis. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
When reviewing a trial court’s ruling on a motion to suppress, we accept
the trial court’s findings unless they lack support in the record or are clearly
erroneous. State v. Newcomb, 161 N.H. 666, 670 (2011). However, we review
the trial court’s legal conclusions de novo. Id.
Part I, Article 19 of the New Hampshire Constitution provides that every
citizen has “a right to be secure from all unreasonable searches and seizures of
his person, his houses, his papers, and all his possessions.” N.H. CONST. pt.
I, art. 19. Warrantless searches are per se unreasonable unless they fall within
the narrow confines of a judicially crafted exception. Newcomb, 161 N.H. at
670. The State has the burden of proving that the search falls within one of
the exceptions. Id.
Inventory searches fall within a well-defined exception to the warrant
requirement. See id. Such searches are permissible because they serve
important non-investigative government interests, including protecting an
owner’s property while it is in the custody of police, insuring against claims of
lost, stolen, or vandalized property, and guarding the police from danger. Id.
We have previously recognized that inventory searches are permissible so long
as they are conducted pursuant to a neutral policy. Id.; see also Colorado v.
Bertine, 479 U.S. 367, 374 (1987) (concluding that “reasonable police
regulations relating to inventory procedures administered in good faith satisfy
the Fourth Amendment”). A neutral policy reduces police discretion to search
at will and turn an inventory procedure into an investigative search. Newcomb,
161 N.H. at 671.
3