THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0115, State of New Hampshire v. Michael
Flynn, the court on February 16, 2017, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
defendant, Michael Flynn, appeals his conviction for driving under the
influence of an intoxicating liquor (DUI). See RSA 265-A:2 (2014). He argues
that the Circuit Court (Gardner, J.) erred by: (1) denying his motion to
suppress; (2) taking judicial notice that the road on which he had been driving
was a “way” for purposes of RSA 265-A:2 and RSA 259:125 (2014); and (3)
determining that the evidence presented at trial was sufficient to support the
conviction. We affirm.
The defendant first contends that, under the State and Federal
Constitutions, the trial court erred by denying his motion to suppress evidence
obtained as a result of his extended detention by police. See N.H. CONST. pt. I,
art. 19; U.S. CONST. amends. IV, XIV. He argues that the arresting officer
unlawfully expanded the scope of the traffic stop to investigate whether the
defendant was driving under the influence of an intoxicating liquor—
specifically, by “questioning him about where he had been and what he had
been doing.” The defendant does not dispute that the initial traffic stop was
valid. We conclude that the officer’s expanded investigation was lawful
because it was supported by reasonable suspicion.
We first address the defendant’s argument under the State Constitution
and rely upon federal law only to aid in our analysis. State v. Ball, 124 N.H.
226, 231-33 (1983). “When reviewing a trial court’s ruling on a motion to
suppress, we accept the trial court’s factual findings unless they lack support
in the record or are clearly erroneous, and we review its legal conclusions de
novo.” State v. Mouser, 168 N.H. 19, 22 (2015).
A traffic stop is a seizure for purposes of the State Constitution. State v.
Blesdell-Moore, 166 N.H. 183, 187 (2014). The scope of the stop must be
carefully tailored to its underlying justification. Id. The stop may be expanded
to allow an officer to investigate other suspected illegal activity only if the
officer has a reasonable and articulable suspicion that other criminal activity is
afoot. Id.
To determine the sufficiency of an officer’s suspicion, we evaluate the
articulable facts in light of all surrounding circumstances, keeping in mind
that a trained officer may make inferences and draw conclusions from conduct
that may seem unremarkable to an untrained observer. Id. at 188. We
recognize that experienced officers’ perceptions are entitled to deference, but
our deference is not without limit. Id. The articulable facts must lead to
something specific and not simply “a general sense that this is probably a bad
person who may have committed some kind of crime.” Id. at 189 (quotation
omitted).
The evidence submitted at the suppression hearing establishes that, at
approximately 1 a.m. on November 2, 2014, the officer stopped the defendant’s
vehicle on Lafayette Road in Rye after observing that the rear lights that
normally illuminate the license plate were not on. See RSA 266:44 (2014)
(requiring vehicle to have a light that “illuminat[es] the registration plate of
[the] vehicle”). The defendant was the driver and sole occupant of the vehicle.
Upon approaching the vehicle and explaining to the defendant why he had
been stopped, the officer smelled an odor of alcohol emanating from the vehicle.
At the suppression hearing, the officer testified that he has worked as a full-
time patrol officer for three and one-half years and has been trained in the
detection of the mental and physical signs of alcohol impairment. From his
training and experience, the officer knew that the “high time[] . . . for [DUI]s” is
between the hours of 10 p.m. and 1 a.m. After smelling the odor of alcohol, the
officer asked the defendant “where he was coming from.” The defendant stated
that he had been at a local pub. When the officer questioned the defendant
regarding his alcohol consumption, the defendant admitted that he had
consumed “two drinks” during the forty-five minutes that he had been at the
pub. The officer then asked the defendant to step out of the vehicle and
administered field sobriety tests.
In arguing that the officer unlawfully expanded the scope of the traffic
stop to question the defendant regarding “where he had been and what he had
been doing,” the defendant contends that: (1) the record does not support the
trial court’s finding that the officer smelled an odor of alcohol, because the
officer also agreed when questioned that it is not the alcohol, but the
“substances you add to” the alcohol, that have an odor; (2) the trial court
applied the wrong legal standard because it assessed whether the officer had
reasonable suspicion to believe that the defendant “had consumed alcohol . . .
instead of . . . [assessing] whether the officer had a reasonable suspicion [that]
the defendant had been driving while impaired”; and (3) the odor of alcohol,
standing alone, does not provide an officer with reasonable suspicion of
criminal activity. We are not persuaded.
First, regardless of his particular phrasing, the officer testified that he
smelled an odor emanating from the defendant’s vehicle that he associated with
alcoholic beverages; thus, the trial court could reasonably find that this odor
2
supported the officer’s suspicion. Second, based upon our review of the trial
court’s order, we conclude that the trial court correctly applied the relevant
standard—i.e., whether the officer had reasonable suspicion that the defendant
had been, was, or was about to be engaged in criminal activity. See Blesdell-
Moore, 166 N.H. at 188. Third, the defendant’s argument that an odor of
alcohol, by itself, does not provide an officer with reasonable suspicion is
beside the point because there were other facts supporting the officer’s
suspicion. Specifically, the hour at which the defendant was driving, along
with the odor of alcohol emanating from the vehicle and the fact that the
defendant was the sole occupant, all contributed to the reasonableness of the
officer’s suspicion.
We conclude, as did the trial court, that when considered together in
light of the officer’s training and experience, these circumstances provided the
officer with reasonable and articulable suspicion sufficient to justify the
expansion of the scope of the stop. Accordingly, the officer was permitted to
ask the defendant a moderate number of questions to confirm or dispel his
suspicion, see State v. Bell, 164 N.H. 452, 455 (2012), and to administer field
sobriety tests, see State v. Steeves, 158 N.H. 672, 677 (2009).
Because the Federal Constitution offers the defendant no greater
protection than does the State Constitution under these circumstances, see
State v. McKinnon-Andrews, 151 N.H. 19, 27 (2004), we reach the same result
under the Federal Constitution as we do under the State Constitution.
Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court did not err in denying the
defendant’s motion to suppress.
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred by taking judicial
notice that Lafayette Road in Rye is a “way” for purposes of RSA 265-A:2 and
RSA 259:125. One required element of the offense of driving under the
influence of an intoxicating liquor is that the defendant drive the vehicle “upon
[a] way,” RSA 265-A:2, I, which is defined to include public highways and
streets, RSA 259:125, II. The defendant contends that the State failed to
present evidence to prove that Lafayette Road is a way. After trial, the
defendant filed a motion to dismiss upon this ground, arguing that, without
such evidence, his case must be dismissed or he must be found not guilty.
The trial court denied the defendant’s motion and instead took judicial
notice of the fact that “Lafayette Road is a public way.” In its order, the court
determined that “Lafayette Road is of sufficient notoriety to be the subject of
judicial notice taken by the court”—that is, Lafayette Road is generally known
in this jurisdiction as a way. The court further stated that “[i]f the defendant
wishe[d] to contest” the court’s determination, he could “request a hearing
consistent with [Rule] 201” of the New Hampshire Rules of Evidence. Although
the defendant filed a motion for reconsideration, which the trial court denied,
3