THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0444, In re Estate of Scott Brewster, the
court on May 16, 2017, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we conclude
that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1). We affirm.
The petitioner, Rachel Cuneo, appeals an order of the Circuit Court
(Quigley, J.), in favor of the respondent, Zachary Brewster (son), the son of the
decedent, Scott Brewster, denying her petition to be recognized as the decedent’s
spouse pursuant to RSA 457:39 (2004). She contends that the trial court erred
by: (1) not finding that she and the decedent “acknowledged each other as
husband and wife” and “were generally reputed to be such”; (2) admitting
documents regarding the decedent’s life insurance and testimony regarding his
obituary; and (3) neither ruling on her requests for findings of fact and rulings of
law, nor making its own “numbered” findings, nor citing our prior opinions in its
order.
New Hampshire does not recognize common-law marriages except to the
limited extent provided by RSA 457:39. In re Estate of Bourassa, 157 N.H. 356,
357 (2008). To establish status as a spouse under RSA 457:39, the survivor
must demonstrate that, for the three years preceding the other party’s death,
they: (1) cohabited; (2) acknowledged each other as husband and wife; and (3)
were generally reputed in their community to be husband and wife. Bourassa,
157 N.H. at 357. The evaluation of inconsistent conduct on the part of the
decedent is a question of fact to be decided by the trial court. Delisle v. Smalley,
96 N.H. 58, 59 (1949).
“The findings of fact of the [trial court] are final unless they are so plainly
erroneous that such findings could not be reasonably made.” RSA 567-A:4
(2007). Thus, we review the record to determine if the trial court’s findings could
be reasonably made, recognizing that it is in the best position to resolve conflicts
in the testimony, measure the credibility of witnesses, and determine the weight
to be given evidence. Bourassa, 157 N.H. at 358; see Cook v. Sullivan, 149 N.H.
774, 780 (2003). Furthermore, the trial court is not compelled to believe even
uncontested evidence. Bourassa, 157 N.H. at 358. We review the application of
law to fact de novo. Blagbrough Family Realty Trust v. A & T Forest Prods., 155
N.H. 29, 33 (2007).
We first address whether the trial court erred by finding that the petitioner
and the decedent did not acknowledge each other as husband and wife.
Acknowledgment of another as one’s spouse under RSA 457:39 involves
declaration or avowal of the relationship. Bourassa, 157 N.H. at 358. In rare
cases, the parties’ conduct can conceivably rise to the level of an avowal of the
existence of a legal relationship. Id. at 359.
In this case, people close to the decedent — his brother, with whom he
spoke bi-weekly, his son’s mother, with whom he spoke weekly, and his son, with
whom he “talked about . . . everything” — testified that the decedent did not
indicate that the petitioner was his wife, that he intended to marry her, or that
she was his son’s step-mother. The decedent’s sister-in-law testified that,
approximately a month before his death, she heard the decedent introduce the
petitioner as his “girlfriend.” The mother of the decedent’s son testified that,
when she and the decedent contemplated marriage, he bought her a ring and
announced their plan to marry, none of which he did with the petitioner.
The trial court found that the decedent “would likely have shared happy
news” with his family and the mother of his son, such as a declaration of his
relationship with the petitioner. Although the petitioner characterizes this
finding as being “based entirely upon conjecture,” it was a reasonable inference
from the decedent’s previous announcement of his intent to marry his son’s
mother. The petitioner argues that the decedent’s failure to acknowledge her as
his wife to his family shows that she “was not made to feel welcome by [his]
family.” However, the petitioner testified that she saw the decedent’s family on
holidays and “had [a] very nice, happy relationship” with them.
The petitioner testified that she and the decedent did not have a joint bank
account or cell phone plan, and that her name on her driver’s license did not
include his surname. She also testified that they did not have a joint credit card
account because the decedent “didn’t use credit cards.” However, the record
reflects a significant claim against the decedent’s estate by a credit card
company. Thus, the trial court could have reasonably inferred that the decedent
did not fully apprise the petitioner of his finances.
The petitioner points to testimony by several witnesses that the decedent,
when making plans, frequently said, “I’ll have to ask the wife,” or something
similar. However, the decedent’s long-time friend testified that the decedent
employed this turn of phrase prior to having cohabited with the petitioner for
seven years, which, the petitioner testified, was when he thought she had become
his common-law spouse. Thus, the trial court could have reasonably inferred
that the decedent used this as a colloquial phrase, rather than a declaration of
his relationship.
The petitioner points to a letter that she and the decedent wrote to a utility
provider, which she signed using the decedent’s surname, regarding an account
in the decedent’s name. She argues that the decedent was aware that she used
his name because he also signed the letter. However, the trial court could have
reasonably determined that the decedent acquiesced to her use of his surname
on the letter for reasons other than acknowledging her as his wife.
2
The petitioner argues that utility bills identified her by the decedent’s
surname. However, the trial court noted reasonably that utilities put whatever
names they are told on bills; as the court stated, utility companies “don’t know
the relationship between the people.”
The petitioner argues that, after the trial court denied the son’s motion for
a directed verdict at the close of her case, evidence of the decedent’s “claimed
omissions” or failure to acknowledge her as his wife was “not enough to rebut
[her] case.” Cf. Renovest Co. v. Hodges Development Corp., 135 N.H. 72, 76
(1991) (allowing trial court to render judgment for defendant upon motion to
dismiss at close of plaintiff’s case). She implies that evidence was required that
she or the decedent “specifically disavowed a marital relationship.” However,
even if the son had presented no evidence, the mere fact that the trial court
denied the motion would not have compelled a ruling in her favor. See id. at 75-
78 (discussing standards applicable to motions to dismiss in a bench trial).
Although in Bourassa the parties affirmatively disavowed their marital status,
such a disavowal is not required for a trial court to find no marital status under
RSA 457:39. See Bourassa, 157 N.H. at 359. In Delisle, where the decedent
specifically disavowed a marital relationship in her will, we held that even an
outright disavowal “must be weighed against other evidence of acknowledgment
of the relation.” Delisle, 96 N.H. at 60.
The petitioner argues that the trial court “did not take into account [her]
evidence.” However, the trial court reviewed her evidence at length. She
contends that the trial court did not find “that [she] or any of her witnesses were
not credible.” However, the trial court stated that its findings were based, in
part, upon “the credibility and demeanor of the witnesses.” See Nordic Inn
Condo. Owners’ Assoc. v. Ventullo, 151 N.H. 571, 586 (2004) (stating that we
assume trial court made all subsidiary findings necessary to support its general
finding). To the extent that the petitioner argues that her evidence regarding the
decedent’s statements was more persuasive than the son’s evidence of the
decedent’s failure to acknowledge a marital relationship, we defer to the trial
court’s determination of the weight given to evidence. See Bourassa, 157 N.H. at
358; Delisle, 96 N.H. at 59.
The petitioner contends that the trial court “inappropriately” considered
whether the decedent treated her “in a manner that a spouse would consider and
care for another at the time of death” because “[a]ny apparent failure to provide
for a common-law spouse is not a factor under RSA 457:39.” The trial court
found that the decedent did not make the petitioner the beneficiary of his life
insurance policy or his 401(k) account, which it concluded “would appropriately
have gone to a spouse, if one existed.”
The petitioner argues that this finding “ignores the clear remedial intent of
RSA 457:39: to provide a common-law status and right to inheritance for those
lacking a formal ceremony.” However, nothing in RSA 457:39 precludes the
consideration of inheritance provisions, among other evidence, when determining
3