THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0064, State of New Hampshire v. Angel
Sanchez, the court on March 23, 2017, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. We affirm.
The defendant, Angel Sanchez, appeals his conviction, following a bench
trial in Superior Court (Delker, J.), on three charges of attempted witness
tampering involving three witnesses. See RSA 629:1 (2016); RSA 641:5, I
(2016). The defendant contends that “[t]he circumstantial evidence was
insufficient to prove that [he] took a substantial step toward the crime of
witness tampering or that he had a purpose to induce witnesses to withhold
testimony or absent themselves from legal proceedings.” (Capitalization
omitted.)
Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, the trial
court could have found the following facts. The defendant was charged with
crimes arising from a home invasion, which the investigating police officer
characterized as “heinous.” The primary evidence against him consisted of
three witnesses, who had been his cohorts. While incarcerated awaiting trial,
the defendant wrote and sent ten letters to gang members and others. In many
of these letters he represented himself as a member of the Latin Kings. Letters
5 and 7 each contained a second letter intended for a different recipient (letters
5B and 7B respectively). Many of the letters contained language or symbols
associated with the Latin Kings.
Letters 3 and 7 enclosed photographs of the witnesses, with their names.
In letter 6, the defendant offered to send the recipient photographs of the
witnesses. In letter 3 and letter 7B, the defendant discussed sending the
recipient copies of the witnesses’ statements acquired through discovery.
Letter 5B was addressed to a New Hampshire prison inmate and identified one
of the witnesses as being “up-state,” which meant the witness was in the New
Hampshire State Prison. Letter 9 identified the location of a second witness.
Letters 2, 3, 5, 6, 7B, 9, and 10 characterized some or all of the witnesses as
“rats” and/or “snitches.” Letters 2, 3, 5, 5B, 6, and 8 all communicated that
the State would not be able to convict the defendant without the testimony of
the three witnesses. In letter 7B, the defendant told a member of another gang
that the three witnesses were “ratting [him] out” and that the defendant was
“not writing this to look for trouble or to go to war.”
The trial court found that, reading the letters in concert, “the only logical
conclusion is that the Defendant had the intent to get members of his own
gang, the Latin Kings, to engage in some sort of retaliation against the three
primary witnesses in this case and that he knew, if they would not testify
against him, that the case would collapse.” The trial court further found that
the defendant took a “substantial step” toward witness tampering because he
“intended to set in motion a chain of events that would cause these witnesses
not to testify against him.” The court also found that the defendant believed
that two of the witnesses were affiliated with another gang, which might take
umbrage at actions against its members, and “that’s why [the defendant] was
so desperate to . . . avoid retribution or a rival gang war.” The trial court found
the defendant guilty of attempted witness tampering, and this appeal followed.
Pursuant to RSA 641:5, I, a person is guilty of witness tampering if,
“[b]elieving that an official proceeding . . . is pending[,] . . . he attempts to
induce or otherwise cause a person to . . . [t]estify . . . falsely[,] . . . [w]ithold
any testimony[,] . . . or . . . [a]bsent himself from any proceeding.” Pursuant to
RSA 629:1, I, “[a] person is guilty of an attempt to commit a crime if, with a
purpose that a crime be committed,” he takes “a substantial step toward the
commission of the crime.”
To prevail on a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, a defendant
must show that no rational trier of fact could have found the essential elements
of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt, considering all the evidence and all
reasonable inferences therefrom in the light most favorable to the State. State
v. Craig, 167 N.H. 361, 369 (2015). We examine each evidentiary item in the
context of all the evidence, not in isolation. Id. Circumstantial evidence may
be sufficient to support a finding of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Id.
Further, the trier of fact may draw reasonable inferences from facts proved and
also inferences from facts found as a result of other inferences, provided they
can be reasonably drawn therefrom. Id. at 369-70. Because a challenge to the
sufficiency of the evidence raises a claim of legal error, our standard of review
is de novo. Id. at 370.
When the evidence as to one or more elements of the charged offense is
solely circumstantial, a defendant challenging sufficiency must establish that
the evidence does not exclude all reasonable conclusions except guilt. Id. The
proper analysis is not whether every possible conclusion consistent with
innocence has been excluded, but, rather, whether all reasonable conclusions
based upon the evidence have been excluded. State v. Germain, 165 N.H. 350,
361 (2013), abrogated on other grounds by State v. King, 168 N.H. 340, 345
(2015). “‘[T]he reviewing court evaluates the evidence in the light most
favorable to the prosecution and determines whether the alternative hypothesis
is sufficiently reasonable that a rational [fact finder] could not have found proof
of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.’” Germain, 165 N.H. at 361-62 (quoting
State v. Captville, 448 So. 2d. 676, 680 (La. 1984)). In cases predicated upon
2
circumstantial evidence, questions about the reasonableness of theories of
innocence are for the fact finder to decide. Id. at 362.
The defendant argues that “the evidence was susceptible to a reasonable
conclusion consistent with innocence.” We first address whether the evidence
was sufficient to support the trial court’s finding that the defendant took a
substantial step toward the commission of witness tampering. “‘Substantial
step’ means conduct that is strongly corroborative of the actor’s criminal
purpose.” RSA 629:1, II. The act of taking a substantial step toward the
commission of a crime consists of behavior “‘of such a nature that a reasonable
observer, viewing it in context[,] could conclude beyond a reasonable doubt
that it was undertaken in accordance with a design to violate the statute.’”
State v. Allcock, 137 N.H. 458, 461 (1993) (quoting United States v. Dworken,
855 F.2d 12, 19-20 (1st Cir. 1988)).
The defendant contends that “the evidence was insufficient to show that
[he] communicated the witnesses’ information to fellow gang members.” Letter
3 was addressed to Jose Burgos and the salutation was to “Tatuli.” It
contained the witnesses’ names and photographs and stated, “[T]hey don’t have
conclusive evidence against us, only what those three characters said.” Letter
4 was also addressed to Burgos, at the same address. Its salutation was to
“Bebo,” and it identified the recipient as a member of the defendant’s gang.
Based upon these facts, the defendant argues that
although it may be reasonable to conclude that both letters 3 and
4 were intended for the same recipient and thus, that [the
defendant] was providing information about the witnesses to a
fellow gang member, it was also reasonable to conclude that the
two letters were intended for different recipients and that the letter
related to the witnesses was not sent to a gang member.
However, like letter 4, letter 3 referred to the recipient as “little brother.” It
assured him that the defendant was not “a snitch” or “a rat” and was “loyal.”
Furthermore, in other letters the defendant addressed the recipients by
nicknames that differed from the name to which the envelope was addressed.
The defendant argues that “[i]t was common for [him] to include letters
intended for other people in his letters.” However, on the two occasions in
evidence when he did this, the defendant included instructions to each letter’s
addressee regarding what to do with the second letter. Letter 3, containing the
witnesses’ photographs, does not contain such a direction.
Although in his letters, the defendant did not overtly request that the
recipients take action against the witnesses, the trial court could have
reasonably inferred, from his repeated and emphatic statements that he would
3