THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0583, WHS Homes, Inc. v. Traditional
Living, Inc. & a., the court on December 21, 2017, issued the
following order:
Having considered the briefs, the record submitted on appeal, and the
oral arguments of the parties, the court concludes that a formal written opinion
is unnecessary in this case. The plaintiff, WHS Homes, Inc. (WHS), appeals
orders of the Superior Court (McNamara, J.) that pursuant to the Asset
Purchase Agreement (APA) entered into by the parties, WHS is obligated to pay
“trade payables” up to $1.7 million, and awarding the defendants, Traditional
Living, Inc. (TLI), Tod H. Schweizer (Schweizer) d/b/a Lyme Investment
Company and d/b/a Lyme Investment Partnership, Nestor, Inc., and SRS
Partners, LLC, attorney’s fees and costs. We affirm.
The pertinent facts follow. TLI, acquired in 1979 by Schweizer,
manufactured log homes. In 2010, Schweizer decided to sell the business.
William H. Silverstein, who owns and operates WHS, offered to buy the
business. Among other proposed terms, Silverstein’s Letter of Intent (LOI)
proposed assuming $1.7 million of TLI’s debt to its vendors. Such debts are
also referred to in the record as “accounts payable,” “trade payables,” and
“vendor payables.”
In January 2011, the parties signed the APA. Although Silverstein’s LOI
promised that his company would pay the trade payables of $1.7 million, the
APA does not include that language. The pertinent section of the APA provides:
1.2 Assumption of Liabilities. At the Closing, Buyer will assume
only the following liabilities (the “Assumed Liabilities”):
(a) liabilities reflected on the balance sheet (and schedules)
of Seller attached as Exhibit A hereto (the “Closing Balance Sheet”);
(b) liabilities of Seller under the Assumed Contracts,
including warranty issues, but excluding any obligations for pre-
Closing default or breach by Seller for which Seller shall remain
liable; and
(c) liabilities of Seller for vacation time accrued by the Seller
Employees . . . and not yet used as of the Closing Date. . . .
The total amount of the Assumed Liabilities shall not exceed One
Million Seven Hundred Thousand Dollars ($1,700,000.00). Buyer
expressly shall not assume, or be responsible for, any other
liabilities or obligations of Seller or Stockholder, whether actual or
contingent, matured or unmatured, known or unknown, and
whether arising out of occurrences prior to, at or after the Closing
(the “Excluded Liabilities”).
At the time of the closing, liabilities existed under section 1.2(a) (the trade
payables category) in the amount of approximately $1.8 million, under section
1.2(b) (the customer contracts category) in the amount of approximately $1.3
million, and under section 1.2(c) (the employee vacation category) in the
amount of approximately $120,000.
The underlying suit between the parties commenced in 2012. Thereafter,
WHS moved for summary judgment on TLI’s claim that WHS had failed to
assume $1.7 million of the trade payables required by section 1.2 of the APA.
WHS argued that it had fulfilled its obligations under the APA by assuming
approximately $2.2 million of TLI’s liabilities, consisting of all of TLI’s customer
contracts and employee vacation time, sections 1.2(b) and (c) of the APA, and
some of TLI’s trade payables, section 1.2(a) of the APA. WHS asserted that the
APA permitted it to choose among the categories listed in section 1.2 at its
discretion. TLI countered that the APA required WHS to assume all $1.7
million of TLI’s trade payables and that this interpretation is consistent with
the parties’ agreement prior to contracting.
The trial court determined that “each party’s interpretation of the APA is
reasonable” and that “the absence of a definition of priority or other clarifying
term relating to WHS’s obligation to assume certain categories of TLI’s liabilities
creates an ambiguity.” Given that TLI had “produced substantial evidence
indicating that the parties . . . intended WHS to assume a large percentage of
trade payables,” the trial court denied WHS’s motion for summary judgment
because there was “a genuine issue of material fact as to the parties’ intent
regarding the priority of ‘Assumed Liabilities’ and WHS’s obligation to assume
those liabilities.”
A four-day bench trial was held in October 2015. The issues at trial
included TLI’s allegation that WHS was responsible for paying $1.7 million in
trade payables pursuant to the APA, but did not do so, and WHS’s allegation
that TLI was liable to WHS for a number of missing assets that were not turned
over at the closing. Relying upon extrinsic evidence, the trial court found that
“the parties intended that WHS pay the trade payables up to $1.7 million prior
to deciding whether to assume any other liabilities.” The court determined that
WHS had paid approximately $933,000, and Schweizer had paid approximately
$456,000, to TLI’s vendors. Therefore, the trial court ordered WHS to
reimburse Schweizer for the $456,000 and to pay approximately $311,000 to
2
vendors. The trial court also determined that WHS’s missing assets claim
lacked merit. Subsequently, the court awarded TLI approximately $703,000 in
attorney’s fees and approximately $35,000 in costs. This appeal followed.
On appeal, WHS contends that the trial court erred: (1) by denying its
motion for summary judgment; (2) in determining that extrinsic evidence
demonstrated that the parties intended to prioritize the trade payables; (3) by
not addressing WHS’s claim that it was entitled to reimbursement of liabilities
it assumed in excess of $1.7 million; and (4) in awarding attorney’s fees.
As an initial matter, we decline to address the merits of WHS’s claim that
the trial court erred in denying its motion for summary judgment because WHS
has not briefed “a fundamental preliminary question bearing on the issue:
whether an erroneous trial court order denying summary judgment is
reviewable on appeal where, as here, the case proceeds to the entry of a final
judgment after trial.” O’Malley v. Little, 170 N.H. ___, ___, 169 A.3d 954, 957
(2017). We have never addressed this question and do not do so now. Id. at
___, 169 A.3d at 957.
In reviewing a trial court’s decision rendered after a trial on the merits,
we uphold the trial court’s factual findings and rulings unless they lack
evidentiary support or are legally erroneous. Id. at ___, 169 A.3d at 957. We
do not decide whether we would have ruled differently from the way that the
trial court did, but rather, whether a reasonable person could have reached the
same decision as the trial court reached based upon the same evidence. Id. at
___, 169 A.3d at 957. Thus, we defer to the trial court’s judgment on such
issues as resolving conflicts in the testimony, measuring the credibility of
witnesses, and determining the weight to be given evidence. Id. at ___, 169
A.3d at 957. We review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de
novo. Id. at ___, 169 A.3d at 957.
The interpretation of a contract presents a question of law, which we
review de novo. In the Matter of Liquidation of Home Ins. Co., 166 N.H. 84, 88
(2014). When interpreting a written agreement, we give the language used by
the parties its reasonable meaning, considering the circumstances and the
context in which the agreement was negotiated, and reading the document as a
whole. Id.
WHS first contends that it was error for the trial court to rely upon
extrinsic evidence because both Schweizer and Silverstein testified at trial that
the APA allowed Silverstein to decide to which of the three categories of
liabilities he would apply the $1.7 million cap. To support this contention,
WHS points to certain of Schweizer’s testimony. The defendants counter that
WHS takes Schweizer’s testimony “out of context and ignores the substantial
testimony where Schweizer persuasively testified that WHS was to pay the
trade payables.” We agree with the defendants.
3