THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0494, State of New Hampshire v. Anthony
Manuel Ortiz, the court on August 16, 2017, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and the oral arguments of the parties and the
record submitted on appeal, the court concludes that a formal, written opinion is
unnecessary in this case. The defendant, Anthony Manuel Ortiz, appeals his
convictions, following a jury trial, on charges of aggravated felonious sexual
assault (AFSA), see RSA 632-A:2, I(m) (2016), and criminal restraint, see RSA
633:2 (2016). He contends that the Superior Court (Delker, J.) erred by: (1)
finding the victim’s statements to a doctor admissible under New Hampshire Rule
of Evidence 803(4) (amended 2017); (2) precluding the defendant from cross-
examining the victim regarding her failure to respond to a particular text
message from her boyfriend; and (3) sentencing the defendant on both the AFSA
charge and the criminal restraint charge. We affirm.
I. Admissibility of the Victim’s Statements under Rule 803(4)
A. Relevant Facts
Before trial, the defendant moved in limine to preclude Dr. Gwendolyn
Gladstone from testifying about statements that the victim made to her on the
ground that they constituted inadmissible hearsay. See N.H. R. Ev. 802
(amended 2017). The State countered that the victim’s statements were
admissible under an exception to the hearsay rule, Rule 803(4), which allows a
declarant’s out-of-court statements to be admitted when they were “made for
purposes of medical diagnosis or treatment.” N.H. R. Ev. 803(4). The trial court
reserved ruling upon the issue until trial.
On the first day of trial, the victim testified that she saw Gladstone “[t]o see
if [she] had any diseases or anything,” such as a sexually transmitted disease,
and to determine whether she was pregnant. On the second day of trial, the
court allowed Gladstone to testify outside of the presence of the jury to determine
whether her testimony about the victim’s statements was admissible under Rule
803(4). Gladstone testified that she evaluated the victim on July 14, 2015, “to
find out from her what had happened” so that Gladstone “could address any
medical issues that might’ve come up as a result.”
Gladstone testified that she starts her medical examinations by asking for
“a general medical history.” She then “proceed[s] to a more detailed history about
the reason for the visit.” Gladstone testified that, when she asked the victim
“about what brought her” to Gladstone’s office, the victim “described . . . an
assault that had happened . . . several weeks before.” Specifically, the victim told
Gladstone “that someone that she knew had sexually assaulted her, which . . .
included penile vaginal penetration, and that she had also been strangled during
the event.” Gladstone testified that the victim described “some symptoms that
she had had since then,” including “having difficulty with intrusive thoughts” and
“[v]aginal pain.” Gladstone testified that she offered to examine “that part” of the
victim’s body, “specifically to look to see if there were signs of injury, since [the
victim] had described pain that had gone on for several days, and to see if there
were any signs of infection, because she didn’t think that her -- the person had
worn a condom at the time.” The victim declined to be examined.
Gladstone also testified that she explained to the victim “that it’s a good
idea to be tested for pregnancy even if a person thinks they aren’t pregnant, just
to be sure,” and, thus, she “recommended that [the victim] be tested.” The victim
was tested for pregnancy and “had medical testing for sexual infections, even
though she had no symptoms.” The trial court ruled that Gladstone’s testimony
about the victim’s statements to her were admissible under Rule 803(4).
B. Analysis
Rule 803(4) constitutes an exception to the general rule that hearsay (an
out-of-court statement offered for the truth of what it asserts) is inadmissible.
See N.H. R. Ev. 801(c) (amended 2017). Rule 803(4) allows out-of-court
statements to be admitted for the truth of what they assert when those
statements are “made for purposes of medical diagnosis or treatment and
describ[e] medical history, or past or present symptoms, pain, or sensations, or
the inception or general character of the cause or external source thereof insofar
as reasonably pertinent to diagnosis or treatment.” N.H. R. Ev. 803(4). Such
statements are admissible “regardless of to whom the statements are made, or
when the statements are made.” Id. In order for such statements to be
admissible, however, the trial court must affirmatively find “that the proffered
statements were made under circumstances indicating their trustworthiness.”
Id.
In State v. Roberts, 136 N.H. 731, 740 (1993), we interpreted Rule 803(4)
as requiring a three-part test before a declarant’s statements may be admitted
under that hearsay rule exception. See State v. Munroe, 161 N.H. 618, 627
(2011). First, a court must find that the declarant intended to make the
statements to obtain a medical diagnosis or treatment. Id. Second, the
statements must describe medical history, or symptoms, pain, sensations, or
their cause or source to an extent reasonably pertinent to diagnosis or treatment.
Id. Third, the court must find that the circumstances surrounding the
statements support their trustworthiness. Id.
2
On appeal, the defendant argues that the victim’s statements fail to satisfy
all three parts of the Roberts test. We accord the trial court considerable
deference in determining the admissibility of evidence, and we will not disturb its
decision absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Id. at 626. To
demonstrate an unsustainable exercise of discretion, the defendant must show
that the trial court’s ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the
prejudice of his case. Id. In determining whether a ruling is a proper exercise of
judicial discretion, we consider whether the record establishes an objective basis
sufficient to sustain the discretionary decision made. State v. Tabaldi, 165 N.H.
306, 321 (2013). We defer to the trial court’s findings of fact, but review its
conclusions of law de novo. See State v. Champagne, 152 N.H. 423, 430 (2005).
1. The Declarant’s Intent
The defendant argues that the first part of the Roberts test is not met, in
part, because the victim was referred to Gladstone by the child advocacy center.
The defendant implies that Gladstone’s examination of the victim was not for a
medical purpose, but, rather, was to further a criminal investigation. See
Munroe, 161 N.H. at 626. As we explained in Munroe, however, “[t]hese two
purposes . . . are not mutually exclusive.” Id.
Here, the evidence supports a finding that one of the purposes of
Gladstone’s examination was to diagnose or treat the victim’s medical symptoms.
As the defendant concedes, the victim saw Gladstone to determine whether she
was pregnant or had a sexually transmitted disease. One of the reasonable
inferences from the victim’s testimony is that she was concerned about
pregnancy and/or sexually transmitted diseases because she had been sexually
assaulted. The fact that the victim then allowed Gladstone to test for pregnancy
and sexually transmitted diseases supports the trial court’s finding that the
victim made her statements to Gladstone “in order to obtain an accurate
diagnosis or proper treatment.” State v. Gordon, 148 N.H. 710, 721 (2002)
(quotation omitted). Contrary to the defendant’s assertions, the fact that the
victim declined to be examined physically by Gladstone does not compel a
contrary conclusion. See id. at 720-21.
The defendant also asserts that the lack of temporal proximity between the
alleged assault and Gladstone’s examination precludes a finding that the victim
made her statements for a treatment or diagnostic purpose. See Munroe, 161
N.H. at 628. However, a lack of temporal proximity is not dispositive of the issue
of intent. Id. Indeed, Rule 803(4) expressly states that a declarant’s statements
are admissible “regardless of . . . when the statements are made.” N.H. R. Ev.
803(4); see Munroe, 161 N.H. at 628.
The defendant further argues that, to show that the victim possessed the
requisite intent, the State had to establish that she made her “statements
understanding that they would further the diagnosis and possible treatment of
3