THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0209, State of New Hampshire v. Walton
Valentin, the court on June 30, 2017, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
defendant, Walton Valentin, appeals his convictions for first degree assault with a
firearm, see RSA 631:1, I(b) (2016) (establishing elements of offense); RSA 651:2,
II-g (2016) (establishing sentencing limits applicable to certain felony
convictions), and for violation of a protective order, see RSA 173-B:9, III (2014).
He argues that the Trial Court (Delker, J.) erred when it: (1) ruled that certain
evidence was admissible under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence (Rule) 404(b);
(2) denied his pretrial motion to dismiss the charges of attempted murder and
criminal threatening; (3) ruled that certain evidence was admissible under Rule
803(4); and (4) denied his motion to dismiss the violation of a protective order
charge at the close of the State’s case. We affirm.
The following evidence was adduced at trial. The victim and the defendant
had dated for approximately four years when the victim ended their relationship.
They frequently argued during their relationship. The victim obtained a
restraining order against the defendant from the Lawrence, Massachusetts
District Court on June 24, 2013, after a hearing.
On November 9, 2013, the defendant called the victim at her home in
Massachusetts to talk about their relationship. He told her that he was nearby
and she went to pick him up. He directed her to drive to a hotel in Salem, New
Hampshire and to pay for a room there. After they entered the hotel room, the
defendant began to argue with the victim and pushed her against the wall. He
pinned her there, holding her face and throat. He hit her twice in the head with
an object; at some point, she lost consciousness.
When she regained consciousness, the victim called a friend because she
was worried that, given her restraining order against the defendant, she “could
get into trouble” for being with him. The victim testified at trial that she did not
know her friend’s last name but that the friend had advised her to tell the police
that the defendant had taken the victim to the hotel against her will. At trial, the
victim’s testimony was inconsistent as to whether the friend told her to say that
the defendant kidnapped her or to say that the defendant kidnapped her “with a
gun.”
The victim testified that she called 9-1-1 after speaking with her friend;
portions of the recordings of that call were played for the jury. During her 9-1-1
call, she reported that the defendant had taken her to the hotel “under threat
with a gun” and that, while in the hotel room, he struck her with a gun.
The jury also heard testimony from three other witnesses to whom the
victim described the assault. She told Officer Gomez, who responded to the call,
that the defendant had pointed a gun at her and pulled the trigger but that it
jammed. She told an Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) who responded to the
scene that she had been choked and hit in the head with a gun. After she was
taken to the hospital, she reported to the nurse who treated her that she had
been choked and hit multiple times with a gun.
The victim met with Detective Bernard the next day at the home of her
friend. It was obvious to Bernard that the victim “was scared” and that she had
been “beaten up . . . ; she was suffering several scratches and cuts on her face.”
She prepared a statement about the assault with the help of a Spanish-speaking
police officer and signed it.
The defendant was charged with attempted murder, kidnapping, two
alternative counts of first degree assault, one count of second degree assault,
criminal threatening, armed robbery, theft by unauthorized taking, violation of a
protective order, and simple assault. Trial was scheduled for May 18, 2015, but
the trial was continued when the State was unable to subpoena the victim. A
trial deposition was subsequently taken of the victim, see RSA 597:6-d (2001),
but the deposition transcript was not admitted at trial. The victim testified at
trial.
On the day of jury selection, the defendant moved to dismiss the charges of
attempted murder, kidnapping, first degree assault with the use of a firearm, and
criminal threatening. In response, the State entered a nolle prosequi on the
kidnapping charge but objected to the dismissal of the other charges. The court
denied the defendant’s motion. Prior to the defendant’s opening statement on the
first day of trial, the court conducted an Anaya colloquy with the defendant, in
which he conceded that he had committed simple assault by pushing and
striking the victim with an object thereby causing her bodily injury. See State v.
Anaya, 134 N.H. 346, 353 (1991) (holding that decision to admit guilt of a lesser
included offense cannot be made without consent of defendant). Consequently,
as the defendant observes, “[t]he trial was essentially about whether the object
was a gun and whether or not that object, whatever it was, constituted a deadly
weapon.”
At the close of the State’s case, the trial court dismissed the attempted
murder, criminal threatening, armed robbery, and theft by unauthorized taking
charges. The defendant was convicted on both counts of first degree assault and
sentenced on the charge of first degree assault with a firearm. He was also
2
convicted of simple assault and violation of a protective order. On appeal, he
challenges his convictions for first degree assault with a firearm and violation of a
protective order.
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred in ruling that evidence
of prior bad acts that he committed against the victim were admissible under
Rule 404(b). The decision whether to admit evidence of prior bad acts lies within
the discretion of the trial court. State v. Davidson, 163 N.H. 462, 467 (2012). We
will reverse the decision of the trial court only if the defendant can demonstrate
that the decision was clearly unreasonable or untenable to the prejudice of his
case. Id.
Rule 404(b) provides:
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to
prove the character of a person in order to show that the person
acted in conformity therewith. It may, however, be admissible for
other purposes, such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent,
preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, or absence of mistake or
accident.
N.H. R. Ev. 404(b). To be admissible under Rule 404(b), evidence must be
relevant for a purpose other than to prove the defendant’s character or
disposition; there must be clear proof that the defendant committed the act; and
the probative value of the evidence must not be substantially outweighed by its
prejudice to the defendant. Davidson, 163 N.H. at 469. We note that, although
Rule 404(b) prohibits the introduction of bad acts evidence to prove a defendant’s
character as a basis of establishing guilt of the crime charged, it expressly
permits the evidence to be admitted for other purposes. See id.
Prior to trial, the State filed a motion in limine seeking a ruling that the
following evidence was admissible under Rule 404(b): (1) the defendant followed
and threatened the victim and her brother and threatened to kill her (June 24
incident); (2) the defendant slapped her and threatened to kill her and her new
boyfriend (June 29 incident); (3) the defendant entered her residence and
assaulted her and her friend with a knife (October 29 incident); and (4) the victim
had obtained restraining orders against the defendant in the past. The trial court
granted the State’s motion, finding that “prior abuse evidence” was admissible
under Rule 404(b) to prove that the defendant had the purposeful intent to
commit the charged acts and to provide evidence of the victim’s state of mind.
On the first day of trial, the victim’s testimony did not confirm the specific
acts proffered by the State in its motion in limine. The defendant then moved for
a mistrial at the beginning of the second day of trial, arguing that the evidence
that had been admitted on the previous day was inadmissible and prejudicial.
The trial court reconsidered its ruling after finding that the State had not
3