THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0219, Petition of Assets Recovery
Center, LLC d/b/a Assets Recovery Center of Florida & a., the
court on June 16, 2017, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
petitioners are Assets Recovery Center, LLC d/b/a Assets Recovery Center of
Florida (ARC) — a mortgage-loan servicing company — and Daniel Ferdinand
Coosemans and John Olsen — 50% owners and managing members of ARC
during the relevant time period. They have petitioned for a writ of certiorari,
see Sup. Ct. R. 11, challenging an order of the New Hampshire Banking
Department (department) concluding that they violated a number of provisions
of RSA chapter 397-B (2006 & Supp. 2015) (repealed 2016). We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. In January 2008, ARC
registered as a mortgage servicing company in New Hampshire. In 2009, ARC
renewed its registration, which remained effective through the end of December
2009.
In November 2009, the department notified ARC that the department
would be conducting an examination of its servicing activities. See RSA 397-
B:9-a, I (Supp. 2015) (permitting the department to conduct examinations in
order to ensure compliance with chapter). The examination was conducted in
April 2010, after which the department issued a report of examination. In the
report, a department examiner found that ARC had committed four violations
of RSA chapter 397-B. Although it was entitled to request a hearing on the
report, see RSA 397-B:9-a, IX (Supp. 2015), ARC did not do so.
Subsequently, in February 2012, the bank commissioner issued a cease-
and-desist order against the petitioners, alleging six violations of RSA chapter
397-B by ARC and five violations by Olsen and Coosemans, see RSA 397-B:6, V
(Supp. 2015) (stating that “[e]very person who directly or indirectly controls a
person liable under this section . . . may . . . be subject to” administrative
fines). Some, but not all, of the violations overlapped with the violations found
by the examiner in the report of examination.
After a hearing on the cease-and-desist order, the presiding officer found
that ARC had committed five violations of RSA chapter 397-B, by: (1) failing to
provide requested materials to the department during the examination, RSA
397-B:9-a, VII (Supp. 2015); (2) failing to obtain a surety bond, RSA 397-B:4,
V(a) (Supp. 2015); (3) failing to file annual reports in 2008 and 2009, RSA 397-
B:4-a, III (Supp. 2015); (4) failing to issue an annual privacy policy to
borrowers located in New Hampshire, RSA 397-B:2, II (Supp. 2015); and (5)
conducting unregistered servicing activity with four borrowers, RSA 397-B:4,
I(a) (Supp. 2015). The presiding officer also determined that Coosemans and
Olsen had committed four violations of RSA chapter 397-B, by: (1) failing to
provide materials requested by the department, RSA 397-B:4-b (2006); (2)
failing to file two annual reports; (3) failing to issue an annual privacy policy to
borrowers; and (4) conducting unregistered servicing activity with four
borrowers. The petitioners filed a motion for rehearing, which, as to the issues
relevant to this appeal, the presiding officer denied. This petition followed.
“Review on certiorari is an extraordinary remedy, usually available only
in the absence of a right to appeal, and only at the discretion of the court.”
Petition of Chase Home for Children, 155 N.H. 528, 532 (2007). Our review of
the department’s decision on a petition for a writ of certiorari entails
examination of whether the department has “acted illegally with respect to
jurisdiction, authority or observance of the law or has unsustainably exercised
its discretion or acted arbitrarily, unreasonably or capriciously.” Id. “We
exercise our power to grant such writs sparingly and only where to do
otherwise would result in substantial injustice.” Id.
I. Res Judicata
The petitioners first argue that the presiding officer erred by determining
that res judicata barred the petitioners from raising a number of their
arguments challenging the cease-and-desist order. By way of background, in
the order on the merits, the presiding officer determined that the examination
conducted by the department in 2010 constituted an administrative proceeding
to which res judicata applied. See Cook v. Sullivan, 149 N.H. 774, 777 (2003)
(stating that res judicata may apply “to a decision of an administrative agency
which was rendered in a judicial capacity, resolved disputed issues properly
before it and which the parties had an opportunity to litigate”). As a
consequence, the presiding officer declined to consider those arguments that
related to violations that he deemed to have been addressed during the
examination.
On appeal, the petitioners argue that res judicata does not apply, and
they renew the substantive arguments that the presiding officer deemed to be
barred by the doctrine. Specifically, the petitioners contend that: (1) they had
no duty to send documents upon the department’s request under RSA 397-
B:9-a, VII; (2) the department could not command the production of documents
under RSA 397-B:4-b; (3) even if they did have a duty to comply with the
department’s requests, they did, in fact, provide the requested information; (4)
ARC had no statutory obligation to obtain a surety bond in 2009; (5) they had
no duty to file annual reports in 2008 and 2009; and (6) they had no duty to
2
renew ARC’s registration in 2010. The department counters that the presiding
officer correctly applied res judicata, and, further, that the petitioners’
substantive arguments on these six issues are without merit.
Because we are not persuaded by the petitioners’ arguments on the six
substantive issues, we need not decide whether res judicata applies under
these circumstances. As the appealing party, the petitioners have the burden
of demonstrating reversible error, see Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740
(2014), and as noted above, on a petition for a writ of certiorari, we examine
whether the department has “acted illegally with respect to jurisdiction,
authority or observance of the law or has unsustainably exercised its discretion
or acted arbitrarily, unreasonably or capriciously,” Petition of Chase Home for
Children, 155 N.H. at 532. Given this deferential standard of review, and
based upon our review of the presiding officer’s decisions, the parties’
arguments, the applicable law, and the record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that, with regard to the six issues, the petitioners have not
demonstrated reversible error. See Gallo, 166 N.H. at 740.
II. Enforcement of Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act
The petitioners next argue that the presiding officer erred when he
concluded that the department had the authority to enforce the privacy-policy
requirement of the federal Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA). See 15 U.S.C.
§ 6803(a) (2012). The petitioners’ argument relates to the department’s claim
that the petitioners violated RSA 397-B:2, II, which provides that mortgage
servicers must “abide by applicable federal laws and regulations” and makes
“[a]ny violation of such law [or] regulation . . . a violation of this chapter.” The
department alleged, and the presiding officer found, that the petitioners
violated RSA 397-B:2, II by failing to adhere to the GLBA, and specifically, its
requirement that financial institutions issue a privacy policy to customers
annually. See id.
The petitioners do not dispute that ARC is subject to the GLBA or that
they failed to comply with the privacy-policy requirement. Nor do they argue
that the GLBA preempts RSA 397-B:2, II. Instead, the petitioners construe the
department’s claim to be an attempt to directly enforce the GLBA, and they
assert that the GLBA does not provide the department with the authority to
bring such an action. In making this argument, the petitioners contend that
the department is not proceeding under the authority of RSA 397-B:2, II,
because that provision cannot be interpreted as “the New Hampshire
Legislature’s adoption of all federal laws that [are] applicable to a licensee,
including the GLBA.” The department disagrees and argues that it is enforcing
RSA 397-B:2, II, which “adopts the provisions” of the GLBA. We agree with the
department.
3