THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0390, Massachusetts Bay Insurance
Company v. American Healthcare Services Association & a., the
court on November 13, 2017, issued the following order:
After review of the motions for reconsideration and/or rehearing filed by
Exeter Hospital, Inc. and by Triage Staffing, Inc., the court modifies the slip
opinion as set forth below. In all other respects, the two motions are denied.
The slip opinion dated September 28, 2017, is modified on page 10.
1. The word “wholly” is deleted from the last sentence of the first full
paragraph.
2. The following footnote is inserted at the end of the last sentence of the
first full paragraph, and the remaining footnotes in the opinion are
renumbered sequentially:
7. In motions for reconsideration and/or rehearing filed
subsequent to the original release of this opinion, Exeter and
Triage argue that the court erred in concluding that the
healthcare professional services exclusion bars coverage under
the general liability coverage form because, but for the provision
of health care services to the Exeter Patients, they would not
have suffered any injuries. Exeter and Triage argue that,
instead of applying a “but for” test, we should employ the
“efficient proximate cause” test, which they assert we applied in
such cases as Therrien v. Insurance Co., 96 N.H. 182, 185-87
(1950) and Nassif Realty Co. v. National Fire Ins. Co., 109 N.H.
117, 119 (1968).
In the foregoing cases, in which we applied the efficient
proximate cause doctrine, the covered cause of harm and the
excluded cause of harm each alone appears to have been
capable of producing the harm, which means that the excluded
cause may have played no role in causing the harm. As the
court recognized in Amherst Country Club v. Harleysville
Worcester Ins. Co., 561 F. Supp. 2d 138 (D.N.H. 2008), on
which Exeter and Triage rely, the efficient proximate cause
analysis does not apply in cases, such as this one, “in which
there is more than one cause of loss and none of the causes is
sufficient by itself to cause the loss.” Harleysville, 561 F. Supp.
2d at 150 (citation omitted). But, contrary to what the
Harleysville court appeared to assume, it does not follow from
the inapplicability of the efficient proximate cause doctrine in
this circumstance that the excluded cause can be effective to
bar coverage only if the exclusion contains anti-concurrent
cause language. On the contrary, both Preferred Nat’l Ins. Co.,
149 N.H. at 763-64 and Philbrick v. Liberty Mut. Fire Ins. Co.,
156 N.H. 389 (2007) demonstrate that this is not the case.
Rather, in cases in which both a covered cause and an excluded
cause were claimed to be necessary contributors to produce the
harm, we have employed the “but for” test to determine whether
the exclusion applies. See Philbrick, 156 N.H. at 393 (“Indeed,
there would have been no injuries and, therefore, no damage
under the negligence claims absent the sexual molestation.”
(emphasis added)).
Reconsideration denied;
slip opinion modified.
Dalianis, C.J., and Lynn and Bassett, JJ., concurred.
Eileen Fox,
Clerk
2