THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case Nos. 2016-0037 and 2019-0589, State of New
Hampshire v. Tristan Wolusky, the court on September 15,
2021, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
defendant, Tristan Wolusky, appeals his conviction, following a jury trial, for
first degree murder. See RSA 630:1-a, I(b)(2) (2016); RSA 626:8, II(c) (2016).
The defendant argues that the Superior Court (Houran, J.) erred when it: (1)
denied his requests to conduct pre-trial depositions of the State’s cooperating
witnesses; (2) did not compel one of the State’s cooperating witnesses to answer
interrogatories before trial; and (3) denied his three motions to set aside the
verdict. We affirm.
I. Facts
The following facts are undisputed or are otherwise supported by the
record. In 2014, the defendant was charged with several offenses, including
first degree murder as a principal and an accomplice. See RSA 630:1-a, I(b)(2);
RSA 626:8, II(c). The State alleged that the defendant, acting in concert with
Zachary Pinette and/or Michael Tatum, knowingly caused the death of the
victim before, after, or while engaged in the commission of a robbery while
armed with a knife, and that the victim’s death was caused by the knife.
Pinette and Tatum pled guilty to multiple charges, including second degree
murder, and agreed to testify for the State at the defendant’s trial.
Before trial, the defendant moved to depose Pinette and Tatum. The
defendant argued that depositions were necessary in order to understand the
witnesses’ “subjective belief[s] . . . with regard to their reward for ‘cooperating’”
with the State. The defendant also argued that depositions were necessary
because the case was complex and Pinette and Tatum had offered inconsistent
accounts of the incident that led to the charges.
The trial court denied the motions, ruling that the defendant had failed
to demonstrate that the depositions were “necessary to ensure a fair trial, avoid
surprise or for other good cause shown.” See RSA 517:13, II(b) (2007). The
court found that the defendant failed to demonstrate that the depositions were
necessary because he had sufficient alternative means to obtain the
information that he sought, and failed to articulate how the case was
“especially complex.” The court observed that the defendant had access to the
witnesses’ plea colloquies and written agreements with the State, in addition to
all recordings and/or transcripts of their statements and interviews with the
State.
Also before trial, the State disclosed to the defendant that, during an
interview, Tatum had informed the State that prior to the incident leading to
the charges, he had told the defendant that he had previously committed
robbery. The defendant sought to depose Tatum about his statements to the
defendant regarding any prior robberies he had committed. The trial court
permitted the defendant to propound written interrogatories to Tatum “limited
to the discrete issue of his statement to [the defendant], prior to the charged
conduct, that Tatum had committed a robbery in the past.” Tatum responded
to the interrogatories by asserting his constitutional privilege against compelled
self-incrimination. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 15; U.S. CONST. amends. V,
XIV. The defendant argued that Tatum’s assertion of the privilege directly
conflicted with the defendant’s right to confront the witnesses against him. See
N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 15; U.S. CONST. amends. VI, XIV. The defendant
requested that Tatum be prohibited from testifying unless he fully answered
the interrogatories. The trial court ruled that it would not prohibit Tatum from
testifying, concluding that any potential conflict between Tatum’s self-
incrimination rights and the defendant’s confrontation rights would be resolved
at trial. At trial, after direct examination and outside the presence of the jury,
and after the State offered Tatum “use immunity,” the court ordered him to
answer the defendant’s questions about the prior robbery.
Following trial, the defendant filed motions to set aside the verdict as
against the weight of the evidence and because the State had offered allegedly
perjured testimony. The defendant argued, in essence, that no reasonable jury
could have credited the testimony of Pinette or Tatum because they each made
numerous inconsistent statements, they contradicted each other, and their
testimony was contradicted by other witnesses and physical evidence from the
victim’s body. The defendant also argued that Pinette had committed perjury
because “his testimony was at odds with the physical evidence” in that he
testified that the victim “was stabbed multiple times in the front,” but “there
were no such injuries,” and he testified that the defendant had stomped on the
victim’s head with work boots, but a medical examiner testified that such an
action could not have occurred. The defendant further asserted that, before
trial, Pinette had “failed” polygraph examinations, and therefore the State
should have known that his testimony would be perjurious.
The trial court denied the motions. The court ruled that, even assuming
that a reasonable jury would not have found substantial portions of Tatum’s
testimony to be credible, and even if the jury had rejected certain portions of
2
Pinette’s testimony, “the inconsistencies and contradictions highlighted by [the
defendant]” did not “so undermine the jury’s weighing of the evidence that the
jury’s guilty verdict . . . was against the weight of the evidence.” See State v.
Spinale, 156 N.H. 456, 466 (2007). In addition, the court found that the State
had not suborned perjury, ruling that the defendant’s arguments regarding
“perjured” testimony went “to the weight and credibility of [Pinette’s]
testimony.”
The defendant also filed a motion for a new trial based on ineffective
assistance of trial counsel. The trial court appointed counsel to assist with the
motion and held a hearing on the merits. Thereafter, the court denied the
motion, ruling that the performance of the defendant’s trial counsel was not
constitutionally deficient, but was, rather, “constitutionally effective.” The
court found that, notwithstanding the verdict, defense counsel had effectively
attacked Pinette’s and Tatum’s credibility and successfully highlighted many
contradictions between their testimony and the physical evidence. The court
concluded that it had “no basis upon which it could determine that trial
counsel’s trial performance on behalf of [the defendant] ‘failed to function as
the counsel the State Constitution guarantees.’” (Quoting State v. Candello,
170 N.H. 220, 225 (2017).)
II. Analysis
On appeal, the defendant argues that the court erred when it: (1) denied
his requests to conduct pre-trial depositions of Pinette and Tatum; (2) did not
prohibit Tatum from testifying or compel him to answer interrogatories before
trial regarding the prior robbery; and (3) denied his three motions to set aside
the verdict.
A. Pre-Trial Depositions and Interrogatories
We first address the defendant’s argument that the trial court erred when
it denied his requests to depose Pinette and Tatum. The defendant asserts
that, because the State had “unfettered access” to Pinette and Tatum before
trial, the State had information not available to him, and depositions were
therefore “necessary to create a level playing field.” We disagree.
“A defendant does not have an unqualified due process right to compel
depositions in a criminal case.” State v. Fernandez, 152 N.H. 233, 236 (2005).
Rather, the trial court may permit a defendant to depose a witness “upon a
finding by a preponderance of the evidence that such deposition is necessary
. . . [t]o ensure a fair trial, avoid surprise or for other good cause shown.” RSA
517:13, II(b). “In determining the necessity, the court shall consider the
complexity of the issues involved, other opportunities or information available
to discover the information sought by the deposition, and any other special or
3