THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0054, Kulick's, Inc. v. Town of
Winchester, the court on September 16, 2016, issued the
following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we conclude
that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1). We affirm.
The petitioner, Kulick’s, Inc. (abutter), appeals an order of the Superior
Court (Kissinger, J.) upholding a decision by the planning board (board) of the
respondent, the Town of Winchester (town), to approve a site plan submitted by
the intervenor, S.S. Baker’s Realty Co., LLC (applicant). The abutter contends
that the trial court erred because: (1) the site plan did not constitute a material
change from a prior site plan, which the board had rejected; (2) the board
imposed an illegal condition subsequent; (3) the applicant’s special exception had
expired; (4) the board improperly granted the applicant two waivers from the
town’s site plan regulations; and (5) the applicant’s storm water management
plan violated the town’s storm water management regulations.
Superior court review of planning board decisions is limited. CBDA Dev.,
LLC v. Town of Thornton, 168 N.H. ___, ___, 137 A.3d 1107, 1111 (2016). The
appealing party bears the burden of persuading the trial court that, by the
balance of probabilities, the board’s decision was unreasonable. Id. On appeal,
the board’s factual findings are deemed prima facie lawful and reasonable. Id. at
___, 137 A.3d at 1113; RSA 677:6 (2008). The superior court’s review is not to
determine whether it agrees with the planning board’s findings, but to determine
whether there is evidence upon which they could have been reasonably based.
CBDA, 168 N.H. at ___, 137 A.3d at 1111. Our review of the superior court’s
decision is equally deferential. Id. We will uphold the decision on appeal unless
it is unsupported by the evidence or legally erroneous. Id.
We first address whether the board had jurisdiction to review the second
site plan. A board may review a successive site plan if it represents a material
change from a previously rejected plan. Id. at ___, 137 A.3d at 1113. Whether a
subsequent plan materially differs from its predecessor is a question of fact, to be
determined, in the first instance, by the board. Id. A board may consider a
subsequent plan that has been modified to address the board’s concerns about
the prior plan. Id. at ___, 137 A.3d at 1114.
In this case, the board denied the first site plan because it concluded that:
the project overwhelms the site and it does not adhere to best design
standards. Additional reasons of denial are three safety issues: 1)
the left hand turn onto Rt. 10 south crosses the northbound lane, 2)
parking on the shoulder of Rt. 10 northbound, and 3) the overflow of
traffic from the drive thru window onto Rt. 78.
The second site plan included: (1) prohibiting left turns onto Route 10; (2)
removing one parking space, thereby increasing the open space on the site; and
(3) reducing the size of the building to increase the width of the travel lanes.
Although the board did not explicitly find that these modifications
constituted a material change, such a finding is implicit in its decision to
consider the second site plan. Cf. Nordic Inn Condo. Owners’ Assoc. v. Ventullo,
151 N.H. 571, 586 (2004) (stating trial court is assumed to have made all
findings necessary to support its decision). The trial court found that the second
site plan “specifically addressed” the board’s concerns regarding the first site
plan. We cannot conclude that this finding was unsupported by the evidence.
See id. at ___, 137 A.3d at 1111.
The abutter contends that the changes in the second site plan were “not
significant” and were not “physical changes.” However, it does not cite, nor are
we aware of, any authority requiring that changes be “significant” or “physical.”
The abutter argues, relying upon a Connecticut case, that “[t]here is no material
change in a plan when the changes ‘could have been required by the board at the
first hearing as conditions precedent’” (quoting Consiglio v. Bd. of Zoning Appeals
of City of New Haven, 217 A.2d 64, 66 (Conn. 1966)). However, this does not
reflect New Hampshire law. See CBDA, 168 N.H. at ___, 137 A.3d at 1114
(stating board may consider subsequent plan that has been modified to address
its concerns).
The abutter argues that “judicial grant of carte blanche authority to land
use boards to characterize any change as ‘material’ will invariably produce
political results” and will “open[ ] the floodgates to an endless series of re-
submitted applications.” However, this concern is unwarranted when a site plan
has been modified to address the board’s specific concerns about the initial plan.
See id.
We next address whether the trial court erred in upholding the board’s
requirement that the applicant “hire a qualified engineer to oversee the
construction site work . . . and report to the town,” which the abutter contends
was an “illegal” condition. Planning boards have the authority to condition site
plan approval. Sklar Realty v. Town of Merrimack, 125 N.H. 321, 327 (1984).
RSA 676:4-b (Supp. 2015) permits a planning board to obtain third-party review
2
of a site plan and to require the applicant to pay for it, but it does not require a
planning board to do so.
In this case, the abutter argues that requiring the applicant to hire an
engineer to oversee the site work was unreasonable because it “creat[ed]
significant conflicts of interest contrary to public policy.” However, the board’s
minutes state that it discussed “at length” whether to hire its own engineer, at
the applicant’s expense, or to require the applicant to hire an engineer. They also
describe one member’s reasoning that “a licensed professional would not
jeopardize his license, and also the responsibility would be on the town if
something went wrong.” We note that section IX of the town’s storm water
management regulations requires only that the applicant report to the board
regarding the site work. Accordingly, we cannot conclude that the trial court’s
decision – that the abutter failed to show that this condition was unlawful or
unreasonable – was unsupported by the evidence or legally erroneous. See
CBDA, 168 N.H. at ___, 137 A.3d at 1111.
We next address whether the trial court erred in upholding the board’s
finding that the applicant’s special exception had not expired. The special
exception, which was granted on February 22, 2012, allowed the applicant a
“drive-thru window.” The town’s zoning ordinance provides that a special
exception is valid for one year and may be renewed. The applicant filed its first
site plan in March 2012, which the board denied and the applicant appealed;
pursuant to statute, the trial court issued a writ of certiorari. See RSA 677:15
(Supp. 2015). RSA 677:15, II provides that the issuance of such a writ “shall
stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from.” That appeal was not
resolved until our order of March 19, 2014. On June 24, 2013, while that appeal
was pending, but more than one year after the special exception was granted, the
applicant filed its second site plan.
Effective September 22, 2013, RSA 674:33, IV (Supp. 2015) was amended
to provide that a special exception is valid for two years “or as further extended
by local ordinance or by the zoning board of adjustment for good cause, provided
that no such special exception shall expire within 6 months after the resolution
of a planning application filed in reliance upon the special exception.” Although
the parties do not contend that this amendment governs, it is strong evidence of
the legislature’s intent that a special exception not expire while an application
relying upon the exception is pending. Cf. Cecere v. Loon Mt. Recreation Corp.,
155 N.H. 289, 293 (2007) (“Where an ‘amendment [is] enacted soon after
controversies [arise] as to the interpretation of the original act, it is logical to
regard the amendment as a legislative interpretation of the original act.’”).
The trial court correctly observed that, pursuant to RSA 677:15, II, its
certiorari order stayed the planning board proceedings, thereby preventing the
applicant from exercising its special exception. The trial court reasoned that the
town’s ordinance “presupposes that the applicant is actually able to engage in the
3