THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0007, State of New Hampshire v. Ernesto
Rivera, the court on July 2, 2024, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The
defendant, Ernesto Rivera, was convicted in Superior Court (Garfunkel, J.) on
two counts of being a felon in possession of a gun, four counts of solicitation of
witness tampering, and one count of possession of cocaine with intent to
distribute. On appeal, the defendant argues: (1) that the trial court erred by
denying his motion to sever the charges; and (2) that the recording of four
convictions and imposition of four sentences for solicitation of witness
tampering violated the defendant’s double jeopardy rights and constituted plain
error. We reverse and remand.
The record supports the following relevant facts. On May 5, 2013, the
defendant, who was a convicted felon, and his friend Chantal Guertin took a
gun safety class in Hudson, during which the defendant practiced shooting
using Guertin’s gun. On May 13, Guertin purchased a gun in Merrimack,
filling out a firearm transaction record stating that she was the actual buyer of
the firearm, but in fact the purchase was made for the defendant. Later that
day the defendant took possession of the gun.
In August 2013, Guertin contacted the Nashua Police Department to
inform them that she had purchased a gun for the defendant. Officer
Hannigan obtained a statement from Guertin regarding that purchase. Based
upon the information that Guertin provided, the Nashua police obtained a
search warrant for the residence in Hudson, where the defendant lived together
with Elvira Kersey. On August 20, Kersey arrived home to find the police
searching the house. They seized a safe from the master bedroom, and told
Kersey that they were looking for a gun, but had not found one. Thinking the
gun might be in the safe, the police obtained a search warrant to open the safe.
Inside they found 44 grams of cocaine.
On August 23, the defendant called Kersey, told her there was a gun in
the house and where it was located, and directed her to find it and “[t]ake it off
the house.” Kersey thereafter found the gun, and reported its location to the
police, who obtained a search warrant, returned to the house, and seized the
gun.
In December 2013, while incarcerated at the Hillsborough County House
of Corrections, the defendant placed several telephone calls that resulted in the
four charges of solicitation of witness tampering. The first charge arose from
two calls made on December 9 to his friend Rene Lavoie, in which the
defendant allegedly asked him to speak with Kersey in order to induce her to
recant. The second charge arose from a call made to Lavoie on December 10,
in which the defendant again allegedly asked him to speak with Kersey in order
to induce her to recant. The third and fourth charges arose from a single call
made to Katherine Vitale on December 11. The defendant allegedly asked
Vitale: (1) to “introduc[e]” Lavoie to Kersey’s residence so that Lavoie could
speak with Kersey in order to induce her to recant; and (2) to transport Lavoie
to Kersey’s residence so that Lavoie could speak with Kersey in order to induce
her to recant.
Prior to trial, the defendant sought to sever the charges. The Superior
Court (Temple, J.) ruled that the seven charges at issue in this appeal could be
tried together.1
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred by failing to
sever the two felon in possession charges both from the drug and witness
tampering charges and from each other. He also argues that double jeopardy
prevents the entry of four convictions for solicitation of witness tampering,
asserting that only one conviction could be entered. Acknowledging that the
double jeopardy issue was not raised in the trial court, the defendant raises it
now as plain error. See Sup. Ct. R. 16-A.
Joinder of charges is governed by New Hampshire Rule of Criminal
Procedure 20. If offenses are unrelated, they may be joined only with the
defendant’s consent. See N.H. R. Crim. P. 20(a)(3).2 Offenses are related if
they:
1 The defendant’s motion to sever stated that the defendant stood accused of: (1) criminal
threatening and five simple assaults with an incident date of July 21, 2013; (2) six simple
assaults with an incident date of August 30, 2013; (3) two counts of possession with intent to
distribute with incident dates of July 21, 2013 and August 20, 2013; (4) one count of felon in
possession and armed career criminal with an incident date of May 5, 2013; (5) one count of
felon in possession and armed career criminal with an incident date of August 23, 2013; (6)
one count of felon in possession and armed career criminal with an incident date of May 13,
2013; and (7) seven counts of witness tampering with incident dates ranging from November
27, 2013 to February 19, 2014. The defendant sought to sever the indictments so that there
would be seven separate trials. The trial court granted the motion in part and denied it in part,
ruling that three separate jury trials would be scheduled. The seven charges here on appeal
were joined as one of those three trials.
2 At the time of trial, the joinder rule in effect was former Superior Court Rule 97-A. See State
v. Rivera, 175 N.H. 496, 497-98 (2022). The relevant provisions of Rule 97-A are identical to
the corresponding provisions of the current rule, New Hampshire Rule of Criminal Procedure
20. Because both rules use the same language, we refer to and rely upon the current rule,
Rule 20, in this order. See id.
2
(A) Are alleged to have occurred during a single criminal episode; or
(B) Constitute parts of a common scheme or plan; or
(C) Are alleged to have occurred during separate criminal episodes, but
nonetheless, are logically and factually connected in a manner that does
not solely demonstrate that the accused has a propensity to engage in
criminal conduct.
N.H. R. Crim. P. 20(a)(1). If offenses are related, they shall be joined “unless
the trial judge determines that joinder is not in the best interests of justice.”
N.H. R. Crim. P. 20(a)(2). The parties agree that we should review the trial
court’s ruling on joinder for an unsustainable exercise of discretion. To show
the trial court’s decision is unsustainable, the defendant must demonstrate
that the ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his
case. State v. Brown, 159 N.H. 544, 550 (2009).
We begin by considering whether the felon in possession charge arising
from the gun safety class (the gun safety charge) should have been severed
from the other charges. In denying the defendant’s motion to sever, the trial
court relied upon Rule 20(a)(1)(C), concluding that the charges were logically
and factually connected in a manner that did not solely demonstrate that the
accused had a propensity to engage in criminal conduct. In Brown, we
explained:
[W]hether offenses that occur during separate criminal episodes are
logically and factually connected in a manner that does not solely
demonstrate that the accused has a propensity to engage in criminal
conduct is largely determined by the close relationship among the
offenses with respect to both the underlying charged conduct and the
evidence to be used to prove the charges. The following factors will aid in
discerning whether charges arising from separate criminal episodes are
related: (1) the temporal and spatial relationship among the underlying
charged acts; (2) the commonality of the victim(s) and/or participant(s)
for the charged offenses; (3) the similarity in the defendant’s mode of
operation; (4) the duplication of law regarding the crimes charged; and
(5) the duplication of witnesses, testimony and other evidence related to
the offenses.
No single factor is dispositive on the question of relatedness.
Id. at 551-52 (quotations and citations omitted).
Here, we note that the gun safety charge involved a different gun
possessed at a different time and place from the other charges. With respect to
the defendant’s “mode of operation,” the gun safety charge involved his
temporary possession of a gun owned by another in the public setting of a gun
safety class — we find little similarity between this and the defendant’s mode of
3