THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0458, State of New Hampshire v. Andre J.
Bergeron, the court on August 11, 2017, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
We affirm.
The defendant, Andre J. Bergeron, appeals his convictions of fraudulent
use of a credit card, see RSA 638:5 (2016), and receiving stolen property, see
RSA 637:7 (2016), arguing that the Superior Court (Bornstein, J.) erred in
admitting printed receipts of the credit card transactions.
The record shows that the victim’s credit cards were stolen on August 17,
2015. Later that day, one of the credit cards was used twice to make
purchases at a gas station and convenience store. The defendant objected to
the admission of printed receipts from those transactions because the State did
not provide him with copies until six days prior to trial. Until then, the
defendant had seen only electronic copies of the receipts. The trial court
overruled the defendant’s objection, allowing the State to introduce the receipts
and finding that the defendant had not been prejudiced by the late disclosure.
“In general, we accord considerable deference to the trial court’s ruling
on a discovery sanction, and intervene only when it constitutes an
unsustainable exercise of discretion.” State v. Reader, 160 N.H. 664, 667
(2010). To show that the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion, the
defendant must demonstrate that the court’s decision was clearly unreasonable
and prejudiced his case. Id.
The defendant argues that, because of the best evidence rule, he had no
reason to believe, until six days prior to trial, that any witness would be
permitted to testify regarding the contents of the receipts. The State counters
that the defendant failed to preserve this specific issue for review because he
did not raise it at trial. See State v. Edic, 169 N.H. 580, 583 (2017) (“The
general rule in this jurisdiction is that a contemporaneous and specific
objection is required to preserve an issue for appellate review.”). Assuming,
without deciding, that the issue is preserved, we find no error. Even if the
receipts had not been admitted into evidence, store witnesses would have been
able to testify regarding the transactions, including information contained in
the receipts. See R & R Associates, Inc. v. Visual Scene, Inc., 726 F.2d 36, 38
(1984) (“No evidentiary rule . . . prohibits a witness from testifying to a fact
simply because the fact can be supported by written documentation.”).
The defendant also argues that he was prejudiced by the trial court’s
ruling because only the receipts specifically connected his purchases to the
victim’s credit cards. However, the defendant argued at trial that he had
permission to use the cards from a friend, who told the defendant that the
cards belonged to his girlfriend. The defendant admitted to the investigating
officer that he purchased the items with credit cards owned by a person whom
he did not know. On cross-examination, he admitted that the credit cards
belonged to the victim. The defendant’s admissions thus connected his
purchases to the victim’s credit cards. In addition, the testimony of the store
witnesses connected the defendant’s purchases to the victim’s credit cards.
Accordingly, we cannot conclude that the trial court unsustainably exercised
its discretion in allowing the receipts into evidence. See State v. Reader, 160
N.H. at 667.
Affirmed.
Dalianis, C.J., and Hicks, Lynn, and Bassett, JJ., concurred.
Eileen Fox,
Clerk
2