THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0191, State of New Hampshire v. Kyle C.
Buffum, the court on September 19, 2017, issued the following
order:
The defendant, Kyle C. Buffum, was indicted on one count each of
conspiracy to commit murder, accomplice to attempted murder, and criminal
solicitation. He pled not guilty by reason of insanity. After a four-day trial, the
jury found him sane and guilty of the three charged offenses. He appeals the
sentence imposed by the Trial Court (Nicolosi, J.) following his convictions. He
argues that the court erred by imposing a sentence “based, in part, on his
choices to have a trial and to appeal, and their effect on the victim” and asks that
we review his claim of error under our plain error rule. See Sup. Ct. R. 16-A. We
affirm.
The following evidence was adduced at trial. The defendant began to date
Samantha Heath when she was fifteen and he was nineteen years old. When
Heath’s parents found out, they attempted to end her contact with him. The
defendant provided Heath with a cell phone to continue the contact and offered
to let her move in with him. Heath moved in with the defendant, and his mother
and grandmother, when she was sixteen.
Heath and the defendant continued their relationship and eventually
moved into a duplex apartment. Although their relationship was originally
monogamous, they agreed to begin seeing other people. At some point, the
defendant was convicted of facilitating an underage alcohol house party, see RSA
644:18 (2016), and received a 30-day jail sentence. He served his sentence over
several weekends. During that time, Heath went to parties with the victim. The
defendant subsequently learned that Heath had been at parties and that she had
also had sexual relations with his friends.
The defendant began speaking of killing others who he believed had hurt
him. He and Heath developed a plan to kill the victim. After spending time with
the victim, Heath took her to an isolated area and stabbed her; the victim
survived.
Heath eventually pled guilty to attempted first degree murder. She
received a sentence of 20 years to life. The sentence included the condition that
five years of the maximum sentence could be suspended if she was of good
behavior and demonstrated genuine rehabilitation.
The State obtained three indictments against the defendant. The
conspiracy to commit murder indictment alleged that the defendant agreed with
Heath to commit the crime of murder, and that in furtherance of the conspiracy,
Heath took the victim to a location and repeatedly stabbed her; and the
defendant sent text messages to Heath instructing her how to stab and dispose of
the victim’s body. The accomplice to attempted murder indictment alleged that:
(1) the defendant aided “Heath in planning and committing the crime of
attempted murder by encouraging Heath to murder [the victim] and telling her
how to kill [the victim] and dispose of the body”; (2) Heath, “[a]cting in concert
with and aided by [the defendant],” stabbed the victim multiple times; (3) the
defendant believed that the actions, “in concert with and aided by” Heath,
“constituted a substantial step towards the commission of the crime of attempted
murder”; and (4) the defendant acted with the purpose to cause the death of the
victim. The criminal solicitation indictment charged that the defendant
“commanded, solicited, and requested Samantha Heath to murder” the victim
and that he “acted with the purpose that Samantha Heath commit the offense of
murder.” The defendant pled not guilty by reason of insanity.
Following the jury’s verdict, the trial court sentenced him on the
accomplice to attempted murder conviction to 35 years to life, with the option
to “petition the court to reduce his minimum sentence by seven years if he has
been of good behavior while in prison.” The court sentenced the defendant on
the criminal solicitation and conspiracy to commit murder convictions to
concurrent fifteen-to-thirty-year sentences to run consecutively with the
attempted murder conviction if they were imposed; these sentences were
suspended for forty years.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the sentence imposed by the trial
court violated his rights under Part I, Articles 15 and 18 of the New Hampshire
Constitution and under the Fifth, Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments to the
United States Constitution. Specifically, he cites statements made by the trial
court during its sentencing soliloquy to argue that the court erred, when it
crafted his sentence, by considering his decisions to go to trial and to appeal
his convictions, and the effect of those decisions on the victim.
Because he failed to raise this argument in the trial court, he requests
that we review the issue under our plain error rule. See Sup. Ct. R. 16-A. For
us to find plain error: (1) there must be error; (2) the error must be plain; and
(3) the error must affect substantial rights. State v. Thomas, 168 N.H. 589,
604 (2016). If all three of these criteria are met, we may then exercise our
discretion to correct a forfeited error only if the error meets a fourth criterion:
the error must seriously affect the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of
judicial proceedings. Id.
We first address the defendant’s argument under the State Constitution
and rely upon federal law only to aid our analysis. See State v. Ball, 124 N.H.
2
226, 231, 233 (1983). The State Constitution requires that the trial court
consider several objective factors before imposing any sentence, including
whether the sentence will meet the traditional goals of sentencing —
punishment, deterrence, and rehabilitation. State v. Burgess, 156 N.H. 746,
751 (2008); see N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 18. We generally review a trial court’s
sentencing decision to determine whether its exercise of discretion is
sustainable. State v. Willey, 163 N.H. 532, 541 (2012). When, as here, the
defendant contends that his constitutional rights have been violated as a result
of that decision, our review as to whether there was a constitutional violation in
sentencing is de novo. Id. at 541; see also id. at 548 n.1 (Lynn, J., concurring
in part and dissenting in part).
The sentencing transcript includes 21 pages of statements made by the
State, defense counsel, the defendant, the defendant’s mother, and the victim.
After hearing these statements, the trial court took a brief recess and then
returned to impose sentence upon the defendant. The court first addressed the
three factors to be considered in sentencing:
My job as a sentencing judge is to consider three factors in
punishment. They are punishment, deterrence, and rehabilitation.
And all of the presentations I’ve heard today have addressed those.
I will tell you as for those factors, the most weighty one for
me today is punishment. And the least weighty one is
rehabilitation. Although my hope, as is in every single case, is that
when you are in prison that you manage to address whatever your
issues are or were that brought you to the place where you did
such an onerous act that led to the attempt to take the life of
another.
The reason why I’m not focusing on rehabilitation and that
my priority in this case is punishment, is that I don’t really see a
need for rehabilitation. You’ve presented to this Court without a
significant mental health history. I don’t see a significant mental
health issue as you stand before me today. I do not think that this
crime was borne out of mental health, mental illness. I do not
think it was the product of mental illness. And I think the jury’s
verdict on that has essentially said that. And as I say, I agree with
it.
Punishment is my focus. This case, your acts, combined
with Samantha Heath, came as close to one can come to murder.
There was not a stitch of conduct on your part that brought it
away from that end.
3