THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0388, John E. LaFratta v. Office of Public
Guardian, the court on March 27, 2017, issued the following
order:
Having considered brief filed by the plaintiff, John E. LaFratta, the
memorandum of law filed by the Office of Public Guardian (OPG), and the
record submitted on appeal, we conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in
this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1). The plaintiff appeals the order of the Superior
Court (Nicolosi, J.), which dismissed his complaint. We affirm.
On July 21, 2016, the plaintiff filed an ex parte complaint against the
OPG. He alleged that the OPG was “assigned to collect [his] SSDI and pay [his]
bills on time and in full” and that the OPG had failed to do so, causing his
home to be foreclosed upon. Based upon those allegations, the plaintiff
requested that the court stay his eviction, “schedule a hearing/Law Suite”
against the OPG, and award him $500,000 in damages.
The trial court dismissed the plaintiff’s ex parte complaint. In its order,
the court explained that the OPG had “no control over the foreclosure process”
and that the plaintiff had not alleged “any facts or law that would warrant the
issuance of an injunction against the mortgagee or its servicer.”
In his notice of appeal, the plaintiff questions whether this court “can . . .
overrule the superior court decision.” He also requests that we issue an
emergency stay of his eviction and “grant a hearing date for a law suit” against
the OPG because, he alleges, they failed to pay his mortgage and caused a
foreclosure.
In its memorandum of law, the OPG argues that this court has both
statutory and constitutional authority to reverse a superior court decision. See
RSA 490:4 (2010); see also N.H. CONST. pt. II, art. 4. The OPG further argues
that the relief that the plaintiff seeks (specifically, a hearing for a lawsuit
against OPG) is now moot because, in November 2016, while this appeal was
pending, the plaintiff sued OPG for having failed to pay his mortgage and for
causing his home to be foreclosed upon. His November 2016 complaint has
since been dismissed. In its order dismissing the plaintiff’s November 2016
complaint, the trial court credited OPG’s assertion that, although OPG had
been appointed by the federal Social Security Administration to be the
“representative payee” of the plaintiff’s social security disability payments, the
OPG has never served as guardian either of the plaintiff’s person or of his
estate and, thus, had no legal authority to present or otherwise assist him in
the pending foreclosure.
As the appealing party, the plaintiff has the burden of demonstrating
reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014). Based upon our
review of the trial court’s order, the plaintiff’s challenges to it, the relevant law,
and the record submitted on appeal, we conclude that the plaintiff has not
demonstrated reversible error. See id.
Affirmed.
Dalianis, C.J., and Hicks, Conboy, Lynn, and Bassett, JJ., concurred.
Eileen Fox,
Clerk
2