THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0543, Appeal of Mr. Bult’s, Inc., the
court on October 16, 2017, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
petitioners, Mr. Bult’s, Inc., Zurich Insurance Company, and The Lawson
Group, appeal a decision of the Compensation Appeals Board (CAB) affirming
the denial of recovery from the State Special Fund for Second Injuries (Second
Injury Fund) for injuries to Richard Morrissette. We affirm.
The following facts were found by the CAB or are supported by the
record. Morrissette, a truck driver, was hired by Mr. Bult’s, Inc. on August 26,
2013. Before he was hired, as part of his commercial driver’s license renewal
process, Morrissette underwent a Department of Transportation physical
examination. For the physical examination, Morrissette completed a medical
questionnaire, upon which he indicated that he had diabetes that was
controlled by “diet and pills.” Morrissette’s license was renewed, and Mr.
Bult’s, Inc. placed the information about Morrissette’s diabetes in his personnel
file.
On August 13, 2014, a gust of wind blew open the back doors of
Morrissette’s truck. Morrissette was thrown backwards. He suffered injuries
to one shoulder, a cervical sprain, and headaches. Ultimately, he underwent
rotator cuff surgery on his injured shoulder.
In connection with Morrissette’s injuries, the petitioners requested
reimbursement from the Second Injury Fund on September 1, 2015, which the
New Hampshire Department of Labor (DOL) denied. The petitioners appealed
the decision to the CAB, and the CAB held a hearing on the matter on July 20,
2016. The CAB thereafter denied the petitioners’ request for recovery because
it concluded that the petitioners had not met their burden of proving, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that Morrissette had a “permanent physical
impairment at the time of hire or that the Employer had knowledge of an
impairment.” Specifically, the CAB found that the petitioners had “not proven
that an employer, if it learned of the controlled diabetes, would more likely
than not significantly consider it in making a decision to hire or retain an
employee.” This appeal followed.
Our standard of review of decisions of the CAB is established by statute:
[A]ll findings of the commission upon all questions of fact properly
before it shall be deemed to be prima facie lawful and reasonable;
and the order or decision appealed from shall not be set aside or
vacated except for errors of law, unless the court is satisfied, by a
clear preponderance of the evidence before it, that such order is
unjust or unreasonable.
RSA 541:13 (2007). Accordingly, our review of the CAB’s factual findings is
deferential. Appeal of Hartford Ins. Co., 162 N.H. 91, 93 (2011). We review its
interpretations of statutes, however, de novo. Id. “On questions of statutory
interpretation, this court is the final arbiter of the intent of the legislature as
expressed in the words of a statute considered as a whole.” Id. (quotation
omitted). “We interpret legislative intent from the statute as written and will
not consider what the legislature might have said or add language that the
legislature did not see fit to include.” Id. (quotation omitted). We first examine
the language of the statute itself, and, where possible, construe that language
according to its plain and ordinary meaning. Appeal of Letellier, 163 N.H. 24,
27 (2011). “We construe liberally the Workers’ Compensation Law in order to
give the broadest reasonable effect to its remedial purpose.” Appeal of Hartford
Ins. Co., 162 N.H. at 93 (quotation omitted).
The petitioners raise several arguments on appeal. They contend that:
(1) the CAB erred in applying the inquiry we set forth in Appeal of Hartford to
determine whether a pre-existing permanent impairment is “of such
seriousness as to constitute a hindrance or obstacle to obtaining employment”
under RSA 281-A:2, XIV (2010); (2) the DOL “waived” the Appeal of Hartford
inquiry, and, therefore, the CAB erred in requiring the petitioners to satisfy
that inquiry; (3) the DOL, in contravention of RSA 281-A:2, XIV and RSA 281-
A:54 (2010), erred by denying their reimbursement request on the sole basis
that Morrissette’s pre-existing permanent impairment is diabetes; (4) the CAB
misinterpreted RSA 281-A:54 by requiring the petitioners to meet “a heightened
burden of proof concerning ‘employer knowledge’ that would be considered
illegal for an employer to obtain;” and (5) the CAB erred by disregarding
uncontradicted expert testimony and by not relying upon medical evidence.
(Bolding and capitalization omitted.)
We begin with a brief overview of the Second Injury Fund. “The second
injury fund was created to encourage employers to hire or retain employees
with permanent physical or mental impairments of any origin by reducing the
employer’s liability for workers’ compensation claims.” Id. (quotation omitted).
The implementing statute provides, in relevant part:
If an employee who has a permanent physical or mental
impairment, as defined in RSA 281-A:2, XIV, from any cause or
2
origin incurs a subsequent disability by injury arising out of and in
the course of such employee’s employment on or after July 1,
1975, which results in compensation liability for a disability that is
greater by reason of the combined effects of the preexisting
impairment than that which would have resulted from the
subsequent injury alone, the employer or the employer’s insurance
carrier shall in the first instance pay all awards of compensation
provided by this chapter. However, the commissioner shall
reimburse such employer or insurance carrier from the [Second
Injury Fund] for all compensation payments subsequent to those
payable for the first 104 weeks of disability.
RSA 281-A:54, I. A “[p]ermanent physical or mental impairment” is defined as
“any permanent condition that is congenital or due to injury or disease and
that is of such seriousness as to constitute a hindrance or obstacle to
obtaining employment or to obtaining employment if the employee should
become unemployed.” RSA 281-A:2, XIV (quotation omitted).
In order to qualify under this section for reimbursement from
the [Second Injury Fund], an employer shall establish by written
records, or by affidavit executed at the time of hire or retention in
employment, that the employer had knowledge of the employee’s
permanent physical or mental impairment at the time that the
employee was hired or at the time that the employee was retained
in employment after the employer acquired such knowledge.
RSA 281-A:54, III.
We first address the petitioners’ argument that the CAB erred in applying
the inquiry we set forth in Appeal of Hartford by using an analysis that we
rejected in that case. In Appeal of Hartford, we considered “whether RSA 281-
A:2, XIV allows the CAB to consider an employee’s past job performance as
evidence that his or her preexisting impairment would not be a hindrance or
obstacle to obtaining employment should the employee become unemployed.”
Appeal of Hartford Ins. Co., 162 N.H. at 95. We concluded that “the employee’s
ability to perform his or her existing job, or one like it, is not determinative of
whether the preexisting impairment is ‘a hindrance or obstacle to obtaining
employment.’” Id. at 96 (quoting RSA 281-A:2, XIV). Instead, we explained
that “[t]he inquiry should be whether the impairment is such that an employer
who knew of it and its extent would more likely than not significantly consider
it when making a decision to hire or retain the employee.” Id. at 97 (quotation
omitted).
A review of the CAB’s decision demonstrates that the CAB applied the
inquiry we adopted in Appeal of Hartford. The CAB determined that “the
[petitioners] ha[ve] not proven that an employer, if it learned of the controlled
3