THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0322, Society for the Protection of New
Hampshire Forests v. Northern Pass Transmission, LLC, the
court on January 30, 2017, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
We affirm.
The plaintiff, Society for the Protection of New Hampshire Forests,
appeals an order of the Superior Court (MacLeod, J.) granting summary
judgment in favor of the defendant, Northern Pass Transmission, LLC. In its
petition for declaratory and injunctive relief, the plaintiff sought to establish
that the defendant’s proposed plan, for which the defendant has not yet
received regulatory approval, to install an underground electrical transmission
line within a state highway easement over a portion of the plaintiff’s land,
exceeds the scope of the highway easement. In granting summary judgment,
the trial court ruled that use of the right-of-way for the electrical line would, as
a matter of law, fall within the scope of the easement. On appeal, the plaintiff
argues that the trial court erred by: (1) declining to address, on ripeness
grounds, whether the proposed installation will result in inverse condemnation,
and not finding that it in fact will result in inverse condemnation; (2) not
finding that a genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether the proposed
installation will exceed the scope of the easement pursuant to the “rule of
reason”; (3) not ruling that the anticipated installation will exceed the scope of
the easement as a matter of law; (4) stating that the easement is not limited to
“viatic” use; (5) allegedly “treat[ing] the dispute as a simple licensing matter”;
and (6) allegedly denying the plaintiff a forum and remedy.
In reviewing an order granting summary judgment, we consider the
affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from such
evidence, in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Pike v. Deutsche
Bank Nat’l Trust Co., 168 N.H. 40, 42 (2015). We review the trial court’s
application of law to the facts de novo. Id. If our review of the evidence
discloses no genuine issue of material fact and demonstrates that the moving
party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, we will uphold the trial court’s
order. Id. An issue of fact is “material” if it affects the outcome of the case
under applicable substantive law. Lynn v. Wentworth By The Sea Master
Ass’n, 169 N.H. 77, 87 (2016).
The record in this case establishes that the defendant has submitted an
application to the New Hampshire Site Evaluation Committee to install a high
voltage transmission line and related facilities. The proposed project would
consist of a single circuit 320 kV high voltage direct current transmission line
carrying hydroelectric-generated power from the Canadian border to Franklin,
where it would be linked to a 345 kV alternating current transmission line that
terminates in Deerfield. In total, the line would extend 192 miles from the
Canadian border to Deerfield. A portion of the line would be buried
underground within the bounds of existing public highway easements.
The buried portion of the proposed project would include a section of
Route 3 in Clarksville that passes through land owned by the plaintiff. At that
point, Route 3 is a four-rod road, and is maintained as a Class I state highway.
The section of Route 3 at issue was laid out by the selectmen of Clarksville,
Stewartstown, and Pittsburgh in 1931 after finding that “for the
accommodation of the public there is occasion for a new highway.” The
plaintiff’s predecessor-in-title was paid $1,000 for the right-of-way. The
defendant has applied for a license from the New Hampshire Department of
Transportation (DOT) to bury the proposed transmission line between fifty and
seventy feet below the surface of Route 3. See RSA 231:160, :161 (2009).
The plaintiff filed the present action seeking a declaratory judgment that
the proposed use of the right-of-way “exceeds the scope of the public right-of-
way and cannot be lawfully undertaken without [the plaintiff’s] permission,”
and an injunction “preventing [the defendant] from conducting any activities on
[the plaintiff’s property] to advance or implement” the proposed project. The
plaintiff did not specify in its petition any specific harm or unreasonable
burden that the proposed use will impose upon its property. In granting the
defendant summary judgment, the trial court ruled that, pursuant to statute
and longstanding precedent, an underground utility is within the scope of a
public highway easement as a matter of law, and that the DOT has exclusive
authority to determine whether to allow the proposed use.
At the outset, we agree with the trial court that “whether the DOT would
effect a taking of [the plaintiff’s] property if it granted [the defendant] a license
to install the transmission line underneath the stretch of Route 3 at issue is
purely speculative” and, thus, is not ripe for adjudication. “Ripeness relates to
the degree to which the defined issues in a case are based on actual facts and
are capable of being adjudicated on an adequately developed record.” Univ.
Sys. of N.H. Bd. of Trs. v. Dorfsman, 168 N.H. 450, 455 (2015) (quotation and
brackets omitted). In determining whether a claim is ripe, we evaluate the
fitness of the claim for judicial determination and the hardship to the parties
caused by the court’s decision not to address an issue. Id. A claim is fit for
determination when it raises primarily legal issues, it does not require further
factual development, and the challenged action is final. Id. In evaluating
hardship on the parties, we examine whether the contested action imposes an
2
impact upon the parties that is sufficiently direct and immediate to render the
issue appropriate for judicial review at this stage. Id.
Whether any regulatory action results in an unconstitutional taking of
private property is a question that turns upon the specific facts of that case.
See Burrows v. City of Keene, 121 N.H. 590, 598 (1982). Here, because the
DOT has not yet acted upon any license application, whether its potential
approval of a license might result in inverse condemnation is too speculative a
question to be fit for judicial determination. Moreover, as the trial court
observed, the parties have the right both to an administrative appeal and an
appeal to this court from any adverse licensing decision. See RSA 21-L:14-:15,
:18 (2012 & Supp. 2016); RSA 541:6 (2007). Thus, the decision not to address
whether a future licensing determination might result in inverse condemnation
does not result in hardship. Under the circumstances, we conclude that the
trial court did not err by declining to address the constitutionality of a future
licensing decision by the DOT. We, likewise, decline to address whether any
future license granted by the DOT might result in inverse condemnation.
By contrast, whether the defendant’s proposed use of the public highway
easement falls within the scope of the highway easement, as discussed below,
does not require significant factual development. Thus, although the trial
court observed that “[t]he extent of [the defendant’s] actual use of the public
right-of-way and whether such use exceeds the scope of the public highway
easement is similarly speculative,” we conclude that it properly addressed
whether the proposed use would exceed the scope of the easement.
We have long recognized that public highway easements may be used for
the placement of public utilities, including electrical transmission lines. See
McCaffrey v. Company, 80 N.H. 45, 45-46 (1921); Trust Co. v. Electric Co., 71
N.H. 192, 200 (1901). As we have explained:
In this state we have never considered a highway purpose to be
limited solely to the transportation of persons and property on the
highways. “The public easement includes all reasonable modes of
travel and transportation which are not incompatible with proper
use of the highway by others. It is not restricted to the
transportation of persons or property in moveable vehicles but
extends to every new method of conveyance which is within the
general purpose for which highways are designed.” . . .
In view of the plenary power of the State over its highways, it
may allow the location therein of any facilities not inconsistent
with the superior rights of the traveling public. As science
develops highways may be used for any improved methods for the
transmission of persons, property, intelligence or other means to
promote sanitation, public health and welfare. Such use of the
3