THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Public Employee Labor Relations Board
No. 2016-0558
APPEAL OF NASHUA SCHOOL DISTRICT
(New Hampshire Public Employee Labor Relations Board)
Argued: June 1, 2017
Opinion Issued: October 4, 2017
Jackson Lewis P.C., of Portsmouth (Thomas M. Closson on the brief and
orally), for Nashua School District.
Sean R. Cronin, of Manchester, on the brief, and Joseph L. DeLorey, of
Boston, Massachusetts, on the brief and orally, for AFSCME, Council 93, Local
365.
LYNN, J. The Nashua School District (District) appeals an order of the
New Hampshire Public Employee Labor Relations Board (PELRB) finding that
the District committed an unfair labor practice by refusing to bargain with the
American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees (AFSCME),
Council 93, Local 365, Nashua Custodial/Janitorial Staff (Union) concerning
the District’s plan to subcontract custodial work at the expiration of the term of
the collective bargaining agreement (CBA) between the parties. We reverse and
remand.
I
The pertinent facts are as follows. The most recent CBA between the
District and the Union covered the period from July 1, 2013 through June 30,
2016. The CBA encompassed the employment of all full-time and part-time
custodians and maintenance personnel employed by the District. Three
provisions of the CBA are pertinent to the present dispute.
Article 5, entitled “Volunteering and Subcontracting,” states, in relevant
part:
5.2 A. The District agrees there will be no layoffs, demotions or
involuntary transfers as a result of contracting out work.
Regardless of subcontracting, in the event of any layoff
within a classification, the District shall cease to utilize
any subcontractor for work specific to that classification
except for work identified on the master list or previously
agreed upon contracted projects, until such time [as] the
staffing levels return to the pre-layoff levels. The Director
of Plant Operations shall maintain a master list, initialled
by both parties, with mutually agreed-upon work that has
been historically subcontracted out. Work on the master
list shall not be assigned to bargaining unit employees to
complete.
B. 1. The District shall present the work it is contemplating
to subcontract in a reasonable period in advance and not
delay the work so the volume of work is anything but for
unforeseen circumstances. The Union shall respond in
five (5) working days, or the District shall proceed with
subcontracting the work.
2. The District shall identify the primary classification in
accordance with the bargaining unit job description that
it believes will be used in the work to be discussed. If the
work will be completed on overtime, the District will post
the overtime opportunity upon notice from the Union
under Section B.1. above and the Union shall have the
opportunity to survey the work force for interest and
availability. If the agreed upon necessary workforce is not
available by the mutually agreed upon date, then the
District may contract out.
3. When bargaining unit employees are doing work which
was initially contemplated to be subcontracted, custodial
staffing of the building shall be subject to an agreement
2
by the parties. Any agreement on building coverage
based on the previous sentence shall not be used outside
of this process.
C. Should any work be contemplated to contract out, the
District and the Union agree the following procedure shall
occur prior to subcontracting.
1. Step One – The Union will designate one Union
member. The Director of Plant Operations will advise
this member of the work it is contemplating
contracting out. A discussion as to whether or not
bargaining unit members can complete the work shall
occur. If an agreement cannot be reached and the
District still desires to subcontract said work, the
parties shall proceed to Step Two.
2. Step Two – The District shall bring the proposed work
to the next scheduled joint labor-management
committee meeting for discussion. If an agreement
cannot be reached and the District still desires to
subcontract said work, the parties shall proceed to
Step Three.
3. Step Three – The parties shall mutually agree on an
arbitrator to decide if the work is bargaining unit work
or not. The basis for consideration shall be the job
descriptions for all classifications, the scope of the
bargaining unit work, as well as prior grievance
decisions and/or grievance settlements. Overtime
shall not be a factor in considering if the work is
bargaining unit work or not. The District may
subcontract out the work prior to arbitration; however,
the subcontracting of the work cannot be used as
consideration for the arbitrator’s decision and the
District understands that an arbitrator’s decision that
the work should have been done in-house will require
the District to pay bargaining unit members for work
already performed.
4. The Arbitrator’s decision shall be final and binding on
the parties. The arbitration shall be in accordance
with AAA rules. The cost of the arbitration shall be
borne equally by both parties.
3
Article 28 of the CBA, entitled “Management Rights,” states:
Except as otherwise . . . provided in this Agreement, the Union
recognizes that the direction of the District operations; the
determination of the methods and means by which such
operations are to be conducted; the supervision, management and
control of the District work force; the right to hire, promote,
transfer, and lay off employees; the right, lawfully and for just
cause, to demote, discipline, suspend or discharge employees; the
right to determine the hours and schedules of work and the work
tasks and standards of performance for employees and all other
rights and responsibilities not specifically provided in this
[A]greement, shall remain the function of Management, all in
accordance with RSA Ch. 273-A. It shall be the right of the Union,
however, to present and process grievances of its members whose
wages, working conditions or other rights expressly and specifically
provided in this Agreement are violated by Management.
Article 29 of the CBA, entitled “Duration of Agreement” provides, in relevant
part:
On June 30, 2016 and on each June 30th thereafter, this
Agreement shall be deemed renewed and extended for the ensuing
year, unless one hundred twenty (120) calendar days or more prior
to such date, either party shall have delivered to the other, notice
of its desire not to have the agreement in its then form renewed.
Such notice shall be deemed delivered when mailed, postage
prepaid, addressed to the last address of the addressee which is
known to the sender of this