THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0549, Joseph W. Chalifoux v. Jennifer M.
Chalifoux & a., the court on September 19, 2017, issued the
following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
The plaintiff, Joseph W. Chalifoux, appeals several orders of the Superior Court
(Temple, J.) dismissing his claims against some of the defendants for lack of
personal jurisdiction based upon an absence of constitutionally-sufficient
minimum contacts with New Hampshire, against other defendants for lack of
personal jurisdiction based upon defective service of process, and against still
other defendants for failure to state a claim upon which relief may be granted.
The plaintiff further appeals the awarding of attorney’s fees to some of the
defendants. We affirm.
In reviewing an order granting a motion to dismiss, we assume the well-
pleaded factual allegations in the complaint to be true, and construe those
allegations in the light most favorable to the plaintiff. See Beane v. Dana S.
Beane & Co., 160 N.H. 708, 711 (2010). We additionally consider documents
attached to the plaintiff’s pleadings, documents the authenticity of which the
parties do not dispute, official public records, or documents referred to in the
complaint. See id. We do not, however, credit allegations that are not well-
pleaded, “including the statement of conclusions of fact and principles of law.”
Snierson v. Scruton, 145 N.H. 73, 76 (2000). Moreover, when a motion to
dismiss does not simply challenge the sufficiency of the plaintiff’s legal claims,
but raises certain defenses, such as a challenge to the trial court’s jurisdiction,
the trial court must look beyond the unsubstantiated allegations in the
complaint and determine, based upon the facts, whether the plaintiff has
sufficiently demonstrated the right to seek relief. See K.L.N. Construction Co.
v. Town of Pelham, 167 N.H. 180, 183 (2014). It is the plaintiff’s burden to
establish that the trial court may properly exercise personal jurisdiction over a
particular defendant. See Fellows v. Colburn, 162 N.H. 685, 690 (2011).
We will uphold a dismissal for failure to state a claim if the pleaded facts
do not constitute a basis for legal relief. Beane, 160 N.H. at 711. We review a
dismissal for lack of personal jurisdiction under the prima facie standard de
novo. Fellows, 162 N.H. at 690. We will uphold an award of attorney’s fees
absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion, according substantial deference
to the trial court. Town of Barrington v. Townsend, 164 N.H. 241, 249 (2012).
The present case arises out of domestic relations proceedings in
Massachusetts between the plaintiff and his former spouse, defendant Jennifer
Chalifoux (Jennifer). The other defendants include: (1) James Cieslik, who is
Jennifer’s father; (2) the Town of Tyngsborough, Massachusetts, its police
department, and its police officers Woods, Wagner, and Bourque; (3) Charlene
Shute, who is another former spouse of the plaintiff; (4) Jamie Mauritz James
and John A. James, who were Jennifer’s legal counsel in the underlying divorce
proceedings; and (5) Richard Wolman, who was assigned by the Massachusetts
court as a guardian ad litem in the underlying divorce proceedings.
The plaintiff alleged that in 2013, shortly after he had filed a motion for
custody of his children in the divorce, Jennifer filed a petition in a different
Massachusetts court seeking a restraining order against him. Jennifer based
the petition, according to the complaint, solely upon an allegation that she had
recently learned of the plaintiff’s acquisition of firearms and possession of them
in Massachusetts, despite knowing that he possessed a large and valuable
collection of firearms at a storage facility in Manchester. Tyngsborough police
officers allegedly accompanied Jennifer to an ex parte hearing at which she
obtained the restraining order, subsequently served the order upon the
plaintiff, and allegedly detained him, interrogated him, and conducted
warrantless searches of his person, car, and New Hampshire residence, and of
a Massachusetts residence of his then-girlfriend. The Massachusetts court
that issued the ex parte order subsequently extended it, after an evidentiary
hearing, for a period of one year. We note that, at no point in the complaint
does the plaintiff allege that he appealed or otherwise successfully challenged
the lawfulness of the restraining order in the Massachusetts courts.
After the restraining order was issued and served upon the plaintiff,
Wagner allegedly threatened to arrest him for possessing firearms in violation
of it. At that point, the plaintiff alleges that he relinquished control of the
firearms to the Manchester Police Department. Nevertheless, the plaintiff
claims that the Tyngsborough Police Department then sought to obtain a
criminal complaint against him for possession of firearms. Jamie Mauritz
James subsequently initiated a proceeding, on behalf of Jennifer, seeking to
force a sale of the firearms. Although not alleged in his complaint, the plaintiff
asserts in his brief, without citing any support in the record, that the
Massachusetts divorce court has since ordered that the firearms be sold and
the funds used to satisfy a child support arrearage, that he has appealed that
order in Massachusetts, and that Jennifer has obtained the release and sale of
the firearms without a separate New Hampshire court order.
The plaintiff, who was self-represented, initially filed suit in the United
States District Court for the District of New Hampshire against all defendants
in this case except the Tyngsborough Police Department, asserting numerous
claims under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 (2012) and related state law claims arising out
of the alleged actions of the Tyngsborough police officers. Pursuant to 28
2
U.S.C. § 1915 (2012), the federal court dismissed, sua sponte, most of the
federal claims, including a claim that all of the defendants had conspired to
violate § 1983, for failure to state a claim upon which relief may be granted.
The court allowed § 1983 claims and related state law claims alleging that
Bourque and Woods had unlawfully detained and questioned the plaintiff to be
served upon Bourque, Woods, and the Town of Tyngsborough, dismissed a
Massachusetts statutory cause of action against the town with prejudice, and
dismissed remaining state law claims without prejudice to re-filing them in
state court. Thereafter, the federal court dismissed the remaining claims
against Bourque, Woods, and the Town of Tyngsborough on the basis that
those defendants did not have sufficient minimum contacts with the State of
New Hampshire to satisfy due process. The federal court noted that its
dismissal on personal jurisdiction grounds was “without prejudice.”
The plaintiff filed the present case in New Hampshire Superior Court.
After several defendants moved to dismiss, he obtained counsel, and the trial
court stayed the case so that his counsel could re-plead it. The plaintiff then
revised his complaint, asserting several § 1983 claims and state law assault
and battery claims against the parties affiliated with the Tyngsborough Police
Department, and the following state law claims against the remaining
defendants: (1) malicious prosecution through the initiation of criminal
proceedings; (2) negligent communications with and reporting to law
enforcement officers and courts regarding the plaintiff’s firearms possession; (3)
wanton and reckless conduct; (4) negligent infliction of emotional distress; (5)
civil conspiracy “by communicating to each other and police agencies” that the
plaintiff “was in illegal possession of firearms,” leading to his “unlawful search,
seizure, and ultimate arrest and criminal proceedings” in violation of his civil
rights; and (6) conversion of the plaintiff’s firearms through negligent
communications with and reporting to law enforcement officers.
In dismissing the claims against the parties affiliated with the
Tyngsborough Police Department and against Wolman, the trial court reasoned
that: (1) the plaintiff was collaterally estopped by the federal court’s order from
establishing personal jurisdiction over the Town of Tyngsborough, Bourque, or
Woods, see Archie v. Piaggio Company, 109 N.H. 162, 163 (1968) (applying
collateral estoppel to a prior determination of a lack of personal jurisdiction);
(2) service of process against Bourque, Woods, Wagner, the Tyngsborough
Police Department, and Wolman was defective under RSA 510:4 (2010) because
Bourque, Woods, and Wagner were not served individually with their own
copies of the complaint, see, e.g., Rogers v. Buchanan, 58 N.H. 47, 48 (1876),
and because the Tyngsborough Police Department and Wolman were not
served “forthwith” after the plaintiff had effected service upon the New
Hampshire Secretary of State, see Impact Food Sales v. Evans, 160 N.H. 386,
391-94 (2010); and (3) the Tyngsborough Police Department is not a suable
entity independent of the Town of Tyngsborough, see, e.g., Henschel v.
Worcester Police Dep’t, 445 F.2d 624, 624 (1st Cir. 1971) (holding that a
3