THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0345, State of New Hampshire v. Joshua
J. DeBoer, the court on April 12, 2017, issued the following
order:
Having considered the parties’ briefs and the record submitted on appeal,
we conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R.
18(1). The defendant, Joshua J. DeBoer, appeals his convictions following a
jury trial in Superior Court (O’Neill, J.) on two misdemeanor counts of
disobeying an officer, see RSA 265:4, I(c) (2014), and one misdemeanor count
of reckless conduct, see RSA 631:3 (2016). We affirm.
I. Facts
The jury could have found the following facts. Shortly before 1:00 a.m.
on a Sunday in October 2015, a Laconia police officer observed a “newer type
Jeep” that had a “boxy shape with . . . flares and . . . round headlights” pass
him on Weirs Boulevard. The officer’s radar unit indicated that the vehicle was
traveling 66 miles per hour in a 35-mile-per-hour zone. The officer turned his
cruiser around and attempted to “catch up to the vehicle.” The officer observed
the vehicle traverse along Union Avenue. The officer radioed Officer Armstrong
and asked him to follow the vehicle so as to identify it.
Armstrong saw a small sedan and a “boxy” sports utility vehicle (SUV)
“coming up behind it” at a “very, very quick pace.” Armstrong observed the
“boxy” SUV “brake at such a short distance that the nose of the vehicle went
down and the back of the vehicle went up, indicating that the vehicle was
stopping short or had been traveling at a high rate of speed and was now
coming to a stop.” Armstrong activated “all of the emergency lights” on his
vehicle and made a U-turn. As Armstrong drove down Union Avenue, he
observed the SUV “still moving at a very healthy clip.” He then saw the SUV
turn right onto Elm Street, without a directional signal or brakes being used.
According to Armstrong, the intersection of Union Avenue and Elm Street is
“very dangerous” because there is pedestrian traffic there “at all hours of the
day.” Armstrong testified that, “even at 1 or 2 in the morning there are still
people that are walking to and from the Irving Station, to and from McDonald’s,
and just [in] that general area” and “there can always be somebody out on the
sidewalk.”
Armstrong continued to pursue the SUV. He observed that the distance
between his vehicle and that of the suspect “was just growing” despite
Armstrong’s efforts to “close that gap.” As Armstrong’s vehicle entered a curve
in the road, he became concerned that he was traveling too quickly to avoid the
SUV if it came to a stop. Accordingly, he attempted to “slide into the left lane,”
but he lost control and “total[led] his cruiser.”
Meanwhile, Officer Mailloux was driving east on Elm Street toward Union
Avenue. He saw the SUV travel around a corner at a high rate of speed.
Mailloux’s radar unit emitted a high-pitched tone, which indicated that the
SUV was going well over the 30-mile-per-hour speed limit. Mailloux estimated
that the SUV was traveling at more than 75 miles per hour. Mailloux turned
on all of the emergency lights in his vehicle as the SUV passed him and
followed the vehicle “down Elm Street towards the intersection of Parade Road
and Meredith Center.” Once Mailloux arrived at the intersection, he could no
longer see the SUV. He turned off his emergency lights and continued driving
up Parade Road. He then saw the SUV ahead. He followed it with his
emergency lights turned off. The SUV then “[took] off at a high rate of speed.”
Mailloux estimated that, at this point, the SUV was traveling at more than 100
miles per hour.
Mailloux observed the SUV cross a double-yellow line to pass another
vehicle. Mailloux activated his emergency lights again so that the other vehicle
would pull over, which it did. Mailloux then continued his pursuit of the SUV
with his emergency lights off. The SUV continued to speed. Mailloux testified
that he followed the SUV for “probably two miles” and observed that its “speeds
were consistently about 80 to 100 miles an hour.” As the SUV approached
Meredith, it began to slow down. Believing that it was now safe to conduct a
motor vehicle stop, Mailloux activated his emergency lights. Eventually, the
SUV slowed down further and stopped. Mailloux described the SUV as a dark,
2006, “Hum-Vee” or “Hummer.” Eventually, Mailloux arrested the driver, the
defendant in this case.
The defendant was charged with two misdemeanor counts of disobeying
an officer. The first charge alleged that he disobeyed an officer when he
increased his speed so as to elude pursuit by Mailloux (the Mailloux charge).
See RSA 265:4, I(c). The second charge alleged that the defendant disobeyed
an officer by failing to stop when Armstrong signaled him to do so by using
“audible or visual emergency warning signals” (the Armstrong charge). Id. He
was also charged with felony reckless conduct for driving his 2006 “Hummer
on Parade Road at excessive speed and passing other motorists while failing to
obey the rules of the road.” See RSA 631:3.
The jury found him guilty of both charges alleging that he had disobeyed
an officer. The jury acquitted the defendant of felony reckless conduct, but
convicted him of the lesser included offense of misdemeanor reckless conduct.
2
After he was convicted, the defendant filed a motion for judgment
notwithstanding the verdict (JNOV) on the Mailloux charge. The State moved
to dismiss the defendant’s motion because, only days after filing it, he filed this
appeal. The defendant did not object to the State’s motion. Accordingly, the
trial court dismissed the defendant’s motion for JNOV. The defendant did not
move for reconsideration of that dismissal.
II. Discussion
A. Mistrial
On appeal, the defendant first argues that the trial court erred by not
declaring a mistrial after the prosecutor, in her opening statement, asserted
that Mailloux would testify “that as soon as he made contact with the
defendant, the defendant said what’s going on, that wasn’t me. . . . He also
said, I saw the blue lights and I pulled over. . . . And he said something to the
effect of it wasn’t me, if I get into trouble[,] I could go to jail.”
The State correctly contends that the defendant did not preserve this
argument for the court’s review. “The general rule in this jurisdiction is that a
contemporaneous and specific objection is required to preserve an issue for
appellate review.” State v. Russo, 140 N.H. 751, 753 (1996) (quotation
omitted). To afford the trial court an opportunity to correct an error it may
have made, we require that an objection state explicitly the specific ground of
objection. Id. The defendant failed to meet these requirements: although he
objected generally to the prosecutor’s statement, he never moved for a mistrial.
See id. Nor did the defendant ever argue to the trial court that the court erred
by failing to declare a mistrial sua sponte. Under these circumstances, we
decline to consider the merits of the defendant’s mistrial argument. See id.
B. Mailloux Charge
The defendant next argues that, to convict him of disobeying an officer by
increasing his speed so as to elude Mailloux’s pursuit, the State had to prove
that Mailloux used his emergency lights or siren when the defendant increased
his speed. As the State correctly observes, the defendant also did not preserve
this argument for our review.
The jury was not instructed that it had to find that the defendant eluded
pursuit by increasing his speed when Mailloux was using his emergency lights
or siren, and the record does not demonstrate that the defendant ever objected
to the jury instruction. The defendant did raise this argument in his post-
conviction motion for JNOV. However, the trial court dismissed that motion
without objection from the defendant, and, thus, never considered his
argument substantively.
3