THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0293, State of New Hampshire v. James
Bazinet, the court on November 15, 2016, issued the following
order:
Having considered the memoranda filed in response to our order of
September 6, 2016, relative to the bail issue, and the record provided on
appeal, we conclude that oral argument is unnecessary to resolve the bail
issue. We affirm the trial court’s decision to deny bail pending appeal.
RSA 597:1-a (Supp. 2015) governs a request for bail pending appeal. It
provides that, for a person who has been convicted of a felony and sentenced to
imprisonment, bail is generally not available, unless that person establishes:
(1) By clear and convincing evidence, taking into
consideration the nature of the crime and the length of the
sentence imposed, that the person is not likely to fail to appear to
answer the judgment following the conclusion of the appellate
proceeding, or to pose a danger to himself or herself or to any other
person or the community, or to intimidate witnesses, or otherwise
to interfere with the administration of justice; and
(2) By a preponderance of the evidence that the appeal will
not likely be frivolous or taken merely for delay.
RSA 597:1-a, III(a). In the event the trial court denies a request for bail
pending appeal, the statute requires that it “provide for the record the reasons
for such denial.” RSA 597:1-a, V.
In this case, the defendant, James Bazinet, was convicted of negligent
homicide, see RSA 630:3 (2016), by driving a motor vehicle while he was
intoxicated and causing a fatal collision. The Superior Court (Colburn, J.)
sentenced him to a stand-committed term of imprisonment of five-to-ten years.
At his sentencing hearing, after the trial court announced this sentence, the
defendant requested that it continue his bail pending an appeal, arguing that
he had not been arrested while the case had been pending in the trial court,
that he had appeared for trial and sentencing, and that he had regular medical
appointments. The State countered that the case had “dragged on . . . since
2013,” that the defendant was now “an even greater flight risk,” and that the
State Prison would attend to his medical needs. The State also incorporated
arguments it had earlier made in unsuccessfully requesting that the court
revoke bail, including an argument that he was a danger to the public because
he had been convicted of negligent homicide, and had been convicted several
times of driving while intoxicated in Massachusetts.
The trial court denied the request for bail pending appeal, explaining:
I’m going to not issue a bail order pending appeal. I think,
although I know there are a number of appeal issues at the
forefront of this, I’m not inclined to do that in almost any case,
with rare exceptions, and I don’t find that there are any
circumstances around this case that would encourage me to do so.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court “did not undertake the
statutorily-required analysis” because it failed to “discuss the risk that [he]
would not appear following appeal proceedings,” the “potential danger he may
pose to the community,” or the merits of his appeal issues. We ordinarily
assume, however, that the trial court made all findings necessary to support its
decision. See State v. Silva, 158 N.H. 96, 102 (2008). Moreover, although the
trial court was required to “provide for the record [its] reasons” for denying the
request for bail pending appeal, RSA 597:1-a, V, at no point did the defendant
request specific findings with respect to the statutory elements, see State v.
Addison (Capital Murder), 165 N.H. 381, 443 (2014).
Under RSA 597:1-a, III(a), the defendant was not entitled to bail unless
he could establish, by clear and convincing evidence, that he was not a flight
risk and posed no danger to the community. Here, the trial court had imposed
a substantial prison term on the defendant for causing the death of another by
driving while intoxicated, and according to the State, he had been convicted
several times before of driving while intoxicated. The only reasons offered by
the defendant for granting bail were that he had not been arrested, and had
shown up for trial, while the case was pending, and that he was being treated
for medical issues. Under these circumstances, the trial court reasonably
could have found that the defendant failed to carry his burden of proof.
Dalianis, C.J., and Hicks, Conboy, Lynn, and Bassett, JJ., concurred.
Eileen Fox,
Clerk
2