THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2016-0429, State of New Hampshire v. Charles
Normil, the court on January 17, 2019, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. Following
a jury trial in Superior Court (Abramson, J.), the defendant, Charles Normil,
was convicted on four counts of aggravated felonious sexual assault (AFSA), see
RSA 632-A:2 (Supp. 2018), one count of attempted AFSA, see RSA 632-A:2;
RSA 629:1 (2016), two counts of first degree assault, see RSA 631:1 (Supp.
2018), two counts of second degree assault, see RSA 631:2 (Supp. 2018), one
count of burglary, see RSA 635:1 (2016), one count of conspiracy to commit
burglary, see RSA 635:1, I; RSA 629:3 (2016), and one count of falsifying
physical evidence, see RSA 641:6 (2016). On appeal, the defendant argues that
the trial court erred by admitting a witness’s testimony at trial regarding the
defendant’s request that the witness retain and destroy evidence. The
defendant challenges the trial court’s rulings that: (1) the evidence was
admissible because the defendant failed to include it in a pretrial motion in
limine; and (2) it was admissible as consciousness of guilt evidence. We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. The defendant’s
convictions arise out of events that occurred on November 24, 2012, when he
and his co-conspirator, Lamontagne, were driving around the Bedford area
using illicit drugs and the defendant informed Lamontagne that he intended to
commit a burglary. Lamontagne stopped the car and the defendant put on a
mask and gloves that he retrieved from the car. Lamontagne also put on gloves
and the two men approached the unoccupied home of E.Q. and his wife, S.V.
Lamontagne helped the defendant gain access to the house and then returned
to his car. As soon as Lamontagne got into his car, he saw another car pull
into the driveway. He alerted the defendant by calling his cell phone and then
drove around the neighborhood waiting for the defendant.
While the defendant was inside the house, E.Q. and S.V. returned to
their residence where they discovered the defendant, who demanded that they
provide him with the location of the safe or lockbox. When they told the
defendant that there was no safe or lockbox, the defendant took their cell
phones and told them to lie on the floor. The defendant then beat E.Q.,
stabbing him in the head with a screwdriver, until E.Q. lost consciousness.
The defendant then tied up S.V. and assaulted her, physically and sexually.
The defendant subsequently took E.Q.’s wallet, both victims’ watches and their
wedding bands, and fled the residence.
After waiting for approximately 15 to 20 minutes, Lamontagne picked up
the defendant as he came out of the woods near the victims’ residence. When
the defendant entered the car, his gloves were bloody and he described in detail
the nature and extent of his assaults of both victims.1 The defendant and
Lamontagne then began destroying or concealing the evidence of their crimes.
The defendant threw his bloody gloves out the car window in Amherst. He then
wiped any blood off of the car with socks that he found in the car, and threw
those socks over a guardrail in Amherst. They went back to Lamontagne’s
house where the defendant took off his bloody clothes, washed them with
bleach, and put them in a black plastic bag. Lamontagne and the defendant
then drove back to Amherst to dispose of the clothes. On one of the following
nights, Lamontagne and the defendant returned to the Amherst location,
retrieved the clothing, and drove to two different locations in Milford where the
defendant disposed of the evidence.
A few months later, the police obtained information linking Lamontagne
and the defendant to the Bedford home invasion. They questioned
Lamontagne, who gave an account of what happened that night in Bedford.
Lamontagne also brought the police to one location where they found E.Q’s
wallet, and a second location in Milford where they found a plastic bag with
bleached clothing. Based, in part, upon this evidence, the State indicted the
defendant for the assaults and burglary committed in Bedford and for falsifying
evidence.
Prior to trial, the defendant filed a motion in limine to exclude letters and
testimony by Lamontagne and another witness, Leblanc, regarding bags that
allegedly contained items from other burglaries or thefts unrelated to this case.
The trial court granted the motion, finding that “[i]t appears that at no point
did the bags contain items connected with the charged crimes,” and they do
not have probative value.
At trial, the State sought to introduce evidence through another witness,
Faucher, proffering that she would testify that she received a suitcase from the
defendant’s mother, who told her that it belonged to the defendant, and that he
wanted Faucher to hang onto it. The State further proffered that she would
testify that she placed the suitcase in a closet and then received a letter from
the defendant a few weeks later telling her to dispose of it because the police
were looking to raid the house. The State also proffered that Faucher would
1 Although E.Q. and S.V. survived the assault, they both suffered debilitating injuries. The nature
and extent of the vicious assaults and the severe injuries suffered by the victims were sufficient to
support each of the defendant’s convictions, but those facts are not germane to the issues raised
in this appeal and, thus, are not described in this order.
2
testify that she disposed of the suitcase and never opened it or observed its
contents. The defendant challenged the admissibility of this evidence. The
trial court ruled that Faucher’s testimony was admissible because it was not
included in the motion in limine filed prior to trial and it was “offered to show
consciousness of guilt.”
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred when it
admitted Faucher’s testimony regarding the suitcase because New Hampshire
Rule of Evidence 404(b) prohibits the admission of other acts evidence unless it
is relevant for a non-propensity purpose. He contends that the trial court
committed legal error when it: (1) overruled his “Rule 404(b) objection on the
ground that he did not seek to exclude it in a pretrial motion in limine”; and (2)
“ruled that the evidence was admissible because it showed [the defendant’s]
consciousness of guilt in ‘a case.’”
The State disputes that admission of this testimony was error, but
argues that even if it were, any error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
The defendant counters that the State failed to sufficiently brief the issue of
harmless error regarding the character of the erroneously admitted evidence
itself, and, therefore, we should decline to consider it.
Although the State does not explicitly discuss the character of the
evidence in the context of its harmless error analysis, the State assesses the
inconsequential nature of this evidence when it addresses its prejudice as it
relates to the Rule 404(b) analysis. Thus, for the purposes of this appeal, we
assume, without deciding, that admitting Faucher’s testimony was erroneous,
and we agree with the State that any error was harmless beyond a reasonable
doubt. See State v. Cooper, 168 N.H. 161, 165 (2015); State v. Ramsey, 166
N.H. 45, 47-48 (2014) (applying harmless error review to admission of evidence
assumed to be in violation of New Hampshire Rules of Evidence and State and
Federal Confrontation Clauses).
The harmless-error doctrine recognizes the principle that the
central purpose of a criminal trial is to decide the factual question
of the defendant’s guilt or innocence, and promotes public respect
for the criminal process by focusing on the underlying fairness of
the trial rather than on the virtually inevitable presence of
immaterial error.
State v. Bazinet, 170 N.H. 680, 686 (2018) (quotation omitted).
To establish that an error was harmless, the State must prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that the error did not affect the verdict. Id. at 687. This
standard applies to both the erroneous admission and exclusion of evidence.
Id. An error may be harmless beyond a reasonable doubt if the other evidence
of the defendant’s guilt is of an overwhelming nature, quantity, or weight, and
3