THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2017-0535, MPG Bedford, LLC v. KDG Bedford,
LLC & a., the court on August 13, 2018, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
plaintiff, MPG Bedford, LLC (MPG), appeals multiple orders from the Superior
Court (Abramson, J., and Messer, J.) that denied its motion for partial
summary judgment and granted summary judgment to the defendants, KDG
Bedford, LLC (KDG), Enrohtwah, LLC (Enrohtwah), and nominal defendant
Bentley Commons-Bedford, LLC (Company). The trial court ruled that the
defendants did not breach a duty owed the Company when they did not seek to
apply a discount provision in a previously negotiated forbearance agreement.
The trial court also ruled that the defendants did not breach a duty owed the
Company when it paid a fee that arose as a consequence of a loan modification.
The court concluded that the decision to pay the fee was entitled to the
protection of the business judgment rule. We affirm.
The following relevant facts are derived from the trial court’s orders or
are otherwise undisputed. The Company has three Class A members: MPG,
KDG, and Enrohtwah. KDG and Enrohtwah have an eighty percent interest in
the Company and are owned and controlled by Glenn Kaplan. Because the
Company’s operating agreement provides for management by any two Class A
members, KDG and Enrohtwah control and manage the Company.
In 2006, the Company entered into a loan agreement with bondholders to
finance the construction of a senior housing development. Manufacturers &
Traders Trust Company (M&T) served as the Trustee for the bonds, and Hamlin
Capital (Hamlin) served as the bondholder’s representative. In 2010, the
Company defaulted on the loan, which gave M&T the right to demand
immediate payment, impose higher interest rates, and to foreclose on the
development. As of January 2012, the unpaid principal balance on the loan
was $16,000,000.
In July 2012, KDG and Enrohtwah, on the Company’s behalf, negotiated
a forbearance agreement with M&T to avoid foreclosure and favorably amend
the loan repayment terms. The negotiated agreement included a mechanism
by which, when the Company’s monthly net cash flow was applied to amounts
due on the loan, it would reduce the Company’s indebtedness by $1.00 for
every $0.75 paid, up to an aggregate pay-down of $3,000,000 (discount
provision). As a result of this discount provision, between the signing of the
forbearance agreement in July 2012 and February 2014, the Company paid
$397,500 from its net cash flow to M&T and received a $530,000 reduction in
its indebtedness. In February 2014, the Company refinanced its debt with a
loan servicer for the US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
and paid off the balance of its loan to M&T. The Company did not exercise or
attempt to exercise the discount provision at the time of refinancing.
At the time the Company refinanced and paid off the loan, the loan
agreement with M&T had a five percent prepayment penalty totaling $800,000.
The Company, represented by Kaplan, negotiated the prepayment penalty down
to three percent, or $480,000, thereby saving the Company $320,000. During
negotiations, Hamlin demanded a $220,000 fee for the loan modification.
Kaplan negotiated that fee down to $160,000.
In 2015, MPG sued the defendants for allegedly violating their duty of
care to the Company by failing to insist that the discount provision applied to
the refinance payoff (Count 1), and by paying the $160,000 to Hamlin, a fee
that MPG asserts the Company had no legal obligation to pay (Count 2).
The parties filed cross-motions for summary judgment on Count 1. The
sole issue was whether, at the time that the Company refinanced and paid off
its entire loan to M&T, the Company had a right to apply the discount
provision. The discount provision reads:
On a monthly basis by the 1st day of each month . . . , [M&T] shall
withdraw from the Lockbox [a mechanism established in the
original loan agreement] all income, rents and profits collected
from the [senior housing development project], less actual
expenses paid . . . (the “Net Cash Flow”) and, together with any
other amounts paid by the [Company] from other sources
(including, without limitation, any bridge loan or other permitted
debt subordinated to the Bonds), [M&T] shall apply said funds to
the balance due under the Loan, reducing the Indebtedness by
$1.00 for every $.75 remitted, up to an aggregate pay down of
$3,000,000. Thereafter, the Net Cash Flow shall be applied to the
Loan balance dollar for dollar.
(Emphasis added.) The defendants argued that the discount provision only
applied to partial payments, not to a payment in full satisfaction of the loan.
MPG argued that the discount provision applied regardless of whether the
payment was a partial or full payment.
The trial court denied both summary judgment motions. Both parties
moved for reconsideration. Upon reconsideration, the trial court concluded
that it had not erred in using the canon of construction ejusdem generis to
2
interpret the phrase “including, without limitation, any bridge loan or other
permitted debt subordinated to the Bonds” in the discount provision. Ejusdem
generis means that, “where specific words in a statute follow general ones, the
general words are construed to embrace only objects similar in nature to those
enumerated by the specific words.” Dolbeare v. City of Laconia, 168 N.H. 52,
55 (2015). Although MPG argued that the principle ejusdem generis is
inapplicable to contract interpretation, the court concluded that “[i]t is well-
settled that ejusdem generis applies when interpreting instruments other than
statutes, including contracts.” See 11 Williston on Contracts § 32:10, at 739-
40 (4th ed. 2012). The court recognized that, “[i]n the context of contracts, . . .
the ‘specific clause cannot control the contract when that meaning defeats [the]
agreement’s overall scheme or purpose,’” but found that here, “applying
ejusdem generis does not defeat the contract’s overall scheme or purpose.”
(Quoting 11 Williston on Contracts, supra § 32:10, at 745.) Accordingly, the
trial court concluded that it had not erred in its construction of the phrase
“including, without limitation” and that the phrase “was intended to limit the
discount’s application to payments from sources in the same nature as a
bridge loan or debt subordinated to the Bonds.”
The trial court next addressed whether a refinance loan is of “the same
nature” as a bridge loan or subordinate debt. (Quotation omitted.) See State v.
Njogu, 156 N.H. 551, 552 (2007). Looking to the definitions of “bridge loan”
and “subordinate debt” from Black’s Law Dictionary, the court ruled that the
definitions of both terms “presuppose the continued existence of the underlying
debt, suggesting the parties did not intend to apply the discount provision to
payments that entirely paid off the underlying debt.” The court concluded that,
as a matter of law, the refinance loan “was not in the same nature” as a bridge
loan or subordinate debt. The court found that the defendants “had no duty to
seek to apply the discount provision when they paid off the Company’s debt
with the refinance loan.” Accordingly, the trial court granted the defendants’
motion for reconsideration, and entered summary judgment for the defendants.
The defendants subsequently moved for summary judgment on Count 2.
They argued that the decision to pay $160,000 to Hamlin was a decision
entitled to the protection of the business judgment rule because it was a
reasonable action that benefited the Company. MPG countered that the court
should deny the motion because there were issues of material fact regarding
“the so-called benefit that Defendants’ [sic] secured for the Company, Hamlin’s
entitlement to any fee whatsoever, and the propriety of Defendants’ unilateral
decision to pay the fee.” MPG also contended that, because the defendants
worked with Hamlin on other projects, the defendants paid the fee merely to
preserve their personal relationship, and did so at the Company’s expense.
In ruling on the defendants’ motion for summary judgment, the trial
court correctly stated that the “general purpose of the [business judgment rule]
‘is to afford directors broad discretion in making corporate decisions and to
3