THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2017-0325, James Faro & a. v. IKO Industries,
Inc., the court on January 26, 2018, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
We affirm.
The plaintiffs, James Faro and Mary Jean Faro, appeal an order of the
Superior Court (Ignatius, J.), granting summary judgment in favor of the
defendant, IKO Industries, Inc., on their claims arising out of the alleged
premature failure of roofing shingles manufactured by the defendant. They
argue that, in granting summary judgment on their breach of express warranty
claim, the trial court erred by concluding that the summary judgment record
did not support findings: (1) that the defendant advertised its shingles as “30-
year” shingles, or made any express warranty concerning the longevity of its
shingles that was in addition to a written limited warranty (limited warranty);
or (2) that representations within the defendant’s marketing materials had
become a basis of the parties’ bargain.1
In reviewing an order granting summary judgment, we consider the
affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from such
evidence, in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Weaver v.
Stewart, 169 N.H. 420, 425 (2016). We review the trial court’s application of
law to the facts de novo. Id.
The party opposing a properly-supported motion for summary judgment
must do more than merely assert general allegations or denials; rather, the
opposing party must set forth specific facts demonstrating that there is a
1 In addition to breach of express warranty, the plaintiffs asserted claims for breach of implied
warranty, violations of the New Hampshire Consumer Protection Act and the federal
Magnuson-Moss Act, and negligent misrepresentation. On appeal, however, they challenge
only those portions of the trial court’s narrative order that analyzed the summary judgment
record as to the breach of express warranty claim. Although the plaintiffs contend, in passing,
that the evidence on summary judgment created genuine issues of material fact not only as to
whether the defendant breached an express warranty as to the longevity of its shingles, but as
to whether the defendant misrepresented the longevity of its shingles or violated the Consumer
Protection Act, they have not argued that, even if the trial court’s analysis of the summary
judgment record as to their express warranty claim is correct, its analysis as to any of their
remaining claims is erroneous. Accordingly, any such argument is waived. See State v.
Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 49 (2003) (stating that only arguments that are fully briefed will be
reviewed on appeal).
genuine issue for trial. Id. If our review of the evidence discloses no genuine
issue of material fact and demonstrates that the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law, we will uphold the trial court’s order granting
summary judgment. Id. An issue of fact is “material” if it affects the outcome
of the case under applicable substantive law. Lynn v. Wentworth By The Sea
Master Ass’n, 169 N.H. 77, 87 (2016).
“Any affirmation of fact or promise made by the seller to the buyer which
relates to the goods and becomes part of the basis of the bargain,” or “[a]ny
description of the goods which is made part of the basis of the bargain,” creates
an express warranty that the goods will conform to the affirmation, promise, or
description. RSA 382-A:2-313(1)(a)&(b) (2011). However, “an affirmation
merely of the value of the goods or a statement purporting to be merely the
seller’s opinion or commendation of the goods does not create a warranty.”
RSA 382-A:2-313(2) (2011). “Therefore, to create an express warranty, the
promise or affirmation of fact must both relate to the goods and become part of
the basis of the contractual bargain.” Kelleher v. Marvin Lumber & Cedar Co.,
152 N.H. 813, 841 (2005).
The statute of limitations on a claim for breach of express warranty is
generally four years from when the claim has accrued. RSA 382-A:2-725(1)
(2011). By agreement, however, parties may reduce the limitations period to
not less than one year. Id. A breach of express warranty claim “accrues” upon
tender of delivery of the goods, unless the warranty “explicitly extends to future
performance of the goods and discovery of the breach must await the time of
such performance,” in which case the claim accrues “when the breach is or
should have been discovered.” RSA 382-A:2-725(2) (2011).
In Kelleher, we held that a specific statement in window marketing
materials describing a window’s design and unambiguously asserting that, as a
result of the design, the window would be “permanently” protected against rot,
was sufficient to constitute both a promise or affirmation of fact that the
windows would be permanently protected against rot damage for purposes of
RSA 382-A:2-313, and an explicit extension to future performance so as to
create a lifetime warranty and trigger the discovery rule of RSA 382-A:2-725(2).
Kelleher, 152 N.H. at 828-29, 841, 844. We further held, however, that to
establish that the statement was “part of the basis of the bargain,” the buyer of
the windows had the burden to prove that, at some point during the bargaining
process, he actually “read, heard, saw or was otherwise aware of the
representation” in the marketing materials. Id. at 844.
The summary judgment record here establishes that the shingles at
issue were delivered and installed in 2001, when the plaintiffs built their
house. According to the plaintiffs’ responses to interrogatories, they “believe[d]
that [the shingles] were either ‘30 year shingles’ or ‘35 years shingles,’” and
their belief as to the “duration of the guarantee and promise” was based upon
2
representations made “either by the installer, the architect or the builder” of
the house. They further represented that they “subsequently confirmed” their
understanding concerning the shingles “through internet searches,” that they
had “selected the [defendant’s] shingles based upon their ‘architectural’ quality
designation and the 30 or 35 year guarantee,” that the alleged “30 or 35 year
guarantee” was “set forth in marketing materials,” and that they had requested
the defendant to produce “the brochures, product catalogs, packaging etc.
upon which [they had] relied in 2001 when . . . [they had] decided on the
shingle kind and quality.” In fact, the plaintiffs requested in discovery that the
defendant produce “copies of any labels, inserts, forms, instructions, manuals,
installation guides, product descriptions, literature or packaging materials
used in the marketing and/or sale” of the shingles at issue “from the time of
original manufacture/marketing, to the present,” as well as “any marketing
materials, posters, information, pamphlets, product literature or purchasing
manuals used by [the defendant] from 1995 to the present that includes or
references” the shingles at issue. The defendant produced 16,849 pages in
response, but subject to an objection that the requests required production of
documents that the plaintiffs or their contractor would never have seen.
Each bundle of shingles delivered to the plaintiffs’ property in 2001 was
wrapped in packaging notifying the purchaser, in all capital letters, that the
shingles were subject to a limited warranty, that the limited warranty was
provided to dealers and contractors for distribution to purchasers and was also
available on the defendant’s website, and that the purchaser should read and
retain a copy of the limited warranty. The limited warranty itself warranted
that the shingles were “free from manufacturing defects that result in leaks” for
a total period of thirty years beginning on the date of installation (warranty
period). The limited warranty further provided that, for the first five years of
the warranty period, the defendant would repair or replace any defective
shingles, but that its maximum liability would be “equal to the reasonable
replacement cost of the defective shingles,” and that it would not “be
responsible for roof tear-off, flashing, and metal work or required repairs to
associated defects or damage.” After the first five years of the warranty period,
the limited warranty further reduced the defendant’s liability to “a prorated
amount of the current value of the shingles only (exclusive of labor, disposal
and tear-off),” to be “calculated by reducing the reasonable replacement
material cost by the monthly reduction figures for the specific shingles for each
month the shingles have been installed.” The limited warranty required the
purchaser to notify the defendant of any defect within thirty days of its
discovery, and provided that no action for breach of warranty would be brought
more than one year after the cause of action had accrued. Finally, the limited
warranty provided that it “REPLACE[D] ALL OTHER ORAL OR WRITTEN
WARRANTIES” of the defendant, and disclaimed any liability “FOR ANY ORAL
STATEMENT OR OTHER WRITTEN STATEMENT ABOUT THE SHINGLE.”
3