THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2017-0696, Michael J. Walsh, Trustee v. Sydney
H. Walsh, Trustee, the court on August 21, 2018, issued the
following order:
The following order, originally issued on August 9, 2018, is being
reissued to correct errors in two dates identified in the narrative portion of the
August 9 order. The dates that have been corrected appear below in the first
sentence of the last paragraph on page 3, and in the first sentence of the first
paragraph on page 4.
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
We affirm.
The petitioner, Michael J. Walsh, appeals an order of the Circuit Court
(King, J.) removing him, upon an ex parte motion of the respondent, Sydney H.
Walsh, as a co-trustee with her of a trust. He argues that the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion because: (1) the order will effectively
remove him from property owned by the trust and allegedly allow the
respondent, as sole trustee, “to alienate the property for any amount she
wishes without regard to [his] reliance interests or the interests of the
beneficiaries”; (2) the respondent, as sole trustee, will “purport to execute a
warranty deed on behalf of the same trust she seeks to have declared void, and
to convey property that she actively seeks to revert to herself, individually”; and
(3) removing him as co-trustee is allegedly inconsistent with the trust.1
The record reflects the following facts. Although the parties participated
in a religious marriage ceremony in 2004, they did not seek or obtain a civil
marriage license. In 2007, the petitioner, an attorney admitted to practice law
in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, prepared instruments, which the
respondent executed, creating an irrevocable trust and conveying to it certain
1 The petitioner also raises, purportedly as “plain error,” several questions that we earlier
dismissed as an improper interlocutory appeal. Regardless of whether the petitioner brought
those issues to the attention of the trial court, see Sup. Ct. R. 16-A (allowing this court to
consider a plain error affecting substantial rights even though it was not brought to the
attention of the trial court or supreme court), we dismissed those questions because they were
not properly before us in this appeal, and we reject the petitioner’s attempt to circumvent our
dismissal order by labeling the questions as “plain error.” Accordingly, we decline to address
the issues that the petitioner labels as “plain error” in his brief and limit our review to those
issues addressing his removal as trustee that we accepted in our order of January 16, 2018.
residential property in Troy. At that time, the respondent, but not the
petitioner, had an ownership interest in the Troy property. Shortly thereafter,
the respondent executed an instrument, which the petitioner had also
prepared, appointing the petitioner as co-trustee, and providing that he was
“deemed to be in joint possession of all trust property, including realty.”
The petitioner filed the present action on July 28, 2016, asserting that
the parties’ relationship had deteriorated, and that the respondent sought to
sell the Troy property and divide the proceeds in a manner that was
inconsistent with the trust. He requested that the trial court enjoin the
respondent from selling the property and dividing the sale proceeds in a
manner that he claimed she had proposed, and from otherwise encumbering
the property. He further requested the court, “if it deems it prudent or
necessary, . . . [to] appoint a Master to oversee the listing, sale and application
of sale proceeds,” and to divide the proceeds equally into two new trusts, each
governed by the same terms as the original trust, and with each party being
appointed a trustee of one of the new trusts. At no point in the petition did the
petitioner request specific performance of any agreement to transfer the
property or any unique chattel. Nevertheless, on the same day that he filed his
petition, he caused a notice of lis pendens referencing the matter to be
recorded in the Cheshire County Registry of Deeds, claiming that “the specific
performance of an agreement (trust) is under litigation.” But see RSA 511-A:8,
III (2010) (authorizing litigant to file lis pendens in registry of deeds without
prior application to the court and notice to the defendant only in “equity cases
for specific performance of an agreement to transfer land or a unique chattel,”
or in cases seeking to perfect a labor and materials lien); TPM Holdings, Inc. v.
Intra-Gold Industries, Inc., 91 F.3d, 1, 4-5 (1st Cir. 1996) (upholding federal
court decision invalidating notice of lis pendens under RSA 511-A:8, III on the
basis that there was no claim seeking specific performance of an agreement to
transfer land or a unique chattel at the time the lis pendens was filed).
The respondent filed an answer and counterclaim on October 5, 2016. In
her counterclaim, the respondent requested that the trial court set aside “the
Trust interest in the real estate . . . and [declare] the real estate . . . to be the
sole property of [the respondent] disencumbered of any claim by [the petitioner]
and/or” the trust, asserting that the petitioner had taken advantage of his
position and relationship with her when he created the trust.
During the litigation, the petitioner, but not the respondent, resided at
the property, and the parties were not paying all of the property’s carrying
costs. Ultimately, they agreed to sell the property, and entered into a purchase
and sale agreement with a third party. Under the terms of the agreement, the
closing was to occur on or before November 30, 2016, and the parties were
obligated to make a good faith effort to correct any title defect identified upon a
title examination.
2
At a motions hearing on November 3, 2017, the parties notified the trial
court of the purchase and sale agreement, and that, other than a contingency
granting the purchaser until November 13 to secure financing, all required
conditions under the agreement had occurred. During a separate colloquy
addressing a motion to dismiss the respondent’s counterclaim on statute of
limitations grounds, the petitioner suggested that the respondent’s challenge to
the legitimacy of the trust called into question the validity of the purchase and
sale agreement, and he asserted that she could not “just erase the trust, . . .
and the deed, and this purchase and sale agreement that we both signed as
trustees.” At that point, the trial court interjected, stating that “I don’t think
there’s a dispute that the trust holds legal title and has the ability to sell it. . . .
How the money gets divvied up, whatever is left is – I mean, clearly, under the
current situation, it doesn’t go to either party in this lawsuit because of trust
assets.” The trial court then suggested that, if the closing were to occur, it
would order the proceeds to be held in escrow pending its decision. Counsel
for the respondent expressly agreed with the trial court’s statements.
On November 7, 2017, the trial court issued an order denying the
petitioner’s motion to dismiss the counterclaim. Subsequently, counsel for the
title company requested that the petitioner discharge his notice of lis pendens,
advising that the petitioner could not convey clear title with the pending lis
pendens. On November 22, the petitioner refused, asserting that the
counterclaim, and not the lis pendens, was the title defect because, he claimed,
if the respondent prevailed on her counterclaim, title would revert to her. He
further asserted that, because the trial court had denied his motion to dismiss,
only the respondent could address the title issue by dismissing her
counterclaim, and that he would release the lis pendens only if the respondent
dismissed her counterclaim with prejudice. He similarly told the parties’
broker, after the broker had advised that the purchaser’s lender had issued a
“clear to close” notice, that the deal could not close because of the lis pendens,
and that the respondent “holds the key to this problem. All she has to do is
dismiss the counterclaim and this deal can go forward. If she dismissed her
counterclaim (with prejudice) I’d remove the” notice of lis pendens.
Finally, on November 26, 2017, the petitioner sent a three-page letter on
his law office letterhead to the purchaser, advising the purchaser that: (1) the
counterclaim was “the title issue that will prevent the closing from taking place
this week”; (2) because of the lis pendens, any buyer of the property would take
the property subject to the outcome of the suit; (3) if the respondent prevailed
on her counterclaim, any deed to the purchaser would be void; and (4) unless
the respondent voluntarily dismissed her counterclaim, the purchaser and his
lender “would be foolish to proceed” with the transaction. The petitioner
expressed to the purchaser his hope that the respondent could “be prevailed
upon and persuaded to dismiss her counterclaim . . . so that the property can
be sold and financed.”
3