THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2017-0451, Lloyd T. Graves, Trustee of the
Lloyd T. Graves Revocable Trust – 1997, Hampton and North
Hampton, New Hampshire v. Town of Hampton, the court on
June 21, 2018, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
plaintiff, Lloyd T. Graves, as Trustee of the Lloyd T. Graves Revocable Trust –
1997, Hampton and North Hampton, New Hampshire (Graves), appeals an order
of the Superior Court (Anderson, J.) denying his petition to lay out a class V
highway on “Lot B” in the Stowecroft Subdivision in Hampton. We affirm.
I. Facts
The relevant facts follow. Graves owns two parcels of land relevant to this
dispute. The first parcel consists of 12.65 acres of undeveloped land (Parcel 1).
Most of Parcel 1 is located in Hampton. The second parcel, the parcel on which
Graves lives, consists of approximately three acres of land and is located in
North Hampton (Parcel 2). Graves’s two parcels share a common boundary,
which roughly tracks the town line between Hampton and North Hampton, and
is approximately 100 feet in length. Existing access to Parcel 1 is via that
common boundary. According to the trial court, “there is a gravel path –
approximately the width of a driveway – that extends from the edge of [Parcel
2]’s paved driveway in a southerly direction, all the way down to [Parcel 1].” At
the point at which the path stops in Parcel 1, it is approximately 27 feet wide.
Parcel 1 abuts “Lot B,” an undeveloped .03-acre tract of land that is part
of the Stowecroft Subdivision. Lot B contains several trees and rocks and a
stone wall that separates it from Parcel 1.
On January 5, 1983, the Stowecroft Subdivision Plan was conditionally
approved by the planning board for the defendant, the Town of Hampton
(Town). Some of the conditions required by the planning board were the result
of an agreement made between a subcommittee of the planning board and the
developer. One such condition was that the developer would
create Lots A, B, and C – Lot A to be a 50’ strip giving access to the
Ross property, Lot B to be a 50’ strip giving access to the Graves
property and Lot C being a 50’ strip giving access to the Stevens
property – these lots will be specified as non-building lots and will
remain in [the developer] for a period of six (6) years after recording
of plans, after which ownership of the lots goes to the Town -
during the six year period, [the developer] retains the right to sell
lots A, B, and C to provide access to abutting properties.
This condition is memorialized on the Stowecroft Subdivision Plan as “Note 3,”
which states:
LOTS A, B, & C ARE 50’ STRIPS TO BE USED FOR FUTURE
ACCESS TO ABUTTING PROPERTIES. THESE LOTS ARE NON-
BUILDABLE LOTS. OWNERSHIP REMAINS IN [THE DEVELOPER]
FOR A PERIOD OF SIX (6) YEARS FROM RECORDING DATE OF
THESE PLANS, AFTER WHICH OWNERSHIP GOES TO THE TOWN
OF HAMPTON. [THE DEVELOPER] RETAINS THE RIGHT TO SELL
LOTS A B & C DURING THE SIX YEAR PERIOD TO PROVIDE
ACCESS TO ABUTTING PROPERTIES.
Lot A eventually became part of Westridge Drive, which connects
Stowecroft Drive to the Westridge Subdivision and connects the Westridge
Subdivision to Exeter Road. The Westridge Subdivision was constructed in the
mid-to-late 1990s by the same developer that constructed the Stowecroft
Subdivision. Lot C eventually became part of Fieldstone Circle, a circular road
that serves the Fieldstone Subdivision.
Lot B is situated where Stowecroft Drive ends in a cul-de-sac. Stowecroft
Drive traverses the middle of the Stowecroft Subdivision and is more than
2,000 feet long. The Town has not formally accepted Stowecroft Drive as a
public road, although it has maintained it.
In October 2013, Graves agreed to sell Parcel 1 to Green & Company
Building and Development Corporation (Green & Company) for $640,000. The
agreement is conditioned upon the parties obtaining the requisite approvals for
a residential subdivision consisting of at least 10 lots. Green & Company hired
an engineering firm to design a 13-lot subdivision called “Dalton Woods.” The
plans for the Dalton Woods Subdivision propose that a road be built over Lot B
to provide access to the subdivision. The proposed road would extend from the
Stowecroft Drive cul-de-sac over Lot B and then branch off into two proposed
subdivision roads that would each end in a cul-de-sac.
In May and June 2014, the planning board considered Green &
Company’s application to construct the Dalton Woods Subdivision. At its May
2014 meeting, the planning board expressed concern about the title of Lot B.
At its meeting in June 2014, at the request of Green & Company’s engineering
firm, the planning board voted “to allow conversion of the [subdivision]
application to design review.”
2
In December 2014, Graves petitioned the selectboard to lay out
“Stowecroft Drive Extension,” a class V highway, over Lot B. The selectboard
denied the petition in a 3-2 vote.
Graves appealed the selectboard’s decision to the superior court, which
reviewed his petition de novo. Following a three-day bench trial and a view of
the property, the trial court denied the petition, concluding that there was no
occasion for laying out the proposed extension. Although it found no public
interest in laying out the proposed extension, the trial court assumed arguendo
that a slight interest exists and determined that the burden imposed on the
Town by the layout outweighed it. The trial court ruled that the Town had a
statutory obligation to plow, pave, and rebuild the proposed extension. See
RSA 231:3, I (2009). The trial court observed that, according to the Town’s
witnesses, plowing a cul-de-sac is difficult and those “difficulties would
increase if the Town had to plow a small stub of a road off of the existing
Stowecroft Drive cul-de-sac.” The court further stated that it found credible
testimony regarding “the increased maintenance costs of a road constructed
upon wet soils.” Based upon that testimony and upon one of the Town’s
exhibits, the court found that, because of Lot B’s “hydrological characteristics,”
a road built over Lot B would require “more frequent annual maintenance” and
“would have to be rebuilt twice as frequently as a typical road.” Accordingly,
after equitably weighing the “slight public interest in the layout” against the
burdens imposed upon the Town, the court found “no occasion for the layout.”
Graves unsuccessfully moved for reconsideration of the superior court’s
decision, and this appeal followed.
II. Analysis
RSA 231:8 (2009) grants to a municipal selectboard the authority, upon
petition, to “lay out any new class IV highway not financed in whole or in part
with federal aid highway funds, and class V or VI highway or alter any such
existing highway within [the] town for which there shall be occasion.” If a town
refuses to lay out a road, the plaintiff may petition the superior court to do so.
Wolfeboro Neck Prop. Owners Assoc. v. Town of Wolfeboro, 146 N.H. 449, 452
(2001); see RSA 231:38 (2009). “The superior court conducts a de novo
hearing to make an independent determination of the occasion, or
appropriateness, of laying out a road as requested.” Wolfeboro Neck Prop.
Owners Assoc., 146 N.H. at 452 (quotation omitted).
Assessing whether there is an “occasion” to lay out a road involves a two-
step process in which competing interests are equitably balanced. See Green
Crow Corp. v. Town of New Ipswich, 157 N.H. 344, 350 (2008). The first step
requires balancing the public interest in the layout against the rights of the
“affected landowner.” Id. (quotation omitted). If the affected landowner’s rights
outweigh the public interest, then there is no occasion to lay out the road. See
id. By contrast, if the public interest justifies taking the land without the
3