THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2017-0177, State of New Hampshire v. Michael
D. Mooney, the court on February 9, 2018, issued the following
order:
Having considered the brief, the memorandum of law, and the record
submitted on appeal, we conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this
case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1). To the extent that the defendant argues that not
holding oral argument “would violate his rights to due process, production of all
proofs favorable, effective assistance of counsel and equal protection” under the
State and Federal Constitutions, he does not develop this argument. See State v.
Chick, 141 N.H. 503, 504 (1996). We affirm.
The defendant, Michael D. Mooney, appeals his conviction, following a
bench trial in the Circuit Court (Morrison, J.), on a charge of driving under the
influence. See RSA 265-A:2 (2014). He contends that the evidence was
insufficient to find that he was driving.
When considering a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, we
objectively review the record to determine whether any rational trier of fact could
have found the essential elements of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt,
considering all the evidence and all reasonable inferences from it in the light
most favorable to the State. State v. Sanborn, 168 N.H. 400, 412 (2015). The
defendant bears the burden of demonstrating that the evidence was insufficient
to prove guilt. Id. When reviewing the evidence, we examine each evidentiary
item in the context of all the evidence, not in isolation. Id. at 413. Further, the
trier of fact may draw reasonable inferences from facts proved and also inferences
from facts found as a result of other inferences, provided they can be reasonably
drawn therefrom. Id.
To prevail on a sufficiency of the evidence challenge when the evidence as
to one or more elements of the charged offense is solely circumstantial, the
defendant must establish that the evidence does not exclude all reasonable
conclusions except guilt. State v. Germain, 165 N.H. 350, 361 (2013), modified
on other grounds in part by State v. King, 168 N.H. 340, 345 (2015). The proper
analysis is not whether every possible conclusion consistent with innocence has
been excluded, but, rather, whether all reasonable conclusions based upon the
evidence have been excluded. Id. Because a challenge to the sufficiency of the
evidence raises a claim of legal error, our standard of review is de novo. State v.
Cable, 168 N.H. 673, 677 (2016).
RSA 265-A:2, I, prohibits a person from driving a vehicle upon a way while
under the influence of intoxicating liquor. Driving is defined as operating or
being in “actual physical control” of a motor vehicle. RSA 259:24 (2014). To
have “actual physical control” of a motor vehicle, a person must have the
capacity bodily to guide or exercise dominion over the vehicle at the present time.
State v. Winstead, 150 N.H. 244, 247 (2003).
What constitutes “actual physical control” will vary depending upon the
facts of the case, but the primary focus of the inquiry is whether the person is
merely using the vehicle as a stationary shelter or whether it is reasonable to
assume that the person will, while under the influence, jeopardize the public by
exercising some measure of control over the vehicle. State v. Holloran, 140 N.H.
563, 565 (1995).
This case is controlled by Winstead, which affirmed that the defendant was
in actual physical control of a vehicle when he was found asleep in the driver’s
seat with the engine running and the transmission in neutral. See Winstead,
150 N.H. at 248. In this case, the defendant does not contest that he was
intoxicated when he returned to his vehicle after drinking in two bars. He
testified that, when he parked the vehicle earlier in the evening, he locked it and
took the keys with him. The arresting police officer testified that he found the
defendant asleep in the driver’s seat of his vehicle with the keys in the ignition
and the dashboard lights and radio illuminated. Although, unlike in Winstead,
here the vehicle’s engine was not running, this is not dispositive. See Holloran,
140 N.H. at 565 (affirming defendant in actual physical control of vehicle when
keys in ignition, but engine not running). The trial court could have reasonably
inferred that, prior to falling asleep in the vehicle, the defendant unlocked it,
placed the key in the ignition, and turned it on, thereby illuminating the
dashboard lights.
The defendant argues that the presumption of innocence requires all
factual disputes be resolved in his favor. However, in a challenge to the
sufficiency of the evidence, we assume all credibility resolutions in favor of the
State. State v. Saunders, 164 N.H. 342, 351 (2012).
The defendant argues that the officer testified inconsistently regarding the
defendant’s radio. However, the officer resolved any possible inconsistency
during cross-examination when he explained that he considered the radio “on”
because it was illuminated. To the extent that the defendant relies upon State v.
Daly, 313 A.2d 194, 195 (N.J. 1973), it is not consistent with New Hampshire
Law. See Winstead, 150 N.H. at 248.
The defendant argues that he did not intend to drive his vehicle because a
designated driver was to transport him back to his friend’s apartment. However,
the defendant testified that he drove his own vehicle to the town where he and
his companions intended to drink, that he left the bar before his companions to
2
return to his vehicle, that he was asleep and did not remember getting any calls,
such as a call notifying him that the designated driver was ready to go, and that
he did not know where the designated driver had parked. Furthermore, the trial
court could have inferred from the designated driver’s testimony that the
designated driver left well before the officer found the defendant. On this
evidence, the trial court could have reasonably inferred that the defendant did
not intend to be transported by the designated driver.
We conclude, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the State,
that the trial court could reasonably have found that the defendant was in actual
physical control of the vehicle when he fell asleep. See Sanborn, 168 N.H. at
412; Winstead, 150 N.H. at 247.
Affirmed.
Dalianis, C.J., and Hicks, Lynn, Bassett, and Hantz Marconi, JJ.,
concurred.
Eileen Fox,
Clerk
3