THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2017-0073, State of New Hampshire v. Alan A.
Kenison, the court on September 17, 2018, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. Following
a jury trial in Superior Court (Bornstein, J.), the defendant, Alan A. Kenison,
was convicted of two counts of felonious sexual assault, see RSA 632-A:3, III
(1986) (amended 2003), and eighteen counts of aggravated felonious sexual
assault, see RSA 632-A:2, I(l) (1986) (amended 1992, 2003). The defendant
argues on appeal that the trial court erred by: (1) replaying a recorded
conversation between him and the victim during jury deliberations, despite
ruling pretrial that the jury would hear the recording only once at trial; and (2)
failing to sua sponte strike statements by the prosecutor during opening and
closing arguments that allegedly “direct[ly] comment[ed] on [his] decision to not
testify and invited the jury to draw an adverse inference against [him]” for
exercising that right. We affirm.
I
The relevant facts follow. In August of 2015, the victim reported to
authorities that the defendant sexually assaulted her on several occasions
between 1989 and 1993, when she was under the age of thirteen. Following up
on the report, the police received authorization for a one-party intercept, see
RSA 570-A:7 (Supp. 2001) (amended 2015, 2017), and recorded a telephone
conversation between the victim and the defendant in October of 2015. Due to
the quality of the recording, what was said during this telephone conversation
was the subject of conflicting characterizations by the prosecution and the
defense at trial, as discussed more fully below. The defendant was
subsequently indicted on the instant charges.
Prior to trial, the defendant moved to prohibit the recording from being
provided to the jury during deliberations, arguing that giving jurors the
opportunity to play the recording “over and over again” would be unfairly
prejudicial. See N.H. R. Ev. 403. Ruling that the entire recording could be
admitted and played at trial, the trial court nevertheless agreed with the
defendant that the recording should not be provided to the jury during
deliberations. In the trial court’s view, the jury was entitled to “hear [the
recording] once, just like they hear the [d]efendant’s [or any other witnesses’]
[trial] testimony,” and providing the recording during deliberations would risk
the jury giving it “undue weight” as compared to other evidence. But cf. State
v. Dugas, 147 N.H. 62, 72 (2001) (finding no error, in relevant part, in
providing deliberating jurors with admitted audiotapes of defendant’s
interviews with police because such tapes are not testimonial evidence, but
rather “tangible exhibits,” and, as with other admitted exhibits, the
presumption is that recordings “are available to jurors to consider while
deliberating, without limitation” (quotation omitted)).
On the first day of trial, the State admitted the recording through a police
witness and it was played to the jury. During a court recess later that day, the
trial court informed counsel that a juror had asked one of the bailiffs: “[W]hen
do I get to ask the judge a question about that one party intercept[?]” The
parties and the trial court concurred that the court would not respond to the
inquiry, though the prosecutor noted: “When the tape was playing, it seemed
like some of the jury was unable to hear it, so I expect we’re going to have this
question from a few people during deliberation.”
The State presented the testimony of five witnesses in total, including
that of the victim, before resting on the second day of trial. The defendant
thereafter neither testified, nor called any witnesses in his defense. During the
ensuing closing arguments, the prosecutor contended that, in the recording,
the victim asked the defendant, “Are you sorry for molesting me?,” to which he
replied, “Of course, I’m truly sorry. I never really meant for any of that to
happen. I was totally being selfish.” Defense counsel, by contrast, argued to
the jury that the defendant told the victim, “I’m sorry, dear, I think it was
somebody else; are you sure it wasn’t somebody else?” and that, although the
defendant apologized to the victim repeatedly in the recording, it was not for
committing sexual assaults against her.
Shortly after retiring to deliberate, the jury sent three questions to the
trial court, the second of which read: “Is there a written transcript of [the
recording] or can we listen to the phone call again? (The majority of the jury did
not hear most of [the defendant’s] part of the conversation.)” As a follow-up to
the foregoing, the jury’s third question inquired: “Can we have a reasoning [sic]
for this if the answer is no?” After hearing the prosecution’s and defense’s
respective positions on the issue, the trial court took a brief recess to review
with the parties this court’s decision in State v. Reinholz, Case No. 2012-0605,
2014 WL 11621670, at *2 (N.H. Jan. 17, 2014) (3JX Order) (citing State v.
Dugas, 147 N.H. at 72, and State v. Monroe, 146 N.H. 15, 17 (2001)).
Upon review, the prosecutor maintained that the recording should be
submitted to the jury for review during the remainder of its deliberations.
Arguing against this course of action, defense counsel raised concerns that the
jury may give the recording “undue weight” and play it repeatedly throughout
deliberations. Defense counsel further argued that “the evidence has been
closed . . . [and] should remain closed,” and that his trial strategy would have
2
been different if the trial court had ruled that the recording would be made
available to the jury during deliberations.
The trial court noted that the jurors were entitled to hear the entire
recording at least once, which, as reflected in the question, a majority had not,
and moreover, “in retrospect, the State was probably entitled to have the
[recording] admitted as a full exhibit” in light of Reinholz, Dugas, and Monroe.
The trial court also acknowledged, however, that “[d]efense counsel
understandably, crafted cross-examination and trial strategy, and closing
argument based on the understanding and expectation that the [recording] was
not going to be a full exhibit.” Seeking to “strike a balance” between the
competing considerations, the trial court ultimately opted to bring the
deliberating jury back into the courtroom for a one-time replaying of the
recording.
Prior to reconvening the jury, the trial court, at defense counsel’s
request, issued the following cautionary instruction to the jurors:
The audio recording of the third-party intercept will be played for
you in the courtroom one more time. You should not give this
evidence any more weight or less weight than any other evidence
merely because the audio-recording is being played for you a
second time.
You should consider this evidence along with all the evidence
presented at trial and give all the evidence [the weight] you think it
deserves.
After the recording was replayed in the courtroom, the jurors returned to the
deliberation room and later returned guilty verdicts against the defendant on
each of the 20 sexual assault charges before them.
II
On appeal, the defendant first argues that the trial court’s decision to
replay the recording during deliberations constituted an unsustainable exercise
of discretion necessitating reversal of his convictions.
The determination of how to respond to a deliberating jury’s question or
request is a matter within the trial court’s sound discretion, and the trial
court’s exercise of this discretionary power will not be cause for reversal unless
there has been an unsustainable exercise of the discretion. See State v.
Littlefield, 152 N.H. 331, 334 (2005). “To show an unsustainable exercise of
discretion, the defendant must demonstrate that the court’s ruling was clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.” Id. at 338 (quotation
omitted).
3