THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2017-0412, Louis F. Clarizio v. R. David
DePuy, Esq. & a., the court on October 12, 2018, issued the
following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
plaintiff, Louis F. Clarizio, appeals an order of the Superior Court (Brown, J.),
granting summary judgment to the defendants, R. David DePuy, Esq. and
McLane, Graf, Raulerson & Middleton, P.A., on the plaintiff’s legal malpractice
claims. In its order, the trial court ruled that the plaintiff’s claims are barred
by the three-year statute of limitations. See RSA 508:4, I (2010). Although the
defendants filed a cross-appeal, they have not briefed their cross-appeal issues,
and, thus, we deem those issues waived. See In re Estate of King, 149 N.H.
226, 230 (2003). We affirm.
The trial court recited, or the record supports, the following facts. DePuy
represented the plaintiff at a divorce mediation that took place on July 29,
2008. The mediation began in the morning, but as negotiations continued into
the evening, the parties reached an impasse regarding the plaintiff’s child
support obligation. When it appeared that negotiations were going to end
unsuccessfully, DePuy and counsel for the plaintiff’s wife discussed a
resolution whereby the wife would accept a $1 million property settlement
payment and $20,000 per month in child support, on the condition that the
plaintiff agree that the latter was “permanent” and that the final agreement
contain language describing the payment as part of the overall property
settlement, non-modifiable by either party.
DePuy discussed the proposal with the plaintiff, and, after doing so,
advised him that he would draft a permanent stipulation resolving the
plaintiff’s divorce. While DePuy drafted the permanent stipulation, the plaintiff
napped. When DePuy had finished drafting the permanent stipulation, he
woke the plaintiff and presented it to him. The pertinent provisions in the
stipulation stated:
Child Support. As an overall property settlement, the parties agree
that [the plaintiff] shall pay to [his wife] the sum of $20,000.00 per
month as child support until [the youngest child] reaches the age
of 18 or terminates high school, whichever occurs later. Neither
party will seek to modify this amount under any circumstances
whatsoever and the child support shall not be increased or
decreased under any circumstances. Said amount shall be paid on
the first day of each month beginning on October 1, 2008.
. . . .
Property Settlement. As a full final and complete property
settlement including the parties[’] agreement for child support
payments [the plaintiff] shall pay to [his wife] the sum of
$1,000,000.00 in the following manner. $500,000 within 30 days
of the execution of this agreement, and the remaining $500,000 on
or before October 1, 2008.
(Emphases added.) The plaintiff elected not to read the stipulation before
signing it, instead choosing to rely upon DePuy’s affirmative responses to the
following questions: “Is it the same that we just agreed to?” “Same $20,000 in
child support?” “Same property settlement?”
Beginning in December 2008, the plaintiff began inquiring of DePuy
whether, if he were to obtain full custody of the children, his child support
obligation could be modified. On February 10, 2010, DePuy sent an opinion
letter to the plaintiff, which stated, in pertinent part:
[I]t appears that the child support order is modifiable despite the
language stating that it is not modifiable and despite the language
stating that it is part of a property settlement.
. . . .
In the Stipulation entered into by you and [your ex-wife] . . . it is
specifically provided that you shall pay [your ex-wife] $20,000 per
month as child support as part of an overall property settlement
until [your youngest child] terminates high school or reaches age
18. Since property settlements are, generally speaking, not
modifiable, such a provision might be viewed as preventing any
modification of the child support order until [your youngest child]
reaches the age of 18 or terminates high school.
. . . .
[I]f you obtained a substantial change in parenting time, and if you
were to pursue modification of the child support order because of
that change in custody . . . , there is a substantial risk that [your
ex-wife] would then seek to reopen the property settlement division
on the basis that she agreed to that division in reliance on the
intended permanent nature of the child support payments and
that, if the child support is found to be modifiable, then the
2
property settlement should be reconsidered. There is legal support
for such an approach. . . . Thus, if you were to succeed in
obtaining a modification of child support, the court might
reconsider the property division.
In July 2011, the plaintiff was awarded primary care and custody of the
children, and the children have resided with him ever since. Although the
plaintiff urged DePuy to file a motion to modify his child support, DePuy
advised him to wait. DePuy did not file a motion to modify the plaintiff’s child
support obligation until February 10, 2012.
On September 27, 2012, because of the ambiguity in the divorce
stipulation regarding whether the plaintiff’s child support payments were part
of the overall property settlement, the circuit court denied his ex parte request
to suspend his child support obligation immediately. Nonetheless, in late
2012, following an evidentiary hearing, the circuit court concluded that the
parties intended the monthly payments to be child support and terminated the
plaintiff’s obligation to make them. The circuit court ruled, however, that the
plaintiff would not be reimbursed for the child support payments he had
previously made in light of the undue hardship it would place on his ex-wife.
The plaintiff filed the instant action on January 20, 2015, alleging that
DePuy committed legal malpractice by failing to: (1) obtain his informed
consent before drafting the language in the permanent stipulation related to
child support; (2) withdraw from representing the plaintiff when it became
apparent in December 2009 that the stipulation’s language would become an
issue in post-divorce litigation; and (3) file a timely motion to modify child
support in July 2011, when the plaintiff obtained primary custody and care of
his children. According to his appellate brief, for this allegedly negligent
conduct, the plaintiff sought to recover the approximately $200,000 in child
support he paid from March 2012 through December 2012 and the $500,000
in attorney’s fees that he paid the defendants after December 2009.
Thereafter, the defendants moved for summary judgment, arguing, in
pertinent part, that the plaintiff’s claims are barred by the three-year statute of
limitations. See RSA 508:4. The plaintiff asserted that the discovery rule tolled
the statute of limitations until September 27, 2012, the date on which his
emergency request to suspend his child support obligation was denied. See id.;
see also Lamprey v. Britton Constr., 163 N.H. 252, 257 (2012) (setting forth the
discovery rule under which a statute of limitations is tolled until a plaintiff
knew or reasonably should have known that he suffered some harm because of
the defendant’s conduct). The trial court ruled that the discovery rule did not
render the plaintiff’s legal malpractice claims timely. Specifically, the court
found that, as of July 2011, the plaintiff knew or should have known of
DePuy’s alleged negligence and of its causal relationship to his harm. Thus,
the trial court granted summary judgment to the defendants.
3