THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2017-0675, Sheila D. Petrin v. David M.
Liberatore & a., the court on September 17, 2018, issued the
following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
plaintiff, Sheila D. Petrin, appeals an order of the Superior Court (Nicolosi, J.)
dismissing her first amended complaint filed against defendant David M.
Liberatore alleging claims for fraud, negligent misrepresentation, breach of the
implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing (implied covenant), and violation
of the New Hampshire Consumer Protection Act (CPA), see RSA ch. 358-A
(2009 & Supp. 2017). On appeal, the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred
by dismissing: (1) her fraud and negligent misrepresentation claims on the
ground that she alleged insufficient facts to state claims upon which relief
could be granted; and (2) her implied covenant and CPA claims on the ground
that they were time-barred because they constituted entirely new causes of
action, filed after the applicable statute of limitations had run. We affirm in
part, reverse in part, and remand.
The following facts, viewed in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, are
derived from either her first amended complaint or the record submitted on
appeal. In September 2013, the plaintiff, who had little experience in real
estate transactions, retained Liberatore as her real estate agent. Before she did
so, Liberatore informed her that he had been a licensed realtor since 1992, the
president of the Lakes Region Board of Realtors in 2006, and that
organization’s “Realtor of the Year” in 2007.
On the day that the plaintiff retained Liberatore, the two visited a mobile
home listing in Concord. During their visit, Liberatore did not inspect the
home for signs of mold or rot or examine the furnace, water heater, oil tank, or
roof. Liberatore also did not advise the plaintiff that she should inspect the
home for signs of mold or rot or examine the furnace, water heater, oil tank, or
roof.
Afterwards, Liberatore drafted a purchase and sale (P & S) agreement for
the plaintiff to purchase the mobile home. As he did so, Liberatore advised the
plaintiff that it was unnecessary to have the home inspected by a home
inspector. Liberatore did not disclose to the plaintiff that he had not personally
examined the home for signs of mold or rot or inspected the furnace, water
heater, oil tank, or roof.
Relying upon Liberatore’s recommendation, the plaintiff signed the P & S
and waived her right to a home inspection. Her offer was accepted, and the
sale closed on October 30, 2013. The plaintiff took possession of the home on
October 31.
Soon thereafter, the plaintiff discovered that: (1) the water heater was
not properly wired; (2) there was mold growing under the water heater and the
new bathroom tiles; (3) the furnace had not been serviced since 2003; and (4)
the oil tank was mounted on loose cinder blocks. Within days of discovering
those problems, the plaintiff asked Liberatore to help rectify them, and he
refused. Although the plaintiff took actions to rectify the problems, she
continued to have health problems potentially caused by mold. Therefore, she
retained a contractor to look for additional mold in the home. Mold was
discovered in the walls of the home and the plaintiff was informed that to
remove it would cost more than $13,000. The plaintiff is currently unable to
live in the home because of the continued presence of mold.
The plaintiff, representing herself, filed her original complaint against
Liberatore on October 31, 2016. That complaint, written on a standard judicial
branch form, requested that the trial court order Liberatore to resolve “all mold
issues” and to partially reimburse her for “the expenses of the home obligations
while [the home is] unlivable.” The initial complaint did not identify any legal
theory underlying the plaintiff’s claims.
Liberatore moved to dismiss the plaintiff’s initial complaint on the
ground that any claim was time-barred and that she had failed to allege
sufficient facts to sustain a claim. The plaintiff, now represented by an
attorney, objected to the motion and argued that her initial complaint alleged
claims for fraud and negligent misrepresentation. On March 7, 2017, the trial
court ruled that those claims were timely because they were filed on Monday,
October 31, 2016, “within the time limit imposed by the statute of limitations,”
but dismissed them because insufficient facts were alleged to support them.
The court allowed the plaintiff to amend her complaint “to allege further facts
to support her claims.”
The plaintiff filed her first amended complaint on April 5, 2017, alleging
substantially similar facts to those in her initial complaint. This complaint
divided her claims into four causes of action: fraud, negligent
misrepresentation, implied covenant, and violation of the CPA. Liberatore
moved to dismiss the plaintiff’s first amended complaint on the grounds that:
(1) her implied covenant and CPA claims constituted entirely new causes of
action that were time-barred because they were filed after the applicable
statute of limitations had run; and (2) her fraud and negligent
misrepresentation claims were supported by insufficient facts. The trial court
agreed with Liberatore and dismissed the plaintiff’s first amended complaint in
its entirety. This appeal followed.
2
We first address the trial court’s dismissal of the plaintiff’s implied
covenant and CPA claims. “Generally, a court should allow amendments to
pleadings to correct technical defects but need only allow substantive
amendments when necessary to prevent injustice.” Thomas v. Telegraph Publ’g
Co., 151 N.H. 435, 439 (2004); see RSA 514:9 (2007). “It is well settled that a
defendant is entitled to be informed of the theory on which [a plaintiff is]
proceeding and the redress that [the plaintiff] claim[s] as a result of the
defendant’s actions.” Pike Industries v. Hiltz Construction, 143 N.H. 1, 3
(1998) (quotation omitted). Thus, “[a] substantive amendment that introduces
an entirely new cause of action, or calls for substantially different evidence,
may be properly denied.” Thomas, 151 N.H. at 439.
In this case, after dismissing her initial complaint, the trial court gave
the plaintiff 30 days to amend it in order “to allege further facts to support her
claims.” Thereafter, the court decided that the plaintiff’s implied covenant and
CPA claims constituted entirely new causes of action and that, to allow her to
amend her complaint to add them “over five months after the statute of
limitations ha[d] run” would be “unfair and prejudicial” to Liberatore. See id.
at 440 (determining that “[t]o allow the plaintiff to amend his writ” to add an
invasion of privacy claim “after the statute of limitations had run would
unfairly prejudice the defendants”). Thus, the court dismissed them. We treat
the trial court’s rulings as a denial of a motion to amend the plaintiff’s initial
complaint and review that portion of the trial court’s decision under our
unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. See id. at 439.
Here, the plaintiff’s initial complaint did not allege a specific legal theory.
However, when objecting to Liberatore’s motion to dismiss, the plaintiff stated
that her initial complaint contained only two claims: (1) fraud; and (2) negligent
misrepresentation. She did not, at that time, assert that her complaint also
alleged claims for breach of the implied covenant or violation of the CPA.
Moreover, neither the implied covenant claim nor the CPA claim could
reasonably have been inferred from the plaintiff’s initial complaint. Thus, we
agree with the trial court that the plaintiff’s implied covenant and CPA claims
constituted entirely new causes of action. Absent a showing of injustice, it was
within the trial court’s sound discretion to disallow the addition of those two
new claims. See Thomas, 151 N.H. at 440.
The plaintiff contends that justice required the amendment of her
complaint to add the new claims because she filed her initial complaint on a
standard judicial branch form as a self-represented party. However, self-
represented parties “are required to abide by and are bound by the same rules
of procedure as those with counsel.” In re Brewster, 115 N.H. 636, 638 (1975);
see also In the Matter of Birmingham & Birmingham, 154 N.H. 51, 56 (2006).
Moreover, the plaintiff had counsel when she identified the two causes of action
in her initial complaint as fraud and negligent misrepresentation.
3