THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2017-0331, State of New Hampshire v. David
Decker, the court on May 22, 2018, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
We affirm.
The defendant, David Decker, appeals his conviction, following a jury
trial in Superior Court (Bornstein, J.), on a charge of being a felon in
possession of a deadly weapon. See RSA 159:3 (2014). He argues that the trial
court erred by not allowing him to present a competing harms defense, see RSA
627:3 (2016), and by allowing the State to introduce certain evidence over his
hearsay objection.
We first address whether the trial court erred by not allowing the
defendant to present a competing harms defense. “Competing harms” is a
justification defense codified by RSA 627:3, I, which provides, in relevant part:
Conduct which the actor believes to be necessary to avoid
harm to himself or another is justifiable if the desirability and
urgency of avoiding such harm outweigh, according to ordinary
standards of reasonableness, the harm sought to be prevented by
the statute defining the offense charged.
For the defense to apply, (1) the unlawful conduct must be urgently necessary,
(2) there must be no lawful alternative to the unlawful conduct, and (3) the
harm to be prevented must outweigh, according to ordinary standards of
reasonableness, the harm sought to be prevented by the violated statute. State
v. O’Brien, 132 N.H. 587, 590 (1989). For unlawful conduct to be “urgently
necessary,” the harm to be prevented cannot be “speculative and uncertain,”
but must instead constitute a “clear and imminent danger” that is “reasonably
certain to occur.” Id. (quotations and emphasis omitted). Any lawful
alternative to the unlawful conduct must be reasonable. State v. L’Heureux,
150 N.H. 822, 827 (2004).
A defendant seeking to raise a competing harms defense is required to
file notice of it, including the grounds for it, with both the State and the trial
court within a specified period of time unless the trial court extends the
deadline for good cause. N.H. R. Crim. P. 14(b)(2)(B); see State v. Lavoie, 152
N.H. 542, 546 (2005). The trial court is required to grant a defendant’s
requested jury instruction on a timely-raised competing harms defense if there
is some evidence to support a rational finding in favor of the defense. State v.
Lavoie, 152 N.H. 542, 546 (2005). “Some evidence” means more than a
minutia or scintilla of evidence. Id. “If the trial court determines that no
reasonable person, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the
defendant, could maintain a reasonable doubt as to the absence of the defense,
. . . then the competing harms defense is unavailable to the defendant.” State
v. Bernard, 141 N.H. 230, 235-36 (1996). We review the trial court’s decisions
not to allow a competing harms defense for failure to timely raise it, or not to
provide a requested jury instruction on the defense based upon a lack of
evidence to support it, for unsustainable exercises of discretion. Lavoie, 152
N.H. at 546-47; State v. Chen, 148 N.H. 565, 569 (2002).
The record establishes that on September 16, 2016, while incarcerated at
the Northern Correctional Facility in Berlin on a 1992 felony conviction, the
defendant was found to possess a piece of metal, commonly referred to as a
“shank,” see State v. Duran, 162 N.H. 369, 371, 374 (2011), that was
approximately two-and-a-half inches long, sharpened on four sides, and meant
to stab other inmates. The defendant was searched and found to possess the
shank after an investigator reviewed a letter containing a statement asserting
that the defendant had a shank. When asked about the shank, the defendant
told the investigator that he should “send [the defendant] to Concord or [the
defendant would] lay somebody out,” which the investigator understood to
mean that the defendant would hurt someone seriously.
On April 20, 2017, fifteen days before jury selection, the defendant filed a
notice that he may raise a competing harms defense. The State asserts in its
brief, and the defendant does not dispute, that under the version of N.H. R.
Crim. P. 14(b)(2)(B) governing this case, the defendant was required to provide
notice of the defense no later than January 11, 2017. In the notice, the
defendant asserted that the New Hampshire State Prison “is a dangerous place
to live,” that “inmates and Correctional Officers alike take precautions to
protect themselves,” and that the defendant’s possession of a shank was
“necessary to avoiding harm to himself when living in an environment where
other people are armed and one’s safety is constantly in peril.”
At a motions hearing, the State objected to the notice, but not on
timeliness grounds. The defendant argued that: (1) possessing the shank was
necessary because he “could be attacked or . . . killed in the prison for any
number of reasons”; (2) “[t]here were three individuals [who] conspired to
provide a weapon to somebody to kill [him] in recent months” or within “a
couple days” of being found with the shank; (3) he could testify that he is a
target because he is serving a life term and provide examples of how persons
have tried to kill him during his incarceration; and (4) he could testify that
protective custody, as an alternative to carrying a shank, is fallible. The
defendant answered affirmatively to the trial court’s question whether the
2
result of his argument is that “competing harms . . . [is] going to be a defense
in every single case in which [an] inmate in a prison is charged with felony
possession,” but stated that he could “tailor [his] testimony to . . . why [he] in
particular [is] a target.” The trial court sustained the State’s objection on the
basis that the notice was untimely, and because, under the defendant’s offer of
proof, he had not satisfied the three-part O’Brien test. The defendant did not
move to reconsider, or otherwise challenge the trial court’s timeliness ruling.
At trial, the defendant testified that on September 15, 2016, he learned
that three inmates, who he thought were his friends, wanted to kill him, and
had armed another inmate with a shank and attempted to prompt him to kill
the defendant. The defendant claimed that he subsequently confronted each
member of the alleged plot in his cell, and that each member “started putting
the blame on each other.” According to the defendant, he is a target because,
due to his reputation within the prison, killing him would enhance the
reputation of his killer. The defendant admitted that the shank he was found
with on September 16 was his. Shanks are, according to the defendant, “part
of prison life,” and are “all over the place.” The defendant claimed that he
made his shank only after learning of the plot to kill him. At another point in
his testimony, however, he stated that he had the shank before learning of the
plot, but that he did not have it before September 15.
The defendant testified that “protective custody” is available for an
inmate who the prison administration believes is a target of other inmates for
harm, or for an inmate who fears for his life. He also claimed, however, that
inmates intentionally scheme to be placed in protective custody for the purpose
of harming an inmate who is already there, and that prison officers have at
times told other inmates that an inmate has been placed in protective custody.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred by ruling, sua
sponte, that his notice of defense was untimely. According to the defendant,
the State was not prejudiced by the untimely notice, and the trial court did not
consider whether sanctions short of precluding the defense were appropriate.
The defendant argues further that he satisfied the O’Brien elements under the
“some evidence” standard, thus entitling him to a competing harms
instruction. The State counters that the defendant failed to preserve his
argument that the trial court erred by rejecting the defense on timeliness
grounds, that there was no good cause for the untimely notice, and that he
failed to establish the O’Brien elements as a matter of law.
At the outset, we agree with the State that the defendant failed to
preserve his argument that the trial court erred by ruling, sua sponte, that his
notice of defense was untimely. “To preserve issues for an appeal to the
Supreme Court, an appellant must have given the [trial] court the opportunity
to consider such issues; thus, to the extent that the court, in its decision,
addresses matters not previously raised in the case, a party must identify any
3