THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2017-0459, State of New Hampshire v. Robert
Chambers, the court on January 8, 2019, issued the following
order:
The defendant, Robert Chambers, appeals his convictions for aggravated
felonious sexual assault (AFSA). See RSA 632-A:2 (1996) (amended 1997,
1998, 1999, 2003, 2008, 2012, 2014, 2017, 2018). He argues that the Trial
Court (Ruoff, J.) erred by: (1) excluding evidence of the victim’s disclosure of a
prior sexual assault and her participation in counseling; (2) admitting the
contents of a recorded phone call between the victim and the defendant; and (3)
failing to disclose the victim’s counseling records. We affirm.
The defendant appeals his convictions on three counts of AFSA-pattern
sexual assault; the convictions are based on assaults that he committed
against the victim between 1994 and 2000. The victim was born in 1985. The
defendant met the victim’s mother when the victim was five or six years old. In
1992, the defendant and the victim’s mother had a son and married. The
defendant lived with the victim, her mother, and the son from 1992 to 2001.
The victim testified that the defendant began sexually assaulting her when she
was seven years old. The assaults progressed to oral sex, and then sexual
intercourse when she was twelve years old. The assaults continued through
the victim’s high school years and while she was home during college break.
The victim’s mother testified that when she came home during the day,
she occasionally found the defendant napping, with the victim in bed with him.
She testified that she was concerned, and told the defendant that “it didn’t look
right.” She also asked the victim about it. Both told her that there was
“nothing going on.” The victim’s mother also testified that she was “not
surprised” when she later learned of the allegations against the defendant.
At trial, the victim testified that the first time she threatened to tell her
mother about the abuse, the defendant gave her several reasons why she
should not do so:
He said that he was a police chief and that was my word
against his. And people would believe him and not me. There
were -- he also mentioned that they would take me out to go live in
a group home. And he said, little girls got raped with broomsticks
there and said that he didn’t -- that I didn’t want that to happen to
me.
The victim was then asked why she decided against telling her mother, and she
responded: “I was scared.” Thereafter she testified that she did not disclose the
abuse at a later date because she was “scared” and “ashamed.” She further
testified that she “was terrified. I was so alone. And I didn’t want to be taken
out away from my mom and my little brother. And I didn’t think anyone would
believe me. He had said multiple times that no one would believe me, and that it
was consensual.” She testified that the assaults continued when she returned
during summer break in college. Although she acknowledged that she was in
counseling in college, she explained that she did not report the assaults at this
time because “I was very afraid of the person that he is. I was afraid for my life.”
Prior to trial, the State filed a motion in limine to exclude evidence of “a
potential sexual assault” of the victim by her biological father. The State
alleged that, during a deposition of the victim’s mother, “reference was made to
counseling records of [the victim]” from “when she was approximately 6 years
old. The counseling was allegedly in regards to a potential sexual assault by
[the victim]’s biological father.” Describing the report as a “touching
allegation,” the State argued that it was irrelevant on several grounds.
In his assented-to motion for in camera review of the records, the
defendant argued that the records were “material and potentially exculpatory”
to confirm that the victim, when younger, had accused her father of having
sexually assaulted her.
After reviewing the counseling records, the trial court concluded that none
of the records “contain material that is exculpatory or even favorable to the
defense in this case.” The court also ruled that “any probative value of evidence
of prior sexual abuse (or as the state styles it: prior sexual conduct by [the
victim]) between [the victim] and her biological father is substantially outweighed
by the danger of unfair prejudice.” The court further found that evidence of the
alleged earlier abuse would not be probative on the issue of the victim’s
credibility, and that its admission would result in a trial within a trial and cause
significant confusion of the issues before the jury. See N.H.R. Ev. 403.
The defendant filed a motion to reconsider, arguing that the court had
“misapprehended the relevancy of this evidence.” He argued that the support
that the victim would have received in counseling was relevant to “her claims
that she was scared and embarrassed to tell her mother [about the defendant’s
assaults] and worried that no one would believe her.” He also argued that the
victim’s mother’s reaction to the victim’s “disclosure” about her biological
father,1 that she immediately entered her into counseling, was in contrast to
1 For the purposes of this appeal, we will assume that the victim received counseling services
beginning sometime around 1990 as a result of her disclosure to her mother that her birth
father had touched her inappropriately.
2
her reaction to feeling that something inappropriate was happening between
the defendant and the victim when she found them sleeping together in the
master bedroom on multiple occasions and yet allowed the victim to continue
living with the defendant when the mother and defendant separated.
The trial court released three pages of the victim’s counseling records,
subject to a protective order, finding that “they relate to what appear to be
comments [the victim] made about the defendant in 1992.” By separate order,
the trial court reaffirmed its earlier ruling that evidence of the sexual abuse of
the victim was inadmissible.
Following a jury trial, the defendant was convicted and filed this appeal.
He first argues that evidence of the victim’s earlier report that she had been
sexually abused by her biological father and her resultant receipt of counseling
was relevant for two reasons: (1) because it would undermine her assertion
that she did not disclose the defendant’s assaults because she did not expect to
be believed; and (2) because it would discredit her mother’s “expected
testimony that she witnessed signs of sexual misconduct involving [the
defendant and the victim].”
A trial court has broad discretion to determine the scope of cross-
examination and the admissibility of evidence. State v. Aldrich, 169 N.H. 345,
348 (2016). We review the court’s decision on these issues to determine
whether its exercise of discretion is sustainable. State v. Letarte, 169 N.H. 455,
461 (2016). To prevail under this standard, the defendant must demonstrate
that the trial court’s decision was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the
prejudice of his case. Id. When we apply our unsustainable exercise of
discretion standard of review, we determine only whether the record establishes
an objective basis sufficient to sustain the discretionary judgment made. Id.
Even if we assume, without deciding, that the trial court erred in its evidentiary
ruling, it remains the defendant’s burden on appeal to demonstrate that the
“trial court’s error was clearly unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.” State
v. Morrill, 154 N.H. 547, 552 (2006). Having reviewed the record before us, we
conclude that the defendant has not carried his burden.
The defendant testified at trial and denied that the charged assaults had
occurred — he specifically testified that he did not sexually assault the victim.
He was able to extensively cross-examine the victim about her acts of affection
toward him and her continuing contact with him after she left home, thereby
challenging the veracity of both her disclosures and her asserted reasons for
her “delay” in disclosing them.
Significantly, there were substantial differences between the alleged
inappropriate touching of the victim by her biological father and the assaults
committed by the defendant. These differences diminish any probative value of
the excluded evidence. Here, the defendant had served as a police chief for six
3