THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2017-0345, State of New Hampshire v. Brittany
Boggs, the court on December 7, 2017, issued the following
order:
Having considered the memoranda filed in response to our orders of
October 2 and 25, 2017, relative to bail, and the record provided on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary to resolve the bail issue. We
assume, without deciding, that the bail issue is properly before us in this
appeal, and we uphold the trial court’s decisions denying the defendant’s
requests for bail pending appeal.
RSA 597:1-a (Supp. 2016) governs a request for bail pending appeal. It
provides that, for a person who has been convicted of a felony and sentenced to
imprisonment, bail is generally not available, unless that person establishes:
(1) By clear and convincing evidence, taking into
consideration the nature of the crime and the length of the
sentence imposed, that the person is not likely to fail to appear to
answer the judgment following the conclusion of the appellate
proceeding, or to pose a danger to himself or herself or to any other
person or the community, or to intimidate witnesses, or otherwise
to interfere with the administration of justice; and
(2) By a preponderance of the evidence that the appeal will
not likely be frivolous or taken merely for delay.
RSA 597:1-a, III(a). Whether to grant bail pending an appeal is a matter left to
the trial court’s sound discretion. State v. Marini, 117 N.H. 71, 73 (1977). We
will reverse the trial court’s decision only on compelling evidence. Id.
The defendant, Brittany Boggs, was convicted, following a jury trial in
Superior Court (Ignatius, J.) on two charges of issuing bad checks, see RSA
638:4 (2016), one in the amount of $8,517.27, and the other in the amount of
$1,315.73. She was sentenced to serve a stand-committed state prison term of
four to eight years, with a concurrent term of one-and-a-half to three years.
The record reflects that, in 2007, prior to the criminal conduct at issue in
this case, the defendant pleaded guilty to three charges of theft by
unauthorized taking for stealing substantial sums of money from prior
employers. She was ordered to pay a total of $346,160.01 in restitution, and
received a state prison sentence of seven-and-a-half to fifteen years.
The defendant was released on home confinement on August 29, 2009,
to be supervised until August 29, 2021. Following her release, the defendant
worked for, and embezzled approximately $30,000 from, an attorney.
According to the State’s sentencing memorandum, the attorney agreed not to
report the theft to law enforcement or the defendant’s parole officer based upon
the promise of her family to repay the stolen funds.
The defendant issued the checks at issue in this case on December 13,
2014, to a business that had hosted her wedding reception. According to the
State, the defendant “was given multiple opportunities to make payment and
had several excuses why payment was further delayed,” and as of the May 17,
2017 sentencing hearing, she had not yet paid for the wedding. At the time of
sentencing, the defendant was awaiting trial in another case in which the State
alleged that she had written bad checks to a business in 2014 and 2015.
Following the defendant’s convictions on February 28, 2017, the State
requested that the trial court impose a cash bail requirement of $5,000
pending sentencing, arguing that the case had a “lengthy history” of delays
caused by defendant for “medical issues, and the like, that did not come to
light,” that she was awaiting trial in another case, and that the State was
concerned “that this could be a delay or turning to a failure to appear
situation.” The defendant countered that she could not afford $5,000, that she
had exhibited good behavior throughout the case, that she had appeared at
court hearings, and that she had young children. The trial court asked
whether, in a prior case, the defendant had fled the jurisdiction. She
responded that the incident to which the court referred was a vacation, and
that, at the time she had left for that vacation, she had not yet been charged.
The trial court imposed a $2,500 cash bail term pending sentencing, explaining
that there had been “a long series of representations and misrepresentations,
and explanations and excuses, . . . all of which adds up to a whole lot of delay
and attempt to mislead,” and that the court was “more skeptical than [it] would
be in the normal course on promises to abide by court rules and bail orders.”
At the May 17, 2017 sentencing hearing, after the trial court imposed a
stand-committed prison term, the defendant requested that the sentence be
stayed pending an appeal. She argued that she had previously surrendered
herself on a parole revocation warrant, that she had attended all required court
hearings, that she was still facing criminal charges in another case, that she
had children and was married, that she had ties to the community, and that
her appeal was not frivolous. The State objected, arguing that the defendant
had caused multiple delays in the case, including some delays it suspected she
had intentionally caused, that she had been arrested in a prior case upon her
return from vacation, that it disputed, therefore, that she was not a flight risk,
2
and that it disputed that her appeal had merit. With respect to her arrest in
the prior case, the defendant countered that she was not aware that any
warrant had been issued in that case until she had returned from her vacation.
The trial court denied the request, finding no basis for it, and noting that “we
have had such tremendous delay getting to this point, from conviction in
February to sentencing finally in May.”
Following her filing of the present appeal, the defendant filed a motion for
bail pending appeal in the trial court. See State v. Gubitosi, 153 N.H. 79, 81
(2005) (observing that bail pending appeal is an “independent matter” over
which the trial court retains jurisdiction notwithstanding an appeal). She
argued that she had been granted bail pending sentencing, that the statutory
standards for bail pending appeal were “essentially the same” as the standards
for bail pending sentencing, that she had appeared at the sentencing hearing,
and that her appeal was not frivolous. The State objected, arguing that the
defendant had “continuously delayed the proceedings even claiming to have”
cancer, that the case “was pending for an extraordinary amount of time”, that
the “history of this case suggests [that the] appeal is frivolous and taken merely
for delay,” and that the defendant was a flight risk, having previously “left the
country” to be “arrested on her return from the tropics.” The trial court denied
the motion, finding that “[t]he defendant has not been forthright with the
court,” and that “there are concerns regarding her potential risk of flight.”
The defendant moved for reconsideration, asserting that, with respect to
the vacation, she had entered Barbados on October 18, 2005, and that the
indictments for which she was arrested were not returned until October 20,
2005. The trial court denied the motion, finding that the defendant had failed
“to establish by clear and convincing evidence that she is ‘not likely to fail to
appear’ at the conclusion of the appellate proceeding or that, by a
preponderance of the evidence, . . . her appeal is not frivolous.” The court
noted that it was “familiar with the evidence at trial, [the defendant’s] lack of
candor to the Court, and the further felony charge now scheduled for trial,”
and that “[t]his information creates an on-going concern that the defendant
may fail to appear or is merely seeking to avoid and/or delay incarceration.”
We subsequently granted the defendant’s motion to add the denial of bail
pending appeal as an issue in this appeal. See Sup. Ct. R. 16(3)(b). Thereafter,
the defendant filed a self-represented renewed motion for bail pending appeal
in the trial court, and we granted her counsel’s assented-to motion to stay the
appeal so that the trial court could consider it. At a subsequent hearing, the
trial court declined to rule on the renewed motion, but clarified its rationale for
denying bail as follows:
The concerns that I have are that there has been a pattern in this
case, or maybe pattern’s a bad word, that there has been instances
of a lack of honesty to the Court, misrepresentations, and that the
3