THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2017-0097, State of New Hampshire v. Anthony
Collins, the court on March 1, 2018, issued the following order:
Having considered the brief filed by the defendant, Anthony Collins, the
State’s memorandum of law, and the record submitted on appeal, we conclude
that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1). The
defendant appeals his conviction for first degree assault, following a jury trial
in Superior Court (Kissinger, J.). See RSA 631:1, I(b) (2016). On appeal, he
argues that the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion when it
admitted into evidence color photographs depicting the victim’s injuries. He
also argues that the trial court committed plain error when it failed to strike,
sua sponte, certain testimony by the victim. See Sup. Ct. R. 16-A. We affirm.
I. Admissibility of the Photographs
The defendant was charged with having committed first degree assault
when he “knowingly caused bodily injury” to the victim “by means of a deadly
weapon, when he stabbed [the victim] in the hand and cut [the victim’s] face
with a knife.” See RSA 631:1, I(b). The indictment further alleged that the
knife was a deadly weapon because “the manner in which it was used is known
to be capable of producing death or serious bodily injury.” See State v. Hatt,
144 N.H. 246, 248 (1999).
During the State’s direct examination of the victim, the State sought to
introduce color photographs depicting the victim’s injuries. Defense counsel
objected, arguing that the photographs were inadmissible under New
Hampshire Rule of Evidence 403. See N.H. R. Ev. 403 (2016) (amended 2017).
The trial court overruled the objection and allowed the photographs to be
admitted into evidence.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court misapplied Rule
403. Under Rule 403, the trial court may exclude relevant evidence if its
probative value is substantially outweighed by “the danger of unfair prejudice,
confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by considerations of undue
delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence.” Id.
Evidence is unfairly prejudicial if its primary purpose or effect is to appeal to a
jury’s sympathies, arouse its sense of horror, provoke its instinct to punish, or
trigger other mainsprings of human action that may cause a jury to base its
decision on something other than the established propositions in the case.
State v. Ainsworth, 151 N.H. 691, 696 (2005). However, “[u]nfair prejudice is
not . . . mere detriment to a defendant from the tendency of the evidence to
prove his guilt, in which sense all evidence offered by the prosecution is meant
to be prejudicial.” State v. Jordon, 148 N.H. 115, 117-18 (2002) (quotation
omitted). “Rather, the prejudice required to predicate reversible error is an
undue tendency to induce a decision against the defendant on some improper
basis, commonly one that is emotionally charged.” Id. at 118 (quotation
omitted).
Because the trial court is in the best position to gauge the prejudicial
impact of particular evidence, see State v. Tabaldi, 165 N.H. 306, 323 (2013),
we accord the trial court considerable deference in determining whether the
probative value of evidence is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair
prejudice, Ainsworth, 151 N.H. at 696. We will not disturb its decision absent
an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Id. To show an unsustainable
exercise of discretion, the defendant must demonstrate that the court’s ruling
was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Id.
The trial court reasonably determined that the probative value of the
photographs was not substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair
prejudice to the defendant. See Tabaldi, 165 N.H. at 323. The photographs
“were relevant as bearing on the nature and the degree of the crime and the
defendant’s purpose and mental state, as well as an aid in making clear to the
jury oral descriptions of the [victim’s] injuries.” State v. White, 105 N.H. 159,
162 (1963). The photographs were also probative of whether the knife was
used as a deadly weapon. See Hatt, 144 N.H. at 248 (explaining that a weapon
is deadly if it may be objectively understood to be capable of causing death or
serious bodily injury in the manner in which it is used, intended to be used or
threatened to be used).
In the context of this case, we cannot say that the photographs were
likely to have any greater emotional impact on the jury than the victim’s
testimony describing his injuries. See Tabaldi, 165 N.H. at 323. Although the
photographs “may have been prejudicial, we cannot conclude that [they were]
so inflammatory as to substantially outweigh [their] probative value.” Id.
(quotation omitted).
II. Plain Error
During the State’s direct examination of the victim, the prosecutor asked
him how he felt waiting for the fire department to arrive after the stabbing, and
the victim responded:
Oh, what did it feel like waiting? Complete panic. You know,
having a wife who is pregnant with your daughter and not
knowing. You know, I hadn’t seen my face. I didn’t know the
severity of the injuries. And all I could think about was my wife
2
and my unborn daughter and my son. I mean it was torture. I
didn’t know if whoever this was was going to come back and do it
again. Just shock and terror and fear.
Shortly thereafter, the prosecutor asked the victim to explain his prior
testimony that one of the long-term effects of the stabbing had been
“emotional,” and the victim responded:
It’s been the worst 14 months of my life. I’ve had to deal with this
with no closure, you know. I feel like I’m always having to look
behind my shoulder because I had — I didn’t have any idea who it
was that did it and if it was going to happen again. It’s just — it’s
been a nightmare, you know. My family’s been looking at moving
to try to escape it. I don’t know how else to describe it, other than
just a nightmare.
The defendant did not object to the admission of this testimony. On appeal, he
argues that the admission constituted plain error. See Sup. Ct. R. 16-A.
“For us to find plain error: (1) there must be error; (2) the error must be
plain; and (3) the error must affect substantial rights.” State v. Thomas, 168
N.H. 589, 604 (2016) (quotation omitted). “If all three of these conditions are
met, we may then exercise our discretion to correct a forfeited error only if the
error meets a fourth criterion: the error must seriously affect the fairness,
integrity or public reputation of judicial proceedings.” Id. (quotation omitted).
“The plain error rule is used sparingly, however, and is limited to those
circumstances in which a miscarriage of justice would otherwise result.” Id.
(quotation omitted).
“Because the defendant did not object to the challenged testimony, and
the trial court made no ruling on its admissibility, the pertinent question is
whether the trial court erred in failing sua sponte to strike that testimony.” Id.
(quotation omitted). “We have never held that a trial court must sua sponte
strike a witness’s testimony.” Id. (quotation omitted). “A trial court might have
that obligation when there could be no dispute that certain testimony impaired
the defendant’s substantial rights and adversely affected the fairness, integrity,
or public reputation of judicial proceedings”; however, “this case . . . does not
present such a situation.” Id. (quotation omitted).
“Even if we were to assume that there was error and that it was plain,
the error must affect substantial rights.” Id. at 606. This third prong of the
plain error test “is similar to the harmless error analysis we use to evaluate
preserved claims of error, with one important distinction: whereas the State
bears the burden under harmless error analysis, the defendant bears the
burden under the plain error test.” State v. Mueller, 166 N.H. 65, 70 (2014).
“To meet this third prong, the defendant must demonstrate that the error was
3