THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2017-0647, Salmon Properties, LLC v. Michael
Herpst & a., the court on November 16, 2018, issued the
following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
The defendants, Michael Herpst and Myla Randall (tenants), appeal an order of
the Circuit Court (Ashley, J.) granting judgment to the plaintiff, Salmon
Properties, LLC (landlord), in this possessory action for non-payment of rent.
The trial court found that the tenants had failed to pay rent in July and August
2017 and “did not establish they gave written notice to the landlord at a time
when they were not in arrears, nor that any such notice satisfied the terms of
RSA 540:13-d.” We affirm.
We will uphold the trial court’s factual findings unless they are
unsupported by the evidence or erroneous as a matter of law. Town of
Atkinson v. Malborn Realty Trust, 164 N.H. 62, 66 (2012). The trial court was
in the best position to evaluate the evidence, measure its persuasiveness, and
assess the credibility of the witnesses, and we defer to its judgment on such
issues. Id. at 66-67. As the fact finder, the trial court was entitled to accept or
reject, in whole or in part, the testimony of any party and was not required to
believe even uncontroverted evidence. Id. at 67. We review questions of law de
novo. Miller v. Slania Enters., 150 N.H. 655, 659 (2004).
The tenants first argue that the trial court “incorrectly interpreted RSA
540:13-d (2007) as requiring written notice to the landlord of violations of the
premises.” We review the trial court’s statutory interpretation de novo. Appeal
of Local Gov’t Ctr., 165 N.H. 790, 804 (2014). “In matters of statutory
interpretation, we are the final arbiter of the intent of the legislature as
expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole.” Id. “We first look
to the language of the statute itself, and, if possible, construe that language
according to its plain and ordinary meaning.” Id. “We interpret legislative
intent from the statute as written and will not consider what the legislature
might have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit to include.”
Id.
RSA 540:13-d, I, provides that “[n]o action for possession based on non[-]
payment of rent” may be maintained with respect to residential premises “if
such premises are in substantial violation of the standards of fitness for health
and safety” and “such violation materially affects the habitability of said
premises,” provided that, among other requirements, the tenant proves by clear
and convincing evidence that: (1) “while not in arrears in rent, he provided
notice of the violation to the person to whom he customarily pays rent”; and (2)
“[t]he landlord failed to correct the violations within 14 days of the receipt of
such written notice or, in an emergency, as promptly as conditions require.”
(Emphasis added.) As the plain language of the statute requires that the notice
be in writing, we conclude that the trial court’s interpretation of RSA 540:13-d
was not erroneous.
The tenants next assert that the trial court erred when it found that
there was no evidence that they furnished written notice to the landlord when
they were not in arrears. They argue that they provided a list of needed repairs
to the landlord in April 2017, which they contend sufficed as the written notice
required by RSA 540:13-d. However, the evidence before the trial court was
conflicting as to the content of the April 2017