THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2017-0277, Michael D. Roche & a. v. City of
Manchester, the court on August 2, 2018, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
plaintiffs, a group of former employees of the defendant, City of Manchester,
appeal two orders of the Superior Court (Ruoff, J., and Kissinger, J.) in favor of
the City. We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand.
The record reflects the following facts. The plaintiffs are a group of now-
retired former City of Manchester employees who were enrolled in the
Manchester Employees’ Contributory Retirement System (MECRS). MECRS is
governed by Laws 1973, chapter 218, as repealed and reenacted by Laws 2002,
chapter 194, and as thereafter amended. See Laws 1973, ch. 218 (repealed
and reenacted by Laws 2002, ch. 194) (the Act). Section 8 of Chapter 218
requires the City to “appropriate annually to the retirement board the amounts
required to fund the benefits” that the plan provides. Laws 1973, 218:8
(repealed and reenacted by Laws 2002, 194:1). Sections 9 and 28 require
employees to contribute a total of 5% of their calendar year earnings in
addition to the City’s contribution. See Laws 1973, 218:9, I (repealed and
reenacted by Laws 2002, 194:1); Laws 1973, 218:28, II (repealed and reenacted
by Laws 2002, 194:1 and amended by Laws 2005, 41:1).
One group of plaintiffs is union-affiliated, and the rest of the plaintiffs
are nonaffiliated, meaning they were not members of, or represented by, any
collective bargaining units. Prior to retiring, all plaintiffs entered into
agreements that provided for severance packages. The union-affiliated
plaintiffs, represented by three different unions, entered into collective
bargaining agreements with the City (CBAs). The CBAs contained nearly
identical severance clauses stating, in pertinent part, that employees who:
retire on or after March 1, 2012 and prior of June 30, 2015 shall
have earned a severance benefit of $13,000. The City may
withhold from this benefit such amounts as are necessary to pay
the employer and the employee contributions to the [MECRS].
The CBAs also contained substantially similar clauses defining “grievance” as
“a claim or dispute arising out of the application or interpretation of this
agreement,” and specifying a procedure for resolving grievances, culminating in
binding arbitration. The nonaffiliated plaintiffs all agreed to an employees’
benefits package (the Understanding) with the City. The Understanding
provided that “[r]etirements between 3/1/2012 and 6/30/2015 shall earn
$13,000 severance. The City may withhold the employee and the employer
contributions to the retirement system.”
It is undisputed that all of the plaintiffs retired from City employment
within the time period specified by the severance provisions. Upon their
retirements, the plaintiffs accepted severance payments in the gross amount of
$13,000. Both employee and employer contributions were withheld from that
amount pursuant to the CBAs and the Understanding. As a result of the
severance payments, the plaintiffs’ retirement benefits increased.
The plaintiffs subsequently filed a complaint alleging that the provisions
of the CBAs and the Understanding permitting the City to withhold the
employer contributions from the employees’ severance payments are “ultra
vires,” as contrary to the Act, and, therefore, unenforceable. The plaintiffs
requested that the court order the City to refund the amount of employer
contributions withheld from the severance payments. The City moved to
dismiss the union-affiliated plaintiffs’ claims, arguing that the Public Employee
Labor Relations Board (PELRB) had primary jurisdiction. The trial court
granted the City’s motion to dismiss, concluding that, because the union-
affiliated plaintiffs’ claims relate to the application of CBA provisions, the
PELRB had primary jurisdiction. The trial court also reasoned that it lacked
jurisdiction based upon the language of the grievance clauses of the CBAs,
which required claims arising out of the application or interpretation of a CBA
to be submitted to binding arbitration. The trial court denied the union-
affiliated plaintiffs’ motion to reconsider.
The City then moved for summary judgment on the nonaffiliated
plaintiffs’ claims, arguing that the Act does not prohibit the withholding of City
contributions from employees’ severance packages. The trial court granted the
motion, concluding that the Understanding is not ultra vires because the Act
merely provides a framework for funding the retirement plan and neither
entitles employees to a severance payment nor prohibits severance agreements
such as the Understanding. In support of this ruling, the court noted that the
MECRS Board of Trustees reviewed, but did not object to, the severance
provision contained in the Understanding. The trial court denied the
nonaffiliated plaintiffs’ motion to reconsider. This appeal followed.
On appeal, the plaintiffs argue that the trial court erred when it
dismissed the union-affiliated plaintiffs’ claims on jurisdictional grounds, and
when it granted summary judgment to the City on the nonaffiliated plaintiffs’
claims. We turn first to the plaintiffs’ argument that the trial court should
have retained jurisdiction because the union-affiliated plaintiffs’ claims arise
out of a violation of the Act, rather than a violation of the terms of the CBAs
2
themselves. The City counters that the trial court was correct that the union-
affiliated plaintiffs’ claims arise out of the application or interpretation of the
CBAs, and, therefore, the PELRB had primary jurisdiction. The City further
contends that, while the PELRB has jurisdiction to determine whether a
dispute involves a matter covered by a CBA, it does not typically have
jurisdiction to interpret the CBA when it provides for binding arbitration. It
asserts that, because the CBAs include grievance provisions providing for
binding arbitration, the trial court correctly found that an arbitrator, not the
trial court, would have jurisdiction to resolve this dispute. We agree with the
plaintiffs.
“In reviewing the trial court’s grant of a motion to dismiss, we consider
whether the allegations in the plaintiff[s’] pleadings are reasonably susceptible
of a construction that would permit recovery.” England v. Brianas, 166 N.H.
369, 371 (2014). However, “[w]hether the trial court had jurisdiction is a
question of law subject to de novo review.” Univ. Sys. of N.H. Bd. of Trs. v.
Dorfsman, 168 N.H. 450, 453 (2015).
Generally, “claims involving public employment disputes must be
resolved before the PELRB in the first instance.” Collins v. City of Manchester,
143 N.H. 708, 710 (1999); see also RSA 273-A:6, I (2010) (providing that
PELRB has jurisdiction over all violations of RSA 273-A:5); RSA 273-A:5, I(h)
(2010) (prohibiting breach of collective bargaining agreement by public
employer). However, the PELRB’s jurisdiction does not extend to claims that do
not emanate from a CBA. See Stankiewicz v. City of Manchester, 156 N.H.
587, 591-92 (2007). In Stankiewicz, we held that the superior court had
jurisdiction over a union employee’s claim. Id. Although the employee’s union
had entered into a CBA with the City, the employee argued that his claim
stemmed from a controlling ordinance. Id. at 588-89. We stated, “while the
determination of arbitrability is generally within the jurisdiction of the
arbitrator or the [PELRB], that rule applies when the relevant claim arises
under the CBA.” Id. at 591 (citation omitted). We concluded that because “the
plaintiff’s claim . . . arises out of a right conferred by [the controlling
ordinance,] . . . the plaintiff is seeking to vindicate a right that does not
emanate from the CBA.” Id.; see also Fowler v. Town of Seabrook, 145 N.H.
536, 539 (2000) (“Where the plaintiff seeks to vindicate a statutory right, the
presumption of arbitrability does not pertain. Such a claim is not arbitrable
unless there is a ‘clear and unmistakable waiver’ of the employee’s right to
pursue his statutory claim.” (citation omitted)).
Here, the merits of the plaintiffs’ claims do not arise out of an alleged
violation, misinterpretation, or misapplication of the CBAs. Rather, the
plaintiffs’ complaint states: “The City has reported the entire $13,000.00 to the
Retirement Board as earnings and upon information and belief withheld both
the employee’s 5% contribution and the City’s actuarially determined
contribution contrary to the provisions of Laws 218:4, VIII and laws 218:8.”
3