THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2017-0721, Sandra Janvrin v. Federal National
Mortgage Association & a., the court on July 11, 2019, issued
the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
appellant, Sandra Janvrin, appeals an order of the Superior Court (Wageling,
J.) denying her petition to enjoin the foreclosure sale of her home, and to set
aside the mortgage held by appellee Federal National Mortgage Association
(FNMA), and serviced by appellee PNC Mortgage, a division of PNC Bank, NA
(PNC). We reverse and remand.
The pertinent facts are as follows. Janvrin’s home, which she inherited
unencumbered, is located in Salem. Janvrin has a tenth-grade education, is
not experienced in financial matters, and, as of 2007, was unemployed, on
medical disability, and receiving social security benefits. In 2007, Janvrin’s
son, William Brightman, and his children lived with his girlfriend, Angela
Warren, in Warren’s multi-unit home located in Haverhill, Massachusetts. In
approximately July of 2007, Warren asked Janvrin to loan her $40,000 to pay
an arrearage on Warren’s mortgage, using Janvrin’s home as collateral, and
Janvrin orally agreed to take out a loan to do so. In furtherance of the loan,
Janvrin provided Warren with her date of birth, social security number, and
income information. On July 31, 2007, a loan application in Janvrin’s name
was submitted, presumably by Warren, to E-Loan, Inc., an internet-based
lender. On August 8, 2007, Warren submitted false information regarding
Janvrin’s employment status and income. On August 9, 2007, E-Loan
approved a loan in the amount of $100,000.
On August 10, 2007, Warren brought Janvrin to Pentucket Bank, where,
in order to facilitate receipt of the loan proceeds, they added Janvrin’s name to
Warren’s account. Because E-Loan was an internet-based lender, a power of
attorney was necessary to provide the requisite authority for an agent to sign
the loan documents on Janvrin’s behalf. Therefore, while at the bank, Janvrin
also signed a limited power of attorney, which was notarized by a bank
employee. Janvrin, trusting Warren, did not read the document. Thereafter,
Warren used the signed and notarized limited power of attorney to create a
fraudulent limited power of attorney. In that document, Warren added the
name of Janvrin’s husband, Gary Janvrin, and forged both his and Janvrin’s
signatures on the altered document. Additionally, Janvrin’s name was
misspelled, her forged signature appeared on the signature lines for both the
principal and the agent, and the document specified that the closing was to
occur in July 2007. By its terms, the fraudulent limited power of attorney
authorized Thomas Betz, apparently affiliated with E-Loan in some manner, to
act as agent for Janvrin and her husband in executing documents for a
$100,000 loan.
On August 13, 2007, Betz executed the loan documents — an
acknowledgement of attorney-in-fact, quit-claim deed, mortgage, and note —
on behalf of Janvrin and her husband. On August 16, 2007, Janvrin again
accompanied Warren to Pentucket Bank, where she signed duplicate copies of
another limited power of attorney, each of which was notarized by a bank
employee. Janvrin again did not read the documents. Thereafter, as before,
Warren used the signed and notarized limited power of attorney to create a
fraudulent limited power of attorney: she added Gary Janvrin’s name, and
forged both his and Janvrin’s signatures. By its terms, this fraudulent limited
power of attorney authorized a closing on August 13, 2007, and authorized
Betz to act as agent for Janvrin and her husband in executing documents for a
$100,000 loan. On September 6, 2007, E-Loan recorded the fraudulent
August 16, 2007 limited power of attorney, along with the loan documents
executed by Betz. Neither of the limited powers of attorney actually signed by
Janvrin on August 10, 2007 and August 16, 2007 were introduced as evidence
at trial.
On August 20, 2007, the loan proceeds, in the amount of $94,541.00,
were deposited into the joint bank account at Pentucket Bank. Warren used
the funds to pay off the arrearage on her mortgage and for other personal
expenses. Janvrin did not receive any of the loan proceeds, nor was she aware
that they had been deposited in the account.
On October 2, 2007, the first mortgage payment of $690.68 was made
out of the joint account. In November 2007, when no further payments on the
loan had been made, National City Mortgage Bank, the loan servicer, began
calling Janvrin and sending her certified mail. However, Janvrin never opened
the mail, and the calls were made to Warren’s phone number. In early 2008,
an individual purporting to be Janvrin negotiated a repayment plan with
National City’s legal counsel, Harmon Law Offices. On May 14, 2008, a
forbearance agreement was signed by an individual who, the trial court found,
was “purporting to be [Janvrin], but who was not [Janvrin].”
Prior to the execution of the forbearance agreement, on March 17, 2008,
Janvrin’s mortgage was assigned to FNMA. On approximately April 29, 2008,
Janvrin learned that National City was planning to foreclose on her home. She
contacted Harmon Law Offices, informed it that she was a victim of fraud, and
asked what she needed to do to keep her home. Janvrin was told that, to stop
the foreclosure, she needed to send the firm $3,941.22. On May 20, 2008,
Janvrin did so, and National City suspended the planned foreclosure.
2
After her initial report of fraud to Harmon Law Offices, Janvrin continued
to report the fraud to the firm, as well as to PNC — which, in October 2008,
had acquired National City and begun servicing the loan. As the trial court
observed,
[s]he frequently told the person who answered her telephone call
that she was the victim of a fraud and that she believed someone
was looking into it. . . . [Janvrin] had few, if any, resources to
obtain legal assistance, and she relied on a belief that once
notified, PNC would locate the source of the fraud. She attempted
to alert the police, local courts, and Pentucket Bank of her claim of
fraud. She also attempted to garner assistance from an attorney,
with little luck.
Janvrin continued to make payments on the loan, but, in November
2009, she notified PNC that she needed assistance. On December 16, 2009,
Janvrin and PNC entered into a forbearance agreement setting forth a modified
repayment plan. On July 10, 2010, in response to another request for
assistance, the parties entered into a loan modification agreement.
Sometime between April and July 2012, Janvrin was visiting a family
member who lived in Warren’s home, and she discovered a box containing
various documents related to the loan. Among the documents in the box were
limited power of attorney forms — both blank and bearing signatures. Janvrin
brought the box of documents to Attorney Ralph Stein. Stein sent a letter to
PNC notifying it of the fraud, and asserting that, due to the forged limited
power of attorney, the loan was invalid and the mortgage was a nullity. In
response to Stein’s letter, PNC reviewed the mortgage file, and found, inter alia,
that there were signature and name spelling discrepancies on various loan
documents, including the August 10, 2007 limited power of attorney and the
May 14, 2008 forbearance agreement. Nonetheless, on December 20, 2012,
PNC responded to Stein’s letter, stating that Janvrin would not be excused
from the loan as she had “reaffirmed her obligation to pay the loan in full in the
Loan Modification Agreement.”
On January 26, 2015, PNC sent a letter to Janvrin informing her that
her mortgage was delinquent, and that, to avoid foreclosure, she could choose
to enter into a new trial loan modification agreement, sell her home, or execute
a deed-in-lieu of foreclosure. On February 6, 2015, Janvrin signed the new
trial loan modification agreement. According to PNC, as of February 2015,
Janvrin owed $102,687.08 in principal and interest on the loan, $8,146.08
more than the original disbursement in 2007. On May 22, 2015, PNC offered
her a new permanent loan modification agreement. As of that date, more than
seven years after the date of the original disbursement, Janvrin had made loan
payments totaling $73,479.62. Utilizing the assistance of Attorney Roger
Phillips through the New Hampshire Foreclosure Relief Project, Janvrin
3