THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2017-0439, State of New Hampshire v. Cesar
Abreu, the court on November 15, 2018, issued the following
order:
The defendant, Cesar Abreu, appeals his convictions for resisting arrest
and being a felon in possession of a deadly weapon. See RSA 642:2 (2016);
RSA 159:3, I (2016). He argues that the State failed to present sufficient
evidence to support the convictions and that the Superior Court (Brown, J.)
erred in allowing an arresting officer to testify about his interpretation of a
statement made by the defendant. We affirm.
The following evidence was presented to the jury. During the overnight
hours of December 17, 2016, Manchester police officers responded to a
Manchester apartment complex. The first responding officers met the resident
of one of the apartments in the office of the complex. The resident provided
Officer O’Meara with a key to her apartment. O’Meara went to the apartment
where he was met by another Manchester police officer. When O’Meara
knocked at the door, the defendant responded. O’Meara advised him that he
was no longer welcome at the apartment and that they were there to remove
him. After the defendant swore and closed the door, O’Meara used the key to
gain access. When he entered the apartment, he saw the defendant sitting on
a couch. A black handgun was next to him on the couch, at arm’s length from
him. When O’Meara told the defendant not to move, the defendant began to
move toward the gun. O’Meara pulled the defendant off the couch to the floor.
The defendant was angry, telling the police to leave the apartment. When he
said that he was going to be sick, the officers brought him to the bathroom. He
did not get sick. As the officers were returning him to the living area, the
defendant became belligerent and told O’Meara that he wasn’t afraid of him.
He walked toward O’Meara “in an aggressive manner” and, after another
struggle, he was eventually handcuffed. Following a jury trial, he was
convicted of resisting arrest and of being a felon in possession of a deadly
weapon. This appeal followed.
The defendant first argues that the State presented insufficient evidence
to prove the felon in possession charge. See RSA 159:3, I. To convict the
defendant of this offense, the State was required to prove beyond a reasonable
doubt that the defendant had been convicted of a statutorily-defined felony and
that he was in possession of the gun. See id. The defendant argues that the
State failed to prove that he was in constructive possession of the gun. See
State v. Francis, 167 N.H. 598, 604-05 (2015) (setting forth several factors
relevant to determination of constructive possession).
A challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence raises a claim of legal error;
therefore, our standard of review is de novo. State v. Ruiz, 170 N.H. 553, 564-
65 (2018). To prevail, the defendant must demonstrate that no rational trier of
fact, viewing all of the evidence and all reasonable inferences from it in the light
most favorable to the State, could have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
Id. at 565.
The evidence presented at trial included testimony about the defendant’s
position on the couch, his proximity to the gun, and his actions after he was
directed not to move. Accordingly, it consisted of both direct and
circumstantial evidence. Therefore, the defendant’s sufficiency challenge must
fail if the evidence is such that a rational trier of fact could find guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt. See State v. Saunders, 164 N.H. 342, 351 (2012).
The trial court provided the following instruction on possession without
objection:
Possession. A person possesses an item when he has it in
his physical custody or exercises dominion and control over it.
Possession can be actual or constructive.
Actual possession is where a person has direct physical
control over the item.
Constructive possession is the power to determine the use or
disposition of the item.
In either case the State must prove that:
1) The Defendant knew the location of the item;
2) That the defendant knew the nature of the item; and
3) The defendant had custody of the item in the sense that it
was in a place where it was under his control.
In a case of constructive possession, mere access to an item
is insufficient as is mere presence in the location where the item is
found. The Defendant must have the power to control the item.
Constructive possession can be inferred from all the evidence
presented, including any incriminating statements or any other
circumstances linking the Defendant to the item. Further,
2
constructive possession of the item need not be exclusive. The
item can be possessed jointly with another.
A person cannot be convicted of the crime of unlawful
possession of a firearm when he happens to walk or be in an
apartment or house where a weapon merely exists.
A defendant’s control over a weapon is not based upon its
location at any particular place; rather, it is based upon the
defendant’s ability to determine the use and disposition of the gun.
We have stated that a defendant’s control over a weapon is based upon
his ability to determine its use and disposition. State v. Haycock, 136 N.H.
361, 363 (1992). In determining whether the defendant had control, the
question is whether he is the one who could determine who could use the
particular weapon. State v. Hammell, 147 N.H. 313, 319 (2001) (finding
evidence that defendant “brandished” the weapon relevant to issue of control).
The evidence before the jury included the following facts: (1) when the
officers entered the apartment, O’Meara observed the defendant sitting on a
couch with a black handgun to his left; (2) the gun was an “arm’s length” from
him; (3) when O’Meara instructed him not to move, the defendant began to
move toward the firearm; and (4) after securing the scene, O’Meara examined
the gun and found that it was loaded and the safety was off. Having
considered the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, we conclude
that it was sufficient for a rational trier of fact to conclude that the defendant
had the ability to determine the use and disposition of the gun. Accordingly,
we affirm the defendant’s conviction for being a felon in possession. See, e.g.,
State v. Fox, 150 N.H. 623, 625 (2004) (generally person is in control of firearm
if that person has the ability to determine who may have ultimate use of it).
The defendant also argues that the State failed to present sufficient
evidence to prove that he resisted arrest. To convict the defendant of resisting
arrest, the State was required to prove that he (1) knowingly or purposely (2)
physically interfered with a person (3) recognized to be a law enforcement
official (4) seeking to effect his arrest regardless of whether there was a legal
basis for the arrest. See RSA 642:2. A conviction for resisting arrest must rest
upon conduct that occurs while law enforcement is seeking to effect an arrest
or detention. See State v. West, 167 N.H. 465, 472 (2015).
The defendant contends that no evidence was presented that the police
announced their intention to arrest him and that, given their earlier announced
purpose of removing him from the apartment, the State introduced insufficient
evidence to prove that he understood that their later actions indicated that they
intended to arrest him. Because persons rarely explain to others the inner
workings of their minds or mental processes, one’s culpable mental state is
3