THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2017-0544, In re Estate of Amy Marjorie
Patnaude, the court on June 29, 2018, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs, memorandum of law, and record submitted
on appeal, we conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See
Sup. Ct. R. 18(1). We affirm.
The appellant, Barbara Fleeman (Barbara), appeals the order of the
Circuit Court (King, J.) invalidating a 2014 codicil to the 2010 will of Amy
Marjorie Patnaude (Amy), Barbara’s mother, as the product of undue influence.
Barbara argues that the trial court erred in: (1) finding undue influence, when
only two of the four factors usually present in undue influence cases existed in
this case; (2) failing to give sufficient weight to the relationship between her
sister, Doreen Demers (Doreen), and their mother in the fall of 2014; (3) finding
that Doreen provided sufficient evidence to rebut the presumption that their
mother was free of undue influence; (4) finding that Amy lacked an
understanding of whether, and how much, Doreen had repaid her loan debts;
and (5) finding that Amy lacked the requisite mental capacity to execute the
2014 codicil.
“The findings of fact of the judge of probate are final unless they are so
plainly erroneous that such findings could not be reasonably made.” RSA 567–
A:4 (2007). Consequently, we will not disturb the trial court’s decree unless it
is unsupported by the evidence or plainly erroneous as a matter of law. In re
Estate of Couture, 166 N.H. 101, 105 (2014). We defer to the judgment of the
trial court to resolve conflicts in testimony, measure the credibility of
witnesses, and determine the weight to be given to testimony, recognizing that,
as the trier of fact, it is in the best position to measure the persuasiveness and
credibility of evidence. In re Guardianship of E.L., 154 N.H. 292, 296 (2006).
We first address Barbara’s argument that the trial court erred because,
after noting that four factors are usually present in cases involving undue
influence, it found undue influence in this case based upon two of the factors.
In particular, she argues that the disposition Amy made in her 2014 codicil
was not an unnatural disposition of her assets and that neither Barbara nor
her daughter, Lisa Richmond (Lisa), used improper means to procure the
contested disposition. As an initial matter, we note that the trial court was
citing a Massachusetts case which noted that such factors are usually present.
The trial court did not rule, nor have we held, that undue influence cannot
exist absent an unnatural disposition of assets or the use of improper means.
In New Hampshire, the determination of whether undue influence exists is a
question of fact based upon an examination of all the circumstances. In Re
Estate of Cass, 143 N.H. 57, 61 (1998). We consider factors including the
relationships among the parties, the physical and mental condition of the
testator, the reasonableness and nature of the disposition, and “the
personalities of the parties.” Id. (quotation omitted).
In this case, the court found that from 2007 through October 2014,
Doreen had assumed the role of Amy’s caregiver, bringing her to appointments,
assisting with daily medications, and helping her pay bills. However, in the fall
and winter of 2014, Barbara and Lisa not only “isolate[d] Amy from her
previous long-time caregiver, Doreen,” but also “assisted in procuring a ‘no-
trespass order’ against [Doreen].” The court found that Amy, who was 92 years
old and suffering from dementia, was “in a state of diminished mental capacity
that rendered her easily influenced by those around her.” In early September
2014, Lisa “noticed” a bank statement in Amy’s home showing that Amy held a
$97,000 certificate of deposit (CD) in trust for Doreen. Shortly after this
discovery, Barbara “suddenly began taking a heightened interest in Amy’s
circumstances and finances.” Barbara, who “did not undertake regular contact
with Amy until the final fifteen months of Amy’s life,” soon “arrived
unannounced from Texas on October 1, 2014.” “Ostensibly,” the court found,
“her visit was to ‘surprise’ Amy for her birthday on October 5th.” However, on
October 3, 2014, Amy, Lisa, and Barbara went to the bank to have the CD
“split three ways,” a change that benefitted Barbara. Barbara returned to
Texas in mid-October.
Amy’s original will, which was executed in 2010, provided for small
bequests to two other children and a stepson; Amy left the residuary estate to
Barbara and Doreen in equal shares. No one disputes that the 2010 will was
valid. On December 10, 2014, Lisa accompanied Amy to meet with an
attorney, who drafted a codicil to Amy’s will, the only purpose of which was to
disinherit Doreen. Amy and Lisa returned to the attorney’s office the next day,
and Amy executed the codicil in Lisa’s presence. Amy died approximately one
year later. The court found that “Barbara, who stood in a confidential
relationship with Amy, not only benefitted from the 2014 Codicil, but was the
only person to benefit from it, as it removed Doreen as a residuary distributee,
rendering Barbara as Amy’s only child to receive a large share of her probate
estate.” We conclude that these findings were sufficient to support the trial
court’s conclusion that the codicil was the product of undue influence. See In
re Estate of Couture, 166 N.H. at 105.
We next address Barbara’s argument that the trial court failed to give
sufficient weight to the relationship between Doreen and Amy in the fall of
2014. We do not reweigh the evidence to determine whether we would have
ruled differently. In re Guardianship of E.L., 154 N.H. at 296. Rather, we
2
review the record to determine if the trial court’s findings could be reasonably
made given the testimony and the evidence before it. Id.
The record shows that the court fully considered Doreen’s relationship
with Amy during the fall of 2014. The trial court noted that in October 2014,
shortly after Barbara, Lisa and Amy went to the bank to change the CD,
Doreen brought Amy back to the bank to reverse the change. However, Amy
told the bank manager privately that she wanted to have the CD “split three
ways.” Because the bank was unable to confirm that Amy had the mental
capacity to manage her affairs, the bank froze the account. Shortly thereafter,
Doreen retained an attorney to prepare a power of attorney for Amy, naming
Doreen as agent.
The trial court noted that if it were called upon to determine the validity
of the power of attorney, it would most likely conclude that it was the product
of Doreen’s undue influence. The court found that “at times after September 1,
2014, Doreen, Barbara, and Lisa all attempted to take advantage of Amy in
order to control both her financial assets and her person.” In the process, the
court found, Amy “became a human ping pong ball, subjected to attempts to
control and influence her person and finances by two daughters, each trying to
maximize their inheritance.” Based upon these findings, we conclude that the
trial court fully considered Doreen’s relationship with Amy in the fall of 2014,
and that its findings could be reasonably made given the testimony and the
evidence before it. See In re Guardianship of E.L., 154 N.H. at 296.
Barbara argues that the trial court erred in stating that “[i]t need not
linger on the legal [e]ffect, if any, of Doreen’s attempts [to unduly influence
Amy], however, as that issue is not before it.” Barbara asserts that “[b]y not
analyzing what Doreen had done to her mother, the Court paints a distorted
picture.” The interpretation of a trial court’s order presents a question of law
for this court. See Guy v. Town of Temple, 157 N.H. 642, 649 (2008). We do
not construe the court’s order to mean that it did not consider Doreen’s
attempts to unduly influence Amy. As previously noted, the record shows that
the court fully considered Doreen’s relationship with Amy during the fall of
2014.
Barbara next argues that Doreen, having failed to produce an expert
witness, did not provide sufficient evidence to rebut the presumption that Amy
was free of undue influence. As an initial matter, Barbara has failed to show
that she raised this issue in the trial court. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt.,
151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004). Even assuming, without deciding, that the issue is
preserved, Barbara misstates the evidentiary burdens. The court found that
Barbara was in a confidential relationship with Amy, and that Barbara was the
beneficiary of the challenged codicil. A beneficiary in a confidential
relationship with the testator has the burden of proving the absence of undue
influence. Archer v. Dow, 126 N.H. 24, 28 (1985). Thus, as Barbara concedes
3