THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2017-0414, State of New Hampshire v. Gregory
M. Bruno, the court on December 26, 2018, issued the
following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
defendant, Gregory M. Bruno, appeals his twenty-eight convictions. He argues
that the Superior Court (Delker and Schulman, JJ.) erred in joining the
charges. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. In May 2015, the defendant was
arrested for various crimes against a woman he had dated, including
burglarizing and setting fire to her home, torturing her three dogs by burning
them to death in the fire, threatening to “burn [her] car and stab her,” and
posting nude pictures of her on Instagram. He was also charged with other
crimes that the State claimed the defendant committed to deflect blame from
himself or cast blame on a fictional malefactor bent on harming both the
defendant and the victim. Those crimes included: setting fire to a self-storage
unit that the defendant rented (a fire that damaged adjoining units and
property), lying to the insurance company that covered some of the losses,
feeding his own dog razor blades, setting fire to a vehicle with a dog in it
(thereby killing the dog), setting a grass fire, setting a wood pile on fire, starting
a fire on his own lawn, repeated false reports to law enforcement, and witness
tampering. In 2016, while he was incarcerated, he was charged with multiple
counts for soliciting fellow inmates to set fires at the same victim’s home.
Before trial, the parties engaged in motion practice regarding whether all
thirty-five charges should be joined for trial. The defendant moved to sever the
charges into seven trials arguing that the charges are not logically and factually
connected because they were geographically and temporally distinct, involved
different witnesses, involved different modes of operation, and were different
types of crimes. The defendant also asserted that joinder was not in the best
interests of justice.
The trial court consolidated the charges on the grounds that they are
“logically and factually connected in a manner that does not solely demonstrate
that the accused has a propensity to engage in criminal conduct.” (Quoting
N.H. R. Crim. P. 20(a)(1)(C).) The court reasoned that “both the 2015 and 2016
conduct can be viewed as part of a common scheme or plan to (a) terrorize the
victim and (b) make the victim believe that a third party is responsible.” The
trial court considered whether unfair prejudice would result from joining the
cases into a single trial, but concluded that the risk could be dealt with
through: expanded jury voir dire, increased peremptory challenges, detailed
jury instructions, and vigilance to guard against any propensity-based
arguments. The court also observed, “A defendant is not unfairly prejudiced
merely because the evidence is harmful to his case as a result of the evidence’s
tendency to prove his guilt. Rather, evidence is unfairly prejudicial if it causes
the jury [to] base [its] verdict on emotion, outrage, resentment, or some other
improper basis.” (Citation omitted.)
After a fifteen-day jury trial, the trial court dismissed a violation of
privacy charge. The jury then convicted the defendant on twenty-eight
charges: fourteen charges related to arson, seven counts of false public alarm,
two counts of cruelty to animals, two counts of burglary, and one count each of
criminal threatening, solicitation of falsifying physical evidence, and solicitation
of criminal mischief. The jury found the defendant not guilty of the remaining
charges including three counts of cruelty to animals. This appeal followed.
The decision to join multiple charges is a discretionary matter left to the
trial court. State v. Brown, 159 N.H. 544, 550 (2009). Thus, we will uphold
the trial court’s ruling unless the decision constitutes an unsustainable
exercise of discretion. Id. To show the trial court’s decision is unsustainable,
the defendant must demonstrate that the ruling was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of the defendant’s case. Id.
New Hampshire Rule of Criminal Procedure 20 governs the joinder of
criminal offenses and distinguishes between charges that are related and
unrelated. The rule defines three categories of related offenses:
Two or more offenses are related if they:
(A) Are alleged to have occurred during a single criminal
episode; or
(B) Constitute parts of a common scheme or plan; or
(C) Are alleged to have occurred during separate criminal
episodes, but nonetheless, are logically and factually
connected in a manner that does not solely demonstrate that
the accused has a propensity to engage in criminal conduct.
N.H. R. Crim. P. 20(a)(1). When a party moves to join related charges, the trial
court must join them unless it determines that “joinder is not in the best
interests of justice.” N.H. R. Crim. P. 20(a)(2).
2
The defendant argues that the trial court’s decision to join the charges
was an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Specifically, he asserts:
The thirty-five charges were not all “related” within the
meaning of Criminal Procedure Rule 20. Neither the factor
permitting consolidation upon the finding of a logical and factual
connection, Rule 20(a)(1)(C), nor the factor permitting joinder upon
the finding of a common scheme or plan, Rule 20(a)(1)(B), applied.
Because the charges were not all related in that sense, [the
defendant] had a right to severance of unrelated charges. In the
alternative, even if all thirty-five charges were related, the court
erred in joining them, because joinder was not in the best interests
of justice.
We are not persuaded.
In Brown, we held that whether offenses that occur during separate
criminal episodes are “logically and factually connected in a manner that does
not solely demonstrate that the accused has a propensity to engage in criminal
conduct is largely determined by the close relationship among the offenses with
respect to both the underlying charged conduct and the evidence to be used to
prove the charges.” Brown, 159 N.H. at 551 (quotation omitted). We then set
forth the following factors to “aid in discerning whether charges arising from
separate criminal episodes are related”:
(1) the temporal and spatial relationship among the underlying
charged acts; (2) the commonality of the victim(s) and/or
participant(s) for the charged offenses; (3) the similarity in the
defendant's mode of operation; (4) the duplication of law regarding
the crimes charged; and (5) the duplication of witnesses, testimony
and other evidence related to the offenses.
Id. at 551-52. No single factor is dispositive on the question of relatedness. Id.
at 552. Joinder of charges into a single trial may benefit a defendant because
it “may result in a faster disposition of all cases, may increase the possibility of
concurrent sentences in the event of conviction, and may prevent the
application of enhanced sentencing statutes.” Id. (quotation omitted). Joint
trial of related charges also “enables the state to avoid the duplication of
evidence required by separate trials, to reduce the inconvenience to victims and
witnesses, to minimize the time required to dispose of the offenses, and to
achieve a variety of other economies in connection with prosecutorial and
judicial resources.” Id. (quotation omitted).
The defendant argues the charges should not have been joined in a
single trial because: they cover a two-year period of time; do not all involve
common participants; and involve different locations, modes of criminal
3