THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2018-0389, Patrick Stack & a. v. Merriewoode
Village, Inc., the court on March 14, 2019, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
We affirm.
The defendant, Merriewoode Village, Inc., appeals orders of the Superior
Court (Ruoff, J.) declining to strike a default judgment entered in favor of the
plaintiffs, Patrick Stack, Kim Stack, Anita Pelletier, and Catherine Phillips, and
in favor of the intervenor, the Town of Stoddard, and entering a final decree,
following a hearing, in favor of the plaintiffs and town, see Super. Ct. R. 42(e).
The defendant argues that the trial court erred by: (1) allegedly receiving and
considering an ex parte communication; (2) denying its motion to strike the
default; and (3) denying its motion to dismiss for lack of subject matter
jurisdiction based upon the failure to join allegedly necessary parties.
The record establishes the following facts. The plaintiffs and defendant
have property interests in lots along the western shore of Highland Lake in the
Town of Stoddard. The plaintiffs’ lots abut one another, and the lot of plaintiffs
Pelletier and Phillips abuts the defendant’s lot to its south. The plaintiffs
primarily access their properties by boat. However, since prior to 1975, the
plaintiffs’ properties have also been accessed by motor vehicle over a roadway
that traverses the defendant’s lot. The present litigation ensued in 2016 after
the defendant effectively deprived the plaintiffs’ lots of motor vehicle access by
locking a gate across the roadway and placing boulders adjacent to the gate.
The plaintiffs sought declaratory and injunctive relief establishing their
right to use the portion of the roadway that crosses the defendant’s property on
grounds that it constitutes a class VI highway, and that they have an easement
in it. The town intervened, asserting that a portion of the roadway is a class VI
highway. The defendant filed a counterclaim seeking to establish its right to
bar access to the roadway. In September 2016, the Trial Court (Kissinger, J.)
denied the parties’ requests for preliminary injunctions, ruling that the
plaintiffs had failed to demonstrate a likelihood of success on the merits as to
their claims of prescriptive easement, “easement by acquiescence,”1 and
1 In rejecting this claim, the trial court observed that “the phrase ‘easement by acquiescence’
appears nowhere in New Hampshire law,” and that “[a]n extrajurisdictional search for the
phrase yields similarly sparse results.”
equitable estoppel, and that the defendant had failed to establish a danger of
irreparable harm. The trial court observed that the parties had negotiated an
agreement granting the plaintiffs access to the roadway to obtain septic tank
services. Thereafter, the parties agreed to stay the case.
In 2016, the superior court adopted a policy (e-mail policy), published on
its website, providing that “[c]ounsel of record and pro-se litigants will receive
all non-confidential orders and notices via e-mail from the court. Pro-se
parties without email will receive notices and orders via U.S. mail.” The e-mail
policy was implemented in the Cheshire County Superior Court, where this
case was pending, on September 1, 2016. The e-mail policy warned that “pro
se part[ies] and attorneys must be sure that the court [e-mail] addresses are
not blocked by firewalls or spam filters.”
In July 2017, the defendant erected a berm across the roadway,
rendering the roadway impassable. Shortly thereafter, counsel for the
defendant withdrew. At that point, the case was stayed. The trial court issued
notices of the withdrawal on July 13 and August 30, 2017, see Super. Ct. R.
17(f), and warned the defendant in the second notice that its failure to file an
appearance would result in default, see Super. Ct. R. 17(b) & (f).
In September 2017, Thomas Migliore, Jr. filed a motion seeking
permission to represent the defendant as its non-lawyer representative. See
Super. Ct. R. 20. Migliore also filed: (1) an affidavit pursuant to Superior Court
Rule 20(a)(2) (non-lawyer affidavit), in which he acknowledged that he “must
comply with the Rules of Professional Conduct as set forth in Professional
Conduct Rule 8.5,” see Super. Ct. R. 20(b); (2) an appearance, in which he
disclosed his e-mail address, see Super. Ct. R. 17(a) (requiring appearance to
include e-mail address); and (3) a printout of an e-mail that had been sent to
the same e-mail address disclosed in the appearance, that had been forwarded
from that address to another recipient with the message, “Sent from my
iPhone,” and that contained authorizations from the defendant’s officers for
him to represent it (e-mail authorization). Over the plaintiffs’ objection, the
Trial Court (Ruoff, J.) granted Migliore’s motion to represent the defendant.
On October 18, 2017, the trial court issued a notice of hearing for a
status conference to be held on November 3, 2017. The notice warned that “[i]f
you do not appear at this hearing, the Court may consider you to be in default
and may make orders against you without your input. If you are the defendant
and do not appear, the Court may find for the plaintiff(s) and proceed
immediately to the assessment of damages or a hearing on the relief sought.”
In accordance with the e-mail policy, the hearing notice was sent to the e-mail
address disclosed by Migliore in his appearance. Migliore did not attend the
hearing, and the trial court granted a joint motion filed by the plaintiffs and
town for the entry of default, requiring the defendant to demonstrate good
cause to strike the default within ten days.
2
On November 20, 2017, within the ten days required by the order
granting the default, new counsel appeared for the defendant and moved to
strike the default. In the motion, the defendant asserted that Migliore had “not
receive[d] the notice [of hearing] mailed by the court and therefore did not make
arrangements to attend the status conference.” (Emphasis added.) The
defendant submitted an affidavit of Migliore stating that he “did not receive
[the] notice [of hearing] in the mail and therefore did not attend the hearing.”
(Emphasis added.) The defendant argued that, “[g]iven the fact that this matter
is presently stayed and the scheduling involved a status conference . . . ,
issuing a default is extreme.”
The plaintiffs and town objected, arguing that the status conference was
“very important” because: (1) the case had been pending for more than a year;
(2) the defendant had “been unwilling to negotiate a resolution, and ha[d] . . .
refused to respond to the Plaintiffs’ settlement proposal for almost one year”;
(3) the defendant had continued to deny access to the roadway “even for
emergency or necessary maintenance issues,” refusing to respond to several
requests by the plaintiffs to access the roadway “for deliveries of supplies and
septic pumping”; and (4) the defendant had made access to the roadway
impossible by erecting the berm. The plaintiffs and town additionally argued
that, notwithstanding Migliore’s claim that he had not received the hearing
notice “in the mail,” pursuant to the e-mail policy, the hearing notice was sent
to Migliore by e-mail, and the “Clerk’s office report[ed that] no emailed notices
to Mr. Migliore were returned as undeliverable.” The plaintiffs and town
observed that, in addition to the hearing notice, the court had e-mailed Migliore
notices of its decisions granting both the motion to allow him to represent the
defendant and the motion for the entry of default. In denying the motion to
strike, the trial court “agree[d] with the arguments of the Plaintiff[s].”
The defendant moved for reconsideration, acknowledging the existence of
the e-mail policy and that Migliore had received the hearing notice by e-mail,
but claiming that the he had been unaware of the e-mail because it had been
directed to a “spam” folder without notification to him. The defendant argued
that, by its terms, the e-mail policy applied only to “[c]ounsel of record and pro-
se litigants,” and not to a “non-lawyer representative” like Migliore. The
defendant further argued that Migliore had requested, in his cover letter to the
court, that the court contact him by mail, and that “the procedures for non-
lawyer representation and the application which the clerk’s office supplied” did
not notify Migliore of the e-mail policy. The defendant claimed that Migliore
was never “requested to provide the court with an email address,” and that “to
date he has not provided his e-mail address to the court.” The defendant
surmised that the trial court had obtained Migliore’s e-mail address, without
his knowledge, from the e-mail authorization. With the motion, the defendant
submitted: (1) an affidavit from an engineer who examined Migliore’s laptop
computer, opined that Migliore is not “computer savvy,” and stated that the
computer was set up such that the court’s incoming e-mails would be directed
3