THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Grafton
No. 2018-0495
DENIS GIRARD & a.
v.
TOWN OF PLYMOUTH
Argued: May 16, 2019
Opinion Issued: August 30, 2019
Cleveland, Waters and Bass, P.A., of Concord (William B. Pribis on the
brief and orally), for the plaintiffs.
Donahue, Tucker & Ciandella, PLLC, of Exeter (John J. Ratigan and
Brendan Avery O’Donnell on the memorandum of law, and Mr. O’Donnell
orally), for the defendant.
DONOVAN, J. The plaintiffs, Denis Girard and Florence Leduc, appeal
an order of the Superior Court (MacLeod, J.) upholding a decision of the Town
of Plymouth Planning Board denying their subdivision application. They argue
that the trial court erred in upholding the planning board’s denial of their
application because: (1) the board “engaged in impermissible ad hoc rule” and
“decision making” when it relied upon an “overly broad” subdivision regulation;
(2) the board relied on a subdivision regulation that does not specifically
authorize the board to regulate wetlands; (3) the board’s regulation of wetlands
is preempted by State statute; (4) the trial court unreasonably relied on certain
evidence provided by a wetlands scientist; (5) the board’s decision to reject the
application based upon the proposed subdivision’s impact on the wetlands was
unreasonable; and (6) the board violated New Hampshire law by discussing the
application at a hearing without notice to the applicants or the public. We
address each of these arguments and affirm.
I. Facts
The following facts are drawn from the trial court’s order or are otherwise
evident from the certified record. The plaintiffs own an undeveloped parcel of
land in Plymouth with four other people (co-owners). The property’s southwest
border abuts Fairgrounds Road. Vehicles access the property through a
“woods road,” which originates from Fairgrounds Road near the property’s
southwest corner and runs northerly through the property.
In 2009, the plaintiffs sought to partition the property in probate court.
Pursuant to a settlement stipulation, the parties agreed to subdivide the
property into a southerly 50-acre parcel, to which the plaintiffs would take title
after the subdivision approval, and a northerly 199-acre parcel, to which the
co-owners would take title. Attached to the stipulation was a hand-drawn
sketch of the property that depicts the proposed lot lines separating the two
parcels.
As portrayed in the sketch, the smaller lot would encompass the
southern portion of the woods road and most of the southwest boundary along
Fairgrounds Road, while the larger parcel would retain a narrow corridor of
land abutting Fairgrounds Road in the southwest corner of the property. The
sketch also depicts a proposed new access to the larger parcel, wholly confined
within its boundaries, beginning at Fairgrounds Road and running northerly
until it intersects with the existing woods road. The settlement stipulation
states, “It is understood that the sketch/plan is conceptual in nature and has
not received State or Local Approvals.” The stipulation required that the
parties exchange quitclaim deeds within 30 days of receiving final subdivision
approval.
The Probate Court (Boyle, J.) approved the settlement stipulation. For
several years, however, the parties disputed the requirements of the settlement
stipulation and, in 2016, the plaintiffs filed a motion for contempt against the
co-owners in the probate division of the circuit court for failure to submit a
subdivision application. The Circuit Court (Rappa, J.) denied the motion but
ordered the parties to file a subdivision application with the Plymouth Planning
Board no later than December 1 of that year. The parties submitted a
subdivision application to the planning board in November. The proposed
subdivision map was consistent with the sketch attached to the settlement
2
stipulation, including the proposed access way. The subdivision map also
demarcated several wetlands areas.
During four public hearings between February and June 2017, the
planning board heard from the parties to the application. At the initial hearing,
planning board members, an abutter, and the co-owners raised concerns about
the impact the proposed access way would have on the wetlands. As a result,
the board and the parties discussed possible alternative locations for the
access way. The board continued the hearing and asked the parties to
renegotiate the proposed lot lines to permit the relocation of the access way
east of the wetlands. At the next hearing on the application, which occurred in
April, the plaintiffs informed the board that they would not agree to relocate the
access way and asked the board to approve the application as submitted. The
co-owners and abutter again expressed concern about the impact of the
proposed access way on wetlands. The board decided to conduct a site visit
and solicit a written “synopsis” from a wetlands scientist before reaching a
decision.
In May, the board visited the property and, thereafter, received a letter
from a certified wetlands scientist who had also inspected the property. At a
subsequent public hearing that month, the board chair read the wetlands
scientist’s letter into the record, which stated, in relevant part, that the location
of the proposed access way “has several large areas of wetlands and areas of
high water table” and was not “suitable for the construction of a driveway.”
The letter further stated that another possible location for the access way,
which has one large wetlands and “small areas with a high water table,” would
provide a “better alternative,” and that the “best option would be to grant an
easement on the existing access roadway.” The letter also noted that the New
Hampshire Department of Environmental Services (DES) would not “approve a
wetlands crossing when there is an alternate location for an access or driveway
with less wetlands impact.” Based upon this information, the board continued
the hearing and again asked the parties to “seriously consider” three options:
(1) allow the co-owners to use the existing woods road; (2) relocate the
boundary lines of the subdivision to accommodate the relocation of the access
way “east of the major wetland,” consistent with the wetlands scientist’s second
alternative; or (3) “run[] a right of way that accomplishes the same thing.”
At the last hearing on the matter, on June 15, the plaintiffs informed the
board that they would not agree to any of the proposed alternatives. The board
voted unanimously to deny the application and subsequently issued a written
decision, citing the concerns the board raised about the wetlands, the board’s
site visit, the wetlands scientist’s letter, and the plaintiffs’ rejection of the three
alternatives presented to them as reasons for the denial. The decision further
stated that the board relied upon Article VIII, Section B of the Town’s
subdivision regulations, which allows the planning board to “impose
requirements upon the subdivider in order to preserve and protect the existing
3
features, . . . [and] other natural resources.” Plymouth, N.H., Subdivision
Regulations (PSR) art. VIII, § B (2002). The decision noted that the board
considered wetlands to constitute “other natural resources” under the
regulation.
The plaintiffs appealed the planning board’s decision to the superior
court, which upheld the decision. This appeal followed.
II. Standard of Review
At the outset, we first explain the applicable standard of review. The trial
court’s review of a planning board’s decision is governed by RSA 677:15 (2016),
which provides that the trial court “may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or
may modify the decision brought up for review when there is an error of law or
when the court is persuaded by the balance of probabilities, on the evidence
before it, that [the board’s] decision is unreasonable.” RSA 677:15, V. Thus,
the trial court’s review is limited. Trustees of Dartmouth Coll. v. Town of
Hanover, 171 N.H. 497, 504 (2018). The trial court must treat the factual
findings of the planning board as prima facie lawful and reasonable and cannot
set aside its decision absent unreasonableness or an identified error of law. Id.
The appealing party bears the burden of persuading the trial court that, by the
balance of probabilities, the board’s decision was unreasonable. Id. The trial
court determines not whether it agrees with the planning board’s findings, but
whether there is evidence upon which its findings could have reasonably been
based. Id.
Our review is similarly limited. We will reverse a trial court’s decision on
appeal only if it is not supported by the evidence or is legally erroneous. Id.
We review the trial court’s decision to determine whether a reasonable person
could have reached the same decision as the trial court based upon the
evidence before it. Id.
III. Analysis
A. Statutory and Regulatory Claims
We now address the plaintiffs’ statutory and regulation-based claims,
which require that we interpret the statutes and regulations governing the
planning board’s decision. We review the interpretation of statutes and
regulations de novo, Petition of Sawyer, 170 N.H. 197, 203 (2017), and,
accordingly, we are not bound by the interpretation of the planning board,
Trustees of Dartmouth Coll., 171 N.H. at 508. We use the same principles of
construction when interpreting both statutes and regulations. Petition of
Guillemette, 171 N.H. 565, 568 (2018). Thus, in construing rules, as in
construing statutes, where possible, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meaning
to the words used. Id. We interpret legislative or administrative intent from
4
the statute or rule as written and will not consider what the legislature or
administrative agency might have said or add language that the legislature or
administrative agency did not see fit to include. Id. We construe all parts of a
statute or regulation together to effectuate its overall purposes and to avoid
absurd or unjust results. Id. at 568-69. Moreover, we do not consider words
and phrases in isolation, but rather within the context of the statute or
regulation as a whole. Id. at 569. When the language of a statute or regulation
is plain and unambiguous, we need not look beyond the statute or regulation
itself for further indications of legislative or administrative intent. Id.
The plaintiffs first argue that the trial court erred in upholding the
planning board’s reliance upon Article VIII, Section B of the subdivision
regulations. Under Section B, captioned “Preservation of Existing Features,”
the planning board “may impose requirements upon the subdivider in order to
preserve and protect the existing features, trees, scenic points, views, brooks,
streams, rock out-croppings, water bodies, stone walls, boundary markers,
other natural resources and historic landmarks.” PSR art. VIII, § B. The board
considered wetlands to fall within the phrase “natural resources” in Section B.
The trial court agreed, concluding that wetlands are comparable to the other
items enumerated in the regulation. The plaintiffs argue that the trial court’s
interpretation of the regulation is erroneous. We disagree.
The subdivision regulations define “wetlands” as “lands containing soils
that are hydric, including freshwater and saltwater marshes . . . .” PSR art. III,
§ B; see also RSA 482-A:2, X (2013) (defining “[w]etlands” as “an area that is
inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater . . . .”). Although
Article VIII, Section B does not include the term “wetlands,” it does include the
phrase “other natural resources and historic landmarks.” PSR art. VIII, § B.
When viewed in isolation, “natural resources” is broader than the
specifically enumerated items in the regulation. See Webster’s Third New
International Dictionary 1507 (unabridged ed. 2002) (defining “natural
resources” as “materials (as mineral deposits and waterpower) supplied by
nature”); PSR art. III, § B. However, the term, along with “historic landmarks,”
is accompanied by the word “other” and is preceded by the specifically
enumerated features. PSR art. VIII, § B. This construction implies that the
specifically enumerated features are either “natural resources” or “historic
landmarks.” PSR art. VIII, § B. These features include items found in nature
that share similarities with wetlands: brooks, streams, and water bodies. PSR
art. VIII, § B. In construing “other natural resources” as “embrac[ing] only
objects similar in nature to those enumerated by the specific words,” State v.
Beauchemin, 161 N.H. 654, 658 (2011) (quotation omitted), we conclude that
wetlands are similar in nature to the specifically enumerated natural resources
in the regulation, and therefore fall within the phrase “other natural
resources.” See Home Gas Corp. v. Strafford Fuels, Inc., 130 N.H. 74, 82
5
(1987) (explaining that a statute’s broader term “takes on the more specialized
character of its neighbors”).
Our conclusion is supported by another provision of the subdivision
regulations. See Appeal of Old Dutch Mustard Co., 166 N.H. 501, 506 (2014)
(“[W]e interpret statutes and regulations in the context of the overall statutory
and regulatory scheme and not in isolation.”). Article VI, Section M(12)
includes “wetlands” under a category similar to “natural resources”:
“[s]ignificant natural features.” PSR art. VI, § M(12) (requiring final subdivision
plats to show “[s]ignificant natural features such as . . . wetlands”). In addition
to wetlands, Article VI, Section M identifies items similar to the items identified
in Article VIII, Section B. Compare PSR art. VIII, § B (naming “trees, scenic
points, views, brooks, streams, rock out-croppings, [and] water bodies”) with
PSR art. VI, § M(12) (naming “woods, wetlands, streams, ponds, ledges, mines,
scenic views, parks, [and] public open spaces”). Thus, our interpretation of
“natural resources” as including wetlands is consistent with the regulations’
inclusion of wetlands as a “[s]ignificant natural feature.”
The plaintiffs, however, assert that Article VIII, Section B is so broad that
it authorizes the planning board to deny an application “for any reason [it]
deems fit” whenever the board identifies any kind of “existing feature” that may
be disturbed by a proposed development. However, as discussed above, the
enumerated items in the regulation limit the scope of “natural resources” to
items similar in nature, which, we conclude, includes wetlands. Contrary to
the plaintiffs’ argument, the regulation confers only limited authority upon the
board. Article VIII, Section B does not permit the board to unconditionally
deny an application based upon its perceived impact on wetlands; rather, it
states that the board may impose “requirements” on a subdivision application
“to preserve and protect” wetlands. Thus, the regulation does not provide the
planning board with unbridled discretion to deny an application on any basis,
as the plaintiffs maintain.
The plaintiffs next argue that the planning board “effectively wrote a rule
that does not exist,” and therefore engaged in impermissible ad hoc
rulemaking, by denying the application based upon a criterion not expressly
identified in the regulation. Because “wetlands” does not expressly appear in
the regulation, the plaintiffs contend it provides no notice to a subdivision
applicant that wetlands would be a factor considered by the board. In essence,
the plaintiffs argue that the planning board was not permitted to base its
decision on a term that does not expressly appear in the regulation. We
disagree.
We have never held that a planning board cannot act upon criteria that
do not expressly appear in a regulation when the criteria fall within the plain
and ordinary meaning of other terms within the regulation. See Dolbeare v.
City of Laconia, 168 N.H. 52, 55 (2015). To the contrary, we have held that,
6
pursuant to the principle of ejusdem generis, when a general term is preceded
by specific terms, then specific terms not expressly stated in the statute or
regulation, but similar in nature to the specifically-enumerated ones, may fall
within the general term. See Beauchemin, 161 N.H. at 658. Furthermore,
given the nature of the specific terms within the regulation and the express
inclusion of wetlands as a “significant natural resource” in another section of
the regulations, we conclude that the regulation provides notice that wetlands
could be considered by the board. See PSR art. VIII, § B, art. VI, § M(12).
The plaintiffs further contend that, in order for a municipality to have the
authority to regulate wetlands, RSA 674:55 (2016) requires “wetlands” to be
explicitly identified in the applicable regulation. Again, we disagree. RSA
674:55 provides:
Wherever the term “wetlands” . . . is used in regulations and
ordinances adopted pursuant to this chapter, such term shall be
given the meaning in RSA 482-A:2, X and the delineation of
wetlands for purposes of such regulations and ordinances shall be
as prescribed in rules adopted under RSA [chapter] 482-A.
Although the statute defines the word “wetlands” when it appears in a
municipal regulation, the statute contains no language that prohibits a
municipality from regulating wetlands merely because the applicable regulation
does not contain the term “wetlands.” This conclusion, however, does not
suggest that, outside the limited application of Article VIII, Section B, the Town
may regulate wetlands without first enacting an ordinance or regulation
pertaining to wetlands pursuant to the relevant enabling legislation. See, e.g.,
Derry Sr. Development, LLC v. Town of Derry, 157 N.H. 441, 447-48 (2008).
B. Preemption Claim
We now consider the plaintiffs’ preemption argument which asserts that
state law preempts municipalities from regulating wetlands. The preemption
doctrine flows from the principle that municipal legislation is invalid if it is
repugnant to, or inconsistent with, state law. Forster v. Town of Henniker, 167
N.H. 745, 756 (2015). Preemption may be express or implied. Id. Here, the
plaintiffs’ argument is based upon implied preemption, which may be found
when the comprehensiveness and detail of the State statutory scheme evinces
legislative intent to supersede local regulation. Id. State law also impliedly
preempts local law when there is an actual conflict between the two. Id. A
conflict exists when a municipal ordinance or regulation permits that which a
state statute prohibits or vice versa. Id. Moreover, even when a local
ordinance does not expressly conflict with a state statute, it will be preempted
when it frustrates the statute’s purpose. Id. Because preemption is essentially
a matter of statutory interpretation and construction, whether a state statute
preempts local regulation is a question of law, which we review de novo. Id.
7
The plaintiffs do not argue that an actual conflict exists between Article
VIII, Section B and a state statute. Cf. Lakeside Lodge v. Town of New London,
158 N.H. 164, 173-74 (2008). Instead, they argue that the planning board’s
interpretation of Article VIII, Section B “is contrary to, and frustrates the
purpose of,” the comprehensive regulatory scheme that governs the regulation
of wetlands by DES. See RSA ch. 482-A (2013 & Supp. 2018). We disagree.
In enacting RSA chapter 482-A, the legislature gave DES the authority to
regulate excavation, removal, fill, dredge, or construction in or on wetlands
through a comprehensive permitting process. See RSA 482-A:3, :6, :11 (2013
& Supp. 2018). The legislature “found [it] to be for the public good and welfare
of this state to protect and preserve its submerged lands under tidal and fresh
waters and its wetlands . . . from despoliation and unregulated alteration.”
RSA 482-A:1 (2013). Article VIII, Section B allows the planning board to
impose requirements on an application “in order to protect and preserve”
existing natural resources, which, we have concluded, includes wetlands. The
record demonstrates that the planning board requested that the plaintiffs
adopt an alternative access way location to protect wetlands. We conclude that
Article VIII, Section B, and the planning board’s action pursuant to that
regulation, serves, rather than frustrates, the purpose of RSA chapter 482-A.
Nevertheless, the plaintiffs point to provisions of RSA chapter 482-A that
reference municipalities’ involvement in the wetlands permitting and
designation process. See RSA 482-A:11, III(a) (Supp. 2018); RSA 482-A:15,
I(a)-(b), II (2013). They argue that, by specifically setting forth a municipality’s
involvement in these procedures, RSA chapter 482-A limits a municipality’s
regulation of wetlands to those provisions. We disagree.
RSA 482-A:11, III(a) states that, upon receiving written notification from
a municipal body that the municipality “intends to investigate any notice
received by it pursuant to RSA 482-A:3,” DES cannot render a decision on a
permit application until it “receive[s] and acknowledge[s] receipt of a written
report” from the municipality or until 40 days from the date of filing of the