THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2018-0677, Santander Bank, N.A. v. Jerome J.
Day, Jr., Trustee of the Jerome J. Day, Jr. Revocable Inter Vivos
Trust u/t/d November 10, 2000 & a., the court on September 27,
2019, issued the following order:
Having considered the brief filed by the defendants, Jerome J. Day, Jr.,
trustee of the Jerome J. Day, Jr., Revocable Inter Vivos Trust, and Jane F. de
C. Currivan, trustee of the Jane F. de C. Currivan Revocable Inter Vivos Trust,
the brief filed by the plaintiff, Santander Bank, N.A. (Santander), the
memorandum of law filed by NE Moves Mortgage, LLC (NE Moves), and the
record submitted on appeal, we conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in
this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1). The defendants appeal orders by the Superior
Court (Delker, J.) in the action Santander brought to reform a mortgage
originally granted to NE Moves and later assigned to Santander. We affirm.
The following facts either were recited by the trial court or drawn from
documents introduced at trial and made part of the record on appeal. The
defendants, a married couple, are the respective trustees of eponymous
revocable inter vivos trusts. Through their trusts, they own property in North
Hampton. In 2004, they obtained a $430,000 first mortgage on the property
from Piscataqua Savings Bank (Piscataqua). In 2007, they obtained a
$640,000 loan from NE Moves, which they secured with a mortgage on the
property. In their mortgage application, the defendants indicated that they
held the property jointly as individuals. The defendants did not disclose that
title to the property was actually held by their respective trusts. When NE
Moves discovered that the property was held by the trusts, it requested copies
of the trust documents, which the defendants provided.
The closing occurred on December 7, 2007. Although the defendants
were listed only in their individual capacities on the first page of the new
mortgage, they initialed and signed the mortgage both individually and as
trustees.
Under the promissory note accompanying the loan, the defendants
agreed to pay $640,000 plus interest at 8.75% for 30 years. The note provided
that, in January 2013, the initial fixed interest rate would change to an
adjustable rate calculated by adding 2.250% to an index tied to the average
yield on United States Treasury securities adjusted to a constant maturity of
one year (the One-Year Constant Maturing Treasury Rate). According to the
defendants, for the first five years, the promissory note “was interest only,” and
“it would begin to amortize after that.”
The loan proceeds were used to pay off the first mortgage and for home
improvement projects. The new mortgage was recorded on December 11, 2007,
and, a discharge of the first mortgage was recorded on December 14. NE
Moves completed an assignment of the mortgage to Santander on December
21.
In 2008, the defendants received a letter from Santander, stating that the
promissory note erroneously tied the eventual adjustable rate to the wrong
interest rate index and that, in January 2013, the rate would “become
adjustable based on the LIBOR index.” The “LIBOR index” refers to the
“average of interbank offered rates for one-year U.S. dollar-denominated
deposits in the London market.” Santander requested that the defendants sign
a mortgage modification agreement, but they did not.
The defendants defaulted on their mortgage in 2010. To facilitate a
foreclosure, Santander requested that the defendants sign a corrective
mortgage, but they refused. Thus, Santander filed the instant action to reform
the mortgage to indicate that the defendants were granted a mortgage both in
their individual capacities and as trustees of their respective trusts.
Alternatively, Santander asked the court to “order that Santander has priority
over the interests of [the defendants], to the extent of $409,153.48[,] under the
theory of equitable subrogation.” In response, the defendants asserted a
counterclaim for breach of contract, among other claims. The defendants
asserted that Santander breached the parties’ contract by charging a higher-
than-agreed-to interest rate.
Thereafter, Santander moved for summary judgment on its reformation
and equitable subrogation claims. The trial court denied the motion as to the
reformation claim because it found “a genuine dispute of material facts as to
the defendants’ subjective intentions at the time of closing.” The trial court
granted the motion as to the equitable subrogation claim. Santander also
moved to dismiss the defendants’ counterclaims, and the trial court granted
the motion.
The trial court subsequently held a two-day bench trial on Santander’s
reformation claim. At the close of Santander’s case, the defendants moved for
a directed verdict on the ground that Santander had failed to demonstrate that
it properly held the mortgage at issue. The trial court denied that motion,
explaining that “[t]here has never been a dispute in this litigation, that
Santander . . . is the proper successor to the loan and mortgage issued to NE
Moves . . . on December 7, 2007,” and observing that the court had granted
summary judgment to Santander on its equitable subrogation claim “as
successor-in-interest to the mortgage at issue.”
2
Thereafter, in a narrative order, the trial court ruled in Santander’s favor
on the reformation claim. In so ruling, the court observed that Santander had
“meticulously submitted documentation that overwhelmingly contradicts [the
defendants’] story that they believed that they were only signing the paperwork
in their individual capacit[ies].” The court termed the defendants’ testimony on
this subject “nonsensical” and described the defendants as “simply not
credible.” The court observed that neither defendant “fell off the proverbial
turnip truck.” The court found that both defendants are “well-educated and
familiar with the world of finance” in that Currivan “has a master’s degree in
international studies, was a real estate agent, and was involved in international
banking for 10 years,” and Day has a master’s in business administration, has
completed the course work for a doctorate degree, describes himself as an
economist, and has taught master’s-level courses in economics and statistics.
The court found “clear and convincing—indeed overwhelming—evidence”
that the defendants “have taken advantage of a scrivener’s error to prolong the
loss of their home by concocting this distinction between granting a mortgage
in their individual capacity, as opposed to on behalf of their trusts.” The court
explained:
[The defendants] both wanted this loan from the bank for
home improvement projects. They both knew that they could not
get the loan without granting the lender a security interest in the
Property. They both admitted that they were aware that if they did
not repay the loan, the bank could foreclose on the Property. They
have not made a single payment toward the loan since 2010. . . .
At the time of the closing on December 7, 2007, all parties to this
mortgage transaction intended for NE Moves to have an
enforceable security interest in the Property. In fact, even after the
closing[,] when [the defendants] applied for a loan modification in
2011, they acknowledged that [the] loan [was] secured [by their]
only residence . . . . In light of these admissions, their effort now
to disavow the security interest in the Property is disingenuous.
(Quotation and citations omitted.) This appeal followed.
On appeal, the defendants first challenge the trial court’s determination
that Santander was entitled to reformation. We will uphold the trial court’s
findings and rulings unless they are not supported by the evidence or are
legally erroneous. Cook v. Sullivan, 149 N.H. 749, 780 (2003). Our standard
of review is not whether we would rule differently than the trial court, but
whether a reasonable person could have reached the same decision as the trial
court based upon the same evidence. Id.
“The law is well settled in this jurisdiction that reformation may be
granted . . . where the instrument fails to express the intention which the
3