THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2018-0239, Neal Kurk v. Thomas Clow & a., the
court on May 9, 2019, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. This case
arises out of the calculation of the Town of Weare’s 2018 default budget
pursuant to RSA 40:13 (Supp. 2017) (amended 2018). The defendants, the
Town of Weare, Thomas Clow, and other members of the town’s board of
selectmen, appeal orders by the Superior Court (Nicolosi, J.) denying their
motion to dismiss and granting the relief requested by the plaintiff, Neal Kurk.
On appeal, the defendants argue that the trial court erred in ruling that: (1) the
plaintiff has standing to bring this suit; (2) the 2018 default budget improperly
included the cost of certain contracts the town entered into in 2017; and (3) the
plaintiff was entitled to an award of attorney’s fees. We affirm, in part, and
reverse, in part.
The relevant facts follow. The town is a Senate Bill 2 town that passes its
budget by an official ballot pursuant to RSA 40:13. Under the statute, the
governing body of the town presents both a proposed operating budget and a
default budget to the voters. RSA 40:13. In the event the proposed operating
budget fails to pass, the default budget is imposed unless the governing body,
in this case the board of selectmen, elects to proceed to a special meeting
pursuant to RSA 40:13, XVI (Supp. 2018). RSA 40:13, X (Supp. 2018). The
default budget is defined as:
[T]he amount of the same appropriations as contained in the
operating budget authorized for the previous year, reduced and
increased, as the case may be, by debt service, contracts, and
other obligations previously incurred or mandated by law, and
reduced by one-time expenditures contained in the operating
budget. For the purposes of this paragraph, one-time expenditures
shall be appropriations not likely to recur in the succeeding
budget, as determined by the governing body, unless the
provisions of RSA 40:14-b are adopted, of the local political
subdivision.
RSA 40:13, IX(b) (Supp. 2017) (amended 2018). The board of selectmen
calculated a default budget for 2018 and published a document entitled “2018
Budget Worksheet” that included the default budget.
In February 2018, after the default budget was published and before the
town voted, the plaintiff initiated a declaratory judgment action against the
defendants seeking a temporary and permanent injunction. He alleged that
$59,864 in budget increases were improperly included in the default budget
because they were the result of contracts entered into by the board of
selectmen after the last town meeting and without a vote by the citizens of
Weare. The plaintiff asserted that although the contracts were valid, they did
not qualify as “contracts . . . previously incurred” under the statute, and thus,
could not be included in the default budget without approval by the town. See
RSA 40:13, IX(b).
In response, the defendants filed both an answer contesting the merits
and a motion to dismiss for lack of standing. Following a hearing, the trial
court denied the defendants’ motion to dismiss and granted the relief requested
by the plaintiff. In its order, the trial court found that the plaintiff had
standing because he established that he would suffer actual, concrete harm in
the form of paying higher taxes if the default budget went into effect. On the
merits, the trial court found that the board of selectmen improperly included
the contested contracts in the default budget calculation. Engaging in
statutory interpretation, the trial court determined that the phrase “previously
incurred” set forth in RSA 40:13, IX(b) was ambiguous. The court then
considered the overall statutory scheme and concluded that the “contracts . . .
previously incurred” that increase the default budget must be previously voted
on at a town meeting. See RSA 40:13, IX(b). Accordingly, the trial court
ordered the defendants to remove the contracts identified by the plaintiff from
the default budget before presenting the budget at the upcoming deliberative
session.
Shortly thereafter, the plaintiff filed a motion for attorney’s fees, which
the trial court granted over the defendants’ objection. The trial court found
that the plaintiff conferred a substantial benefit on the public by providing the
citizens of Weare with an opportunity to provide “meaningful input” on the
“appropriation of money by the governing body” that increases the default
budget. The court determined that this benefit to the citizens of Weare
“extends beyond the confines of the instant litigation.” This appeal followed.
The defendants argue that the trial court erred when it found that the
plaintiff had standing to bring this lawsuit. Following briefing on appeal, the
plaintiff moved to strike the standing issue, arguing that a constitutional
amendment, approved by the voters of New Hampshire in the November 2018
election, grants him standing. The defendants counter that the constitutional
amendment does not apply retroactively. We need not reach this issue because
we conclude that the plaintiff has standing under the law in effect at the time
the case was decided in the trial court.
2
When the relevant facts are not in dispute, we review de novo the trial
court’s determination on standing. State v. Actavis Pharma, 170 N.H. 211, 214
(2017). “[S]tanding under the New Hampshire Constitution requires parties to
have personal legal or equitable rights that are adverse to one another, with
regard to an actual, not hypothetical, dispute, which is capable of judicial
redress.” Duncan v. State, 166 N.H. 630, 642-43 (2014) (citations omitted).
The defendants contend that the plaintiff lacks standing because he
alleges the same harm as every other taxpayer and fails to allege an actual, as
opposed to hypothetical, harm. As to the defendants’ first point, the plaintiff
counters that there is no requirement that a party suffer a “unique injury” to
establish standing. We agree with the plaintiff. Although a person’s status as
a taxpayer is not, by itself, sufficient to establish standing, taxpayer status in
conjunction with an injury or an impairment of rights can confer standing. See
Baer v. N.H. Dep’t of Educ., 160 N.H. 727, 730-31 (2010); see also Duncan,
166 N.H. at 645 (to bring a declaratory judgment action under RSA 491:22, a
party must establish that some right of the party has been impaired or
prejudiced by the application of a rule or statute). The United States Supreme
Court discussed what kind of personal injury confers standing and held that:
As a general matter, the interest of a federal taxpayer in seeing
that Treasury funds are spent in accordance with the Constitution
does not give rise to the kind of redressable “personal injury”
required for Article III standing. Of course, a taxpayer has
standing to challenge the collection of a specific tax assessment as
unconstitutional; being forced to pay such a tax causes a real and
immediate economic injury to the individual taxpayer.
Hein v. Freedom From Religion Foundation, Inc., 551 U.S. 587, 599 (2007).
Here, the plaintiff contends that the calculation of the default budget will
impair his personal rights by illegally increasing his taxes. Specifically, he
asserts that the town’s default budget proposed to “take money from his
pocket,” without the legislative body’s approval of the contracts, in violation of
RSA 40:13. This is not simply a case where a plaintiff asserts standing as a
taxpayer and contests the spending or allocation of the funds at issue. See
Duncan, 166 N.H. at 646 (petitioner’s claim that a program will result in “net
fiscal losses” to local governments does not articulate a personal injury); Baer,
160 N.H. at 730-31 (holding that petitioners lacked standing as taxpayers
because they failed to demonstrate how certain waiver rules that allowed their
taxes to be used to finance certain schools in the community impaired or
prejudiced their rights). Instead, the plaintiff here is contesting the collection
of a specific tax assessment, arguing that it is based upon an unlawful default
budget calculation. Although the increased taxes will impact all of the
taxpayers in the town, not just the plaintiff, that does not mean that the
plaintiff’s personal rights are not sufficiently impaired to confer standing.
3