THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2018-0552, Brian Desfosses v. Thomas Ippolito
& a., the court on April 15, 2019, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
We affirm.
The defendants, Thomas Ippolito and Marie Garvey (tenants), appeal a
decision of the Circuit Court (DeVries, J.) entering judgment in favor of the
plaintiff, Brian Desfosses (landlord), in an eviction proceeding. The trial court
terminated the tenancy pursuant to RSA 540:2, II(d) (Supp. 2018), based upon
the tenants’ conduct in “regularly interrupt[ing] the quiet enjoyment by other
tenants of the property, a [four-unit] multi-family dwelling,” by being “loud, in
arguments, at various hours of the night [and] at other times, disturbing other
tenants.”1 The tenants argue that the trial court erred by: (1) allowing into
evidence “hearsay in the form of printouts of text messages that originated from
a biased and prejudiced declarant,” and not considering Ippolito’s testimony
concerning that declarant allegedly because the testimony was hearsay; (2)
allowing into evidence certain police reports involving Garvey over the tenants’
relevance objections; and (3) evicting Ippolito based upon Garvey’s conduct.
We will uphold the trial court’s factual findings unless they are
unsupported by the evidence or erroneous as a matter of law, deferring to the
trial court’s judgment in resolving conflicts in testimony, evaluating the
credibility of witnesses, and determining the weight of the evidence presented.
Town of Atkinson v. Malborn Realty Trust, 164 N.H. 62, 66-67 (2012); Colonial
Village, Inc. v. Pelkey, 157 N.H. 91, 92 (2008). As the trier of fact, the trial
court is entitled to accept or reject, in whole or in part, whatever evidence is
presented, and is not required to believe even uncontested testimony. Malborn
Realty Trust, 164 N.H. at 67.
The trial court has broad discretion to determine the admissibility of
evidence, and we will not disturb its evidentiary rulings absent an
1 RSA 540:2, II(d) authorizes the termination of a tenancy of a restricted property based upon
“[b]ehavior of the tenant[s] . . . which adversely affects the health or safety of the other
tenants.” On appeal, the tenants do not challenge whether “regularly interrupt[ing] the quiet
enjoyment” of other tenants by being “loud, in arguments” may constitute “behavior . . .
adversely affect[ing] the health or safety of the other tenants” for purposes of RSA 540:2, II(d).
Accordingly, we will assume, for purposes of this appeal only, that engaging in the behavior
that the trial court found the tenants to have engaged in satisfies RSA 540:2, II(d).
unsustainable exercise of discretion. State v. Edic, 169 N.H. 580, 584 (2017).
To establish that the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion, the
tenants bear the burden on appeal to show that the court’s evidentiary ruling
was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of their case. See id.
We first address the tenants’ hearsay arguments. The tenants first
challenge the admission of printouts of certain text messages. At trial, the
tenants objected, on hearsay grounds, to the following testimony of the
landlord: “I did give [the tenants] an eviction notice in May because the[ir]
behavior was such that tenants around them told me that the –.” The trial
court initially sustained the objection to the extent the testimony was being
“offered for the truth,” but then asked, “Are you telling me this is why you took
action as to what was happening?” The landlord replied in the affirmative, and
stated that he had “text messages to support that, which [the landlord] could
submit.” The trial court responded, “Well, text messages would still constitute
hearsay, but if you’re – well, why don’t you just continue and I’ll sort it out.”
The landlord subsequently testified that he had issued an eviction notice
based in part upon reports that the tenants were
having loud arguments in the middle of the night. And to be fair,
[the landlord’s] tenants ha[d] told [the landlord] that [Ippolito] does
not seem to be the problem, but [that Garvey] is extremely loud
and screams, swears, stomps, slamming doors. The back slider of
my house has taken a massive beating. I mean, [Garvey] will open
and close that door and slam it, and slam it, and slam it, and slam
it over and over and over again.
Two mornings ago my tenant informed me she was slamming
the door in the middle of the hallway for 15 minutes straight,
slamming it over, and over, and over, and over again for no reason,
at 5 a.m. She has conversations in the apartment with nobody.
She has screaming matches in the apartment with nobody.
The landlord identified the source of this information as “texts from all the
other tenants,” and testified that he had “screenshotted and printed” the texts,
and that he had “no way to manipulate” them. When counsel for the tenants
responded that he could not cross-examine texts, the trial court stated,
. . . Well, I think there’s a – the issue is a landlord’s duty to
secure the premises so that the other tenants’ peace and
enjoyment are not disturbed. So if what you’re telling me is a
series of things happened –
. . .
2
. . . – that brought you here –
. . .
. . . – because you have a duty to be here, that’s testimony
that is relevant.
. . .
. . . So it doesn’t have to be truthful that they weren’t – that
the noises were loud at a particular time, but you can describe the
circumstances that led you to file this petition and allege what you
did.
Subsequently, the landlord testified that he had “done everything [he
could] possibly do to try and ask [the tenants] to please be quiet in the interest
of the peace of their neighbors. [The tenants] have time and time again . . .
totally disregarded that.” The trial court then asked whether the landlord had
text messages that reflected “actual back and forth [communications] with the
tenants.” When the landlord answered affirmatively, the trial court stated that
“[t]hose are not hearsay. Those would be an admission.” At that point, the
trial court allowed the landlord to introduce into evidence an exhibit consisting
of twenty-three pages of images of what appear to be “screenshots” taken from
a mobile phone containing what appear to be numerous text messages.
On appeal, the defendants argue that the trial court erred because the
text messages “do not meet the criteria of [New Hampshire] Rule [of Evidence]
803,” and because the declarants “do not meet the criteria for being
unavailable that are described in [New Hampshire] Rule [of Evidence] 804.”
The trial court, however, did not admit text messages based upon any of the
hearsay exceptions in Rules 803 or 804. Rather, it allowed the messages, or
testimony concerning their content, into evidence because they contained
“admissions” of a party, see N.H. R. Ev. 801(d)(2) (providing that an admission
of a party offered against the party is not hearsay), and because they were
offered not to prove the truth of the matters asserted in the messages, but to
establish that the landlord was seeking the eviction to satisfy his obligation to
secure the quiet enjoyment of other tenants, see N.H. R. Ev. 801(c)(2) (defining
hearsay to mean a statement offered into evidence to prove the truth of the
matter asserted in the statement). The tenants do not address these grounds
in their brief. Moreover, we note that under RSA 540:16-a (2007), “records of
complaints made by other tenants to the landlord” are admissible in any
possessory action “based on allegations concerning the behavior of the
defendant or his family,” so long as certain foundational requirements are
satisfied. See N.H. R. Ev. 802 (allowing for statutory exceptions to the hearsay
rule). Under the circumstances, we conclude that the tenants have not
3