THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2018-0580, In the Matter of Mary Schwarzer-
Hampton and R. Scott Hampton, the court on September 16,
2019, issued the following order:
The petitioner’s motion for reconsideration of our July 9, 2019 order to
proceed on the respondent’s brief alone and for enlargement of time in which to
file a brief is denied. Having considered the brief and record submitted on
appeal, we conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct.
R. 18(1). We affirm.
The respondent, R. Scott Hampton (father), appeals a post-final-decision
order by the Circuit Court (Hall, J.) on pending motions in his divorce from the
petitioner, Mary Schwarzer-Hampton (mother). He contends that the trial court
erred by: (1) considering the mother’s August 2017 motion for contempt; (2) not
addressing his May 18, 2018 motion; (3) finding that he intentionally disregarded
the trial court’s May 2017 order; (4) disregarding findings that the trial court had
made in previous orders; (5) finding that his motion for reconsideration failed to
state points of law or fact that the trial court had overlooked or misapprehended;
(6) awarding the mother attorney’s fees based upon the “erroneous conclusions”
that he had disregarded the trial court’s orders; and (7) not clarifying its decision
regarding his May 2018 motion or the trial court’s “inequitable enforcement of
other Court’s [sic] rulings.” He further identifies “16 erroneous or misleading
statements in the current Order and how each influenced a conclusion
inconsistent with both actual events and previous findings.”
When reviewing a trial court’s decision rendered after a hearing on the
merits, we uphold the trial court’s factual findings and rulings unless they lack
evidentiary support or are legally erroneous. O’Malley v. Little, 170 N.H. 272,
275 (2017). We do not decide whether we would have ruled differently than the
trial court, but rather, whether a reasonable person could have reached the same
decision as the trial court based upon the same evidence. Id. Thus, we defer to
the trial court’s judgment on such issues as resolving conflicts in the testimony,
measuring the credibility of witnesses, and determining the weight to be given
evidence. Id. We review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de
novo. Id.
To the extent that the father argues that the trial court did not rule on his
May 18, 2018 motion, we note that the court granted the mother’s motion to
strike the father’s motion because the father had failed to comply with previous
orders requiring the parties to first seek the assistance of a parenting coordinator
and then to participate in good faith mediation to resolve any “parenting issues”
prior to filing a motion with the court. The trial court correctly determined that
the father’s motion involved “parenting issues” because it addressed the times at
which the parents exchanged custody of their child and sought to add language
to the parenting plan.
To the extent that the father argues that the trial court should not have
ruled upon the mother’s August 2017 motion for contempt because the mother
did not first seek mediation, the trial court correctly determined that it did not
involve any “parenting issues” that triggered the mediation requirement. Upon
review of the record, we conclude that the evidence supports the trial court’s
findings that: (1) the father’s assertion that he had a “conflict” with the parent
coordinator with whom the parties had been ordered to engage was “self-created,
self-serving, and a further attempt to avoid compliance with the Court’s order”;
and (2) the father “willfully, intentionally and blatantly disregarded the directives
contained in the May 17, 2017 Order.” See O’Malley, 170 N.H. at 275.
As the appealing party, the father has the burden of demonstrating
reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014). Based upon our
review of the trial court’s well-reasoned order, the father’s challenges to it, the
relevant law, and the record submitted on appeal, we conclude that the father
has not demonstrated reversible error. See id.
To the extent that the father raises any other issues in his brief, they either
are not sufficiently developed, see State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 49 (2003), or
otherwise do not warrant further discussion, see Vogel v. Vogel, 137 N.H. 321,
322 (1993).
Affirmed.
Hicks, Bassett, Hantz Marconi, and Donovan, JJ., concurred.
Eileen Fox,
Clerk
2