THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2018-0437, Manuel Barba v. Town of Rye, the
court on June 24, 2019, issued the following order:
Having considered the opening and reply briefs filed by the plaintiff,
Manual Barba, the brief filed by the defendant, the Town of Rye (Town), and
the record submitted on appeal, we conclude that oral argument is
unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1). The plaintiff appeals an order
of the Superior Court (Schulman, J.) ruling in favor of the defendant on the
plaintiff’s request for a declaratory judgment on his municipal estoppel claim.
We affirm.
The trial court found, or the record reflects, the following facts. The
plaintiff owns a 4.2-acre parcel in Rye. In the early 1990s, the parcel was part
of a larger parcel owned by the Green family. The Green homestead is still
standing, and the plaintiff resides there. When the Greens still owned the
property, one of the Green brothers built a tool shed in the rear of what is now
the plaintiff’s parcel. The tool shed was originally a small, one-story structure
with no chimney or heating unit. In the mid-1960s, it was improved by the
addition of a tiny kitchen, bathroom, dormered second half-story, electrical
service, a connection to a water well, and an underground holding tank for
waste water. The tool shed/cabin was not used as a residence at any time
before the Town adopted its first zoning ordinance in 1953. That ordinance
was the first to prohibit more than one dwelling per lot.
There is no evidence that the tool shed/cabin was used as a dwelling
until the 1970s. The trial court could not determine based upon the evidence
before it whether the tool shed/cabin was used at all, let alone as a dwelling,
between 1979 and 1986. In 1986, the son of the then owners of the parcel
moved into the tool shed/cabin. He lived there until 1988 or 1989.
The tool shed/cabin was next used as a dwelling in 1991 when the then
owners rented it out as a second dwelling. The Town building inspector issued
a cease and desist letter to those owners, explaining that using the tool
shed/cabin as a second dwelling violated the ordinance. The letter stated that
the tool shed/cabin “is not, nor has it ever been, a legal dwelling,” and, thus,
“could not be legally occupied.” Although the water district disconnected the
tool shed/cabin from the water line, the owners reconnected it. The owners
ignored the cease and desist letter and rented out the cabin to multiple tenants
from 1991 to 2000, when they sold the parcel to the plaintiff’s immediate
predecessor-in-title, Robert MacLeod.
In 2003, one of MacLeod’s neighbors complained that MacLeod had
installed a mailbox for the tool shed/cabin. At that time, MacLeod was renting
the tool shed/cabin to tenants. The building inspector met with MacLeod and
inspected the tool shed/cabin. Thereafter, the building inspector sent a letter
to the complaining neighbor dated July 8, 2003, which stated:
Mr. Mac[L]eod brought to my attention that when he bought this
property, his attorneys researched the legitimacy of the second
dwelling and discovered that in 1991, this issue had come in the
town as a cease and desist.
It was determined that the structure and use of the second
dwelling was established prior to zoning . . .
Therefore, . . . the second dwelling is a legal use and may continue
indefinitely.
The letter was sent to the Town Administrator and to the Board of Selectmen.
A copy of the letter was also placed “in the Town’s file.” There is no evidence,
however, that the letter was ever sent to MacLeod. Nor is there any evidence
that the building inspector ever informed MacLeod otherwise that the tool
shed/cabin’s use as a second dwelling was a grandfathered, nonconforming
use.
In 2005, MacLeod obtained an opinion letter from an attorney regarding
the lawfulness of using the tool shed/cabin as a second dwelling. The attorney
explained that, in 1991, he had researched the lawfulness of using the tool
shed/cabin as a second dwelling for its then owner and had discovered that
“the second dwelling unit has been present on the lot since some time in the
early 1940’s, before the enactment of zoning by the [T]own . . . in 1953.” He
also indicated that the prior owner of the property had done her own research
and had discovered that the tool shed/cabin “had been used continuously as a
dwelling unit until around 1989.” He explained that in 1991, he had informed
the building inspector that the tool shed/cabin qualified as a prior, non-
conforming use, but that the building inspector had not responded to this
information. He stated that he understood that MacLeod had given the same
explanation to the current building inspector, and that the building inspector
had not responded to MacLeod’s explanation. The attorney opined that
“[b]ased on the fact that two different building inspectors . . . apparently
accepted the explanation that the [tool shed/cabin] qualified as a prior non-
conforming use, it was reasonable to conclude that” using the tool shed/cabin
as a second dwelling did not violate the Town zoning ordinance. The attorney’s
letter did not refer to the July 8, 2003 letter from the building inspector.
The trial court inferred from the attorney’s letter that the attorney did not
know about the July 8, 2003 letter and that MacLeod did not know about the
2
letter, either. The court stated: “If counsel had been aware of the letter then
(a) he would have mentioned it and (b) he would not have said MacLeod never
heard back from the [T]own.”
MacLeod sold the parcel to the plaintiff in 2006. MacLeod sent the
plaintiff’s realtor a copy of the attorney’s 2005 letter. The realtor then
exchanged emails with the building inspector, who informed the realtor that
the tool shed/cabin could be used by the owners as a guest house, but could
not be used “for anything other than occasional use” and could not be rented.
In 2008, the building inspector issued an enforcement order to the
plaintiff, noting that it had come to her attention that the tool shed/cabin was
being rented. The building inspector informed the plaintiff that the tool
shed/cabin “is an illegal structure that has a history of enforcement,” and that
it could be used only occasionally as a guest house for family, and that money
could not be collected for its use. The building inspector stated: “This
structure is not legal, does not have a legal septic system, and can not [sic] be
used as a dwelling.”
In January 2009, the building inspector advised the plaintiff that the
2005 attorney opinion letter did not provide adequate grounds for his
continued rental of the cabin. The building inspector explained that in order
for the use of the tool shed/cabin to be lawful as a pre-existing, nonconforming
use, “the use must be grandfathered, and there is no proof that [the tool
shed/cabin] was used as a dwelling pre-zoning, only that the structure
existed.” The building inspector informed the plaintiff that he could: (1) cease
and desist using the tool shed/cabin as a second dwelling; (2) obtain the
necessary variances; or (3) appeal her enforcement order to the ZBA. The
plaintiff ignored the building inspector’s enforcement order and continued to
rent the tool shed/cabin.
In September 2015 and April 2016, a new building inspector issued two
virtually identical notices to the plaintiff regarding his continued use of the tool
shed/cabin as a second dwelling, requiring him to vacate the tool shed/cabin,
remove its kitchen and bathroom, and schedule an inspection to prove
compliance. The building inspector issued a third notice to the plaintiff in July
2016. The plaintiff responded, through counsel, that the prior inspector’s July
8, 2003 letter, which was sent to the complaining neighbor, but not to the
plaintiff’s predecessor-in-title, constituted a binding “thirteen-year[-]old
determination of the legality” of using the tool shed/cabin as a second dwelling.
The building inspector issued a fourth and final notice of violation on
November 1, 2016, alleging the same violations as the prior three notices.
The plaintiff appealed the November 1, 2016 notice of violation to the
Town’s zoning board of adjustment (ZBA), which upheld it. The ZBA found that
“neither the use nor the structure of the second dwelling on the lot was
3