THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2018-0244, In the Matter of Thomas Gelinas
and Karin Gelinas, the court on June 5, 2019, issued the
following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. We affirm.
The petitioner, Thomas Gelinas, appeals an order, recommended by a
Marital Master (Cooper, M.) and approved by the Circuit Court (Stephen, J.),
granting a decree of divorce from the respondent, Karin Gelinas; making orders
regarding the division of property, awards of alimony, and child support; and
ordering the petitioner to pay certain of the respondent’s attorney’s fees. The
petitioner raises nine issues relating to alimony, the division of marital property
and debt, the valuation of the petitioner’s business, and the award of attorney’s
fees. We will refer to the relevant facts as necessary in addressing the
petitioner’s arguments.
“The trial court has broad discretion in determining matters of property
distribution and alimony when fashioning a final divorce decree. Absent an
unsustainable exercise of discretion, we will not overturn its ruling or set aside
its factual findings.” In the Matter of Gronvaldt & Gronvaldt, 150 N.H. 551, 554
(2004) (quotation, citation, and brackets omitted). We sustain the findings and
rulings of the trial court unless they are lacking in evidentiary support or tainted
by error of law. In the Matter of Letendre & Letendre, 149 N.H. 31, 34 (2002).
It is within the province of the trial court to accept or reject, in
whole or in part, whatever evidence was presented, including that
of the expert witnesses. Our standard of review is not whether we
would rule differently than the trial court, but whether a
reasonable person could have reached the same decision as the
trial court based upon the same evidence. Thus, we defer to the
trial court’s judgment on such issues as resolving conflicts in the
testimony, measuring the credibility of witnesses, and determining
the weight to be given evidence.
Cook v. Sullivan, 149 N.H. 774, 780 (2003) (citations omitted).
We first review the alimony award. The applicable alimony statute
provides, in relevant part, that the court shall order alimony, upon timely
motion therefor, if it finds that:
(a) The party in need lacks sufficient income, property, or
both, including property apportioned in accordance with RSA
458:16-a, to provide for such party’s reasonable needs, taking into
account the style of living to which the parties have become
accustomed during the marriage; and
(b) The party from whom alimony is sought is able to meet
reasonable needs while meeting those of the party seeking alimony,
taking into account the style of living to which the parties have
become accustomed during the marriage; and
(c) The party in need is unable to be self-supporting through
appropriate employment at a standard of living that meets
reasonable needs . . . .
RSA 458:19, I (2018) (amended 2018); see RSA 458:19-a, I (Supp. 2018).
The petitioner argues that the trial court erred in awarding lifetime
alimony to the respondent in light of its findings that the petitioner has a high
school education, requires surgery on both hips, has two cardiac stents, suffers
from depression and vertigo, and is unable to obtain life insurance. He argues
that the award of lifetime alimony to the respondent, “without considering the
Petitioner’s age and health and the precarious nature of his work situation is
an unsustainable exercise of discretion which . . . leaves the Petitioner to pay
alimony for the remainder of his life and will require that he work until his
death.” We find no unsustainable exercise of discretion.
The trial court considered the petitioner’s health, and found that
“[d]espite these conditions, . . . he is not precluded from working full time and
is otherwise in good health. He earns a substantial income and has the ability
to generate further assets in the future.” See RSA 458:19, IV(b) (2018)
(amended 2018) (directing court, in determining the amount of alimony, to
consider, among other things, each party’s health); see also RSA 458:19-a,
IV(a) (Supp. 2018). Although the petitioner contends that “the trial court
assumed that [he] will work forever, and that [his] health will remain
unchanged into the indefinite future,” the court’s finding is more accurately
interpreted as an appropriate refusal to engage in speculation as to future
conditions. Cf. In the Matter of Cohen & Richards, 171 N.H. ___, ___ (decided
March 29, 2019) (slip op. at 12-13) (affirming trial court’s exclusion of future
medical and dental expenses from consideration in determining amount of
alimony because such future expenses were speculative). An award of alimony,
like that of child support, must generally be based upon current income
figures, In the Matter of Nassar & Nassar, 156 N.H. 769, 776 (2008), and
changes in circumstances are dealt with by later modification, see RSA 458:14
(2018) (amended 2018), :19-aa (Supp. 2018). As the Court of Appeals of Iowa
aptly stated:
2
[W]e make alimony determinations based on the circumstances of
the parties at the time of trial, not based on speculation of what
their situations may perhaps be in the future. If changes in the
parties’ health or employment circumstances occur, either party
may seek modification of the [divorce] decree at that time.
In re Marriage of Utter, No. 04-0252, 2005 WL 974694, at *7 (Iowa Ct. App.
Apr. 28, 2005).
The petitioner presented no evidence regarding his various health issues
that would allow a factfinder to reach any non-speculative conclusions about
their impact on his ability to pay alimony. Cf. Cohen, 171 N.H. at ___ (slip op.
at 12-13). Similarly, to the extent the petitioner argues that his ability to pay
alimony is affected by either his lack of education or “the tentative situation
with his company,” which “pays a commission on a month to month contract
that is terminable without cause,” that argument is also based upon
speculation. The petitioner’s circumstances at the time of trial included
employment earning approximately $28,000 per month. He presented no
evidence that a change in that employment was anticipated with any certainty
or even likelihood.
The petitioner also argues that the trial court failed to consider his age
and lack of retirement assets. He contends that the alimony award of $6,500
per month for life “implies that [he] will always be able to pay that amount.”
For the reasons discussed above, we disagree. To the extent the petitioner is
claiming that the alimony award will never permit him to retire, he is mistaken.
Because the petitioner presented no evidence of imminent retirement plans, the
trial court could not engage in speculation about that future event. When the
petitioner’s retirement becomes actual or imminent, he may petition to modify
the alimony award. See In the Matter of Arvenitis & Arvenitis, 152 N.H. 653,
655-57 (holding that voluntary retirement may constitute a substantial change
of circumstances justifying termination of alimony provided it “was not both
actually anticipated and foreseeable” at the time of divorce).
The petitioner further contends that the trial court erred in concluding
that he “has the ability to generate further assets in the future.” He argues
that he has no such ability while paying lifetime alimony, “a significant
property settlement,” and the parties’ debt to the IRS. The trial court, however,
found that the petitioner earns approximately $28,000 per month, that his
“bank statements reflect that he has significant balances available after
payment of all his monthly expenses,” and that his “representations that he
cannot pay his monthly expenses are not credible.” The petitioner has not
demonstrated that these findings are unsupported by the evidence or legally
erroneous. See In the Matter of Nyhan and Nyhan, 147 N.H. 768, 770 (2002).
Accordingly, we find no error in the trial court’s conclusion that the petitioner
“has the ability to generate further assets in the future.”
3