THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2018-0068, State of New Hampshire v. Meritel
Saintil, the court on May 21, 2019, issued the following order:
The defendant, Meritel Saintil, appeals her convictions by a jury in Superior
Court (Delker, J.) for negligent homicide, see RSA 630:3 (2016), and failure to
report adult abuse, see RSA 161-F:46 (2014) (amended 2016), :50 (2014). The
defendant’s convictions were based upon her failure to call for help while her
elderly grandmother, the victim, lay on the floor of their shared home for five days
in her own waste. On appeal, the defendant argues that the evidence was
insufficient for the jury to have convicted her on either charge. We affirm.
The record contains the following evidence. The victim was born in March
1940. In September 2014, the defendant and the defendant’s mother moved into
the victim’s home to help her with cooking, cleaning, and running errands. On
February 12, 2016, the defendant found the victim lying on the floor. The
defendant and her mother tried “to get her up” but they could not lift her. The
victim remained on the floor until February 17, 2016, when the defendant’s
mother telephoned the local fire department to ask them to raise her off the floor.
When they arrived, the emergency responders found the victim lying on the floor,
covered in urine and feces. She was unable to answer their questions correctly.
A paramedic determined that the victim did not know where she was and that
“she wasn't making the best decisions for herself. So for her own safety, we
needed to take her to someplace where she could be taken care of and safe.”
The victim was transported to the hospital where she was diagnosed with
necrotizing fasciitis and admitted. The victim died on February 20, 2016.
The defendant was subsequently charged with negligent homicide, failure
to report adult abuse, and criminal neglect of an elderly adult. She was
convicted on the negligent homicide and failure to report adult abuse charges;
she was acquitted on the criminal neglect charge. This appeal followed.
The defendant argues that the evidence was insufficient to support either
conviction. Although the defendant moved to dismiss the charges at the close
of the State’s case, she chose to present a defense and did not renew her
motion to dismiss at the close of all the evidence. She asks that we review her
sufficiency challenges under our plain error rule if we determine that she failed
to preserve them at trial. See Sup. Ct. R. 16-A. We need not determine
whether her challenges are preserved, however, because having reviewed the
record, we conclude that she has failed to carry her burden under either
standard. See State v. Roy, 167 N.H. 276, 292 (2015) (in challenge to
sufficiency of evidence, defendant bears burden of demonstrating evidence was
insufficient to prove guilt); State v. Fiske, 170 N.H. 279, 291 (2017) (defendant
bears burden of demonstrating plain error).
When considering a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, we
objectively review the record to determine whether any rational trier of fact could
have found the essential elements of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt,
considering all the evidence and all reasonable inferences therefrom in the light
most favorable to the State. State v. Norman, 171 N.H. 103 (2018). When the
evidence as to one or more elements of the charged offense is solely
circumstantial, a defendant challenging sufficiency must establish that the
evidence does not exclude all reasonable conclusions except guilt. State v.
Boggs, 171 N.H. 115, 125 (2018). The proper analysis is not whether every
possible conclusion consistent with innocence has been excluded, but, rather,
whether all reasonable conclusions based upon the evidence have been excluded.
Id.
By contrast, when the proof involves both direct and circumstantial
evidence, a sufficiency challenge must fail if the evidence, including the jury’s
credibility determinations, is such that a rational trier of fact could find guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt, even if the evidence would support a rational
conclusion other than guilt if the jury had resolved credibility issues differently.
Saintil-Brown, 172 N.H. at ___ (decided April 17, 2019) (slip op. at 6-7).1
Regardless of whether the evidence is solely circumstantial or involves both direct
and circumstantial evidence, we consider it in the light most favorable to the
State, and we examine each evidentiary item in the context of all of the evidence,
not in isolation. Id. at ___ (slip op. at 7).
We first address the defendant’s challenge to her conviction for negligent
homicide. To convict the defendant of negligent homicide, the State had to prove,
beyond a reasonable doubt, that she caused the victim’s death negligently. See
RSA 630:3, I. The defendant argues that the evidence was insufficient to prove
both that she acted negligently and that her negligence caused the victim’s death.
To establish that the defendant acted negligently, the State had to prove
that she failed “to become aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that the
material element exists or will result from [her] conduct.” RSA 626:2, II(d)
(2016). “The risk must be of such a nature and degree that [her] failure to
become aware of it constitutes a gross deviation from the conduct that a
reasonable person would observe in the situation.” Id. “[C]riminal negligence
requires not only the failure to perceive a more than ordinary risk, but also
some serious blameworthiness in the conduct that caused it.” State v. Dion,
164 N.H. 544, 549 (2013) (quotation and brackets omitted). We use an
1 In State v. Saintil-Brown, the defendant’s mother challenged her convictions that resulted
from the same events that gave rise to the charges in this case.
2
objective test to determine whether the defendant failed to become aware of a
substantial and unjustifiable risk. State v. Shepard, 158 N.H. 743, 746 (2009).
We conclude that, viewing the evidence and the reasonable inferences
therefrom in the light most favorable to the State, the evidence was sufficient for
a rational trier of fact to find, beyond a reasonable doubt, that a reasonable
person would have been aware that there was a substantial and unjustifiable risk
of death in allowing an elderly, obese, diabetic woman to remain on the floor in
her own waste for five days in the middle of February, dressed only in a
nightgown “soaked” with urine and feces. The jury could also have found that a
reasonable person would have been aware that the victim had been unable to lift
herself from the floor on day one and that she could not have been lifted off the
floor without help from emergency responders. And the jury could have found
that a reasonable person would have been aware that allowing the victim to
remain on the floor for five days would not result in the victim suddenly being
able to lift herself off the floor.
A reasonable person would also know that there was a substantial and
unjustifiable risk that the victim would become hypothermic by lying on the floor
in only a wet nightgown, given that it was mid-February and there was a hole in
the floor, approximately the size of a basketball, only feet from where she lay. A
reasonable person would know that hypothermia can be fatal. Indeed, an
emergency room physician testified that, when she examined the victim at the
hospital, the victim “was on the brink” of death. She was “cold to the touch and
covered in stool from her waist to her toes.” In addition, the jury could have
found that a reasonable person would know that lying in one position on a hard
surface can cause sores, that contact with fecal matter can cause infection, and
that infections in the elderly can be fatal.
Although we use an objective test to determine whether the defendant
failed to become aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk, Shepard, 158 N.H.
at 746, the defendant’s testimony, viewed in the light most favorable to the State,
establishes that she was subjectively aware of such a risk. The defendant
testified that “on day one, [she] knew [that the victim] wanted to get up.” She
testified that she knew that the victim was defecating and urinating on herself
while she was on the floor and would have been wet as a result, that she “didn’t
look comfortable” on the floor, and that she and her mother “needed help to pick
[the victim] up.” Moreover, the defendant told police that on the second day of
lying on the floor, the victim hallucinated that the defendant’s brother was
dancing on the wall.
In addition, there was evidence that, when viewed in the light most
favorable to the State, the defendant had a motive for her conduct. The
defendant told the police that she and her mother were supposed to inherit the
money in the victim’s bank account. There was also evidence that the defendant
complained to others about having to care for the victim.
3
The State presented additional mens rea evidence that, when viewed in
the light most favorable to the State, demonstrated that the defendant was
conscious of her guilt. The jury heard evidence that, while the victim was in the
hospital, the defendant spoke on the telephone with a hospital nurse and
screamed about being “blamed.” The jury also heard evidence that, contrary to
what the defendant told the police, the emergency room nurse did not tell the
defendant’s mother that the victim had a right to die in her own home and that
the defendant and her mother should have allowed her to do so.
To establish that the defendant’s neglect caused the victim’s death, the
State had to prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, that her conduct was a
substantial factor in bringing about the victim’s death and that any other factors
were not the sole substantial cause of her death. See State v. Lamprey, 149 N.H.
364, 366-67, 369 (2003). In this case, the jury heard evidence that the victim
likely developed the infection on day three or four after having been found on the
floor. The jury also heard evidence that time is of the essence with a necrotizing
soft tissue infection such as the victim had. As one medical service provider
testified, “You kind of die if it’s not treated right away.” In addition, the State
presented evidence that the victim developed an ulcer on her inner thigh from
being on the floor and from urinating on herself, and that the ulcer became
infected because the victim defecated on herself. We conclude that, based upon
this evidence and the reasonable inferences drawn therefrom, viewed in the light
most favorable to the State, a rational trier of fact could have found that the
defendant’s delay in calling for help was a substantial cause of the victim’s
necrotizing fasciitis and resulting death.
We next address the defendant’s conviction for failing to report elder abuse.
To convict the defendant of failing to report elder abuse, the State had to prove
that she: (1) suspected or believed in good faith that the victim, an incapacitated
adult, had been subjected to abuse, neglect, self-neglect, or was living in
hazardous conditions; and (2) knowingly failed to immediately make the required
report to adult protective services. See RSA 161-F:46, :50. An adult is
“incapacitated” within the meaning of the statute if her “physical, mental, or
emotional ability . . . is such that [she] is unable to manage personal, home or
financial affairs in [her] own best interest, or . . . is unable to delegate
responsibility to a responsible caretaker or caregiver.” RSA 161-F:43, VII (2014)
(amended 2016). “Self-neglect” refers to “an act or omission by an incapacitated
adult which results or could result in the deprivation of essential services or
supports necessary to maintain his or her minimum mental, emotional or
physical health and safety.” RSA 161-F:43, VI (2014) (amended 2016).
The defendant argues that the evidence was insufficient to prove that she
acted “knowingly” because any report to adult protective services would have
been futile. However, to obtain a conviction, the State did not have to prove,
beyond a reasonable doubt, that any report to adult protective services would
have led to a particular result. See Saintil-Brown, 172 N.H. at ___ (slip op. at 14).
4
To convict the defendant, the State had to prove only that the defendant
knowingly failed to immediately report her suspicion or good faith belief that the
victim was “incapacitated” and had been subject to abuse, neglect, self-neglect,
exploitation, or was living in hazardous conditions. See RSA 161-F:46.
Viewing the evidence and the reasonable inferences therefrom in the light
most favorable to the State, a rational trier of fact could find, beyond a
reasonable doubt, that the defendant suspected or had a good faith belief that
the victim was “incapacitated” because she could not manage her affairs on her
own. There was evidence that the defendant and her mother moved in with the
victim precisely because the victim could not manage her affairs. The victim had
previously told an Exeter police officer in May of 2015 that the defendant and her
mother moved in with her because “she had a difficult time taking care of
herself.” The victim said that if the defendant and her mother were to leave her,
“she was afraid she would be going to a nursing home.”
A rational trier of fact, viewing the evidence and the reasonable inferences
therefrom in the light most favorable to the State, could also find, beyond a
reasonable doubt, that the defendant suspected or had a good faith belief that
the victim engaged in self-neglect and lived in hazardous conditions. See RSA
161-F:43, VI. The defendant found the victim on the floor, knew about her self-
neglect regarding her personal hygiene, and quickly became aware that she was
unable to get up without help. A rational trier of fact could also have reasonably
found that the defendant knowingly failed to report that the victim was on the
floor for days, lying in her own waste.
Affirmed.
BASSETT, HANTZ MARCONI, and DONOVAN, JJ., concurred.
Eileen Fox,
Clerk
5