THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2018-0138, Appeal of Kasey L. Dillon, P.A. &
a., the court on March 8, 2019, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case.
Petitioners Kasey L. Dillon, P.A., and Edward J. Williams, M.D., appeal a
decision of the New Hampshire Board of Medicine (board). In its decision, the
board concluded that the petitioners’ treatment of a certain patient, K.H., on
February 23, 2011, fell below the standards established by RSA 328-D:6, IV
(2017) and RSA 329:17, VI (2017), respectively, and thus subjected the
petitioners to formal discipline. The petitioners argue that: (1) the board’s
order is unjust and unreasonable in light of the favorable jury verdict the
petitioners received in the civil case that spurred the board’s investigation; (2)
the board erred by failing to disqualify hearing counsel’s expert witness, Colin
O’Brien, M.D.; and (3) the board’s order and certain factual findings therein are
unjust and unreasonable because they are not supported by sufficient
evidence. We affirm.
The following facts were found by the board or are otherwise derived from
the record. The petitioners are, respectively, a physician assistant and a
physician. They were both working in the Emergency Department of
Wentworth-Douglass Hospital the evening of February 23, 2011. K.H.
presented to Wentworth-Douglass’s emergency room that night after being ill
for five days with a fever, chills, vomiting, diarrhea, upper abdominal pains,
and a cough. Dillon conducted a physical examination of K.H. After the
physical examination, Dillon ordered certain testing, including a complete
blood count (CBC). After Dillon conferred with Williams, influenza and
hepatitis tests were also ordered. No chest x-ray was ordered or conducted.
The CBC disclosed certain abnormal results, including a low white blood cell
count and 36% bands. However, Dillon did not record these abnormalities on
K.H.’s emergency room physician report.
Dillon ordered treatment for K.H., which included two liters of
intravenous normal saline and Zofran, an anti-nausea medication. The
petitioners ultimately diagnosed K.H. with a gastrointestinal virus. Dillon
discharged K.H. with prescriptions for Tussionex, a cough suppressant, as well
as more Zofran, and instructed her to follow up with her primary care
physician. The following day, K.H. returned to Wentworth-Douglass and was
diagnosed with pneumonia, impending respiratory failure, acute respiratory
distress syndrome, and sepsis. Her condition required surgical intervention
and a seven-week hospitalization.
In 2014, the board received a copy of a civil complaint filed in Strafford
County Superior Court. See RSA 329:17, II (2017). The complaint alleged that
the petitioners were grossly negligent in their treatment of K.H. The board then
commenced an investigation of the allegations in the complaint. The civil
proceeding that led to the board’s investigation culminated in a jury verdict for
the petitioners. However, based on information gathered during the board’s
investigation, including letters received from the petitioners, the board
proceeded with the instant disciplinary action. At the hearing, the board heard
testimony and received various exhibits into evidence. The board ultimately
concluded that Dillon’s treatment of K.H. fell below the standards set by RSA
328-D:6, IV, and that Williams’ treatment of K.H. fell below the standards of
RSA 329:17, VI. See RSA 328-D:6, IV (authorizing board to discipline licensed
physician assistant upon finding, after hearing, that licensee “[h]as engaged in
dishonest or unprofessional conduct or has been grossly or repeatedly
negligent in practicing his or her profession or in performing activities ancillary
to the practice of his or her profession or any particular aspect or specialty
thereof”); RSA 329:17, VI(c) (authorizing board to discipline licensed physician
upon finding, after hearing, that licensee “[h]as displayed medical practice
which is incompatible with the basic knowledge and competence expected of
persons licensed to practice medicine or any particular aspect or specialty
thereof”). The board also concluded that formally reprimanding the petitioners
was the appropriate measure of discipline to impose. See RSA 328-D:7 (2017);
RSA 329:17, VII (2017). This appeal followed.
RSA chapter 541 governs our review of the board’s decision. RSA 328-
D:8 (2017); RSA 329:17, VIII (2017); see Appeal of Rowan, 142 N.H. 67, 70
(1997). We will not set aside the board’s order except for errors of law, unless
we are satisfied, by a clear preponderance of the evidence, that it is unjust or
unreasonable. Appeal of Dell, 140 N.H. 484, 487-88 (1995); RSA 541:13
(2007). The petitioners, as the parties seeking to set aside the board’s order,
have the burden of proof. RSA 541:13. The board’s findings of fact are
presumed prima facie lawful and reasonable. Id.; Dell, 140 N.H. at 497. In
reviewing the board’s findings, our task is not to determine whether we would
have found differently than did the board, or to reweigh the evidence, but
rather to determine whether the findings are supported by competent evidence
in the record. Dell, 140 N.H. at 498. However, we review the board’s rulings
on issues of law de novo. See In the Matter of Bloomfield, 166 N.H. 475, 478
(2014).
We first address the petitioners’ argument concerning the effect of the
civil malpractice case on the board’s proceeding. The petitioners argue that, in
light of the favorable jury verdict they received in the civil case that gave rise to
the board’s investigation, the board’s order to the contrary is unjust and
2
unreasonable. However, they never presented this argument to the board, in
their motion for reconsideration or otherwise. Accordingly, it is not preserved
for our review. See RSA 541:4 (2007) (providing that “no ground not set forth
[in a motion for rehearing] shall be urged, relied on, or given any consideration
by the court”); Appeal of Northern New England Tele. Operations, LLC, 165
N.H. 267, 272 (2013); Appeal of Walsh, 156 N.H. 347, 352 (2007); Appeal of
Coffey, 144 N.H. 531, 533 (1999) (“Issues not raised in the motion for rehearing
cannot be raised on appeal.”). Even if we were to conclude otherwise, the
petitioners have not adequately developed their argument. See Lennartz v. Oak
Point Assocs., P.A., 167 N.H. 459, 464 (2015) (explaining that judicial review is
not warranted for complaints regarding adverse rulings without developed legal
argument). For these reasons, we decline to consider the petitioners’
argument.
We turn next to the petitioners’ arguments concerning hearing counsel’s
expert witness, O’Brien. The petitioners contend that the board violated their
due process rights under the State Constitution by failing to disqualify O’Brien.
See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 15. They do not argue that their due process rights
under the Federal Constitution were violated.
At the time of the petitioners’ hearing, O’Brien was a member of the
Medical Review Subcommittee (MRSC), a subcommittee composed of persons
who are nominated by the board and appointed by the governor and council.
See RSA 329:17, V-a (2017) (amended 2018); N.H. Admin. R., Med 102.08. The
MRSC investigates possible misconduct by licensees. See RSA 329:18, I
(2017). The petitioners argue that O’Brien, in light of his status as an MRSC
member sharing a common purpose with the board, “had an undue influence
with the Board or, at a minimum, the appearance thereof.” They argue further
that O’Brien’s statutory duty to protect the public raises “the appearance of
bias on the part of . . . O’Brien in favor of [the patient], as a member of the
public, and against the petitioners.” See RSA 329:1-aa (2017) (“The primary
responsibility and obligation of the board of medicine is to protect the public.”);
RSA 329:18, I (authorizing the board to investigate possible misconduct
through the MRSC). They also note that the initial investigation of the
petitioners by the MRSC was performed by a former member of the
subcommittee, which “raised the prospect” that O’Brien’s testimony was biased
in favor of his former colleague. They argue that O’Brien’s “lack of impartiality,
or appearance thereof, . . . hindered the ability of the petitioners to receive a
fair hearing,” and that this hindrance “became self-evident during the hearing
when the Board critically cross-examined the petitioners and their expert
witness . . . while at the same time all but accepted . . . O’Brien’s opinions from
the outset.”
With respect to the petitioners’ due process claim, we have said that,
when a single individual commingles investigative, accusative, and adjudicative
functions, the mere appearance of prejudice may be sufficient to violate due
3