THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2018-0707, In the Matter of Daniela Gamboa
Soriano and Benjamin Ross, the court on September 27, 2019,
issued the following order:
Having considered the brief filed by the petitioner, Daniela Gamboa
Soriano, and the record submitted on appeal, we conclude that oral argument
is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1). The petitioner appeals from
the final orders recommended by a marital master (DalPra, M.) and approved
by the Circuit Court (Forrest, J.) in her divorce from the respondent, Benjamin
Ross. On appeal, the petitioner argues that the trial court erred by: (1) finding
that the respondent earns $1,700 monthly; (2) deviating downward from the
child support guidelines amount based upon its finding that awarding child
support at the guidelines amount would result in a confiscatory order because
of the respondent’s low income; (3) not awarding her attorney’s fees after
finding the respondent in contempt for failing to timely pay child support; and
(4) deciding, without holding an evidentiary hearing, her post-decree motion
seeking permission to travel to her home country (Chile) with the children in
December 2018 and other relief. We affirm.
The trial court found the following facts. The parties were married in
2012 and separated in 2017. They have two children, who, at the time of the
divorce were six years old and eight months old. The petitioner is unemployed;
the respondent is employed as a bartender and earns approximately $1,700
monthly, including tips. At the time of the parties’ divorce hearing, the
respondent’s child support obligation was in arrears by more than $3,900.
Following an evidentiary hearing, the trial court ordered the respondent
to pay child support in the amount of $100 weekly, which is $23 less per week
than the guidelines amount. The trial court also ordered the respondent to pay
$20 per week towards his arrearage. The trial court determined that a
downward deviation from the guidelines amount was proper because the
respondent’s “low income would make [the] guidelines amount confiscatory.”
The trial court found the respondent “in contempt for failing to timely pay child
support,” but denied the petitioner’s request for an award of attorney’s fees.
The petitioner subsequently moved for reconsideration, arguing, among
other things, that the trial court erred when it failed to award her attorney’s
fees, despite having found the respondent in contempt for failing to timely pay
child support. The petitioner also argued that the respondent was in contempt
of the parties’ temporary decree for failing to have paid rent.
The trial court denied the petitioner’s motion for reconsideration,
observing that, as to her request that the court find the respondent in
contempt for failing to pay rent, “[n]o contempt was entered as the evidence
disclosed that the Respondent was financially unable to . . . afford the rent as
ordered.” This appeal followed.
The trial court has broad discretion in determining child support when
fashioning a final divorce decree. In the Matter of Crowe & Crowe, 148 N.H.
218, 221 (2002). We review its decisions on such matters under our
unsustainable exercise of discretion standard, see In the Matter of Costa &
Costa, 156 N.H. 323, 326 (2007), which means that we review only whether the
record establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the discretionary
judgment made. In the Matter of Kurowski & Kurowski, 161 N.H. 578, 585
(2011). We will not disturb the trial court’s determination if it could reasonably
have been made. Id. The trial court’s discretion necessarily extends to matters
such as assigning weight to evidence and assessing the credibility and
demeanor of witnesses. Id. Conflicts in testimony, questions about the
credibility of witnesses, and the weight assigned to testimony are matters for
the trial court to resolve. Id. The trial court’s factual findings are binding
upon this court if they are supported by the evidence and are not legally
erroneous. See id.
“Our standard of review is not whether we would rule differently than the
trial court, but whether a reasonable person could have reached the same
decision as the trial court based upon the same evidence.” Cook v. Sullivan,
149 N.H. 774, 780 (2003). We will not substitute our judgment for that of the
trial court. See Brent v. Paquette, 132 N.H. 415, 419 (1989). Nor will we
reweigh the equities. In the Matter of Heinrich & Heinrich, 164 N.H. 357, 365
(2012).
We first address the trial court’s finding that the respondent earns
$1,700 monthly. The petitioner argues that the evidence does not support this
finding and asserts that the trial court should have, instead, used the monthly
income figures it used for its temporary orders. However, the respondent
testified at the parties’ final hearing that the amount of his income changed
since the temporary orders were issued. He testified that he is “only working
one job now,” that he is “no longer running” the small business he formerly
ran, and that his only source of income is his full-time employment as a
bartender. The respondent testified that he generally works five days a week,
from 4:00 p.m. to 1:00 or 2:00 a.m., and that he is paid $3.25 per hour, plus
tips. He testified that “[t]he tips make up the majority of [his] income,” and
that the amount of tips varies weekly. The respondent testified that at his
previous job, his weekly income, including tips, ranged from $300 to $1000.
Moreover, the respondent submitted a financial affidavit in which he stated
that his monthly income, including tips, is $1,700. Based upon this record, we
2
conclude that it was reasonable for the trial court to find that the respondent
earns $1,700 monthly.
We next consider whether the trial court erred by ordering a downward
deviation from the child support guidelines. New Hampshire’s child support
guidelines, codified in RSA chapter 458-C, establish a uniform system to
determine the amount of child support awards. In the Matter of Silva & Silva,
171 N.H. 1, 4 (2018). The purpose of RSA chapter 458-C is not only to ensure
uniformity in determining the amount of child support, but also to ensure that
both the custodial and non-custodial parents share in the support responsibility
for their children, according to the relative percentage of each parent’s income.
Id. There is a rebuttable presumption that a child support award calculated
under the guidelines is the correct amount of child support. Id.; RSA 458-C:4, II
(2018). This presumption may be overcome, and the trial court may deviate
from the guidelines, when a party shows by a preponderance of the evidence that
the application of the guidelines would be “unjust or inappropriate,” RSA 458–
C:4, II, because of “[s]pecial circumstances,” RSA 458-C:5, I (2018). If the trial
court deviates from the guidelines, it must “make a written finding as to why a
special circumstance pursuant to RSA 458-C:5 justifies an adjustment from the
child support guidelines to avoid an unjust or inappropriate result.” Silva, 171
N.H. at 4 (quotation omitted); see RSA 458-C:4, II.
RSA 458–C:5, I, includes a non-exhaustive list of special circumstances
that, if raised by a party or the court, the court shall consider in making an
adjustment that deviates from the child support guidelines. The trial court
must consider any special circumstances “in light of the best interests of the
child.” RSA 458-C:5, I. One of the enumerated special circumstances is the
“[s]ignificantly high or low income of the obligee or obligor.” RSA 458-C:5, I(b).
“In considering an adjustment when one or both parents have low income, the
court shall determine how to optimize use of the parents’ combined incomes to
arrive at the best possible outcome for the child or children, provided that the
basic support needs of the child or children are met.” RSA 458-C:5, I(b)(2).
In the instant matter, the trial court specified that a downward deviation
was warranted because the respondent’s “low income would make [the]
guidelines amount confiscatory.” In light of this finding, the court ordered the
respondent to pay $100 in weekly child support, instead of the guidelines
amount of $123. The trial court’s child support guidelines worksheet shows
that, with the self-support reserve, the respondent has only $537 in monthly
income available for support.
The petitioner argues that there is no evidentiary support for the
downward deviation. However, as previously discussed, the respondent’s
testimony supports the trial court’s finding that his gross monthly income is
only $1,700. To the extent that she argues that because the respondent has
$537 in monthly income available for support and because the guidelines
3