THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2018-0359, Aaron E. Olson v. Robert S. Carey,
Esq. & a., the court on June 26, 2019, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs of the parties and the record submitted on
appeal, the court concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in
this case. The plaintiff, Aaron E. Olson, appeals an order of the Superior Court
(Tucker, J.) dismissing his legal malpractice action against the defendants,
Robert S. Carey, Esq., and the law firm of Orr & Reno, P.A., for failure to
disclose an expert witness. We affirm.
The following relevant facts are found in the plaintiff’s complaint, and the
procedural history is taken from the trial court’s orders or the record before us.
In March 2012, the plaintiff hired the defendants to represent him in a federal
criminal case. Prior to entering into a plea agreement in April 2014, Carey
advised the plaintiff that he faced a maximum sentence of five years under the
proposed agreement. The plaintiff accepted the plea agreement and
subsequently pled guilty to four counts of federal tax evasion.
Before his sentencing hearing, the plaintiff solicited a second opinion and
learned that he actually faced a 20-year maximum sentence under the plea
agreement. The plaintiff hired a new attorney, who assisted the plaintiff in
withdrawing his guilty plea. In February 2015, the federal district court
granted the plaintiff’s assented-to motion to withdraw his guilty plea, and he
later entered into a new plea agreement and was subsequently sentenced to a
term of five years in federal prison.
The plaintiff thereafter brought this action against the defendants. His
complaint sought damages for negligence, breach of fiduciary duty, and breach
of contract, all based upon Carey’s advice regarding the maximum sentence he
faced under the initial plea agreement. The case structuring order required the
plaintiff to disclose expert witnesses and their reports by October 31, 2017.
See RSA 516:29-b, I-III (Supp. 2018). On or around October 31, the plaintiff
filed an expert disclosure, identifying Peter Russo as his expert witness. Russo
is a former federal probation officer with whom the plaintiff’s second attorney
consulted to determine the plaintiff’s maximum sentencing exposure under the
initial plea agreement. In lieu of an expert report, the plaintiff provided a
memorandum Russo had written for the plaintiff’s second attorney as part of
this consultation. The memorandum does not reference the defendants or
include an opinion on an attorney’s standard of professional care or the quality
or consequences of Carey’s representation.
The defendants moved to dismiss the plaintiff’s complaint for failing to
disclose an expert opinion sufficient to establish and prove a breach of the
standard of care ordinarily expected of attorneys. The defendants included
with their motion an affidavit signed by Russo, which states that he is not a
lawyer, is not familiar with the standards for legal malpractice in New
Hampshire, and has no opinion as to whether malpractice occurred during the
defendants’ representation of the plaintiff. Based upon the record before the
trial court, the plaintiff argued that this case presents an exceptional
circumstance in which expert testimony is not necessary. He also argued that
the federal district judge’s “findings” and Russo’s report were “more than
sufficient to present the ‘opinions’ of persons with expertise in this issue” and
“to supplant the need for an independent expert.”
The trial court granted the defendants’ motion, concluding that expert
testimony was necessary to establish the professional standard of care and
breach thereof. The plaintiff then moved to reconsider. The trial court denied
the motion, and this appeal followed.
The defendants moved to dismiss the plaintiff’s Notice of Appeal as
untimely because his Notice was due by June 21, 2018, but was received by
this court on June 25. See Sup. Ct. R. 7(1)(A). We denied the defendants’
motion without prejudice to their ability to argue in their brief or memorandum
of law that the legal principle established in Houston v. Lack, 487 U.S. 266
(1988), raised by the plaintiff in his objection to the motion, should not
similarly apply under this court’s Rule 7 and Rule 26. See Houston, 487 U.S.
at 269, 275-76 (holding that, under the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure, a
self-represented prisoner’s notice of appeal is deemed filed when it is delivered
to prison officials).
On appeal, the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in: (1) ruling that
the plaintiff failed to disclose an expert; and (2) dismissing the case rather than
“fashioning a less draconian order,” such as providing the plaintiff with
additional time to procure an expert. (Capitalization omitted). The defendants
argue that the trial court correctly dismissed the plaintiff’s complaint. They
also argue that our court rules provide sufficient safeguards for self-
represented appellants in prison such that we need not adopt the rule in
Houston. Nonetheless, the defendants maintain that even if we decide to follow
Houston, the plaintiff has failed to demonstrate that he is entitled to relief
under that rule. We need not reach this issue, however, because we conclude
that the trial court did not err in dismissing the plaintiff’s complaint for failing
to disclose an expert.
Generally, when reviewing a trial court’s ruling on a motion to dismiss,
we consider whether the petitioner’s allegations are reasonably susceptible of a
construction that would permit recovery. Yager v. Clauson, 166 N.H. 570, 572
(2014). The trial court, however, granted the defendants’ motion to dismiss for
failure to disclose a necessary expert pursuant to the case structuring order.
2
We have long recognized that justice is best served by a system that reduces
surprise at trial by giving both parties the maximum amount of information.
Wong v. Ekberg, 148 N.H. 369, 372 (2002). A party is thus entitled to
disclosure of an opposing party’s experts, the substance of the facts and
opinions about which they are expected to testify, and the basis of those
opinions. Id. We have held that it is within the sound discretion of the trial
court to dismiss a case for failure to comply with the court’s discovery order.
Yager, 166 N.H. at 572. In reviewing a discovery sanction, we will not reverse
the trial court’s ruling unless it constitutes an unsustainable exercise of
discretion. Wong, 148 N.H. at 372.
As an initial matter, the plaintiff appears to suggest that we should apply
the standard under federal law to prove ineffective assistance of counsel, see
Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 687 (1984), rather than our standard
to prove a legal malpractice claim, see Yager, 166 N.H. at 572-73, to determine
whether the trial court properly dismissed the plaintiff’s complaint for failure to
disclose an expert. However, the ineffective assistance of counsel standard
applies to circumstances where a criminal defendant challenges his conviction
based upon a claim that his counsel’s performance was deficient and that the
deficient performance prejudiced his defense. See Strickland, 466 U.S. at 687.
Here, the plaintiff is not challenging his conviction; he is seeking to recover
damages he claims he incurred as a result of Carey’s allegedly erroneous legal
advice. Thus, we apply the standard to prove a legal malpractice claim to
determine whether the trial court’s dismissal of the plaintiff’s complaint for
failure to disclose an expert witness constitutes an unsustainable exercise of
discretion.
It is well established that expert testimony is required where the subject
presented is so distinctly related to some science, profession, or occupation as
to be beyond the ken of the average layperson. Carbone v. Tierney, 151 N.H.
521, 527 (2004). Expert testimony is not required where the subject presented
is within the realm of common knowledge and everyday experience. Id. These
general principles apply to legal malpractice actions. Id.
To establish legal malpractice, a plaintiff must prove: (1) that an
attorney-client relationship existed, which placed a duty upon the attorney to
exercise reasonable professional care, skill, and knowledge in providing legal
services to that client; (2) a breach of that duty; and (3) a resultant harm legally
caused by that breach. Yager, 166 N.H. at 572-73. We have held that, absent
exceptional circumstances, expert testimony is necessary in legal malpractice
cases to inform the jury regarding the skill and care ordinarily exercised by
lawyers and to prove a breach thereof. Id. at 573. We have also held that, in
most instances, expert testimony is required to prove causation. Carbone, 151
N.H. at 528. Without expert testimony, lay juries are unlikely to understand
most litigation issues, local practices, or the range of issues that influence how
an attorney should act or advise. Wong, 148 N.H. at 374.
3