THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2018-0617, Appeal of Suzanne Fournier & a.,
the court on November 14, 2019, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
appellants, Suzanne Fournier, Rajiv and Debra Garg, Adam Goess, and
Gabriela Juocys, appeal an order of the New Hampshire Water Council
upholding the issuance of an alteration of terrain permit by the New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services, Alteration of Terrain Bureau (DES) to
the Town of Milford (Town). We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand.
The pertinent facts are as follows. On September 18, 2017, DES issued
an alteration of terrain permit to the Town to conduct a gravel mining operation
on property referred to as the Brox Community Lands. This town-owned
property is a known habitat for certain species that have been identified by
New Hampshire Fish and Game (Fish & Game) as threatened or endangered,
specifically, the eastern hog-nosed snake, Blanding’s turtle, and spotted turtle.
One month after the permit issued, the appellants, including a regular visitor
to the Brox property as well as owners of land abutting the property, filed a
notice of appeal with the Water Council, challenging DES’ issuance of the
permit. The appeal was rooted in the appellants’ concern that the excavation
would result in adverse impacts to the threatened and endangered species
located on the Brox property. Following a two-day hearing, a majority of the
Water Council, in a four-to-three vote, denied the appeal. This appeal followed.
The Town, as well as Northeast Sand & Gravel, the company employed
by the Town to excavate the Brox property, are intervenors in this appeal. The
appellants contend that the following determinations by the Water Council
were erroneous: (1) DES properly applied the standard set forth in its own
regulation governing the issuance of alteration of terrain permits when it
issued a permit to the Town, see N.H. Admin. R., Env-Wq 1503.19(h); and (2)
DES acted lawfully when it issued the permit without including proposed
construction work to a haul road located on the property.
Our review of Water Council decisions is governed by RSA chapter 541.
See RSA 21-O:14, III (2012). To set aside an order of the Water Council, the
appellants must show that the order is “clearly unreasonable or unlawful.”
RSA 541:13 (2007). All findings of the Water Council upon all questions of fact
properly before it shall be deemed to be prima facie lawful and reasonable.
Appeal of Town of Lincoln, 172 N.H. 244, 247 (2019). “[T]he order or decision
appealed from shall not be set aside except for errors of law, unless the court is
satisfied, by a clear preponderance of the evidence before it, that such order is
unjust or unreasonable.” RSA 541:13. We review the Water Council’s rulings
on issues of law de novo. Appeal of Town of Lincoln, 172 N.H. at 247.
The crux of the appellants’ primary argument on appeal is that DES
applied the incorrect standard in issuing an alteration of terrain permit to the
Town. Pursuant to DES’ rules governing the issuance of such permits, “[t]he
department shall not issue [a] permit unless the applicant demonstrates that
. . . [t]he project has been designed in a manner that will not result in adverse
impacts to state- or federally-listed threatened or endangered species.” N.H.
Admin. R., Env-Wq 1503.19(h) (emphasis added). The appellants argue that
DES failed to comply with Env-Wq 1503.19(h) when it issued a permit for a
project designed to minimize adverse impacts, rather than prevent them. We
agree.
When interpreting administrative rules, we apply the same principles of
construction that pertain to our interpretation of state law. Petition of Parker,
158 N.H. 499, 502 (2009). We ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to
words used, looking at the rule or statutory scheme as a whole, and not
piecemeal. Id. Although we accord deference to an agency’s interpretation of
its own regulations, that deference is not total. Id. We still must examine the
agency’s interpretation to determine if it is consistent with the language of the
regulation and with the purpose that the regulation is intended to serve. Id.
We review the Water Council’s interpretation of administrative rules de novo.
See Appeal of Morton, 158 N.H. 76, 78 (2008).
DES and the intervenors argue that DES’ interpretation of Env-Wq
1503.19(h) — that the project is in compliance with the regulation if it is
designed merely to minimize impacts to threatened or endangered species —
finds some support in the language of the Endangered Species Conservation
Act (ESCA), which directs “state departments and agencies” to “take such
action as is reasonable and prudent to insure that actions authorized, funded,
or carried out by them do not jeopardize the continued existence of such
species.” RSA 212-A:9, III (2019). DES contends that the department took
reasonable and prudent action when it promulgated Env-Wq 1503.19(h), and
when it issued the permit to the Town. DES asserts that its issuance of the
permit was reasonable and prudent because its interpretation of the rule
ensured that the department’s action in issuing the permit “d[id] not jeopardize
the continued existence of [threatened or endangered] species,” as required by
RSA 212-A:9, III.
To adopt DES’ reasoning, however, would, for all practical purposes, read
DES’ regulation out of existence. See Appeal of Morrissey, 165 N.H. 87, 96-97
2
(2013) (stating that we will not interpret an administrative rule in a manner
that would render it meaningless). Once DES chose to promulgate Env-Wq
1503.19(h), it then became the department’s responsibility to comply with the
plain meaning of its regulation. DES cannot now side-step its own regulation
by relying, instead, on the language of the ESCA. Importantly, for the purposes
of this appeal, we are not tasked with deciding whether DES’ interpretation of
Env-Wq 1503.19(h) comports with the ESCA, but rather whether DES complied
with the regulation itself.1
The law is well settled that an administrative agency must follow its own
rules and regulations, and that an agency’s interpretation of its own
regulations is erroneous as a matter of law when it fails to embrace the plain
meaning of its regulations. Appeal of Union Tel. Co., 160 N.H. 309, 317 (2010);
Attitash Mt. Service Co. v. Schuck, 135 N.H. 427, 429 (1992); Appeal of the
City of Nashua, 121 N.H. 874, 876 (1981). Ascribing to each word in the
regulation its plain and ordinary meaning, see Petition of Parker, 158 N.H. at
502, we are not persuaded by DES’ and the intervenors’ argument that there is
no material difference between, on the one hand, designing a project that will
minimize impacts to threatened or endangered species, and, on the other hand,
designing a project so that it will not adversely impact such species.
In support of their argument that DES applied the correct standard in
issuing the permit, DES and the intervenors point to evidence in the record
that both DES and Fish & Game were aware of the actual language used in
Env-Wq 1503.19(h). This awareness means little, however, when the record
makes clear that Fish & Game’s acknowledged goal in suggesting revisions to
the proposed plans was not to design a project that would “not result in
adverse impacts,” as required by the rule, but rather to “minimize” and
“reduce” impacts to threatened or endangered species.
In an effort to validate the misapplication of its own regulation, DES
asserts that the ESCA confers upon Fish & Game primary jurisdiction over
threatened and endangered species in New Hampshire, as it “empowers and
directs [Fish & Game] to conduct investigations, adopt and enforce rules, and
perform other functions to protect threatened and endangered species.” See
RSA 212-A:2, II (2019); :5 (2019). DES argues that, given Fish & Game’s
authority and expertise in this area, DES defers entirely to Fish & Game to
determine whether a project is designed in a manner that will protect such
species. DES contends that, once Fish & Game determines the conditions and
revisions to be included in the permit, DES’ responsibility is merely to enforce
1 The question whether the rule comports with the ESCA, or whether it might be ultra vires as
written, is an issue for another day. See Bach v. N.H. Dep’t of Safety, 169 N.H. 87, 94 (2016)
(declaring as ultra vires administrative rules that “add to, detract from, or modify the statute
which they are intended to implement”) (quotation omitted)). It has not been raised by the parties,
nor do we have the record before us to decide the issue.
3