THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2018-0682, State of New Hampshire v. Bryan
Clickner, the court on September 12, 2019, issued the following
order:
Having considered the opening and reply briefs filed by the defendant,
Bryan Clickner, the brief filed by the State, and the record submitted on
appeal, we conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup.
Ct. R. 18(1). The defendant appeals his conviction, following a bench trial in
Circuit Court (Rappa, J.), on one count of simple assault. We affirm.
The relevant facts follow. The defendant is an attorney whose primary
practice is bankruptcy law. The victim and her husband retained the
defendant to file a bankruptcy proceeding on their behalf and, thereafter, to file
an adversary action against a creditor for violating the automatic stay and
discharge protection of the bankruptcy court. The defendant represented the
victim and her husband in the adversary action on a contingency fee basis.
On the day in question, the defendant met the victim and her husband at
a local fast food restaurant. According to the defendant, he gave the victim a
check made payable to her and asked her to endorse the check and return it to
him so that he could deposit it in his trust account. When the victim refused
to do so, the defendant was heard shouting at the victim to “give [him his]
check back.” When she continued to refuse to relinquish the check, the
defendant placed his hands on her. According to the defendant, he merely
reached for her hand and held on to it. According to an eyewitness and the
victim’s husband, at a minimum, the defendant firmly grasped the victim’s
arm. The eyewitness testified that she heard the victim repeatedly ask the
defendant to “[p]lease let go.” The eyewitness testified that she asked
restaurant staff to call the police. She described the victim as sobbing and
visibly upset. The responding officer testified that the victim’s face was red,
that she was crying and shaking, and that she had several marks on her neck
and a scratch on her arm.
At the scene of the crime, the victim spoke to a police officer, and her
conversation was recorded by the officer’s body camcorder. The video of the
interview was not preserved, however. During the trial, the defendant moved to
dismiss the charge based upon the State’s failure to preserve the recording.
The trial court declined to do so. However, the court granted the defendant’s
alternative request for relief, which was to exclude the victim’s testimony. The
court stated that it did not consider the victim’s testimony in its decision. The
State did not object to the trial court’s exclusion of the victim’s testimony.
The defendant first contests the trial court’s determination that his
conduct was not justified under RSA 627:8 (2016), which provides, in pertinent
part: “A person is justified in using force upon another when and to the extent
that he reasonably believes it necessary to prevent what is or reasonably
appears to be an unlawful taking of his property, or criminal mischief, or to
retake his property immediately following its taking . . . .” The trial court found
that the defendant’s use of force was not justified because “[t]here were several
options available to the Defendant, . . . that would have been far superior to
physically assaulting his client.” The defendant contends that in so finding,
the trial court erred.
In effect, the defendant contends that the evidence was insufficient for
the trier of fact (here, the trial court) to have found that the State met its
burden of disproving his justification defense beyond a reasonable doubt. See
RSA 627:1 (2016) (providing that conduct that is justifiable under RSA chapter
627 “constitutes a defense to any offense”); RSA 626:7, I(a) (2016) (providing
that the State must disprove defenses beyond a reasonable doubt); see also
State v. Etienne, 163 N.H. 57, 81 (2011) (explaining that the legislature has
determined that defenses set forth in RSA chapter 627 constitute “pure
defenses, and, thus, negating such a defense becomes an element of the
offense that the State must prove beyond a reasonable doubt”). When
considering a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, we objectively review
the record to determine whether any rational trier of fact could have found the
essential elements of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt, considering all the
evidence and all reasonable inferences therefrom in the light most favorable to
the State. State v. Francis, 167 N.H. 598, 603-04 (2015). The trier of fact may
draw reasonable inferences from facts proved as well as from facts found as the
result of other inferences, provided they can be reasonably drawn therefrom.
Id. We examine each evidentiary item in the context of all the evidence, and
not in isolation. State v. Craig, 167 N.H. 361, 369 (2015). Because a challenge
to the sufficiency of the evidence raises a claim of legal error, our standard of
review is de novo. Id. at 370. When, as in this case, the proof involves both
direct and circumstantial evidence, a sufficiency challenge must fail if the
evidence, including the trier of fact’s credibility determinations, is such that a
rational trier of fact could find guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, even if the
evidence would support a rational conclusion other than guilt if the trier of fact
had resolved credibility issues differently. State v. Saunders, 164 N.H. 342,
351 (2012).
To disprove the defendant’s justification defense, the State had to prove,
beyond a reasonable doubt, that the defendant was not justified “in using
force” upon the victim because his belief that such force was necessary to
retake the check from the victim was unreasonable. See RSA 627:8; cf. State v.
2
West, 167 N.H. 465, 470-71 (2017) (ruling that the trial court’s jury
instructions correctly explained “the requirement in RSA 627:7 that one using
force must reasonably believe the use of force is necessary to prevent or
terminate a criminal trespass”). “The operative word is ‘reasonable,’ which is
determined by an objective standard. A belief which is unreasonable, even
though honest, will not support the defense.” State v. Leaf, 137 N.H. 97, 99
(1993) (construing comparable language in statute justifying physical force by
persons with special responsibilities). “In other words, it is not enough for the
defendant to say, ‘I believed it reasonably necessary to use the force I used’; it
is for the [trier of fact] to determine whether the belief, even though honest, was
in fact reasonable under all the circumstances.” Id.
Viewing the evidence and all reasonable inferences drawn therefrom in
the light most favorable to the State, we conclude that there was sufficient
evidence for a rational trier of fact to find, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the
defendant’s belief that the force he used to retake the check from the victim
was unreasonable. The evidence before the trial court was that, to retake the
check, the defendant, who was the victim’s attorney, grabbed her arm so firmly
that an eyewitness thought it necessary to call the police. The force used was
such that the victim was described as distraught and shaking. Police observed
several marks on her neck and a scratch on her arm. From the defendant’s
own admission that he did not intend to hurt the victim, the trial court could
have reasonably concluded “that the defendant himself did not reasonably
believe that the force used was necessary.” Id. Viewing the evidence and all
reasonable inferences drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to the State,
we conclude that a rational trier of fact could have found, beyond a reasonable
doubt, that the defendant’s belief that the force he used was necessary was an
unreasonable belief.
To the extent that the defendant asserts that the trial court’s narrative
order is deficient because it “made no findings or mention as to whether the
State had addressed its subsequent burden of proof arising from the proffered
justification defense,” we conclude that this argument is not developed
sufficiently for our review. (Emphasis omitted.) See State v. Blackmer, 149
N.H. 47, 49 (2003).
The defendant next challenges the trial court’s decision to deny his
motion to dismiss, and, instead, to grant his request to exclude the victim’s
testimony. Before addressing the defendant’s appellate arguments on this
issue, we note that, like the trial court, we have not considered the victim’s
testimony in our decision. Accordingly, the defendant’s motion to strike the
State’s brief because the State summarized the victim’s testimony therein is
denied because that motion is moot.
In cases involving lost evidence, once a defendant demonstrates that the
State has lost or destroyed apparently relevant evidence, the State has the
3