THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2018-0310, Appeal of Estate of William Quinn,
the court on August 20, 2019, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
petitioner, Linda Quinn, as widow of William Quinn and beneficiary of the
Estate of William Quinn, appeals a decision of the New Hampshire
Compensation Appeals Board (CAB). The CAB denied the Estate’s request that
the respondents, the Disability Rights Center of New Hampshire (DRC), and its
insurer, Liberty Mutual Insurance Company, pay workers’ compensation
benefits to the Estate as a result of William Quinn’s death from “acute
intoxication by the combined effects of heroin and oxycodone.” We affirm.
The pertinent facts are as follows. On July 19, 2012, Quinn was involved
in a work-related accident in which he fractured his left ankle. Quinn
underwent multiple surgeries, and, as a result, suffered from persistent and
“profound” pain. He underwent various treatments for the pain, and was later
diagnosed with complex regional pain syndrome. Liberty Mutual paid workers’
compensation benefits for Quinn’s injury and treatments.
Quinn was prescribed opioid medications to manage his pain, and he
became dependent on them. In 2015, Quinn’s doctor attempted to wean him
off of the opioid medications, but Quinn experienced increased pain, attempted
suicide, and was hospitalized for further suicidal ideation. Later that year,
Quinn attended an in-patient program where he was successfully weaned off of
the opioid medications. Liberty Mutual paid workers’ compensation benefits
for the in-patient program. Afterward, Quinn did not use opioid medications
for a period of months; however, in September 2015, Quinn was again
prescribed oxycodone for his pain.
On January 23, 2016, Quinn’s body was found by his wife on the floor of
their second home. Near Quinn’s body were a bowl of crushed pills, a straw,
an approximately half full wine bottle, a small black case with another straw in
it, two unlabeled medicine bottles, and an oxycodone pill bottle — which had
been filled on January 11, 2016 — with about 70 pills gone. The medical
examiner, Thomas Andrew, M.D., concluded that the cause of Quinn’s death
was “acute intoxication by the combined effects of heroin and oxycodone” as a
result of “acute substance abuse.” Quinn had ingested heroin and oxycodone
— each in a dose likely sufficient, on its own, to have caused his death.
The Estate filed a claim for workers’ compensation benefits attributable
to Quinn’s death. See RSA 281-A:26 (2010) (providing certain benefits in the
event of an employee’s death resulting from a work-related injury). Liberty
Mutual denied the claim. Thereafter, the Estate requested a hearing at the
New Hampshire Department of Labor. In September 2017, a Department of
Labor hearing officer denied the Estate’s claim for benefits. The Estate
appealed that decision to the CAB, which held a de novo hearing in February
2018.
In its March 30, 2018 order denying benefits, the CAB concluded that
RSA 281-A:14 (2010), which provides that “[t]he employer shall not be liable for
any injury to a worker which is caused in whole or in part by the intoxication
. . . or by the serious and willful misconduct of the worker,” precluded the
payment of benefits. The CAB found that “the consumption of the amount of
oxycodone at the time of death was inconsistent with [Quinn’s] prescribed
dosage,” and that “heroin was not part of [Quinn’s] prescribed medical
treatment.” The CAB noted that Quinn’s body was found lying on the floor,
near a bowl of crushed pills and other drugs and drug paraphernalia. The CAB
found that Quinn “intentionally ingested the heroin” — observing that the use
of heroin is illegal under both federal and New Hampshire law. The CAB
determined that Quinn’s “intentional ingestion of significant overdoses of both
heroin and oxycodone simultaneously constitute[d] serious and willful
misconduct.” The CAB also found that the intentional “actions and
misconduct of [Quinn were] an independent, intervening cause breaking the
‘chain of causation’ between his [compensable] work injury and his death,”
concluding that Quinn’s death “was not causally related to [his] work injury.”
The CAB denied the Estate’s motion for rehearing. This appeal followed.
RSA chapter 541 governs our review of CAB decisions. See RSA 281-
A:43, I(c) (2010). The party seeking to set aside the CAB’s order bears the
burden of proof “to show that the [order] is clearly unreasonable or unlawful.”
RSA 541:13 (2007). “[A]ll findings of the [CAB] upon all questions of fact
properly before it shall be deemed to be prima facie lawful and reasonable.” Id.
“[T]he order or decision appealed from shall not be set aside or vacated except
for errors of law, unless the court is satisfied, by a clear preponderance of the
evidence before it, that such order is unjust or unreasonable.” Id. When
reviewing the CAB’s findings, “our task is not to determine whether we would
have found differently than did the [CAB], or to reweigh the evidence, but
rather to determine whether the findings are supported by competent evidence
in the record.” Appeal of Phillips, 165 N.H. 226, 235 (2013) (quotation
omitted). “The [CAB’s] findings of fact will not be disturbed if they are
supported by competent evidence in the record, upon which the [CAB’s]
decision reasonably could have been made.” Id. (quotation omitted). We review
the CAB’s rulings on issues of law de novo. See Appeal of Wingate, 149 N.H.
12, 14 (2002); RSA 541:13.
2
The Estate argues that it is entitled to benefits because RSA 281-A:26
provides that, if an employee’s death “results from” a compensable work-
related “injury,” as defined in RSA 281-A:2, XI (2010), then the employee’s
dependents receive compensation. RSA 281-A:26. The Estate contends that
“where a work-related injury leads to addiction or substance abuse and,
ultimately, to death, that death is compensable by the workers’ compensation
carrier.”
DRC counters that the CAB properly denied benefits because Quinn’s
intentional conduct — the intentional ingestion of overdoses of heroin, an
illegal drug, and oxycodone, which had been used in an unprescribed manner
— was an independent intervening cause that broke the causal chain between
the injury and his death. In support of its argument, DRC cites Cate v. Perkins
Machine Co., 102 N.H. 391, 394 (1960) for the proposition that, even if an
employee has a compensable work-related injury, post-injury conduct by the
employee can operate to restrict or terminate the payment of benefits. We
agree with DRC.
“To recover under the Workers’ Compensation Law, an employee must
show that his injuries arose out of and in the course of employment.” Appeal
of Kelly, 167 N.H. 489, 492 (2015); see also RSA 281-A:2, XI (defining “injury”).
Here, there is no dispute that Quinn’s initial ankle injury arose out of and in
the course of his employment, and that, therefore, it was compensable under
the statute. Thus, the primary issue in this appeal is whether Quinn’s death
“result[ed] from” his initial compensable ankle injury, and thus, whether his
death is compensable. RSA 281-A:26.
In general, an injured employee is entitled to workers’ compensation
benefits for subsequent injuries, conditions, or necessary and reasonable
treatments that are the “direct and natural result” of the initial injury. See
Appeal of Bergeron, 144 N.H. 681, 684-85 (2000) (finding that, “absent an
independent, intervening cause,” an employer “has a continuing obligation to
provide or to pay for medical, hospital, and remedial care for as long as is
required by an injured employee’s condition where it bears liability for the
initial injury that necessitated the subsequent health care” (quotation
omitted)); 1 Arthur Larson et al., Larson’s Workers’ Compensation Law § 10.01,
at 10-2 (Matthew Bender, rev. ed. 2018) (“[A] subsequent injury . . . is
compensable if it is the direct and natural result of a compensable primary
injury.”). However, even subsequent injuries that are the “direct and natural
result” of the initial compensable injury can be ineligible for benefits when
there is an independent intervening cause of the subsequent injury. See
Bergeron, 144 N.H. at 684-85; Larson, supra § 10, at 10-1. “Our case law
examining independent cause primarily involves the effect of a second
identifiable incident.” Bergeron, 144 N.H. at 685. “To constitute an
independent cause of an injured employee’s condition, an incident must be
both a necessary and a material cause of that condition.” Id. (quotation
3