THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2018-0481, State of New Hampshire v. Jason
Alleyne, the court on May 6, 2020, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
defendant, Jason Alleyne, appeals his convictions for first degree assault,
criminal threatening, and simple assault. He argues that the Trial Court
(Kissinger, J.) erred by limiting the scope of testimony to be admitted from his
expert witness. We affirm.
The following evidence was presented to the jury. On August 21, 2017, the
defendant and the victim engaged in a number of domestic disputes that
included physical violence in several locations. Both the defendant and the
victim had been using methamphetamine for a year and a half to two years
before that date. On August 21, the victim picked the defendant up in the
morning after he finished working an overnight shift. They used
methamphetamine in the car and again when they reached a nearby hotel room
where the victim had spent the previous night.
During the course of the day, the defendant hit the victim in the face, and
punched and kicked her. At one point, the victim drove a car into the defendant,
who rolled off its hood onto the ground. The arguments continued to escalate
until the victim went to a nearby gas station to purchase gas. As the victim was
pumping gas, she saw the defendant walking down the hill toward the station.
He got into the passenger seat of the car. When she entered on the driver’s side,
they continued to argue. As the argument continued, the defendant hit the
victim and told her that if she did not want “him to be with [her],” she should get
out of the car or he would kill her. She left the car and he moved to the driver’s
seat of the car and drove after her. When he reached her, she was first “on top of
the hood for like a second maybe” and then she “got sucked underneath.”
The defendant was subsequently indicted on multiple charges, including
attempted murder and first degree assault. Prior to trial, the defendant disclosed
to the State that he intended to call an expert, Dr. Stuart Gitlow, MD, MPH, to
testify about the general effect of methamphetamine on the brain, including its
effect on behavior.
The State filed a motion in limine seeking to prevent Dr. Gitlow from
testifying at trial. The court ruled that Dr. Gitlow could not offer an opinion on
the issue of the defendant’s intent, but that he could testify “regarding the mental
and cognitive effects of methamphetamine use on a person who is actively under
the influence and whether [the defendant]’s mental and cognitive behaviors at the
time of the alleged offenses were consistent with those of a person actively under
the influence of methamphetamine.” The court explained:
Any testimony suggesting that methamphetamine use causes or
results in violent behavior is inadmissible. Unlike the other effects of
methamphetamine use described by Dr. Gitlow, violent behavior
does not relate to Mr. Alleyne’s mental and cognitive deficits, nor
does it aid the jury in understanding Mr. Alleyne’s intoxication on
August 21, 2017. As discussed above, Dr. Gitlow may not offer an
opinion on the issue of whether Mr. Alleyne formed or was capable of
forming the requisite intent for the crimes charged. Similarly, he
may not testify that violent behavior is caused by or results from
methamphetamine use as it is for the jury to decide whether Mr.
Alleyne had the specific intent to commit the charged offenses, which
primarily involve violent behavior towards the alleged victim.
Essentially, the ultimate purpose of testimony that violent behavior
is caused by methamphetamine use would be to prove a separate
defense of diminished capacity or diminished responsibility. Such
defenses are not recognized in New Hampshire.
Following a jury trial, the defendant was acquitted of the attempted murder
charge and three of six simple assault charges. He was convicted on the
remaining charges and filed this appeal in which he argues that the convictions
for offenses that have a purposeful or knowing mental state element must be
reversed. He contends that the trial court erred in concluding that the proffered
expert testimony addressed his capacity to form the requisite mental state for the
charged offenses; rather, he contends, “the proffered testimony would have
educated the jury on the effects of methamphetamine intoxication generally.”
See RSA 626:4 (2016).
The decision to admit or exclude evidence is within the discretion of the
trial court. State v. Palermo, 168 N.H. 387, 391 (2015). When we review this
discretionary ruling, we consider whether the record establishes an objective
basis sufficient to sustain the decision made. Id. To prevail on his challenge, the
defendant must demonstrate that the trial court’s ruling was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Id. Rule 702 provides that a qualified
expert may offer his opinion if the specialized knowledge will help the trier of fact
to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue. Barry v. N.H. Dep’t of
Health and Human Servs., 170 N.H. 364, 371 (2017).
The test generally employed to determine the admissibility of opinion
evidence is not to inquire whether the issue to which it relates is for
the jury, nor whether it is a matter of daily occurrence and open to
2
common observation, but whether the witness’ knowledge of the
matter in question will probably aid the triers in their search for the
truth.
State v. Labranche, 156 N.H. 740, 743 (2008) (quotation omitted).
We are asked to determine whether the trial court erred in ruling that,
although evidence concerning the emotional and cognitive impairments caused
by methamphetamine use was admissible, evidence of behavior that might be
caused by its use was not. The State contends that, as presented to the trial
court, the defendant’s proffer led the court to conclude that the evidence would
be used to support a claim of diminished capacity. The defendant contends that
the trial court misunderstood his proffer. At oral argument, defense counsel
explained the distinction between the kinds of proffered evidence. He sought to
present evidence that violent behavior was a symptom of methamphetamine
intoxication, i.e., to establish that he was intoxicated; he sought to present
evidence that mental confusion was an effect of methamphetamine intoxication
to negate the charged mental state. We need not decide whether the limitation
imposed by the trial court was error, because, having reviewed the record before
us, we conclude that any error would have been harmless.
The harmless error doctrine recognizes the principle that the central
purpose of a criminal trial is to decide the factual question of the defendant’s
guilt or innocence; it promotes public respect for the criminal process by focusing
on the underlying fairness of the trial rather than on the presence of immaterial
error. State v. Page, 172 N.H. 46, 56 (2019). To establish that an error is
harmless, the State must demonstrate beyond a reasonable doubt that the error
did not affect the verdict. Id. This standard applies to both the erroneous
admission and exclusion of evidence. Id. An error may be established to be
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt if the other evidence of the defendant’s guilt
is of an overwhelming nature, quantity, or weight, and if the evidence that was
improperly admitted or excluded is merely cumulative or inconsequential in
relation to the strength of the State’s evidence of guilt. Id. at 56-57. In making
this determination, we consider the other evidence presented at trial as well as
the character of the erroneously admitted or excluded evidence itself. Id. at 57.
The defendant concedes that, at trial, the only element in dispute was his
mental state; i.e., whether he acted knowingly or purposely. He argues that the
excluded evidence was an “important supporting piece” of his assertion that he
was suffering from methamphetamine intoxication when he committed the
charged offenses. Given that “[t]he central thrust of the defense was that,
because of his acute methamphetamine intoxication, [he] could not form the
purposeful or knowing mental states associated with many of the charges,” he
argues that the trial court’s limitation of testimony describing methamphetamine
intoxication and its effects prejudiced his case. Having reviewed the other
3