THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2018-0043, U.S. Bank Trust, N.A., Trustee v.
Kevin Clifford & a., the court on January 31, 2019, issued the
following order:
Having considered the defendants’ brief and reply brief, the plaintiff’s
memorandum of law, and the record submitted on appeal, we conclude that
oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1). We affirm.
Defendants Kevin Clifford and Elena Rodionova appeal orders of the
Superior Court (Ignatius, J.) entering a final judgment in favor of the plaintiff,
U.S. Bank Trust, N.A., trustee for the LSF9 Master Participation Trust, on the
defendants’ defaults, denying the defendants’ requests to set the defaults aside,
to order a new trial, and to dismiss the case, and denying their motion to
disqualify the presiding trial judge. They argue that the trial court erred by not
vacating the defaults and not granting their motion to recuse.
“The trial court’s decision whether to strike an entry of default is within
its discretion; we will not disturb such a ruling unless the court unsustainably
exercised its discretion or erred as a matter of law.” In the Matter of Maynard
& Maynard, 155 N.H. 630, 633 (2007) (quotation and brackets omitted). Under
RSA 526:1 (2007), a trial court may grant a new trial when it determines that
“through accident, mistake or misfortune justice has not been done and a
further hearing would be equitable.” “Accident, mistake or misfortune” is
something outside of the defendants’ control, or something that a reasonably
prudent person would not be expected to guard against or be prepared to
address. In the Matter of Birmingham & Birmingham, 154 N.H. 51, 56 (2006).
The trial court’s finding concerning whether accident, mistake, or misfortune
occurred is conclusive unless it is unsupported by the evidence. Id.
A defendant is generally required to file an appearance and either an
answer or a motion to dismiss a complaint within thirty days of being served
with the summons and complaint. See Super. Ct. R. 4(e), 9. If a defendant
fails to file a timely answer, the defendant “shall be defaulted.” Super. Ct. R.
42(a) (emphasis added). Absent an agreement of the parties to the contrary,
the trial court “shall strike the default only upon motion and affidavit of
defense, specifically setting forth the defense and the facts on which the
defense is based.” Id. (emphasis added). These rules are not relaxed for self-
represented parties. See, e.g., Birmingham, 154 N.H. at 56-57.
We note that the defendants’ appendix does not include a copy of the
complaint. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004)
(stating that appealing party has burden to provide record sufficient to decide
issues on appeal, and that relevant portions of record not provided are
assumed to support the trial court’s decision). Both the trial court’s order
granting the plaintiff’s motion for final judgment and the representations of the
plaintiff’s counsel at the hearing on that motion, however, establish that the
complaint sought an equitable order authorizing service upon a guardian ad
litem (GAL) of notices of foreclosure directed to defendants Fedor Rodionov and
Valentina Rodionova pursuant to RSA 479:25 (Supp. 2018). Fedor Rodionov
and Valentina Rodionova have an interest, along with Kevin Clifford and Elena
Rodionova, in a certain New Hampshire property encumbered by a mortgage.
However, they reside at an unknown address in Russia.
Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) originally effected
abode service of the complaint upon defendant Kevin Clifford on January 29,
2015, and served all of the defendants by publication. The trial court
appointed a GAL, who accepted service of process on behalf of Elena
Rodionova, Fedor Rodionov, Valentina Rodionova, and the Clifford Family
Revocable Trust. None of the defendants timely filed an answer. Kevin
Clifford, however, filed a motion to quash service of process. On March 9,
2015, the trial court denied the motion to quash, but extended the deadline to
file an answer to April 1, 2015.
Kevin Clifford moved to reconsider the denial of his motion to quash,
moved to strike certain statements in the objection to his motion to quash, and
filed a pleading purporting to provide notice of his intent to appeal. None of the
defendants, meanwhile, filed an answer by April 1, and Fannie Mae moved for
the entry of default. The trial court denied all pending motions, but “in view of
the reconsideration request,” it again extended the deadline for filing an answer
to May 1, 2015, stating that “[t]his is the final extension.”
Again, none of the defendants filed an answer or appearance. On May 1,
2015, however, Kevin Clifford filed a motion “for a more definite statement,”
claiming that language used in the complaint was ambiguous. On May 6,
2015, the trial court entered default against each of the defendants. Both
Kevin Clifford and Elena Rodionova moved for an extension of time in which to
file motions for reconsideration and to strike the defaults. They did not,
however, file any motions to strike the defaults. We note that Superior Court
Rule 42 contains no specific deadline by which a motion to strike a default
must be filed. With their motions, they submitted affidavits, purportedly
pursuant to Rule 42, asserting that they are self-represented, that they thought
Kevin Clifford’s prior filings satisfied their obligations under the Superior Court
Rules, that Kevin Clifford had been “very ill” prior to and after the May 1, 2015
answer deadline, that Kevin Clifford had prepared appearance forms for himself
2
and Elena Rodionova that he had neglected to file, and that they were
attempting to secure legal representation. At no point in the affidavits did they
articulate their “defense[s] and the facts on which the defense[s] [were] based.”
Super. Ct. R. 42(a). The trial court denied the motions, finding that its orders
extending the answer deadline and defaulting the defendants were “clear,
reasonable, and appropriate,” and that “an extension of time for another
reconsideration request is not warranted based on the prior orders.”
In November 2016, Fannie Mae filed a motion to substitute the plaintiff
for it on the basis that it had assigned its rights under the relevant mortgage to
the plaintiff. We note that the record on appeal does not include a full copy of
the motion. See Bean, 151 N.H. at 250. The trial court granted the motion.
Subsequently, the plaintiff moved for the entry of final judgment. See
Super. Ct. R. 42(d). Kevin Clifford and Elena Rodionova objected, requesting
that the trial court vacate the default judgments. They submitted affidavits
claiming, without specification, that they believed “a number of allegations
made by the Plaintiff in the original petition are untrue and misleading.”
Separately, they moved to dismiss, arguing that they had recently discovered
evidence that the plaintiff lacks standing to foreclose upon their mortgage. At
the hearing on the motions, counsel for the plaintiff emphasized that it had not
yet commenced any foreclosure, that the complaint merely sought authority to
serve future foreclosure notices directed to Fedor Rodionov and Valentina
Rodionova upon the GAL, and that the defendants could seek to enjoin any
future foreclosure, and to raise any defenses to foreclosure, should the plaintiff
commence a foreclosure. The trial court denied the motion to dismiss on the
basis that the defendants had already been defaulted, and granted the motion
for the entry of final judgment, ruling that “[a]ny notices of foreclosure . . . that
would otherwise be sent to Fedor Rodionov and Valentina Rodionova, may
instead be served upon the [GAL], . . . as well as Kevin Clifford, Elena
Rodionova, and the Clifford Family Revocable Trust.”
Kevin Clifford and Elena Rodionova subsequently moved to set aside the
final decree and for a new trial pursuant to RSA 526:1, arguing once again that
they had discovered evidence that the plaintiff lacked standing to foreclose.
They further argued that they were only in “technical default,” that they were
not in “substantial default,” and that they were entitled, therefore, to present a
defense. The trial court denied the motion, observing that the “assertions in
the motion are extensions of the arguments made at the” hearing on the
motion for the entry of final judgment, and that there was no basis to set the
decree aside or grant the defendants a new trial. The trial court denied a
subsequent motion for reconsideration, and this appeal followed.
Upon this record, we cannot say that the trial court unsustainably
exercised its discretion or erred as a matter of law by not vacating the defaults.
3