THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Original
No. LD-2018-0007
SALOMON’S CASE
Argued: November 27, 2018
Opinion Issued: January 23, 2019
Elizabeth M. Murphy, assistant disciplinary counsel, on the brief and
orally, for the attorney discipline office.
Upton & Hatfield, LLP, of Portsmouth (Russell F. Hilliard on the brief and
orally), for the respondent.
DONOVAN, J. On June 5, 2018, the Supreme Court Professional
Conduct Committee (PCC) filed a petition recommending that the respondent,
Craig N. Salomon, be disbarred. We order the respondent disbarred.
I. Background
A. Haase Matter
The PCC found the following facts. The Attorney Discipline Office (ADO)
received two unrelated complaints regarding the respondent. The first complaint
(hereinafter, the Haase matter) led to an investigation of the respondent’s
representation of Deborah Fogg during and after her divorce from George Fogg.
The divorce was finalized in 2009 and the final divorce agreement included, inter
alia, the following: (1) Ms. Fogg would obtain possession of the marital property
in Seabrook (the Fogg property); (2) she agreed that she owed Mr. Fogg $22,350;
(3) she would convey a first mortgage to Mr. Fogg for that amount; and (4) the
$22,350 was payable within eighteen months. Ms. Fogg planned to sell the
property and use the proceeds to pay Mr. Fogg. At the time the divorce was
finalized, Ms. Fogg also owed the respondent $12,000 in attorney’s fees and
granted the respondent a second mortgage on the Fogg property in the amount
of $12,000 to guarantee the payment. Both of these mortgages were recorded.
Following the divorce, the respondent continued to provide assistance to
Ms. Fogg by helping her to find a buyer or a developer to purchase the Fogg
property. The respondent never billed Ms. Fogg for his efforts relating to the
Fogg property, nor is there evidence that the respondent asked Ms. Fogg to
execute a fee agreement for his services in this regard. The respondent testified
that he had intended to put a future advances clause in the $12,000 mortgage
instrument as security for future legal fees, but had forgotten to do so.
After the divorce was finalized, the respondent contacted a friend and
client, Dale Wood, to advise him of the settlement. The respondent persuaded
Wood’s company, Pan American Fund, LLC, to accept an assignment of the
second mortgage in exchange for a payment from Pan American Fund to the
respondent. The respondent used information obtained through his
representation of Ms. Fogg, including appraisals and other non-public
information the respondent obtained during his representation, to negotiate the
assignment of the second mortgage and, thus, to obtain his attorney’s fees
prior to the sale of the Fogg property.
Shortly thereafter, the respondent sought a $22,350 advance from Pan
American Fund. He testified that he planned to use the money to purchase the
mortgage issued to Mr. Fogg. He then planned to have Ms. Fogg execute a
mortgage to the respondent in the amount of $22,350, and he intended to
assign that second mortgage to Pan American Fund, so that Pan American
Fund could be in the first position to foreclose on the property if Ms. Fogg was
unable to sell it or otherwise failed to fulfill her obligations.
The respondent’s file included a proposed assignment of the $22,350
mortgage from Ms. Fogg to the respondent. The third page of the document
contained a signature that appeared to be Ms. Fogg’s, but was never dated,
witnessed, or recorded and Ms. Fogg testified that she did not recall signing the
document nor did she recall being apprised of the respondent’s plan to buy out
her ex-husband’s mortgage.
Pan American Fund advanced the respondent the full $22,350 to buy out
the mortgage even though the respondent testified that it was never his
intention to offer the full-face amount of the mortgage to Mr. Fogg. When
asked what the parties intended with respect to any money earned by a
discounted buy-out of Mr. Fogg, the respondent testified that he did not know.
The respondent then offered to buy out Mr. Fogg for less than the full value of
the mortgage. Mr. Fogg declined to accept the offer.
2
Thereafter, the respondent negotiated with Wood to turn the $22,350
into a personal loan, creating an obligation in that amount plus interest to Pan
American Fund. The record reflects that when the respondent signed the
promissory note, he identified the Fogg property as security for the loan of
$22,350.
Subsequently, Pan American Fund assigned to Irving Haase/Heirs, LLC
both the $12,000 mortgage and the respondent’s $22,350 loan. Haase believed
that those amounts were secured by mortgages filed against the Fogg property.
In 2013, Haase contacted the respondent to have him initiate the process of
collecting on the notes, which were past due. Unbeknownst to Haase or the
respondent, Ms. Fogg had quitclaimed the deed to her property to Mr. Fogg to
satisfy her debt to him.
The respondent represented Haase/Heirs, LLC in foreclosure proceedings
against the Fogg property which was now owned by Mr. Fogg. In November
2013, the respondent sent a letter to Mr. Fogg demanding payment of principal
and interest in the amount of $47,891.13. Mr. Fogg notified the respondent
that he contested the amount and requested documentation supporting the
demand. The respondent did not provide documentation. Formal foreclosure
proceedings were initiated in December 2013.
Mr. Fogg retained an attorney who communicated with the respondent.
A settlement agreement was ultimately reached that recognized that the only
mortgage eligible for foreclosure was the second mortgage for $12,000 that the
respondent had assigned to Pan American Fund.
B. Florida Matter
The second unrelated complaint against the respondent was received by
the ADO in October 2014 from an attorney at a law firm in Florida who filed on
behalf of HPC U.S. Fund 1, L.P. and HPC U.S. Fund 2, L.P. and its authorized
representative, Mr. Brinke. This matter involves the respondent’s
representation of Blackport Investment Group, LLC, which was created and
retained by HPC U.S. Fund 1, L.P. and HPC U.S. Fund 2, L.P. The HPC entities
are holding companies of German-based investment vehicles that hold real
estate interests throughout the United States. Blackport managed these
interests for HPC.
Wood was Blackport’s asset manager representative. The respondent
previously represented Wood individually and has represented companies,
including Blackport, of which Wood was an owner, member, or manager. Wood
and the respondent had a lengthy personal and professional relationship.
HPC initiated proceedings in the United States District Court for the
Southern District of Florida concerning Wood’s mismanagement of HPC’s
3
funds, and alleged that Wood had misappropriated approximately $10,000,000.
The federal court issued a temporary restraining order followed by a
preliminary injunction, entered on September 4, 2013, against a number of
defendants, including Wood. The preliminary injunction prohibited Wood or
“any and all persons acting under Defendant’s direction or control” from taking
any action with respect to any property interests held by HPC. The prohibition
included transferring or secreting any property interests or liquid assets they
held as a result of the transfer, sale, or conveyance of HPC’s property interests.
During this time frame, the respondent began to represent Blackport in
the sale of property in Idaho, which was largely owned by HPC. The
respondent contacted North Idaho Title, the company that was handling the
purchase and sale of the Idaho property, and conducted some preliminary work
on behalf of Blackport. Wood was one of the respondent’s contacts for
Blackport. However, as the parties moved towards a possible closing date,
Wood informed the respondent via e-mail about the injunction issued by the
federal court, which prohibited Wood from having any involvement in the
conveyance of any property interests of HPC. In fact, Wood explicitly informed
the respondent that, because of the injunction, Wood was not authorized to
sign on behalf of Blackport for the sale of the property.
Thereafter, the closing was dependent on determining who was
authorized to sign on behalf of the seller. Despite his knowledge of the
injunction, the respondent informed North Idaho Title that Wood could sign on
behalf of Blackport, and the transaction closed in November 2013. The
respondent testified that he advised North Idaho Title that Wood had authority
because Wood had told him that Wood’s lawyer advised Wood to sign on behalf
of Blackport, to protect the minority owner’s interest in the property.
Following the sale of the property, the proceeds were deposited in the
respondent’s escrow account. The respondent did not notify HPC or its counsel
that he was holding funds governed by the preliminary injunction. Instead, the
respondent disbursed those funds at the direction of Wood, including the
payment of the respondent’s attorney’s fees. Approximately two weeks after the
disbursement, $51,970 was returned to the respondent’s trust account and
disbursed to a different entity under the direction of Wood. Wood authorized
the respondent to keep an additional $3,000 in attorney’s fees.
In January 2014, HPC, through their attorneys, discovered that the
property in Idaho had been conveyed without their knowledge. HPC initiated
contempt proceedings in federal court against Wood. The proceedings were
ultimately broadened to include a third-party contemnor claim against the
respondent, who received notice and appeared before the court on one
occasion. The matter was continued, and the respondent did not subsequently
appear at any further proceedings.
4
The federal court found that the respondent had violated the preliminary
injunction. In a September 2014 order, the magistrate found that Wood and
the respondent “were aware of the injunction and had the ability to comply with
it, but chose not to do so.” After the federal court adopted the magistrate’s
report, HPC filed a motion for judgment and an award of attorney’s fees. The
respondent filed an objection. In June 2015, the court ordered that Wood and
the respondent were jointly and severally liable to HPC for $301,874.70 in
contempt damages, $135,739.50 in attorney’s fees, and $4,672.70 in costs.
After receiving these two complaints ― regarding the Haase and Florida
matters ― the ADO requested that the chair of the hearing committee appoint a
hearing panel. See Sup. Ct. R. 37A(III)(b)(4). Following a hearing, the panel
found that the respondent violated numerous rules of the New Hampshire
Rules of Professional Conduct in both matters. The PCC agreed with the
hearing panel and recommended that the respondent be disbarred.
II. Analysis
The respondent argues that there is insufficient evidence to support a
finding by clear and convincing evidence that he violated the Rules of
Professional Conduct in either matter. Furthermore, the respondent contends
that if we agree with the PCC that he violated several Rules, we should impose
an alternative sanction to disbarment, which would allow the respondent to
continue practicing law at a private law firm with oversight with an agreement
to retire from the practice of law in 2020.
In attorney discipline cases, we defer to the PCC’s factual findings if
supported by the record, but retain ultimate authority to determine whether,
on the facts found, a violation of the rules governing attorney conduct has
occurred and, if so, the sanction. O’Meara’s Case, 164 N.H. 170, 176 (2012).
We first consider whether there is sufficient evidence in the record to support
the PCC’s findings by clear and convincing evidence that the respondent
violated the Rules. Sup. Ct. R. 37A(III)(d)(2)(C).
A. Rules Violations: Haase Matter
Regarding the Haase matter, the PCC found that the respondent violated
Rules 1.7, 3.1, 4.1, and 8.4.
As an initial matter, the respondent justifies his actions relating to nearly
all of the rule violations in this matter on the basis that, during the time of the
alleged misconduct, he mistakenly believed that the $12,000 mortgage on the
Fogg property had a future advances clause that entitled him to the amount
equal to that secured by both mortgages on the property. He acknowledges
that the mortgage had no future advances clause, but nonetheless claims that
the $12,000 mortgage on the property was supposed to include a future
5
advances clause, which he contends would have obligated Ms. Fogg to pay up
to $22,350 for legal services he allegedly provided researching the sale and
potential development of the property. The respondent implicitly maintains
that this mistaken belief explains why he signed a promissory note and listed
the Fogg property as the security for the loan of $22,350 by Pan American
Fund. The PCC did not find the respondent’s explanation credible.
Ms. Fogg testified that she did not agree to a mortgage for more than
$12,000. The evidence presented to the PCC supports her testimony because
there is no evidence that the respondent invoiced Ms. Fogg for his post-divorce
work relating to the property and there is no written fee agreement defining the
terms of the respondent’s representation. Although the respondent’s testimony
conflicted with the other evidence presented, “as a fact-finding tribunal, the
PCC was at liberty to resolve any conflict in the evidence and to accept or reject
such portions of the testimony as it saw fit.” O’Meara, 164 N.H. at 178
(quotation and brackets omitted). We defer to the PCC’s finding that the
respondent’s testimony was not credible and we agree that the record does not
support the respondent’s assertion that he believed that the $12,000 mortgage
included a future advances clause.
1. Rule 1.7
Rule 1.7 provides, in relevant part, that:
[A] lawyer shall not represent a client if the representation involves
a concurrent conflict of interest. A concurrent conflict of interest
exists if:
(1) the representation of one client will be directly adverse to
another client; or
(2) there is a significant risk that the representation of one or
more clients will be materially limited by the lawyer’s
responsibilities to another client, a former client or a third
person or by a personal interest of the lawyer.
The PCC found that the respondent violated this rule when he
represented both Ms. Fogg, who had an interest to sell the marital property,
and Pan American Fund, an entity interested in purchasing the property. The
evidence supporting this finding is clear and convincing. The respondent
contends that there was no conflict because his clients had parallel interests.
We disagree. Based upon the record, we agree with the PCC’s inference that
Ms. Fogg wanted to sell her property at a maximum value ― she had to pay Mr.
Fogg within eighteen months and would have wanted to retain any excess
proceeds earned by the sale. In contrast, Pan American Fund was considering
purchasing the property, and the PCC reasonably inferred that it would seek
6
the lowest possible purchase price. Thus, the interests of Ms. Fogg and Pan
American Fund were in conflict. See Boyle’s Case, 136 N.H. 21, 24 (1992)
(finding a violation of Rule 1.7 where a fundamental conflict existed between
the respondent’s role as guardian ad litem for the children and his role as
advocate for their father in a criminal matter). The respondent’s representation
of his clients was also limited by his personal interest to obtain the $22,350
amount he purportedly believed he had earned. Thus, there is ample evidence
in the record that supports the PCC’s finding by clear and convincing evidence
that the respondent violated Rule 1.7.
2. Rule 3.1
Rule 3.1 provides that “[a] lawyer shall not bring or defend a proceeding,
or assert or controvert an issue therein, unless there is a basis in law and fact
for doing so that is not frivolous, which includes a good faith argument for an
extension, modification or reversal of existing law.”
The record supports the PCC’s finding by clear and convincing evidence
that, when the respondent brought the foreclosure action against Mr. Fogg
demanding a sum of money, he knew that he had no legal or factual basis to do
so. The respondent initiated a foreclosure action against Mr. Fogg demanding
$47,891.13. The respondent testified that he did not conduct a title search of
the property or review the mortgage he received from Ms. Fogg prior to
executing the foreclosure