THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0641, State of New Hampshire v. Dana
Avery, the court on October 21, 2020, issued the following order:
Having considered the parties’ briefs and the record submitted on appeal,
we conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R.
18(1). The defendant, Dana Avery, appeals his convictions on two felony counts
of using computer services for a prohibited purpose. See RSA 649-B:4, I
(2016). On appeal, he argues that the Superior Court (Colburn, J.) erred by
denying his motions to dismiss the charges for due process and speedy trial
violations and by denying his motion for a directed verdict. We affirm.
I. Motions to Dismiss
The following facts are relevant to our review. The defendant was first
arrested for the charged conduct on July 21, 2017, and was indicted by the
grand jury on September 19. The original indictments alleged that, between
July 11 and 21, the defendant “knowingly used Craigslist, a computer online
service, in an attempt to solicit a person he believed to be a child to meet him”
so that they could engage in certain sexual activity.
The court held a dispositional conference on January 3, 2018, at which it
scheduled the final pre-trial conference for April 27 and jury selection for May
7. In March, the defendant’s original attorney withdrew from the case after the
defendant retained his current attorney. The defendant’s current attorney
entered an appearance on April 13 and filed a motion for a continuance. The
trial court granted the motion, but required the defendant to submit a waiver of
his speedy trial rights. The defendant did so on April 27. Thereafter, the court
held another dispositional conference on May 24, and rescheduled the final
pre-trial conference for October 18 and jury selection for October 29.
Six days before jury selection, the State entered a nolle prosequi on the
original indictments. On the indictments, the prosecutor wrote that nolle
prosequi was entered “due to defective indictment.” The State brought two new
indictments on November 20, and jury selection was rescheduled for June 17,
2019. The new indictments alleged that the defendant “knowingly used Yahoo
email service in an attempt to solicit ‘lizzynh13,’ a person he believed to be a
child under the age of 16, to commit sexual penetration” as defined by RSA
chapter 632-A.
On April 15, 2019, the defendant moved to dismiss the new indictments,
arguing that the delay in bringing him to trial violated his speedy trial and due
process rights. On June 13, the trial court denied the defendant’s motion
without prejudice to his renewal of the motion following trial, if he was
convicted. The defendant’s jury trial took place on June 26 and 27, after which
the jury convicted him of both charges. The defendant subsequently renewed
his motion to dismiss.
The trial court denied the renewed motion. The court found that the
delay between the defendant’s July 21, 2017 arrest and June 17, 2019 jury
selection was presumptively prejudicial. Having found the delay to be
presumptively prejudicial, the court then examined the reason for the delay,
the defendant’s assertion of his right to a speedy trial, and the prejudice to the
defendant. After considering all of the relevant factors, the court concluded
that the defendant was not denied his right to a speedy trial. In addition, the
trial court found that the defendant’s due process claim lacked merit because
he had “failed to articulate any actual prejudice” from the delay in prosecution
in the case. This appeal followed.
We first consider whether the trial court erred by denying the defendant’s
motions on speedy trial grounds. We address his arguments under the State
Constitution, and cite federal opinions for guidance only. State v. Ball, 124
N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983). We defer to the trial court’s factual findings unless
those findings are clearly erroneous, and consider de novo the court’s
conclusions of law with respect to those factual findings. State v. Allen, 150
N.H. 290, 292 (2003).
To determine whether a defendant’s right to a speedy trial has been
violated under the State Constitution, we apply Barker v. Wingo, 407 U.S. 514,
530 (1972), which requires that we balance the following factors: (1) the length
of the delay; (2) the reason for the delay; (3) the defendant’s assertion of his
right to a speedy trial; and (4) the prejudice to the defendant. State v. Brooks,
162 N.H. 570, 581 (2011). The length of the delay must be presumptively
prejudicial to trigger consideration of the other factors. Id.; see State v. Allen,
150 N.H. 290, 294 (2003) (stating that when defendant is charged with
misdemeanor and not jailed, pre-trial delay of six months is presumptively
prejudicial).
The threshold inquiry in the speedy trial analysis is the length of the
period of delay. Brooks, 162 N.H. at 581. Here, the parties agree and the trial
court found that the delay in this case was presumptively prejudicial. The
defendant contends that because the delay was presumptively prejudicial, the
trial court erred by denying his first motion to dismiss without prejudice
without considering the remaining Barker factors. We conclude that the trial
court did not err in this respect. “[M]ost speedy trial claims . . . are best
considered only after the relevant facts have been developed at trial.” United
2
States v. MacDonald, 435 U.S. 850, 858 (1978). This is particularly so when,
as in the defendant’s first motion to dismiss, the defendant has not articulated
any specific prejudice from the delay in bringing him to trial. See id.
The second Barker factor requires that we assess why the delay
occurred, which party is responsible for it, and how much weight to give the
delay. The defendant does not challenge the trial court’s finding that 14
months of the delay between his arrest and the jury selection is not
attributable to the State (eight months is not attributable to either side and six
months is attributable to the defendant’s decision to seek new counsel and
move for a continuance).
The trial court also found that the 28-day delay between the State’s entry
of nolle prosequi on the first set of indictments and the defendant’s re-
indictment was not counted for the purposes of the second Barker factor. The
trial court determined that, although some of the delay between the
defendant’s re-indictment in November 2018 and the jury selection in June
2019 was attributable to the State’s decision not to prosecute the original
indictments, most of it was attributable “to the typical scheduling practice of
the court system.” In light of that finding and because the court did not find
that the State acted in bad faith, the court did not weigh the delay between the
defendant’s re-indictment and the jury selection heavily against the State.
The defendant does not challenge the trial court’s finding that most of
the delay between his re-indictment and the jury selection was attributable to
the court system. Rather, he asserts, in effect, that the record compels a
finding that the State acted in bad faith and, therefore, that the delay should
have weighed heavily against the State. We disagree.
The power to enter a nolle prosequi exists in the prosecuting officer; the
court has no right to interfere in its exercise. Allen, 150 N.H. at 293. “The
State’s discretion, however, is not unlimited, for the trial courts are empowered
to curb that discretion where it is used to inflict confusion, harassment, or
other unfair prejudice upon a defendant.” Id. In the absence of bad faith on
the part of the State in entering nolle prosequi, we have held that the period of
time between the entry of nolle prosequi and the institution of new criminal
charges is excluded when calculating the length of the delay. Id.
Here, the trial court credited the State’s assertion that the original
indictments were defective in that they would not match the available proof at
trial. Such a defect is a permissible reason for entering a nolle prosequi. Id.
(“The State may enter a nolle prosequi for various reasons, and we have found
it permissible to nolle pross a case where the evidence will not sustain the
charge as alleged.”). The trial court specifically found no evidence that the
State entered the nolle prosequi so as to gain an improper tactical advantage
over the defendant or to harass him or inflict confusion. Under these
3