THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0636, In the Matter of Cassandra
Napolitano and Aaron Napolitano, the court on September 4,
2020, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
We vacate and remand.
The respondent, Aaron Napolitano (father), appeals orders of the Circuit
Court (Lemire, J.) granting a request of the petitioner, Cassandra Schaffer
f/k/a Cassandra Napolitano (mother), to relocate the parties’ child to Virginia,
see RSA 461-A:12 (Supp. 2019), on the basis that the father had not filed a
written objection within “the 10 day responsive pleading period,” and denying
the father’s motions for reconsideration and for late entry of his objection. The
father argues in part that the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion
by denying his motions to reconsider and to allow late entry of his objection
after it had treated the mother’s pleading, which her counsel had expressly
entitled a “petition,” as a “motion,” and had applied the responsive pleading
deadline applicable to motions. See Fam. Div. R. 1.26(E). We agree.
RSA 461-A:12 generally prohibits a parent, at any time after a divorce or
parenting petition has been filed, from relocating a residence in which a child
resides at least 150 days per year unless a court order authorizes the
relocation, the relocation is within the child’s school district or results in the
child living closer to the other parent, or the relocation is necessary to protect
the safety of the child or parent. See RSA 461-A:12, I, II, II-a. The statute
entitles the other parent to reasonable notice prior to the relocation and to a
hearing on relocation upon request. See RSA 461-A:12, III, IV. The statute
places the initial burden on the parent seeking to relocate to demonstrate that
the relocation is for a legitimate purpose and that the proposed location is
reasonable. See RSA 461-A:12, V. If the relocating parent satisfies that
burden, the burden shifts to the other parent to prove that the proposed
relocation is not in the child’s best interest. See RSA 461-A:12, VI; see also In
the Matter of St. Pierre & Thatcher, 172 N.H. 209, 221-22 (2019).
Family Division Rule 2.3 requires that all domestic relations matters be
commenced by the filing of a “petition.” Fam. Div. R. 2.3(A). The rule requires
that “[t]he subject matter of the petition, such as petition for divorce, . . . be
stated in the title of the petition.” Fam. Div. R. 2.3(D). The rule applies not
only to new domestic relations matters, but to new disputes arising between
parties following the issuance of a final decree in a domestic relations case,
such as a post-divorce dispute over parenting rights and obligations. See Fam.
Div. R. 2.3(I). Upon the filing of a petition by one party, the trial court is
required to prepare a “Notice to Respondent” that notifies the opposing party of
the petition and to attach the notice and an appearance form to the petition.
See Fam. Div. R. 2.4(B). The petitioning party is then required to effectuate
formal service of the notice, petition, and appearance form unless the opposing
party has accepted service. See id. Once the opposing party has been served,
the opposing party must file a written appearance within fifteen days of receipt
of the notice in order to participate in the case, and may file a responsive
pleading within the timeframe set forth in the