THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0720, Joseph Kelly & a. v. Pine Trail
Cottages Condominium Association & a., the court on May 6,
2021, issued the following order:
Having considered the opening and reply briefs of plaintiff Glen Schaff,
the brief of defendants Pine Trail Cottages Condominium Association
(Association), Dennis J. Marcucci, and Elizabeth McKinley, and the record
submitted on appeal, the court concludes that a formal written opinion is
unnecessary in this case. Schaff appeals an order of the Superior Court
(O’Neill, J.), issued after a bench trial, denying his requests for specific
performance of his settlement agreement with the Association and an award of
attorney’s fees. We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand.
I. Facts
Schaff has owned unit 15 at Pine Trail Cottages on Lake Winnipesaukee
since 2004. When he purchased his unit, he was unaware that the septic
alarm was located underneath his porch. He did not become aware of that fact
until approximately six years after the purchase when the alarm began
sounding.
Because Schaff complained about the noise, sometime between 2009 and
2011, the control box for the alarm was moved to the outside back wall of his
porch, near the electric meter and circuit breaker box that were already there.
The electric meter services the electricity to the dock, the septic pumps, and
the septic alarm. Inside the circuit breaker box are two circuit breakers. One
circuit breaker, labeled “sewer,” services the septic system; the other circuit
breaker, labeled “Ice Eaters,” is a ground fault breaker that services the outlets
on the docks, which are needed to run the “ice eaters” on the main dock in the
off season.
According to Schaff, the septic alarm has interfered with his use of the
property because the alarm is “easily tripped and set[s] off a braying siren
multiple times a day.” In 2012, he and other unit owners sued the Association
and members of its board of directors (Board), including Marcucci and
McKinley, alleging that the defendants had violated the Association’s rules and
regulations. In 2014, Schaff and another plaintiff entered into a settlement
agreement (the Agreement) with the Association, Marcucci, McKinley, and
another defendant, which disposed of several claims. The remaining claims
were addressed in a bench trial.
The provision in the Agreement related to the septic alarm provides:
Septic Alarm – The Board . . . agree[s] that the May 2014
annual meeting will include an agenda item seeking a vote from all
unit owners on the issue of whether to replace the existing septic
alarm located on the deck of Unit 15 with a silent alarm system. If
a majority of the unit owners vote in favor of a silent alarm system,
the Board . . . agree[s] that the current septic alarm will be
replaced with a silent alarm system in a reasonable period of time
after the meeting (but no later than September 1, 2014) and that
the silent alarm system will be placed in a location other than Unit
15, all at the expense of the [Association]. If a majority of the unit
owners vote against a silent alarm system, the Board . . . agree[s]
that the Board shall cause the current alarm system on Unit 15
[to] be relocated to the tree located between Unit 15 and Unit 3
that currently has lights attached to it in a reasonable period of
time after the meeting, but no later than September 1, 2014. The
[Association] and Plaintiffs agree to share the costs of moving the
septic alarm system from Unit 15 to said tree on a 50/50 basis.
The Agreement also provides: “Changes to the Settlement Agreement - This
Settlement Agreement may not be changed or modified except by agreement in
writing signed by each of the Parties.”
As a result of the Agreement, the control box of the septic alarm was
removed from the outside back wall of Schaff’s porch to a wooden backboard,
located more than 20 feet from his unit. The electric meter was not moved, and
the circuit breaker box was replaced with a new one.
In 2016, Schaff sued the Association, alleging that the Association had
breached the Agreement provision related to removing the septic alarm from
his unit, had retaliated against him after entering into the Agreement, had
harassed him by fining him, had “illegally trespassed, excavated and installed
electrical equipment on” his unit, and had breached fiduciary duties “by failing
and/or refusing to uniformly and fairly enforce the Articles of the
Condominium Declaration” by engaging in certain activities.
According to Schaff, the Association moved for summary judgment in the
2016 case. Thereafter, the trial court dismissed the claims concerning the
alleged breach of the Agreement’s septic alarm provision without prejudice to
Schaff’s re-filing them in a motion to bring forward and reopen the 2012 case.
Specifically, according to the motion to bring forward, as to the breach of the
Agreement’s septic alarm provision, the trial court allowed “paragraphs 4
through 7 [and] 16 through 20” of the 2016 complaint to be re-filed in the
motion. The record submitted on appeal does not indicate whether the
2
remaining complaint allegations were resolved in the summary judgment
proceedings, at trial, or through settlement.
Schaff then moved to reopen the 2012 case, alleging that the Association,
Marcucci, McKinley, and another defendant had violated the Agreement’s
septic alarm provision by: (1) failing to record in the minutes of the
Association’s 2014 annual meeting that a majority of unit owners had voted in
favor of installing a silent septic alarm and, instead, recording that the vote
authorized the Board “to investigate the costs involved” with “updating the
sewer alarm” and to “use their discretion in determining the alarm type and
placement”; (2) failing to install a silent septic alarm; and (3) sending him an
invoice for $1,675 for relocating the septic alarm. Schaff asked the court to
order the Association to “remove any electrical box or equipment mounted on
Schaff’s home or within his limited common area . . . and to install a silent
alarm as voted upon by the majority of [unit] owners.” Schaff also asked for an
award of reasonable attorney’s fees as set forth in the Agreement.
There was no objection to the motion to reopen. Accordingly, the court
granted it. In his pretrial statement, Schaff purported to add claims that the
Association had breached the Agreement by: (1) failing to relocate the audible
septic alarm to a tree between units 15 and 3 and, instead, mounting it “on
new posts in front of [Schaff’s] home”; (2) failing to “remove the electrical
service for the Septic Alarm System and mount[ing] a new large grey electrical
box on [his] home”; and (3) “[c]hanging the alarm placement” without obtaining
his written approval as required by the Agreement.
Following a three-day bench trial, the trial court determined that Schaff
was not entitled to either specific performance of the Agreement’s septic alarm
provision or an award of attorney’s fees. Schaff filed a motion to reconsider,
which the trial court denied. He filed this appeal thereafter.
II. Analysis
A. Standard of Review
In reviewing a trial court decision rendered after a trial on the merits, we
uphold the trial court’s factual findings and rulings unless they lack
evidentiary support or are legally erroneous. O’Malley v. Little, 170 N.H. 272,
275 (2017). Our standard of review is not whether we would have ruled
differently, but whether a reasonable person could have reached the same
decision as the trial court based upon the same evidence. Id. “Thus, we defer
to the trial court’s judgment on such issues as resolving conflicts in the
testimony, measuring the credibility of witnesses, and determining the weight
to be given evidence.” Id. (quotation omitted). We review the trial court’s legal
rulings and its application of law to the facts de novo. See id.
3