THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0667, State of New Hampshire v. Michael
Cenat, the court on June 18, 2020, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
We affirm.
The defendant, Michael Cenat, appeals orders of the Superior Court
(Anderson, J.) denying his motion to suspend his state prison sentences
pursuant to RSA 651:20 (2016), and denying his motion for reconsideration.
He argues that the trial court erred by not aggregating the minimum terms of
consecutive sentences and by not considering the merits of his motion to
suspend as it pertained to sentences that he had not yet begun to serve.
RSA 651:20, I, provides, in relevant part:
I. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, except as
provided in subparagraphs (a), (b), and (c), the sentence to
imprisonment of any person may be suspended by the sentencing
court . . . in response to a petition to suspend sentence which is
timely brought in accordance with the limitations set forth below in
subparagraphs (a), (b), and (c).
(a) Any person sentenced to state prison for a
minimum term of 6 years or more shall not bring a
petition to suspend sentence until such person has
served at least 4 years or 2/3 of his minimum
sentence, whichever is greater, and not more
frequently than every 3 years thereafter. Any person
sentenced to state prison for a minimum term of less
than 6 years shall not bring a petition to suspend
sentence until such person has served at least 2/3 of
the minimum sentence, or the petition has been
authorized by the sentencing court. For the purposes
of this subparagraph:
. . .
(2) For consecutive terms of
imprisonment, the minimum terms of
each sentence shall be added to arrive at
an aggregate minimum term, and the
maximum terms of each sentence shall be
added to arrive at an aggregate maximum
term.
RSA 651:20, I(a). The suspension of a sentence under this statute is not
obligatory. State v. Surrell, 171 N.H. 82, 84 (2018). Rather, the trial court has
broad discretion in determining whether to suspend a sentence in order to
ensure that it “best meet[s] the constitutional objectives of punishment,
rehabilitation and deterrence.” Id. at 84-85 (quotation omitted).
We have held that the statute’s silence as to the factors that the court
should consider under RSA 651:20, I(a), coupled with its use of the permissive
“may,” demonstrates legislative intent to leave the decision as to what factors
or evidence to consider in determining whether to suspend a sentence to the
trial court’s discretion. Id. at 88. In exercising its discretion, the trial court
may consider the nature of the underlying offenses. Id. We have also held
that, in light of the discretionary nature of RSA 651:20, procedural due process
does not apply to sentence suspension proceedings and, thus, that a defendant
has no right to a hearing under RSA 651:20. State v. Duquette, 153 N.H. 315,
317 (2006). We review a trial court’s decision to deny a motion to suspend a
sentence for an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Id. at 316.
The record in this case reflects that the defendant was convicted of
robbery for pointing a gun at three people and demanding money. Prior to
sentencing, the defendant submitted certain false written statements
recommending leniency in his sentencing. On August 14, 2015, the trial court
sentenced the defendant to a stand-committed state prison sentence of six to
twelve years, with pretrial confinement credit of forty-five days. Thereafter, the
defendant was charged with, and pleaded guilty to, falsifying evidence and
conspiracy to falsify evidence based upon the false statements recommending
leniency. In December 2016, the trial court sentenced him to concurrent
stand-committed sentences of one to two years on the falsifying evidence and
conspiracy convictions (falsification sentences), to be commenced upon his
release from the robbery sentence.
On August 26, 2019, the defendant moved to suspend his sentences
pursuant to RSA 651:20, I(a). In ruling on the motion, the trial court
determined that the defendant had served more than two-thirds of his
minimum sentence for robbery, and that he was, therefore, eligible to seek
suspension of that sentence. However, the court also determined that the
defendant was not eligible to seek suspension of the falsification sentences
because he had not yet begun to serve them. As to the merits of the motion,
the trial court ruled that, although the defendant had “made many positive
strides since his December 2016 sentencing on the falsification charges,” the
2
violent nature of the robbery offense, coupled with the defendant’s conduct in
“forging . . . positive sentencing letters [in order] to mislead the sentencing
judge,” continued to justify the robbery sentence. Accordingly, the trial court
concluded that “this is not an appropriate case for the Court to exercise its
discretion under RSA 651:20 because the current sentence is well-suited to
address the goals of punishment and deterrence. Robbing strangers at
gunpoint is an extremely serious crime which warrants a strong sentence.”
The defendant moved for reconsideration, arguing in part that the
falsification sentences amounted to “consecutive terms of imprisonment” for
purposes of RSA 651:20, I(a)(2), and thus, that the court erred by not
aggregating them with the robbery sentence. Because, he claimed, he had
served two-thirds of his minimum sentences when aggregated,1 the defendant
argued that the trial court erred by not considering his motion as it pertained
to the falsification sentences. In denying the motion for reconsideration, the
trial court construed RSA 651:20, I(a)(2) so as to apply only to consecutive
sentences imposed in a single case, and not to “authorize or empower trial
courts to aggregate sentences issued in different cases at different times.”
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court’s interpretation of
RSA 651:20, I(a)(2) is erroneous as a matter of law because it is contrary to the
plain language of the statute, adds words to the statute that the legislature did
not see fit to include, leads to an absurd result, and is contrary to the statute’s
legislative history. The defendant further argues that the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion by refusing to consider his motion to
suspend as it pertained to the falsification sentences, and by denying his
motion for reconsideration. The State counters, in part, that any error of the
trial court in interpreting the statute and refusing to consider the motion as it
pertained to the falsification sentences was harmless. We agree with the State.
An error is harmless if it does not affect the outcome of the proceeding.
See Kessler v. Gleich, 156 N.H. 488, 494 (2007); cf. State v. Cooper, 168 N.H.
161, 168 (2015) (discussing prejudice prong of plain error test). RSA 651:20,
I(a)(2) concerns only when an inmate may file a petition to suspend, effectively
increasing the minimum time that the inmate must serve before seeking
1 In response to the defendant’s motion to modify his sentences, the New Hampshire
Department of Corrections calculated his earliest minimum parole eligibility date as August 30,
2021. The defendant asserts that this date accounts for both forty-five days of pretrial
confinement credit and ten months of “earned time credit” under RSA 651-A:22-a (2016).
Thus, he claims that August 30, 2021 reflects “an aggregate sentence of seven years, minus
earned time credit.” Because the State does not challenge this assertion, we will assume,
without deciding, that it is correct. Likewise, because the State does not challenge the claim
that the falsification sentences were “consecutive terms of imprisonment” under RSA 651:20,
I(a)(2), we will also assume that this assertion is correct. We note, however, that in the
sentencing forms for the falsification sentences, the trial court left blank the provision stating
that the sentences were “consecutive to charge ID(s) _____.” Instead, the forms specified that
the sentences would commence upon the defendant’s release from the robbery sentence.
3