THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0433, State of New Hampshire v. Jessica
Finch, the court on August 19, 2020, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
We affirm.
The defendant, Jessica Finch, appeals her conviction, following a jury
trial in Superior Court (Delker, J.), on charges of simple assault on a law
enforcement officer, see RSA 632:2-a (2016); RSA 651:6, I(g) (Supp. 2019),
resisting arrest, see RSA 642:2 (2016), and disorderly conduct, see RSA 644:2
(2016). She argues that the trial court erred by overruling her objection to a
statement made by the prosecutor during closing argument which, she asserts,
amounted to an impermissible argument of a fact not introduced into evidence.
The conduct giving rise to the charges in this case occurred during the
early morning hours of August 5, 2018, when the defendant observed her
companion being placed under arrest in the parking lot of a bar. The
defendant began yelling and screaming profanities at the police. After an
officer informed the defendant that she was under arrest for disorderly
conduct, she stated that she was not under arrest, refused to place her hands
behind her back, and when that officer and a second officer grabbed each of
her wrists and attempted to place her in handcuffs, she refused to cooperate,
freed her wrist from the first officer’s grasp, and struck the first officer with her
free hand. At that point, the second officer brought the defendant to the
ground where he placed her in handcuffs, and in the process, the defendant’s
face struck the ground causing injuries, including fractures to several bones.
At trial, several bystanders who had witnessed the incident corroborated
aspects of the officers’ testimony concerning the arrest, including their
testimony that the defendant struck the first officer.
The defendant testified. She did not dispute that she was yelling and
screaming obscenities at the officers when they were in the process of arresting
her companion. Nor did she dispute that she struck the first officer during the
course of her arrest, but she claimed that the strike was unintentional. With
respect to her facial injuries, the defendant offered testimony from two
physicians concerning the injuries, and testified that, as of May 16, 2019, the
date of her testimony, she was still receiving treatment for the injuries. No
witness other than the defendant, however, testified that she was receiving
ongoing medical treatment for her injuries.
The defendant argued that, due to the severity of her injuries, the officers had
exaggerated their descriptions of her behavior so as to justify their use of force.
Prior to the defendant’s cross-examination, the prosecutor approached
the bench, explained that the medical records the defendant had produced did
not include records from after November 2018, and stated that she intended to
cross-examine the defendant as to this fact. The defendant’s counsel objected,
explaining that she “had a lot of difficulties getting medical records [from the
defendant], mainly . . . because [the defendant] has memory issues, she would
forget appointments, and she would forget . . . to sign releases,” and arguing
that the issue “goes to attorney-client privilege” and “has nothing to do with”
the defendant, but “has to do with” defense counsel. The trial court overruled
the objection, and the defendant testified, on cross-examination, as follows:
Q Okay. And you spoke a little bit about – on direct about
how you’re still continuing treatment for injuries that you
received?
A Yes.
. . .
Q I don’t have any of those records [concerning the
defendant’s ongoing medical treatment], though, right?
. . .
A I am not sure what kind of records you have.
. . .
Q I only have records that end in November. I don’t have
anything after November, right?
A I’m not sure what records you have.
Q Did you sign releases to allow your attorney to receive
those records after November?
A I signed releases, yes. I don’t know from dates or whatnot.
I’m not sure. I – I don’t –
Q So you know you signed –
A But I’m not sure what records you would have and what
you don’t have.
Q So you know you signed releases to let –
A I know I signed releases for you to have my medical
records. Yes.
. . .
Q Did those releases include any records that you may have
had after November 2018?
A I’m not sure. I really – I really couldn’t tell you. I am not
sure. I do not know the answer.
2
During the State’s closing argument, the prosecutor addressed the
defendant’s alleged ongoing medical treatment as follows:
And you heard testimony that she has continued to receive
treatment for her injuries. And to be clear, the Defendant has no
burden to prove anything in this case. And the State does not have
to prove anything about her injuries. But the State does not have
records of this continued care from after November of 2018.
[Defense counsel]: Objection.
THE COURT: Overruled.
[Prosecutor]: Thank you.
And you didn’t hear from any of those doctors who have
continued to care for her today –
[Defense counsel]: Objection.
[Prosecutor]: – on the stand.
THE COURT: Overruled.
At no point during or immediately after the State’s closing argument did
the defendant articulate any specific reason for why this portion of the State’s
argument was objectionable. At the beginning of the following day, however,
the defendant’s counsel asked “to put a couple of things on the record”
regarding her objections to the cross-examination and to the State’s closing
argument. Specifically, the defendant’s counsel argued that the State’s inquiry
on cross-examination “burden-shifts to the Defense to sort of provide evidence
and to provide documentation to the State.” The defendant’s counsel then
argued that the line of questioning “prey[ed] . . . on the ignorance of the jury [as
to] public defenders, that we don’t just have one client, that we don’t have
unlimited resources, that we don’t . . . have the ability to continuously request
records, continuously track clients down to get signatures, to get records.”
Finally, the defendant’s counsel argued that the line of questioning made her a
witness because she had “an obligation to provide things to the State, not [her]
client,” and because her “client ha[d] no way of knowing when [she] did or what
[she] did or how much [she] did.” The trial court declined to change its ruling.
On appeal, the defendant challenges only the assertion during the State’s
closing argument that “the State does not have records of [the defendant’s]
continued [medical] care from after November of 2018.” According to the
defendant, the trial court erred by overruling her objection to this statement
because, she argues, the State never elicited testimony establishing that the
prosecutor did not possess medical records from after November 2018. Thus,
the defendant argues that the prosecutor improperly argued a fact not in
evidence, unfairly undermining her defense “that the police fabricated or
exaggerated her conduct” and inviting “the jury to draw an incriminating
inference both about [her] credibility and about the true extent of her injuries”
based upon the prosecutor’s unsworn testimony. The State counters that the
trial court did not err by overruling the objection because the jury could
reasonably have inferred from the evidence that the prosecutor did not, in fact,
3