THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0737, State of New Hampshire v. Mark
Heath, the court on November 16, 2021, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, we
conclude that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
defendant, Mark Heath, appeals his conviction, following a jury trial in the
Superior Court (Nicolosi, J.), on one count of second degree murder. See RSA
630:1-b, I(b) (2016). The defendant argues on appeal that the trial court erred
by: (1) admitting evidence of the defendant’s inconsistent statements
concerning his prior animal-cruelty conviction; and (2) precluding the
defendant from cross-examining the victim’s mother about her prior statements
regarding her use of makeup on the victim and involvement in the defendant’s
marijuana enterprise. We conclude that, even assuming that the trial court
erred with respect to either or both of the evidentiary rulings challenged on
appeal, the errors did not affect the verdict. Therefore, we affirm the
defendant’s conviction because any error was harmless beyond a reasonable
doubt.
The jury could have found the following facts. In December 2017, the
defendant lived in an apartment with his girlfriend and her two sons: the
victim, age two; and the victim’s older brother, age five. The victim’s mother
had recently separated from her husband, her two sons’ biological father, who
lived in an apartment upstairs with his uncle.
On December 11, 2017, the victim’s mother awoke at 7:30 a.m. and
drove her older son to school. She then briefly returned to the apartment,
checked in on the victim, and left for work at 8:40 a.m., arriving shortly before
9:00 a.m. Thereafter, only the defendant and the victim remained in the
apartment. At 10:17 a.m., the victim’s mother received a text from the
defendant with a picture of the victim lying on his bed amidst a bowl of cereal,
root beer, a mango, a fruit cup, and a sippy cup — all of which the victim had
taken from the kitchen and spread out on his bed.1 The caption to the text
from the defendant read: “I fell back asleep, woke up to take a piss, and this is
what [the victim’s] bed looks like.” After sending the text and image, the
1 A later search of the defendant’s phone verified that the picture was created and sent at 10:17
a.m.
defendant observed the victim “eating away” and noticed he spilled cereal on
his bed. While cleaning up the spill, the defendant also discovered that the
victim had made a “mess” in his diaper, which the defendant then proceeded to
change.
At approximately the same time, the victim’s father and his uncle, who
were upstairs in their apartment, heard a series of “loud bangs” come from the
victim’s room. The uncle stated the sound “shook the floor,” as if “somebody
had jumped off the bed and landed hard.” Shortly thereafter, the defendant
ran upstairs and knocked on the victim’s father’s door, asking for help because
the victim was not breathing. The victim’s father rushed downstairs, found the
victim unresponsive on his bed, and carried the victim up to the third floor,
where he performed CPR and instructed the defendant to call 911. The
defendant made the call at 11:19 a.m. and emergency responders arrived
approximately four minutes later.
When emergency responders arrived, the victim was unresponsive, with
no pulse, and although his airway was unobstructed, he was not breathing.
The emergency responders also observed significant bruising to his face, torso,
and extremities. The victim was transported to the hospital where he was
pronounced dead.
An autopsy revealed that the victim’s death was caused by blunt impact
injuries to his abdomen, resulting in severe internal bleeding. Based on the
severity of the internal injuries and the significant bruising to the victim, the
medical examiner concluded that the manner of death was a homicide. Police
subsequently arrested the defendant after finding him hiding in the basement
of his mother’s house. The State charged the defendant with two alternative-
theory counts of second degree murder, one count alleging the defendant
recklessly caused the victim’s death with extreme indifference to human life
and the other alleging the same conduct with a knowing state of mind. See
RSA 630:1-b, I (2016).
During the ensuing investigation, the police asked the victim’s mother
about the defendant’s use and sale of marijuana. Initially, the victim’s mother
admitted to being minimally involved with the defendant’s marijuana sales,
claiming to have spoken to a friend about the defendant’s sales on just one
occasion. However, at a later evidentiary hearing, when confronted with a
series of messages, the victim’s mother admitted to attempting to sell the
defendant’s marijuana to multiple friends. Citing, among others, New
Hampshire Rules of Evidence 403 and 404(b), the State filed a motion in limine
to exclude evidence of the victim’s mother’s prior statements about selling
marijuana. The defendant objected, arguing that the statements were
inconsistent and therefore relevant to the victim’s mother’s credibility and
2
consciousness of guilt. The trial court granted the motion, finding that the
probative value of the evidence was “not terribly great” because it related to a
collateral matter and was substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair
prejudice that “the jury may develop an improper bias against the witness
because of her bad acts.”
Prior to trial, the defendant moved in limine to preclude evidence of his
statements to police concerning his fifteen-year-old animal-cruelty conviction.
Specifically, during an interview with police, when asked about the prior
conviction, the defendant denied responsibility for the underlying offense of
killing a cat, instead claiming that he took the “fall” for someone else. The
State objected to the defendant’s motion, arguing that the defendant’s
statements were relevant to attack his credibility and show consciousness of
guilt. The trial court initially determined the evidence was inadmissible under
Rule 403, reasoning, in part, that the defendant did not “provide
misinformation or overtly lie, conduct which would have had substantially
more probative value.” The trial court further determined that the probative
value of the evidence was substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair
prejudice from the jury hearing evidence of a prior bad act.
The State moved for reconsideration, citing new evidence that, while the
defendant’s motion was pending, he stated during a jail telephone call that he
once killed a cat, but did so only in self-defense. The trial court granted the
motion for reconsideration, reasoning that, in light of the defendant’s
subsequent inconsistent statement, the “relative clarity of the lie” increases
“the probative value of this evidence exponentially” towards both the
defendant’s consciousness of guilt and credibility. The trial court reasoned
that “in light of the centrality” of those issues in the case, the probative value of
the evidence substantially outweighed any danger of unfair prejudice.
Accordingly, although the defendant did not testify at trial and evidence of the
conviction was not admitted, the State introduced evidence of the defendant’s
inconsistent statements surrounding the prior conviction through tape
recordings and a detective’s testimony.
Later, at trial, the defendant sought to introduce evidence of an October
2017 text message from the victim’s mother to the defendant, which stated: “If I
have to, I’ll put makeup on him, and we can bring him in,” in response to the
defendant informing the mother that the victim had hurt himself falling off his
bed. When confronted with evidence of this message at an evidentiary hearing,
the victim’s mother responded that she only offered to put makeup on the
victim because it was Halloween. In light of this prior statement, as well as
others downplaying her use of makeup on the victim, the defendant argued
that the text message was relevant to the victim’s mother’s credibility and
consciousness of guilt. The court ruled the evidence inadmissible under Rule
3