THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0399, State of New Hampshire v. Brian K.
Perry, the court on September 16, 2020, issued the following
order:
Having considered the parties’ briefs and the record submitted on appeal,
we conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R.
18(1). The defendant, Brian K. Perry, appeals his convictions, following a jury
trial in Superior Court (Bornstein, J.), on two counts of operating a vehicle after
having been certified as an habitual offender. See RSA 262:23 (Supp. 2019).
We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. In June 2017, the
defendant was certified as an habitual offender and, as such, was barred from
driving a motor vehicle. The defendant knew of his status. In the afternoon of
June 3, a Berlin police officer, who is familiar with the defendant and with his
girlfriend, saw the defendant drive a bright orange “Chevy Aveo” owned by the
defendant’s girlfriend. The defendant drove the vehicle in one direction while
the officer drove in the other direction. The officer looked right at the
defendant and testified that there was “no question in his mind” that the
defendant was driving. The defendant was wearing a mesh baseball cap, which
the officer had observed him wear on more than one occasion. The officer
knew that the defendant was certified as an habitual offender and that he was,
therefore, not authorized to drive. Accordingly, the officer called the Berlin
police department and relayed the information about the defendant driving.
At around midnight on June 9, the officer again encountered the vehicle
owned by the defendant’s girlfriend. This time, he saw the vehicle traveling
west on Green Street in Berlin. Although the officer could not see the face of
the driver, he believed that the driver was the defendant because he is familiar
with the defendant and because the driver wore the mesh baseball cap that the
officer had observed the defendant wear previously.
The officer saw the vehicle turn into the parking lot of a local
convenience store. By the time the officer arrived on the scene, the vehicle was
no longer running, its lights were off, and the vehicle was empty. A passerby
told the officer that the vehicle’s driver had walked up Hillside Avenue. The
officer placed a “boot” on the vehicle and began searching for the defendant,
but was unsuccessful.
The next morning, the officer drove to the defendant’s home and saw the
orange Chevy Aveo parked in the home’s driveway. The officer spoke with the
defendant’s girlfriend, who advised that the defendant was not home, and that
she had driven the vehicle the previous night. When asked if she had worn a
hat while driving, the defendant’s girlfriend said that she “had a hood on.” The
officer obtained a warrant for the defendant’s arrest, which the officer executed
in July 2018.
On appeal, the defendant first argues that the trial court erred when it
overruled his objection to the prosecutor’s closing argument. The arresting
officer testified that he initiated a call for services related to his pursuit of the
vehicle “just before midnight” on June 9, 2017. When asked whether he
verified to whom the vehicle belonged, the officer was shown “a call log for that
night,” and, after his recollection was refreshed, testified that the vehicle’s
owner was the defendant’s girlfriend and was the same vehicle he had seen the
defendant drive on June 3.
In his closing argument, the prosecutor stated that the jury could “verify”
the arresting officer’s testimony regarding the events of June 9 and June 10, by
“go[ing] to the call log.” The prosecutor told the jury that the arresting officer
testified, “after referencing his report and the call log[,] [t]hat at 2358, which is
11:58 p.m., on June 9th, he saw the suspicious vehicle.” Defense counsel
objected that the prosecutor was “reading verbatim from the dispatch log,”
which had not been entered into evidence. The prosecutor countered that he
was merely “summarizing testimony.” The trial court overruled the defendant’s
objection.
The defendant contends that “the prosecutor improperly bolstered the
testimony of a police officer by referencing a document that was not admitted
into evidence.” He argues that the prosecutor’s improper closing argument
requires reversal of his conviction.
Under New Hampshire law, “[a] prosecutor has great latitude in closing
argument to both summarize and discuss the evidence presented to the jury
and to urge the jury to draw inferences of guilt from the evidence.” State v.
Addison, 165 N.H. 381, 547 (2013) (quotation omitted). In deciding whether a
prosecutor’s closing argument requires reversal, we first determine whether the
challenged remarks amounted to improper advocacy. Id. To assess whether
the State advanced an improper argument, we consider the challenged remarks
in the context of the case. Id. at 548. We must be mindful that “[a]lthough
prosecutors may present their cases zealously, this latitude has its limits.” Id.
“Ultimately, determining the propriety of a prosecutor’s comments involves
balancing a prosecutor’s broad license to fashion argument with the need to
ensure that a defendant’s rights are not compromised in the process.” Id.
(quotation omitted).
2
If we conclude that the prosecutor’s argument amounted to improper
advocacy, we then determine whether the error requires reversal of the verdict.
Id. at 547. Making that determination entails balancing: (1) whether the
prosecutor’s misconduct was isolated or deliberate; (2) whether the trial court
gave a strong and explicit cautionary instruction; and (3) whether any
prejudice surviving the court’s instruction likely could have affected the
outcome of the case. Id. at 547-48. We will not overturn a trial court’s ruling
as to whether improper prosecutorial remarks warrant a mistrial or other
remedial action absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Id. at 549.
The defendant likens this case to State v. Lake, 125 N.H. 820 (1984). In
that case, defense counsel argued that the arresting officer “exaggerated his
observations to secure a conviction against the defendant” and that “when it
came to recollecting evidence that might be favorable to the defendant, . . . the
officer’s memory became ‘fuzzy.’” Lake, 125 N.H. at 821. To counter that
argument, the prosecutor stated in his closing argument that the officer’s
recollection of the evidence was “very precise because he reread his report
before testifying.” Id. at 822 (quotation and ellipsis omitted). We observed
that, in fact, “no police report was mentioned during trial,” and held that the
prosecutor’s comment was not a reasonable inference that could be drawn from
the facts proved. Id.
In the instant case, by contrast, the arresting officer had been shown the
call log during his testimony to refresh his recollection. Although the log was
not itself entered into evidence, the jury was aware that it existed and that it
was used to refresh the officer’s recollection. Moreover, even if we assume that
the prosecutor’s comment was improper, it was isolated and there is no
evidence that it was deliberately made. Under these circumstances, we
conclude that the prosecutor’s comment, even if improper, does not require
reversal of the defendant’s convictions.
The defendant next asserts that the trial court erred when it admitted a
certified record of his girlfriend’s convictions for theft by deception into
evidence only for impeachment purposes. Before trial, once notified that the
defendant intended to call his girlfriend as a witness, the State moved in limine
under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 609(a)(2) to admit into evidence for
impeachment purposes only her two March 2019 convictions for theft by
deception. The defendant did not object to the motion, and the trial court
granted it.
On the first day of trial, the trial court discussed the motion with
counsel:
THE COURT: Before I adjourn to do that, the State had also
filed a motion to impeach a witness with a prior criminal
conviction. Will the Defense be objecting to that if the
3