THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0442, State of New Hampshire v. Blake
Colella, the court on April 16, 2021, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. Following
a jury trial in Superior Court (Colburn, J.), the defendant, Blake Colella, was
convicted of witness tampering, see RSA 641:5, I(b) (2016), and was acquitted
of first degree assault, second degree assault, criminal threatening, and on two
counts of cruelty to animals, see RSA 631:1 (2016) (amended 2017); RSA 631:2
(2016) (amended 2017); RSA 631:4 (2016); RSA 644:8 (2016) (amended 2018,
2019).1 He appeals, arguing that the trial court erred in admitting evidence of
an alleged incident in Fall River, Massachusetts, (“Fall River conduct”). The
State counters that the trial court did not err in admitting this evidence and,
alternatively, that any error was harmless. We affirm.
I
The following facts and procedural history are taken from the record of
the hearing on the State’s motion in limine or from trial. The defendant’s first
and second degree assault, criminal threatening, and cruelty to animals
charges stemmed from his alleged conduct occurring on or about April 22,
2017. The witness tampering charge resulted from his conduct on August 16,
2018. In June 2019, the defendant went to trial on all of his charges.
Evidence of the Fall River conduct, allegedly occurring on April 19, 2017, was
admitted at trial.
Prior to trial, the court addressed the admissibility of the Fall River
conduct evidence in response to the State’s motion in limine. The court ruled,
over the defendant’s objection, that this evidence was intrinsic to the charged
conduct occurring on or about April 22, 2017, i.e., to the alleged conduct
underlying the first and second degree assault, criminal threatening, and
cruelty to animals charges. It also ruled in the alternative that the Fall River
conduct was admissible under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 404(b), “for
largely the same reasons” cited in its intrinsic evidence ruling, but also to
“understand why [the victim] would not have simply run away from [the]
defendant, [because] evidence of . . . the prior assaults committed upon [the
1 The defendant was also acquitted of the domestic-violence variants of first degree assault,
second degree assault, and criminal threatening. See RSA 631:1, :2, :4.
victim] by [the] defendant, would indeed [be] quite relevant. Viewed in this
light, the evidence tend[s] to prove, not necessarily [the] defendant’s state of
mind but rather [the victim’s].” (Quotation omitted.)
At trial, the following evidence was presented to the jury. On April 19,
2017, the victim drove to Plymouth, Massachusetts, picked up the defendant,
her then husband, and drove him to Fall River, where the Fall River conduct
allegedly occurred. According to the victim’s testimony: The defendant took the
victim’s cell phone and began searching it, telling her that he wanted to find
out if she had been cheating on him. After finding a male co-worker’s name in
the victim’s phone, the defendant accused her of cheating. The victim
attempted to explain that she did not cheat on the defendant, but the
defendant became “irate” and punched her in the arm so hard that her head
bounced off the driver’s-side window. She continued to drive, and the
defendant continued to scream at her. The victim eventually pulled the car
over, at which point the defendant punched her in the face three times. The
defendant then grabbed the victim by the throat, pushed her into the backseat,
and told her to get down so that no one would see her because her face was
bleeding. While confining the victim to the backseat of the car, the defendant
kept her cell phone, and he drove to her apartment in Nashua. The victim
testified that she did not leave her apartment that night or call the police
because she was afraid of the defendant, and he told her that if she called the
police, he was going to kill her.
On or about April 22, 2017, the defendant allegedly engaged in conduct
that resulted in the first and second degree assault, criminal threatening, and
cruelty to animals charges being brought against him in New Hampshire.
According to the victim’s testimony: That day, the defendant and the victim
went out to dinner and went shopping, where the defendant applied for a store
credit card. His application was denied, and he blamed the victim. After
returning to her apartment, the defendant told the victim to sit down in the
kitchen and not to move. He repositioned his watch so its face was on top of
his knuckles and told the victim that he was “going to cave [her] face in for
ruining his credit, [and] ruining his life.” When the victim’s cat walked into the
kitchen, the defendant told the victim that he was either going to “break [her]
cat’s neck and make [her] bury him,” or “brand [her] for what [she was].” The
victim pleaded with the defendant not to hurt her cat, but the defendant kicked
the cat, which “flew through the air” and “skidded into the living room.” Next,
the defendant grabbed the victim by the throat and choked her. He then told
her to stand up and take off her shirt. The defendant began carving letters into
her back with a kitchen knife, then pointed the knife at her and said, “if I stab
you . . . you’ll die in five minutes.” The incident stopped when the victim
begged the defendant to kill her. Neither she nor the defendant left the
apartment that night.
2
The next day, April 23, the defendant left in the victim’s car, and she
called the police “several hours” later. She was interviewed by the police, and
the defendant was subsequently arrested and was charged with first and
second degree assault, criminal threatening, and cruelty to animals. The
victim’s call to the police on April 23 was the first time she reported the alleged
incident on April 22 and also the first time she reported the alleged Fall River
conduct on April 19. The victim was confronted on cross-examination with her
delay in reporting, and she testified that she was afraid of the defendant and
what would happen if he knew she had called the police. As related to the Fall
River conduct, the jury heard that the charges brought by the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts were later dropped, apparently due to the victim’s lack of
cooperation. She testified that, in that case, she “claimed spousal privilege out
of fear and intimidation.”
Evidence was also adduced that the victim sent two letters to the New
Hampshire prosecutors, one in June 2018 and one on August 10, 2018, both
explaining that she did not want to participate in the case against the
defendant, that she was writing the letters of her own accord, and that her
reasons for writing the letters were “private.” However, the victim testified that
she wrote these letters because she was afraid that the defendant would hurt
her, or have “certain third parties” hurt her, if she testified against him, and
also that the defendant told her to write the letters.
On August 16, 2018, the defendant engaged the victim in a text message
exchange, which formed the basis for his witness tampering charge. The
exchange read:
Defendant: “My lawyer is going to eat you alive. Everything will
come out.”
Victim: “Such as?”
Defendant: “Every sick secret you have in front of the jury.”
Victim: “Okay, whatever those are.”
Defendant: “And I will have recorded everything.”
Victim: “My questioning you as my spouse, okay.”
Defendant: “You forgot everything I know.”
Victim: “Apparently I h[a]ve.”
Defendant: “And he’s getting all your records, every jail you’ve been
to.”
3