THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0273, Robert Gormley & a. v. Rough
Diamond Development, LLC & a., the court on March 10, 2020,
issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
plaintiffs, Robert and Laurie Gormley, appeal an order of the Superior Court
(Temple, J.) dismissing their action against the defendants, Rough Diamond
Development, LLC (Rough Diamond) and State Farm Fire & Casualty Co. (State
Farm), for damages related to the design and construction of their home, on
the ground that it is barred by the eight-year statute of repose, see RSA 508:4-
b (2010). We affirm.
The plaintiffs allege the following facts, which we accept as true for the
purposes of this appeal. In March 2009, the plaintiffs purchased a single-
family residence in Merrimack. The home had been renovated in 2008, and, in
early 2009, Rough Diamond built an addition to the property. In May 2009,
just two months after the plaintiffs bought the property, a fire destroyed the
addition. At the time, the plaintiffs had a homeowners’ insurance policy issued
by State Farm. State Farm covered the loss and engaged another contractor to
rebuild the addition as it had originally been constructed, based upon the
design prepared by Rough Diamond. During the construction, the plaintiffs
lived in a hotel. They returned to the home in the fall of 2009.
Since then, the floor joists supporting the addition have rotted and
deteriorated significantly. The rot, caused by high moisture and humidity
levels, has significantly weakened the overall strength of the joists. In addition,
the moisture and humidity have caused mold and fungus to grow on the joists.
The rot and mold have rendered the addition uninhabitable. The entire floor
assembly and crawl space must be reconstructed properly, with appropriate
humidity-level controls.
In June 2018, as a result of these alleged shortcomings, the plaintiffs
sued Rough Diamond for negligence and violations of the New Hampshire
Consumer Protection Act, see RSA ch. 358-A (2009 & Supp. 2019), and sued
State Farm for breach of contract. The defendants moved to dismiss on the
ground that the plaintiffs’ claims are barred by the eight-year statute of repose.
See RSA 508:4-b, I. The trial court granted the motion, finding that the latest
date on which the construction was substantially completed was December 21,
2009, and that the plaintiffs’ lawsuit filed more than eight years later was
barred by the statute of repose. In so ruling, the trial court rejected the
plaintiffs’ assertion that the statute of repose is unconstitutional as applied to
them because it violates their right to a remedy under Part I, Article 14 of the
State Constitution. However, the court granted the plaintiffs leave to amend
their complaint.
In their amended complaint, the plaintiffs alleged that they “did not
discover” the fact that their floor joists had “significantly rotted and
deteriorated” until “the fall of 2015.” In addition, they alleged that “after the
expiration of the limitations period in the applicable statute of repose,” Mrs.
Gormley discovered that she had “debilitating symptoms as a result of the mold
that has accumulated underneath the addition.” (Emphasis omitted.)
The defendants again moved to dismiss on statute of repose grounds.
The plaintiffs again argued that it was unconstitutional to apply the statute of
repose to their claims, and the trial court again rejected that argument. This
appeal followed.
In reviewing the trial court’s grant of a motion to dismiss for failure to
state a claim, our standard of review is whether the allegations in the plaintiffs’
pleadings are reasonably susceptible to a construction that would permit
recovery. Plaisted v. LaBrie, 165 N.H. 194, 195 (2013). We assume that the
plaintiffs’ well-pleaded allegations of fact are true and construe all reasonable
inferences in the light most favorable to them. Id. We then engage in a
threshold inquiry that tests the facts in the complaint against the applicable
law, and if the allegations do not constitute a basis for legal relief, we must
hold that granting the motion to dismiss was proper. See id.
On appeal, the plaintiffs argue that RSA 508:4-b, I, as applied to them,
deprives them “of due process under the state access to the courts provision in
the New Hampshire Constitution because it deprives [them] of a right to a
remedy.” We interpret this as an argument that applying RSA 508:4-b, I, to
their claims deprives the plaintiffs of their right to a remedy under Part I,
Article 14 of the State Constitution. To the extent that the plaintiffs may have
intended to make a different argument under the State Constitution, we
conclude that they have failed to develop it sufficiently for our review. See
Lennartz v. Oak Point Assocs., 167 N.H. 459, 464 (2015).
The plaintiffs assert only an as-applied challenge to RSA 508:4-b, I. As
such, their challenge “concedes that RSA 508:4-b, I, may be constitutional in
many of its applications, but contends that it is not so under the particular
circumstances of this case.” Id. at 462 (quotation and brackets omitted). “The
constitutionality of a statute involves a question of law, which we review de
novo.” Id. “Further, we presume statutes to be constitutional and we will not
declare one invalid except upon inescapable grounds.” Id.
2
RSA 508:4-b, I, provides:
Except as otherwise provided in this section, all actions to
recover damages for injury to property, injury to the person,
wrongful death or economic loss arising out of any deficiency in the
creation of an improvement to real property, including without
limitation the design, labor, materials, engineering, planning,
surveying, construction, observation, supervision or inspection of
that improvement, shall be brought within 8 years from the date of
substantial completion of the improvement, and not thereafter.
RSA 508:4-b, I, is a statute of repose. Big League Entm’t v. Brox Indus., 149
N.H. 480, 484 (2003). Unlike a statute of limitations, which generally begins to
run at the time of injury or discovery of the injury, a statute of repose usually
begins to run at the time of a defendant’s act. See id. at 483. Thus, statutes of
repose “extinguish a cause of action after a fixed period of time regardless of
when the action accrues, potentially barring a plaintiff’s suit before there has
been an injury or before the action has arisen.” Id.
“RSA 508:4-b functions as a statute of repose because it begins to run
from the date of substantial completion of the improvement, wholly
independent of any accrual of the cause of action.” Id. at 484 (quotation
omitted). Moreover, “the legislative findings and purpose clearly demonstrate
that the purpose of the statute is to relieve potential defendants from infinite
liability perpetuated by the discovery rule.” Id.; see Rankin v. S. St. Downtown
Holdings, 172 N.H. 500, 508 (2019); Laws 1990, 164:1.
We have held that a plaintiff must comply with both the statute of repose
and the applicable statute of limitations. Big League Entm’t, 149 N.H. at 484.
Thus, in a case involving a three-year statute of limitations, we “conclud[ed]
that the plaintiff’s claim must have been filed within three years of the accrual
of the cause of action but no later than eight years after substantial completion
of the project.” Id.
Part I, Article 14 of the State Constitution provides:
Every subject of this state is entitled to a certain remedy, by having
recourse to the laws, for all injuries he may receive in his person,
property, or character; to obtain right and justice freely, without being
obliged to purchase it; completely, and without any denial; promptly, and
without delay; conformably to the laws.
“The purpose of this provision is to make civil remedies available and to guard
against arbitrary and discriminatory infringements upon access to courts.”
Huckins v. McSweeney, 166 N.H. 176, 180 (2014). “The right to a remedy is
not a fundamental right, but is relative and does not prohibit all impairments
3