THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0461, State of New Hampshire v.
Christopher T. Dastrup, the court on November 16, 2020, issued
the following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
The defendant, Christopher T. Dastrup, appeals his conviction, following a jury
trial in Superior Court (Howard, J.), on four charges of indecent exposure and
lewdness for having exposed his genitals to children in a department store. See
RSA 645:1 (2016). On appeal, he argues that the trial court erred by: (1) not
suppressing, under the State and Federal Constitutions, identification
evidence; (2) excluding certain opinion testimony from a defense witness
concerning law enforcement identification procedures; (3) admitting edited
video surveillance footage from the store where the crimes occurred and
testimony from the person who created the edited video; and (4) determining
that the evidence was sufficient to support his conviction. We affirm.
We first address whether the trial court erred by denying the defendant’s
motion to suppress. We address his arguments under the State Constitution
first and rely on federal law only to aid our analysis. State v. Ball, 124 N.H.
226, 231-33 (1983). We will not overturn the trial court’s ruling on a motion to
suppress identification testimony unless it is contrary to the weight of the
evidence. State v. Perri, 164 N.H. 400, 404 (2013). We ask whether the
identification procedure used by the police was so unnecessarily suggestive
and conducive to irreparable misidentification that it denied the defendant due
process. Id. It is the defendant’s burden to establish that the identification
procedure was unnecessarily suggestive. Id. If the defendant satisfies this
burden, the State must demonstrate, by clear and convincing evidence, that
pursuant to the factors set forth in Neil v. Biggers, 409 U.S. 188 (1972), the
procedure was not so suggestive as to have rendered the identification
unreliable. Perri, 164 N.H. at 404; State v. Whittey, 134 N.H. 310, 312 (1991).
The record from the suppression hearing establishes that the victims,
two children, were playing in a department store when the older child, who was
eleven years old, noticed a man staring at them, causing her discomfort. At
that time, the children were unaccompanied by an adult. The children left that
area of the store, deliberately walking past the man in order “to get a better
look at” him so that the older child might be able to describe him if necessary.
As the children walked past the man, his penis was exposed. After the children
left that area of the store, they went to the toy section of the store, where they
encountered the same man. The children left the toy area and encountered the
man a third time in the apparel section of the store, where he again exposed
his genitals. After the third encounter, the children found the older child’s
father and disclosed what they had seen. The father then followed the man
closely to the front of the store and reported the matter to customer service
personnel. The man left the store before store officials could confront him.
That same evening, the father and older child reported the matter to the
local police department. They described the man as a tall, white male wearing
a gray or white tee-shirt,1 a denim baseball cap, glasses, and plaid shorts. On
the following day, a detective contacted the store’s asset protection manager,
who reviewed the store’s surveillance video and identified a potential suspect.
However, the detective determined that the identified suspect did not match the
descriptions provided by the father and child because he was not wearing
glasses, his shorts and hat did not match the clothing described, and he was
pushing a shopping cart, a detail not included in the descriptions. Moreover,
the individual did not appear to be following anyone.
Subsequently, the asset protection manager and detective identified a
different, tall white man wearing a dark hat, white tee-shirt, plaid shorts, and
glasses (second suspect). The video showed the second suspect near the two
children on multiple occasions, at times looking in their direction, including
within areas of the store in which the children reported seeing the man who
had exposed himself. The video additionally showed the children speaking with
the older child’s father and appearing to identify the second suspect to the
father, and the father then following the second suspect through the store.
Finally, the video showed the second suspect in a self-checkout aisle looking
across the store at the customer service desk at the same time that the father
and children were at the customer service desk speaking with store personnel.
At the detective’s request, the asset protection manager sent a still photograph
of the second suspect to the older child’s father, who within hours confirmed
that the photograph depicted the same person that he had described. Without
instruction from the police to do so, the father showed the photograph to the
older child, who likewise confirmed that the man in the photograph was the
same man who had exposed himself.
At that point, the police published the photograph on its Facebook page
and solicited the public’s assistance to identify the man. A member of the
public identified the person in the photograph as the defendant, and the
defendant subsequently admitted that he is the person in the photograph and
that he was in the store at the time of the incidents at issue.
1 When the child and father reported the matter on the evening that the incident had occurred,
both described the man as wearing a gray tee-shirt. At a forensic interview less than a week
later, the child described the tee-shirt as white.
2
The defendant moved to suppress, arguing that the act of showing the
photograph to the older child’s father amounted to a single person show-up.
The defendant suggested that the first person identified as a potential suspect
by the asset protection manager more accurately matched the descriptions
provided by the older child and her father. The State conceded that the
identification procedure was unnecessarily suggestive, but argued that the out-
of-court identifications were reliable pursuant to the Biggers factors. Following
a three-day suppression hearing, the trial court denied the motion.
Shortly before trial, the State showed portions of the surveillance video
footage to the older child in preparation for her trial testimony. The prosecutor
asked the child whether she saw anyone she recognized in the video, at which
point she pointed to the defendant and said, “yeah, that’s the guy who was
doing this.” The defendant argued that the prosecutor’s question constituted
an “out-of-court identification . . . covered by the suppression motion,” that the
child’s response was tainted by the photograph she had viewed at the outset of
the case, and that the child should not be allowed to view the video at trial and
testify that “that’s the person who exposed himself to us.” The defendant
acknowledged, however, that absent the allegedly defective identification
procedure involving the photograph, the State’s trial preparation with the child
would have been proper. The trial court rejected the defendant’s argument.
On appeal, the defendant argues that both the sending of the photograph
to the father and the State’s pretrial preparation of the older child constituted
impermissible single-person show-up identification procedures that necessarily
rendered the subsequent identifications of the defendant unreliable. The
defendant suggests that Biggers does not comport with “the evolution of our
scientific and legal systems’ understanding of the injustice caused by the
continued use of . . . defective and unreliable [identification] procedures,” and
invites us to construe the State Constitution as more protective of the
defendant’s rights than Biggers. The defendant further contends that the trial
court misapplied Biggers in finding the identifications reliable.
We have observed that a one-person show-up is inherently suggestive.
See State v. Leclair, 118 N.H. 214, 219 (1978); State v. Butler, 117 N.H. 888,
891 (1977). We have also recognized, however, that such a procedure may be
justified by exigent circumstances. See Leclair, 118 N.H. at 219. Assuming,
without deciding, that sending the photograph to the father constituted an
identification procedure, and that there were no exigent circumstances, we
conclude that the trial court reasonably found the identifications reliable.
The factors that the trial court must consider when evaluating the
reliability of an identification include: (1) the witness’s opportunity to view the
suspect; (2) the witness’s degree of attention; (3) the accuracy of the witness’s
prior description of the suspect; (4) the witness’s degree of certainty at the time
of the identification; and (5) the lapse of time between the crime and the
3