THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0278, Three Ponds Resort, LLC v. Town
of Milton, the court on June 3, 2020, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties and the
record submitted on appeal, the court concludes that a formal written opinion
is unnecessary in this case. We affirm.
The plaintiff, Three Ponds Resort, LLC (Three Ponds), appeals an order of
the Superior Court (Houran, J.) upholding a decision of the zoning board of
adjustment of the defendant, the Town of Milton, denying Three Ponds’
application for a special exception. Three Ponds contends that the trial court
erred when it ruled that the ZBA: (1) could have reasonably concluded on the
evidence before it that granting the special exception would cause “undue
nuisance or serious hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic”; and (2) correctly
interpreted and applied the regional impact statutes, see RSA 36:54-:58 (2019).
The following facts are derived from the record. Three Ponds owns a
campground in Milton. The campground is located adjacent to Northeast Pond
and has 223 campsites, 220 of which are suitable for use by recreational
vehicles (RVs), and amenities including four bath houses, a playground, sports
fields, beaches, seasonal docks, and a boat launch. Its single access is from
Townhouse Road, which the ZBA found to be no more than 20 feet wide.
In 2017, Three Ponds proposed adding 173 new campsites and
approximately three acres of amenities. Under the terms of the Milton zoning
ordinance, this expansion is allowed only by special exception, which requires
the ZBA to find that: (1) “the specific site is an appropriate location for the
proposed use or structure”; (2) “the use will not be injurious, noxious, offensive
or detrimental to the neighborhood”; (3) “there will be no undue nuisance or
serious hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic”; (4) “adequate and appropriate
facilities and utilities will be provided to insure the proper operation of the
proposed use and structure so that the use will not be contrary to the public
health, safety or welfare”; and (5) “the proposed use or structure is consistent
with the spirit of this ordinance and the intent of the Master Plan.”
Following a public hearing, the ZBA denied Three Ponds’ application,
concluding that it did not meet the third special exception criterion in regard to
pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The ZBA granted Three Ponds’ request for a
limited rehearing solely regarding the third criterion. Subsequently, Three
Ponds amended its application to seek 163, instead of 173, new campsites.
Three Ponds hired a consultant to prepare a traffic study. The traffic
consultant presented its findings to the ZBA at the rehearing and concluded
that adding 173 new sites would result in “no material or undue operational or
safety impact” on Townhouse Road. At the rehearing, ZBA members expressed
concerns regarding the traffic study and voted to obtain an independent
technical review. The technical review concluded that: (1) “[t]he traffic study
used typical methodology for these types of studies”; (2) “[a] review of crash
history . . . indicates that there is not a significant safety issue on Townhouse
Pond [sic] Road”; and (3) based solely upon the road’s crash history “there is no
reason to expect that additional campground traffic would have an undue or
inordinate safety impact.” Although Three Ponds subsequently reduced the
number of new sites it sought to 95, 75 of which would be suitable for use by
RVs, the record does not reflect that it submitted any information regarding the
traffic impact of that reduction.
When the ZBA resumed the rehearing, it announced that it had
concluded that the proposed expansion was a development of potential regional
impact, pursuant to RSA 36:54. It further concluded that it was required to re-
notice the public hearing on the special exception, to include potentially
impacted municipalities in Maine, and to consider anew all five special
exception criteria.
Subsequently, the ZBA held several hearings, at which it received
additional evidence. Ultimately, it denied the special exception by a
unanimous vote, finding that the application did not meet special exception
criteria two, three, and five. Regarding criterion three, in its notice of decision
denying Three Ponds’ application, the ZBA found
there would be undue nuisance or serious hazard to pedestrian or
vehicular traffic including the location and design of access ways
and off-street parking because of Townhouse [Road] being a
maximum of 20ft in width, that [the campground] has one access
road, lack of safe ways for passage of pedestrians and bicyclists on
Townhouse [Road], studies[’] disregard [of] the road between the
intersections studied, that the study was done at the end of August
and that the road cannot be brought up to a safer standard.
Three Ponds moved for another rehearing, which the ZBA denied, and then
appealed the ZBA’s decision to the superior court. See RSA 677:4 (2016).
Following a hearing, the superior court upheld the ZBA’s decision,
finding that: (1) “the ZBA could have reasonably concluded on the evidence
before it that there would be an undue nuisance or serious hazard to vehicular
2
and pedestrian traffic”; and (2) its “application of the regional impact statute
was neither unlawful nor unreasonable.” Because the trial court upheld the
ZBA’s finding that Three Ponds did not satisfy criterion three for a special
exception, it declined to address the ZBA’s findings on criteria two and five.
We first address whether the trial court erred by upholding the ZBA’s
decision that Three Ponds’ proposed expansion did not meet the town’s third
criterion for a special exception. The trial court’s review of the ZBA’s decision
is limited. Rochester City Council v. Rochester Zoning Bd. of Adjustment, 171
N.H. 271, 275 (2018). The trial court will not set aside the ZBA’s decision,
absent errors of law, unless the court is persuaded by the balance of
probabilities, on the evidence before it, that the ZBA’s decision was
unreasonable. See RSA 677:6 (2016). The trial court must deem the ZBA’s
factual findings prima facie lawful and reasonable. Id. The trial court’s review
is not to determine whether it agrees with the ZBA’s findings, but to determine
whether there is evidence upon which they could have been reasonably based.
Rochester City Council, 171 N.H. at 275.
Our review of the trial court’s decision is similarly deferential; we will
uphold its decision on appeal unless it is unsupported by the evidence or
legally erroneous. Id. Our inquiry is not whether we would find as the trial
court found, but rather whether the evidence before the court reasonably
supports its findings. Vigeant v. Town of Hudson, 151 N.H. 747, 750 (2005).
The trial court’s findings are within its sound discretion. Id. As the appealing
party, Three Ponds has the burden of demonstrating that the trial court
committed reversible error. See Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014).
On appeal, Three Ponds argues that the trial court erred because the
traffic study commissioned by Three Ponds was “uncontradicted” and “the ZBA
chose instead to rely upon its own personal, unsubstantiated, conclusory
opinions.” It contends that, as a result, the ZBA’s findings were not entitled to
deference by the trial court. We disagree.
The ZBA was entitled to question and reject the methodology or
conclusions of the expert’s traffic assessment. See Trustees of Dartmouth Coll.
v. Town of Hanover, 171 N.H. 497, 507 (2018) (stating that planning board has
this authority). Although the ZBA may not disregard an expert opinion based
upon the vague and unsupported concerns of town residents, it may rely upon
residents’ statements of objective facts. See id. Similarly, although the ZBA
may not reject expert opinion based upon its members’ subjective personal
feelings or vague unsupported conclusions, id. at 513, “the members of the
board can consider their own knowledge concerning such factors as traffic
conditions, surrounding uses, etc., resulting from their familiarity with the area
involved.” Vannah v. Bedford, 111 N.H. 105, 108 (1971), overruled on other
grounds by Cook v. Town of Sanbornton, 118 N.H. 668, 671 (1978).
3