THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0751, State of New Hampshire v. John
Knott, the court on November 18, 2020, issued the following
order:
Having considered the parties’ briefs and the record submitted on appeal,
we conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R.
18(1). The defendant, John Knott, appeals his conviction by a jury of one
count of aggravated felonious sexual assault. We remand for the trial court to
review certain confidential records in camera, but otherwise reject the claims of
error raised by the defendant.
A. Complainant’s Competency
The defendant first argues that the Superior Court (Ignatius, J.) erred by
finding that the complainant was competent to testify. However, the defendant
has not provided us with the competency hearing transcript as part of the
appellate record. As the appealing party, the defendant had the burden of
providing us with a record sufficient to decide his appellate issues. Bean v.
Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004); see Sup. Ct. R. 13. Absent
the transcript, we must assume that the evidence supported the trial court’s
decision. See Bean, 151 N.H. at 250. We review the court’s competency order
for errors of law only, see Atwood v. Owens, 142 N.H. 396, 397 (1997), and find
none.
B. In Camera Review of School Records
The defendant next asserts that the trial court erred by denying his
request that it review the complainant’s school records in camera. Before trial,
the defendant submitted two different requests for in camera review of the
complainant’s school records. One request pertained to records of the
complainant’s disclosure to school counselors that the defendant had sexually
assaulted her; the other request pertained to records concerning her cognitive
functioning. We address each request in turn.
1. School Counseling Records
Before trial, the defendant filed a motion for in camera review of records
of the complainant’s elementary school regarding the disclosure she made to
two school counselors that the defendant had sexually assaulted her. The
defendant contended that, to the extent that the records show that the
complainant made inconsistent statements about the assault, “those
inconsistencies are relevant to the defense.” He also asserted that “[a]ny
evidence supporting [the complainant’s] recollection of events, or discrepancies
in the reporting of same, and her veracity are relevant and discoverable.” The
defendant’s motion was based upon a police report regarding the disclosures
that the complainant made to the two school counselors.
The trial court denied the motion, ruling that “[m]erely stating that
someone made a report to a counselor is not sufficient to warrant in camera
review.” See State v. Taylor, 139 N.H. 96, 98-99 (1994). The trial court further
determined that “the defendant [had] not articulated an essential need for in
camera review of the school counselor’s records, particularly in light of the
police report addressing the reported disclosure and the contents of the
disclosure, as alleged.”
We review trial court decisions on the management of discovery under
our unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. State v. Ainsworth, 151
N.H. 691, 694 (2004). To satisfy this standard, the defendant must
demonstrate that the trial court’s decision is clearly untenable or unreasonable
to the prejudice of his case. Id.
A defendant’s request to obtain privileged records raises two distinct, but
related, issues. State v. Gagne, 136 N.H. 101, 104 (1992). The first issue is
the standard for obtaining in camera review of privileged material; the second
is the standard for obtaining disclosure of such material. Id. Here, the trial
court misapplied the first standard.
To trigger in camera review of privileged records, “the defendant must
establish a reasonable probability that the records contain information that is
material and relevant to his defense.” Id. at 105. To satisfy this standard, the
defendant must present “some specific concern, based upon more than mere
conjecture, that, in reasonable probability, will be explained by the information
sought.” State v. Sargent, 148 N.H. 571, 573 (2002).
We find Taylor instructive. There, the defendant asserted that he had
reason to believe the victim was interviewed by the Division for Children, Youth
and Families (DCYF). Taylor, 139 N.H. at 98. The defendant, however,
presented nothing more than this general assertion as justification for an in
camera review of DCYF files. See id. Unlike in Gagne, where we allowed in
camera review, the defendant in Taylor failed to offer “specific arguments
concerning relevant evidence that, according to information obtained
independently by counsel, may have been contained in the DCY[F] file.” Id.
Affirming the trial court’s denial of the defendant’s motion for in camera review,
we held that “[a]t a minimum, a defendant must present some specific concern,
based on more than bare conjecture, that, in reasonable probability, will be
explained by information in the DCY[F] file.” Id. at 99.
2
Applying Gagne, we conclude that the defendant established a
reasonable probability that the school counseling records contained
information that may have been material and relevant to his defense. See
Gagne, 136 N.H. at 105. His specific concern, that the complainant had
disclosed the sexual assault to two school counselors, was based upon more
than mere conjecture. Rather, his concern was based upon “information
obtained independently by counsel,” specifically, a police report revealing that
the disclosure had been made. Taylor, 139 N.H. at 98. Under these
circumstances, the defendant has met the standard to require that the trial
court review, in camera, the complainant’s school counseling records. We,
therefore, conclude that the trial court erred by refusing to review the
complainant’s school counseling records in camera and remand for the court to
review those records in camera.
On remand, we direct the trial court to apply the standard we clarified
recently in State v. Girard, 173 N.H. ___, ____ (decided October 16, 2020) (slip
op. at 8-9), to determine whether any of the records must be disclosed to the
defense. If, on remand, the trial court decides that the records contain
evidence meeting the Girard standard, then the court should order a new trial
unless it finds that the error of not admitting the evidence in the first trial was
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. See State v. McLellan, 146 N.H. 108,
113 (2001).
2. Records Pertaining to the Complainant’s Cognitive Functioning
The defendant also filed a motion for in camera review of the
complainant’s academic “school records, including but not limited to, [her]
individualized educational plans (IEPs).” He argued that the records were
“relevant to show the level of [the complainant’s] cognitive functioning and
what, if any, accommodations are made for her in the school environment.”
The trial court denied the motion, reasoning that “[y]ears of school testing,
accommodations, quarterly educational goals, etc., are not material or relevant”
to the defendant’s aggravated felonious sexual assault charge.
Thereafter, the defendant filed a motion for reconsideration, asserting
that, “[a]lthough the requested records may not be directly relevant to the
pending charge[], [the trial court] overlooked the fact that they are necessary in
order to accurately ascertain [the complainant’s] level of function and whether
she is in fact a competent witness for the State.” The defendant contended that
“[a]n IEP or other associated records will a contain specific action plan
containing any necessary accommodations for [the complainant] based upon
her strengths, deficits, or particular learning styles.” He asserted that “[t]his
information becomes even more important based upon” the complainant’s
interview at the Child Advocacy Center. The trial court denied the motion,
stating that “[i]f there is a genuine issue regarding the competence of [the
3