THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0645, In re Simone Garczynski
Irrevocable Trust, the court on July 29, 2020, issued the
following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
We affirm.
The appellant, James Garczynski (James), who is both trustee and a
beneficiary of the Simone Garczynski Irrevocable Trust (trust), appeals an order
of the Circuit Court (Quigley, J.), following a hearing, allowing Michael
Garczynski (Michael), who is James’s brother and also a beneficiary of the
trust, to purchase certain real property that James had acquired from the trust
in 2017. On appeal, James argues that in allowing Michael to purchase the
property, the trial court erred by setting aside an earlier final order in the
absence of a claim of fraud, accident, mistake, or misfortune. See In the
Matter of Harman & McCarron, 168 N.H. 372, 375 (2015). He further argues
that the trial court’s alleged “refusal to enforce the terms of the” prior order is
entitled to no deference, and that the trial court erred by not enforcing certain
terms of the prior order and by not finding that Michael had “unclean hands.”
The trial court proceedings at issue in this case follow our order in In re
Simone Garczynski Irrevocable Trust, No. 2017-0487, 2018 WL 3581069 (N.H.
July 26, 2018) (Garczynski I). In Garczynski I, we vacated a trial court decision
that had denied Michael’s motion to invalidate the trust’s 2017 conveyance of
the property to James and to compel its conveyance to Michael. In vacating
the trial court’s decision, we ruled that the trial court had plainly erred by
ruling that Michael had forfeited his right to purchase the property under an
earlier court order and mediation agreement because the evidence established
that James, as trustee of the trust, had unequivocally refused to convey the
property in accordance with the terms of the earlier order on the mistaken
belief that Michael’s deadline for purchasing the property had passed.
On remand, the trial court held an evidentiary hearing. At the hearing,
Michael testified that if the trial court allowed him to purchase the property, he
should be required to pay the trust, and not James, because the trust had
earlier owned the property, and because he did not trust James to disburse the
purchase money to the trust’s beneficiaries. However, the record establishes
that James had already paid the trust for the property in 2017.
By notice of decision dated February 8, 2019, the trial court ruled that
Michael was entitled to purchase the property from James. Under the terms of
the order, Michael was granted “30 days from the date of the notice of decision”
to purchase the property, “unless extended by agreement of counsel in writing.”
The February 8 order further provided that, if either party found “it appropriate
to extend Michael’s time to purchase the property,” that party was to send a
written request to extend the deadline both electronically and by mail “no later
than 25 days from the date of this