THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0047, State of New Hampshire v. Brim
Bell, the court on November 18, 2022, issued the following
order:
After review of defense counsel’s motion for reconsideration, the court
modifies the slip opinion as set forth below. In all other respects, defense
counsel’s motion for reconsideration is denied.
The defendant has also filed a pro se motion for reconsideration. On April
21, 2022, we determined that we would not “rule on any future pro se motions
that may be filed while the defendant is represented by counsel.” We observe
that, even if we were to rule on the pro se motion for reconsideration, we would
deny it.
The slip opinion dated August 16, 2022, is modified by deleting the last
sentence of the carry-over paragraph at the top of page 12. The following three
new paragraphs are inserted after the revised carry-over paragraph:
With these principles in mind, we now examine whether
joinder was proper in this case. The State alleged in its motion for
joinder that “[e]ach of the cases has an almost identical fact
pattern, occurred in the same time frame, and demonstrate[s] a
common scheme or plan.” The motion described various tactics
the defendant allegedly used to solicit money from the victims and,
in addition, recounted instances in which the defendant jointly
involved some of the victims in his alleged scheme. Specifically,
the motion alleged that the defendant twice directed J.M. to wire
money to a “friend,” who was actually another victim (J.T.), and
that, at least once, the defendant told J.T. that he was buying
parts for J.T.’s car from J.K. and directed J.T. to wire money to
J.K. At the same time, the defendant told J.K. “that he was
supposed to receive a money order from [J.T.], but for some reason
it couldn’t go through,” so he asked J.K. “to take a ‘wire’ from [J.T.]
and rewire it to the defendant.” The State contended that “[t]he
similar tactics used and the fact that [J.T.], [J.M.], and [J.K.]
became unwittingly involved in each other’s cases indicates that
[the defendant] had a common purpose and plan when defrauding
each of the named individuals.”
The State further alleged that “[t]he commonality of the
methods used to deprive the victims of their money and vehicles
demonstrates that the defendant had the same plan and purpose
when soliciting the victims for money.” Significantly, the State
alleged that “[t]he defendant used a series of on-going deceptive
tactics to procure money from the victims. After a while, the
defendant stopped asking for money to work on the vehicles and
began to desperately plead for money to keep his shop open,”
which the victims gave to him “believing that their vehicles were
still being worked on.”
Based on the foregoing, the trial court reasonably could have
ruled that each theft from each of the victims “was part of an
overarching plan” serving the defendant’s ultimate purpose of
“keep[ing] his shop open” by paying his expenses, but not working
on the victims’ cars. In this way, the charges were mutually
dependent. Breed, 159 N.H. at 70. Under these circumstances,
we cannot say that the trial court unsustainably exercised its
discretion by joining the charges in this case. See id.
Reconsideration denied;
slip opinion modified.
Hicks, Bassett, Hantz Marconi, and Donovan, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2