THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0493, In the Matter of Katherine Harper
and Matthew Broas, the court on September 22, 2020, issued
the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
respondent, Matthew Broas (Father), appeals a decision of the Circuit Court
(Alfano, J.) adopting the recommendation of a Marital Master (Cooper, M.)
denying Father’s relocation and modifying the parties’ parenting plan. We
reverse in part, vacate in part, and remand.
The following facts were found by the trial court or recite the contents of
documents contained in the record. Father and the petitioner, Katherine
Harper (Mother), are the parents of two minor daughters. Mother lives in
Concord and, prior to the relocation at issue here, Father lived in Salisbury. A
final parenting plan regarding the children was entered in 2015. It awarded
Father primary residential responsibility, provided that the children would
attend school in the district where Father resides, and ordered a routine
schedule of parenting time for Mother. The parties subsequently “deviated
from the routine schedule on an ad hoc basis” and, over the year preceding this
action, had been “essentially follow[ing] a shared parenting schedule.”
In September 2018, Father signed a purchase and sale agreement on a
house in New London. He informed Mother of the impending move in
December. Mother did not agree to the move, but “followed up with an e-mail
within a few weeks asking him for proposals regarding a change in the
schedule.”
Father did not petition for court approval of his relocation of the children
and, accordingly, Mother filed a petition to enjoin it. The court held an initial
hearing, entered temporary orders, and, after further hearing, issued the order
on appeal. In that order, the court granted Mother’s motion for directed verdict
and denied Father’s relocation, even though, by that time, Father had already
moved to New London. The court also modified the parties’ parenting plan,
reasoning that, “[a]s neither parent resides in the Salisbury School District and
the parties are not able to agree on a school district, the court must make
adjustments to the parties[’] Parenting Plan to reflect their current
circumstances.”
On appeal, Father argues that the trial court erred in: (1) applying the
2018 substantive amendments to RSA 461-A:12 to this case; (2) granting
Mother’s motion for directed verdict; and (3) modifying the parties’ parenting
time. He also contends that the trial court unsustainably exercised its
discretion in denying his intrastate move and made factual findings that lack
support in the record.
Father’s first argument concerns the application of paragraph II-a of RSA
461-A:12, which was added to the statute in 2018. See RSA 461-A:12, II-a
(Supp. 2019). That paragraph provides: “A parent shall not relocate a child
without a court order unless relocation is necessary to protect the safety of the
parent or child, or both.” Id. Father argues that the trial court “impermissibly
retroactively applied RSA 461-A:12, II-a to [him],” in contravention of “his
constitutional right to travel.”
Mother counters that the “issue of whether RSA 461-A:12 as amended
should be applied prospectively or retrospectively to parenting plans drafted
prior to August 7, 2018, is irrelevant to the instant case.” She contends that
although the trial court ruled that Father violated RSA 461-A:12, II-a by not
obtaining a court order prior to relocating, that ruling “was not the basis for
the court’s denial of his request to relocate.” We agree with Mother that we
need not address the issue of retrospectivity to decide this case, and
accordingly, we decline to do so. As Mother points out, the trial court’s “clearly
articulated . . . basis for denying [Father’s] proposed relocation was . . . failure
to meet his burden under RSA 461-A:12, V(b) that his relocation was
reasonable in light of a legitimate purpose.”
Father next argues that the trial court erred in granting Mother’s motion
for directed verdict. “Because motions for directed verdict relate to the
sufficiency of the evidence, they present questions of law which we
review de novo.” Stachulski v. Apple New England, LLC, 171 N.H. 158, 168
(2018). “A party is entitled to a directed verdict only when the sole reasonable
inference that may be drawn from the evidence, which must be viewed in the
light most favorable to the nonmoving party, is so overwhelmingly in favor of
the moving party that no contrary verdict could stand.” DeBenedetto v. CLD
Consulting Eng’rs, 153 N.H. 793, 812 (2006). A plaintiff “may not avoid a
directed verdict by presenting evidence that is merely conjectural in nature,”
but rather, “must present sufficient evidence to satisfy the burden of proof
such that a reasonable [factfinder] could find in [his] favor.” Figlioli v. R.J.
Moreau Cos., 151 N.H. 618, 621 (2005).
Mother contends that a directed verdict in her favor was appropriate
because Father failed to introduce evidence sufficient to sustain his burden of
proof. The parties’ respective burdens are set forth in paragraphs V and VI of
RSA 461-A:12:
2
V. The parent seeking permission to relocate bears the initial
burden of demonstrating, by a preponderance of the evidence, that:
(a) The relocation is for a legitimate purpose; and
(b) The proposed location is reasonable in light of that purpose.
VI. If the burden of proof established in paragraph V is met, the
burden shifts to the other parent to prove, by a preponderance of
the evidence, that the proposed relocation is not in the best
interest of the child.
RSA 461-A:12, V, VI (2018).
The trial court noted that Father’s stated reason for relocating was “the
need . . . [for] more suitable housing for the girls” given that their “housing in
Salisbury was a second-floor apartment” at a busy intersection with “dogs
located with the tenants on the first floor.” The court found Father’s “objective
in this regard to be legitimate.” The court concluded, however, that “the
location of the housing [Father] ultimately obtained [was not] reasonable.”
Father contends that the trial court erred by failing to view the evidence
in the light most favorable to him as the nonmoving party, as required in the
standard for ruling on a motion for directed verdict. He further contends that
“[i]nstead of analyzing [Mother’s] motion for directed verdict under the facts
before it, the trial court . . . made assumptions . . . to assert that [Father]
should have looked elsewhere for a suitable place to live.” Specifically, the
court noted that the home Father chose to purchase was listed at $533,000.00,
and then assumed: (1) that Father did not pay the asking price; and (2) that
“there may well have been other housing in the Concord area — or Salisbury
area — within the $400,000.00 range.” The court then concluded that Father’s
“new residence . . . is 21 miles further away from that of [Mother] . . . and is
not rationally related to achieving [Father’s] objective, particularly when other
options appear to have been available.”
Father argues that the trial court “wrongly imposed on [him] the burden
to show he could not find housing in Concord, where [Mother] lived, or closer to
her.” Although the trial court did not explicitly cite supporting authority for its
conclusion, it appears to have relied upon language in Tomasko v. Dubuc, 145
N.H. 169 (2000), which we quoted from the Supreme Court of Connecticut’s
decision in Ireland v. Ireland, 717 A.2d 676 (Conn. 1998), superseded by
statute as stated in Hardy-Harris v. Harris, No. 0740246475, 2008 WL
2039259 (Conn. Super. Ct. April 21, 2008): “‘[A] relocation motivated by a
legitimate purpose should be considered reasonable unless its purpose is
shown to be substantially achievable without moving, or by moving to a
3