THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case Nos. 2019-0490 and 2021-0501, State of New
Hampshire v. Robert M. Fitzgerald, Jr., the court on November 7,
2023, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has determined
to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The defendant,
Robert M. Fitzgerald, Jr., appeals his convictions on one count of kidnapping,
see RSA 633:1, I (2016), two counts of second-degree assault, see RSA 631:2, I(f)
(2016), one count of simple assault — domestic, see RSA 631:2-b, I(a) (2016),
and one count of obstructing the reporting of a crime — domestic, see RSA
631:2-b, I(k)(1) (2016). He argues that the Trial Court (Smukler, J.) erred when
it denied his motion to dismiss the kidnapping indictment. He also argues that
the Trial Court (Delker, J.) erred when it subsequently denied his motion for a
new trial based on the State’s failure to disclose exculpatory evidence, and
denied his motion for a new trial based on ineffective assistance of counsel. We
affirm in part, vacate in part, and remand.
I
The defendant was first tried in superior court on March 18, 2019.
During the trial, the victim provided testimony about certain information that
the State had not previously disclosed to the defendant. Defense counsel
requested a mistrial; the State argued that a curative instruction could suffice.
The trial court granted the mistrial without prejudice.
A second jury trial was held in June 2019, at which the following evidence
was presented. At the time of the charged offenses, the defendant and the
victim had been married for approximately six weeks. On April 16, 2018, the
victim returned from work and found court documents with the defendant’s
name on them taped to the door to her apartment. She became upset after
reading them, and assuming that he was at work, she called the defendant. She
told him about “what was listed on those documents” and that she “was
extremely upset.” When she opened the door to her apartment, she found the
defendant inside. She told him that the marriage was over and that she wanted
him to move out of her apartment. He responded that she was not ending their
marriage and that the documents were false. She told him to “take his stuff and
go” before she went to her second job as a waitress at a local restaurant.
Toward the end of her shift, the defendant appeared at the restaurant. He
was slurring his words and smelled of alcohol. To avoid seeing him, the victim
remained in the restaurant kitchen until he left. When the victim arrived home
after her shift, the defendant was standing outside the apartment with his dog.
Assuming that he was leaving, she walked past him into the apartment. As she
headed from her bedroom to the bathroom, the defendant entered the
apartment. She could see that “his things were still there.” He told her that he
was not leaving: “he wasn’t breaking up this family.” She told him to leave. She
tried to return to the bedroom to get her phone to call the police. As she headed
past him, he came behind her and pushed her into the wall. After she fell into
the wall, she began crying, and then screamed: “[G]et out.”
In response, the defendant came up behind her and put his arm around
her neck and his hand over her face. She attempted to scream but was unable
to breathe. When she finally stopped struggling, the defendant released her.
When she stood up to try to run to her bedroom to retrieve her phone, he
grabbed her and threw her on the couch. As she screamed and struggled to get
away from him, he took one of the couch pillows and held it over her face. He
told her that no one would miss her if she died and that he was going to kill her.
When she again stopped struggling, he allowed her to sit up on the couch. The
victim then went to her bedroom to attempt to call for help from her bedroom
window, but the defendant slammed it closed and pushed her toward the bed
and told her that she was not leaving. The victim’s phone was on the bed, and a
struggle ensued for the phone. The defendant ended up with the phone. The
victim again attempted to run to the bedroom window, but the defendant again
pushed her away from it. She ran toward the living room, and the defendant
put his arm around her neck and dropped her to the floor. The defendant
eventually allowed the victim to get up and go to the bathroom. The victim
attempted to open the bathroom window, but the defendant shut the window
and slammed the victim onto the toilet and held her there. The defendant
thereafter allowed the victim to go to the living room and sit on the couch, where
she asked for her phone back, pleading for him to let her go and let her call the
police, but the defendant refused. Eventually, she went back to her bed. The
defendant moved a table directly in front of the bedroom door and remained
seated there until the victim fell asleep. The next morning the defendant allowed
the victim to leave for work, where she contacted the police.
The defendant was subsequently charged with three counts of second
degree assault — strangulation; four counts of simple assault — domestic; one
count of criminal threatening; one count of kidnapping; and one count of
obstructing the reporting of a crime — domestic. As previously noted, the first
trial began on Monday, March 18, 2019. On the preceding Friday, March 15,
between 4 and 5 p.m., during a meeting with the prosecutor (Attorney Topham),
the victim advised the prosecutor for the first time about the court documents (a
child support petition) that she had found taped to the door. The prosecutor
shared this disclosure with defense counsel on Monday, March 18. The trial
2
court granted a brief recess to allow defense counsel to discuss the disclosure
with his client. The parties then agreed to proceed without reference to the
name of the documents or their contents. During cross-examination, defense
counsel asked the victim about her pretrial meetings with the prosecutor,
specifically asking her: “how many times have you spoken with Attorney
Topham?” The victim indicated that she had done so on two occasions, once
sometime around May 2018 and once on the previous Friday — March 15, 2019.
At the end of his cross-examination, defense counsel informed the trial
judge that the victim’s testimony regarding her encounter with the defendant
when she returned home from her first job had not been disclosed to him. The
prosecutor agreed, stating that he had mistakenly believed the information was
in the police reports. Defense counsel then requested a mistrial. The trial judge
ordered a recess in order to permit the parties and the judge to research
mistrials. The court reconvened 25 minutes later. The parties then argued the
motion for mistrial, after which the court granted a mistrial without prejudice,
stating: “In this case, a significant portion of the victim’s description and
testimony about what happened that day was not provided to the Defense
counsel until today, and he can’t possibly incorporate that into his trial tactics
or strategic planning with his client.”
The defendant was retried in June 2019 and was convicted. He appealed
to this court, challenging, inter alia, the denial of his motion to dismiss the
kidnapping indictment.
In March 2020, the defendant filed a motion for a new trial, arguing that
his counsel had provided ineffective assistance of counsel when counsel
requested a mistrial at the March 2019 trial without the defendant’s consent.1
In August 2020, the defendant filed a motion for discovery alleging that a third
meeting had taken place between the prosecutor and the victim on Monday,
March 11, 2019, and that documentation of the meeting had not been provided
to him. The State represented that the defendant had been given everything to
which he was entitled but agreed to provide a note created by the victim-witness
coordinator to document the March 11 meeting. The defendant thereafter filed a
second motion for a new trial based on the prosecutor’s failure to disclose
exculpatory evidence.
In August 2021, the Trial Court (Delker, J.) issued an order denying each
of the defendant’s post-conviction motions. He appealed that order to this court.
We accepted the discretionary appeal and consolidated it with the defendant’s
direct appeal.
1 On April 13, 2020, we granted the defendant’s assented-to motion for partial remand and stay
pending final resolution of his motion for a new trial.
3