THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0217, Marianne Salcetti & a. v. City of
Keene, the court on June 3, 2020, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
petitioners, Professor Marianne Salcetti and her journalism students at Keene
State College — Colby Dudal, Alex Fleming, Meridith King, Grace Pecci, and
Abbygail Vasas — appeal several orders of the Superior Court (Ruoff, J.)
granting, in part, and denying, in part, their petition under the Right-to-Know
Law, RSA chapter 91-A (2013 & Supp. 2019). The petitioners argue that the
trial court erred when it: (1) interpreted certain of their Right-to-Know requests
filed with the respondent, the City of Keene, as requests for “lists”; (2) found
that the City conducted a reasonable search for certain requested records; (3)
allowed the City to withhold and redact certain information regarding citizen
complaints of excessive force used by City police officers; (4) upheld the City’s
proposed $300 charge for access to certain records; (5) found that the
petitioners lacked standing to challenge the City’s requirement that requesters
submit signed, written requests; and (6) found that the City’s response times to
the requests were reasonably necessary. We affirm, in part, reverse, in part,
vacate, in part, and remand.
The pertinent facts are as follows. In the Fall of 2017, Salcetti taught a
journalism class at Keene State College during which she instructed her
students to file Right-to-Know requests with public entities seeking information
on topics of public interest. Several of these requests were submitted to the
City, and five of them were denied in full or in part. In December 2017,
Salcetti, as a non-attorney representative for her students, see Super. Ct. Civ.
R. 20, filed a petition in the superior court requesting that the court order the
City to fulfill the students’ Right-to-Know requests. The trial court held a
hearing in June 2018, and issued a series of orders in August 2018, December
2018, and January 2019, which resolved the issues raised by the petitioners
primarily in favor of the City. The petitioners filed a motion to reconsider. The
motion was denied, and this appeal followed.
Resolution of this appeal requires that we interpret the Right-to-Know
Law, RSA chapter 91-A. “The ordinary rules of statutory construction apply to
our review of the Right-to-Know Law.” N.H. Right to Life v. Dir., N.H.
Charitable Trusts Unit, 169 N.H. 95, 102-03 (2016) (quotation omitted). Thus,
“we are the final arbiter of the legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of
the statute considered as a whole.” Id. at 103 (quotation omitted). “When
examining the language of a statute, we ascribe the plain and ordinary
meaning to the words used.” Id. (quotation omitted). “We interpret legislative
intent from the statute as written and will not consider what the legislature
might have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit to include.”
Id. (quotation omitted). “We also interpret a statute in the context of the overall
statutory scheme and not in isolation.” Id. (quotation omitted).
The purpose of the Right-to-Know Law “is to ensure both the greatest
possible public access to the actions, discussions and records of all public
bodies, and their accountability to the people.” RSA 91-A:1 (2013). “Thus, the
Right-to-Know Law furthers our state constitutional requirement that the
public’s right of access to governmental proceedings and records shall not be
unreasonably restricted.” N.H. Right to Life, 169 N.H. at 103 (quotation
omitted); see also N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 8. “Although the statute does not
provide for unrestricted access to public records, we resolve questions
regarding the Right-to-Know Law with a view to providing the utmost
information in order to best effectuate these statutory and constitutional
objectives.” N.H. Right to Life, 169 N.H. at 103 (quotation omitted). “As a
result, we broadly construe provisions favoring disclosure and interpret the
exemptions restrictively.” Id. (quotation omitted). “We also look to the
decisions of other jurisdictions interpreting similar acts for guidance, including
federal interpretations of the federal Freedom of Information Act (FOIA).” Id.
“Such similar laws, because they are in pari materia, are interpretatively
helpful, especially in understanding the necessary accommodation of the
competing interests involved.” Id. (quotation omitted).
“When a public entity seeks to avoid disclosure of material under the
Right-to-Know Law, that entity bears a heavy burden to shift the balance
toward nondisclosure.” Id. (quotation omitted). “We review the trial court’s
statutory interpretation and its application of law to undisputed facts de novo.”
Id.
I. Interpretation of the Right-to-Know Requests
The petitioners first argue that the trial court erred when it interpreted
the Right-to-Know requests filed by Dudal, Fleming, and Vasas as requests for
“lists,” rather than as requests for the responsive governmental records
themselves. The City counters that the trial court did not err in finding that
the students had requested “lists,” and that the City is not required to compile,
cross-reference, or assemble governmental records into a form that does not
already exist. We examine each student’s request in turn.
We first consider Dudal’s Right-to-Know request. On September 26,
2017, Dudal hand-delivered a request to the City seeking “[a] list of the . . .
food establishments that are a part of license class I, license class II, and
2
license class III in Keene that received a score of less than 85” during a
specified time period, and “[a] list of the violations for any and all food
establishments that are a part of license class I, license class II, and license
class III in Keene that received scores of 85 or less, and the checklist of the
inspection accompanying each score,” during the same time period. The City’s
deputy clerk and records manager, William Dow, acknowledged receipt of the
request the following day. On October 4, Dudal called Dow, who instructed
him to contact the City’s Code Enforcement Department regarding his request.
On October 5, Dudal e-mailed a second Right-to-Know request to the Code
Enforcement Department. This request sought “[a]ll food establishments’
scores and dates of inspections for the city of Keene, NH within the past [three]
years for food establishments that are in classes I, II and III,” and “[t]he criteria
in which the food establishments were scored and graded.” Also on October 5,
Dow notified Dudal that there were existing governmental records responsive to
his request.
On October 19, Corinne Marcou, an administrative assistant at the City’s
Code Enforcement Department, e-mailed Dudal, stating that “[a]fter much
conversation[] with William Dow and our City Attorney, the information from
our data system isn’t a government document and as there is no report
currently created with this specific request criteria, the City isn’t obligated to
create one.” On October 26, while at the Code Enforcement Department,
Dudal was told that the information regarding food establishment inspections
was not available because “food establishment records are kept in a database
and no governmental records containing that information existed nor was [the
City] required to create one.”
The trial court found that “the ‘records’ [Dudal] seek[s] from the City are
not existing records that the City keeps or maintains; the data compilations [he
has] requested do not exist in a form [he] requested, but rather exist as
uncollected data in a database, and for the data to be in a form that [he was]
entitled to have, the City would need to create a new record.” Thus, because
“[t]he law is clear that a public body or agency has no obligation to create a
‘list’ of existing data,” the trial court found that the City properly denied
Dudal’s requests.
We agree with the trial court’s decision upholding the City’s denial of
Dudal’s first request, which explicitly sought “lists” that were not compiled or
maintained by the City. “[T]he statute does not require public officials to
retrieve and compile into a list random information gathered from numerous
documents, if a list of this information does not already exist.” Brent v.
Paquette, 132 N.H. 415, 426 (1989); see also RSA 91-A:4, VII (2013) (“Nothing
in this chapter shall be construed to require a public body or agency to
compile, cross-reference, or assemble information into a form in which it is not
already kept or reported by that body or agency.”).
3