THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0736, State of New Hampshire v. Joshua
Heredia, the court on March 24, 2021, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, we
conclude that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
defendant, Joshua Heredia, appeals his convictions, following a jury trial in the
Superior Court (Anderson, J.), on one count of simple assault, see RSA 631:2-a
(2016); RSA 651:6, I(g) (2016), and two class B felony counts of riot, see RSA
644:1, I(a), IV (2016). The defendant argues that the trial court erred by:
(1) denying his motion to strike one of the jurors for cause; and (2) denying his
motion for a directed verdict with respect to one of the two riot charges. We
affirm.
I. Facts
The record supports the following facts. During the early morning hours
of May 11, 2018, three Manchester police officers — Officers Stewart,
Harrington, and Roscoe — responded to a noise complaint at a bar in
Manchester. Upon their arrival, the officers observed the defendant, along with
another individual, arguing with the bouncer outside of the bar. After speaking
briefly with the officers, the defendant started to leave the area, but then
returned. Shortly thereafter, the defendant’s brother and other individuals
joined the defendant outside the bar. The police asked the group to leave, but
they refused, spilling out into the street in front of the bar. The defendant’s
brother then started yelling expletives at the officers and recording them with
his cell phone. The officers decided to arrest the brother for disorderly
conduct, but, as they attempted to restrain him, the group became increasingly
aggressive, “shouting, screaming, swearing, [and] getting . . . very, very close”
to the officers.
As the three officers struggled to restrain the brother, Officers Harrington
and Roscoe became distracted by the group, leaving Officer Stewart alone with
the brother. While Officers Harrington and Roscoe attempted to control the
group, which grew larger after the bar closed, the brother began assaulting
Officer Stewart, beating her in the head and face. Realizing Officer Stewart’s
predicament, Officer Roscoe jumped on top of the brother and punched him
several times. The defendant began punching Officer Roscoe, shifting Officer
Roscoe’s attention away from the brother. The brother then punched Officer
Stewart one last time. The defendant continued punching Officer Roscoe until
another officer tackled and arrested him. As a result of the incident, Officers
Stewart and Roscoe suffered various injuries, and both were diagnosed with
concussions. The defendant was charged with one count of resisting arrest,
one count of simple assault, one count of second-degree assault, and, with
respect to the injuries sustained by Officers Roscoe and Stewart, two class B
felony counts of riot.
During jury selection, Juror B.L. asked the trial court to excuse him from
jury service due to financial hardship. He did not express any concern about
his connections to law enforcement until defense counsel asked him about his
juror questionnaire, which stated that he had friends or relatives in law
enforcement. Juror B.L. responded that, although he did not recognize any of
the names of the officers involved in this case, he “work[s] with a ton of
Manchester Police” at his physical therapy clinic, has “a friend of the family
that’s also police,” and has “a lot of family in law enforcement.” When the trial
court asked if his connections to law enforcement would “affect [his] ability to
be fair and impartial in this case,” Juror B.L. stated:
I would try not to let it be, but I am sympathetic towards
them just because . . . the nature of what I . . . do and my
relationship to them. I’m not going to lie and say I wouldn’t
(indiscernible), but I would try to be unbiased.
The trial court then asked if Juror B.L. could “resolve a difference in testimony
between police and non-police based on the testimony at trial only.” Juror B.L.
responded: “I would try to do that. I would try to do that to the best of my
ability.”
Defense counsel moved to strike Juror B.L. for cause, arguing, in part,
that Juror B.L. could not guarantee his impartiality in serving on the jury. The
trial court denied the motion and ruled that Juror B.L. was qualified, noting:
The question is flawed to begin with because almost
everybody, to some extent, would give some -- I mean, there are
some people that wouldn’t, but a lot of people -- the question really
isn’t an abstract, would you give deference to police. The question
is can you listen to two people testify and decide based on the facts
of the testimony, the demeanor and all of that.
I think he answered that question sufficiently well. I’m going
to find him qualified.
Neither the defendant nor the State struck Juror B.L. via peremptory
challenge. Juror B.L. was seated on the jury, which convicted the defendant
on the simple assault and riot charges.
2
The defendant then moved for a directed verdict on both of the riot
charges. He argued, in part, that no rational jury could have concluded that
he engaged in violent or tumultuous conduct, as required by RSA 644:1, I(a),
until he punched Officer Roscoe, at which point his brother had already
punched Officer Stewart several times. Thus, the defendant argued, because
his brother punched Officer Stewart several times before he intervened, the
State could not prove that his actions caused Officer Stewart’s concussion. See
RSA 644:1, IV. The trial court disagreed, concluding that the jury could have
found that the defendant “was part of the crowd that was surrounding the
officers as they tried to restrain [the brother].” The trial court further noted
that the fact that one of the brother’s blows against Officer Stewart occurred
after the defendant intervened further supported the jury’s findings as to
causation. Accordingly, the trial court denied the defendant’s motion. This
appeal followed.
II. Analysis
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court’s denial of his
motion to strike Juror B.L. for cause violated his state and federal
constitutional rights to an impartial jury because Juror B.L.’s statements that
he would “try” to set aside his feelings about law enforcement were insufficient
to establish his impartiality. We first address the defendant’s claim under the
State Constitution and rely upon federal law only to aid our analysis. State v.
Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
It is a fundamental precept of our system of justice that a defendant has
the right to be tried by a fair and impartial jury. State v. Afshar, 171 N.H. 381,
386 (2018); see U.S. CONST. amend. VI; N.H. CONST. pt. I, arts. 21, 35.
Generally, a juror is presumed to be impartial. Afshar, 171 N.H. at 386. A
juror is impartial if he or she “can lay aside his or her impression or opinion
and render a verdict based on the evidence presented in court.” Id. When a
juror’s impartiality is questioned, the trial court must determine whether the
juror is indifferent. Id.; see RSA 500-A:12, I (2010). “If it appears that any
juror is not indifferent, he [or she] shall be set aside on that trial.” RSA 500-
A:12, II (2010).
The trial court’s determination regarding the impartiality of the jurors
selected is essentially a question of demeanor and credibility. State v. Tabaldi,
165 N.H. 306, 312-13 (2013). Thus, we afford special deference to the trial
court’s decision and we will not overturn the trial court’s ruling unless it was
an unsustainable exercise of discretion or against the weight of the evidence.
Id. at 313.
The defendant draws our attention to State v. Town, 163 N.H. 790
(2012), which involved a challenge to a juror, who had been the victim of a
sexual assault, as to whether she was qualified to sit on a case involving an
3