THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0038, Aaron Wedgwood v. HCA Health
Services of New Hampshire, Inc., the court on September 30,
2019, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
We affirm.
The defendant, HCA Health Services of New Hampshire, Inc. d/b/a
Parkland Medical Center, appeals a jury verdict of $400,000 in favor of the
plaintiff, Aaron Wedgwood. On appeal, the defendant challenges pretrial
rulings of the Superior Court (Anderson, J.): (1) denying its motion in limine
seeking to preclude the plaintiff’s expert from testifying that the plaintiff had
suffered a mental nerve injury; and (2) denying its motion to strike a
supplemental expert disclosure in which the plaintiff had disclosed that his
expert would testify that his mental nerve injury was causally related to a fall
on the defendant’s premises, that the mental nerve injury is consistent with
trauma he experienced as a result of the fall, and that numbness in the
plaintiff’s face is a permanent injury. The defendant argues that, by denying
these motions, the trial court impermissibly allowed the plaintiff’s expert to
offer opinion testimony as to “probable neurological injuries at trial.” The
defendant further argues that the Trial Court (Messer, J.) erred by not issuing
a corrective jury instruction or granting a new trial on the basis of allegedly
prejudicial statements that the plaintiff’s counsel made during closing
arguments, and by utilizing a special verdict form which, it claims, misled the
jury when considering, for purposes of comparative fault, whether the plaintiff’s
conduct was a substantial factor in causing his own injuries.
We first address whether the trial court erred by allowing the plaintiff to
offer expert opinion testimony as to whether he suffered a mental nerve injury
as a result of the defendant’s negligence. The trial court has broad discretion
over the management of discovery and the admissibility of evidence at trial.
Laramie v. Stone, 160 N.H. 419, 425 (2010); Figlioli v. R.J. Moreau Cos., 151
N.H. 618, 626 (2005). We review the trial court’s decisions on such matters
pursuant to the unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. Figlioli, 151
N.H. at 626. To satisfy this standard, the defendant must demonstrate that
the trial court’s ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice
of its case. Id.
“We have long recognized that justice is best served by a system that
reduces surprise at trial by giving both parties the maximum amount of
information.” Id. Thus, a party is generally entitled to disclosure of an
opposing party’s expert witnesses, the substance of the facts and opinions
about which the experts are expected to testify, and the basis for their
opinions. Id. Failure to provide such information in accordance with a court-
ordered discovery schedule should, ordinarily, result in the exclusion of expert
opinion testimony at trial absent a showing of good cause. Id.; Super. Ct. R.
1(d). The good cause standard “does not explicitly bar relief from all
consequences of human neglect.” Perron v. Aranosian, 128 N.H. 92, 95 (1986).
In this case, the plaintiff claimed that in May 2015, while he was being
treated at the defendant’s emergency room, he lost consciousness and fell as a
result of the negligence of a nurse employed by the defendant, thereby suffering
several injuries to his face. The parties waived the requirements of RSA
516:29-b (Supp. 2018), and in accordance with the trial court’s case
structuring order, the plaintiff timely disclosed a physician who would opine
that, to a reasonable degree of medical certainty, he suffered, among other
injuries, permanent jaw pain and permanent “decreased sensation along the
chin and lower lip.” The defendant, in turn, disclosed a physician who would
testify that the plaintiff’s “complaints of pain in his face and numbness to his
chin” indicate that he suffered “a contusion/bruise to the mental nerve which
effects sensation to the chin and face,” that “[a] nerve contusion is the least
severe of potential nerve injuries,” and that “[t]o the extent there was a mental
nerve bruise as a result of [the] fall, it was minor, transient, and its symptoms
should have resolved by the fall of 2015.”
During the discovery deposition of the plaintiff’s expert, he testified that
the plaintiff’s “decreased sensation and jaw pain . . . could potentially be
related to a nerve injury,” that a “bruised nerve” could create a permanent
nerve injury, and that the plaintiff’s jaw pain and loss of sensation were
permanent injuries. He further testified that “the injury to the mental nerve”
was “consistent with the mechanism of injury” described by the plaintiff and
reflected in the plaintiff’s medical records. Following the close of discovery, and
approximately one month prior to trial, the plaintiff provided a supplemental
expert disclosure, stating, among other things, that his medical expert was
“expected to opine that plaintiff’s injuries, which include the . . . mental nerve
injury are causally related to the” fall that the plaintiff sustained in the
defendant’s emergency room, and that “since the numbness complaints have
persisted in excess of two years[,] . . . the facial numbness is more likely than
not permanent.” At that point, trial testimony of the plaintiff’s medical expert
was scheduled to be taken by deposition in three days.
Following the supplemental disclosure, the defendant moved to exclude
testimony concerning a nerve injury on the basis that the plaintiff had not
timely disclosed that his expert would testify concerning a nerve injury, and
2
moved to strike the supplemental disclosure on the same basis. The plaintiff
objected, observing that he had timely disclosed that his expert would testify
that he had experienced permanent jaw pain and decreased sensation along
the chin and lower lip, and that the expert had testified during his deposition
that those symptoms were consistent with an injury to the plaintiff’s mental
nerve. The trial court denied the motions, reasoning that the opinions were
previously disclosed, either during the expert’s discovery deposition or in the
prior disclosure, and that, when the trial court offered the defendant a
continuance to address the alleged inadequacy of the plaintiff’s disclosures, the
defendant had declined the offer and, thus, “to the limited extent that the
supplement[al] disclosure was truly a new disclosure,” the defendant could not
“show meaningful prejudice.”
Upon this record, we cannot say that the trial court’s decision to allow
the plaintiff’s expert to testify concerning “probable neurological injuries” was
clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of the defendant’s case.
Figlioli, 151 N.H. at 626. The plaintiff timely disclosed that his expert would
testify that he had suffered permanent jaw pain and loss of sensation along the
chin and lower lip as a result of the defendant’s negligence. Although the
disclosure did not attribute those injuries to nerve damage, the defendant’s
own disclosure did attribute the injuries to a bruised mental nerve, but claimed
that the injuries were not permanent. During his discovery deposition, the
plaintiff’s expert testified that a bruised nerve can, in fact, cause permanent
injury, that the plaintiff’s loss of sensation and jaw pain were permanent, and
that the “mechanism of injury” described by the plaintiff and reflected in his
medical records was consistent with “the injury to the mental nerve.”
Accordingly, the trial court reasonably could have determined that the plaintiff
had sufficiently disclosed, well in advance of the close of discovery, that his
expert would testify that he had suffered permanent jaw pain and loss of
sensation consistent with an injury to his mental nerve, and that the defendant
would be neither surprised nor prejudiced by such testimony.
We next address whether the trial court erred by not issuing a corrective
jury instruction or granting a new trial on the basis of allegedly prejudicial
statements of the plaintiff’s counsel during his closing argument. The
plaintiff’s attorney began his closing argument by asserting that “[a] trial
should be a search for the truth,” and that it is “not about how many people
can sit at counsel’s table,” “how many screens you can put up,” “how many
expert witnesses you can pay for,” or “how you can take facts and twist them
and manipulate them to try to fit your theory.” The plaintiff’s counsel then
offered the following retort to the assertion of the defendant in its closing
argument that it is “in the business of helping people”: “Until you accuse [the
defendant] of doing something wrong. Because for the last three years [the
defendant] has been in the business of using every weapon in [its] arsenal to
avoid taking responsibility for the carelessness” of its nurse. At that point, the
defendant objected, but did not specify any basis for the objection, request a
3