THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case Nos. 2019-0130 and 2020-0331, State of New
Hampshire v. Pamela Mansulla, the court on August 25, 2022,
issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties and the
record submitted on appeal, the court concludes that a formal written opinion
is unnecessary in this case. In these consolidated appeals, the defendant,
Pamela Mansulla, appeals her convictions following a bench trial in the circuit
court on 13 misdemeanor counts of animal cruelty and the trial court’s post-
conviction denial of her motion to amend her sentences. In her direct appeal of
her convictions, the defendant argues that the Circuit Court (Desjardins, J.)
erred by denying her pretrial motion to suppress all evidence obtained as a
result of a warrant to seize her dog, Carmella, and to search her home and
other animals for evidence of animal neglect. In her discretionary appeal, she
asserts that the Circuit Court (Greenhalgh, J.) erred by denying her motion to
amend her sentences by removing or modifying the condition that she may
“own only one cat or dog, at any one time, for the rest of her life.” We affirm
the defendant’s convictions, but vacate the challenged condition of her
sentences and remand for further proceedings consistent with this order.
I. Defendant’s Appeal of Her Convictions
A. Facts Related to Motion to Suppress
The following facts are derived from the affidavit submitted in support of
the warrant application. In September 2016, the defendant reported to the
local police that S.B. was neglecting her pit bull, Carmella. The defendant told
the police that she had originally obtained Carmella to breed her, but had
subsequently rehomed her to D.B., who, five weeks later, gave her to S.B. The
officer observed Carmella at S.B.’s home and saw that the dog was underweight
and had irritated skin, hair loss, eye mucus, and a “very strong odor.” S.B.
told the investigating officer that the defendant had neglected Carmella. D.B.
similarly told the officer that the defendant had neglected Carmella, stating
that, upon acquiring her, the dog “was covered in urine and feces,” her skin
was scalded by urine, she was very thin, and “her nails were so long they
looked like macaroni noodles.” S.B. later told the officer that she and the
defendant were working together to see to the dog’s veterinary needs. However,
from September 2016 to January 2017, the police received complaints from the
defendant and S.B., each accusing the other of neglecting Carmella.
In January 2017, the defendant reported to the investigating officer that
she had received Carmella from S.B. a month before and that the dog was “in
really bad shape.” The officer attempted to arrange a date and time to see
Carmella and the defendant’s other dogs, having learned that the defendant
regularly bred between 10 and 12 pit bulls at her home. On more than one
occasion, the defendant arranged a date and time for the officer to inspect the
dogs, but “[w]hen the day came to actually see them, she wouldn’t answer the
door or phone calls.”
On March 1, the defendant agreed that the officer could come by her
residence, but then would not allow the officer into her home. While on the
defendant’s front porch, the officer noticed a “strong odor of urine and feces,”
which became “very intense” when the defendant opened the front door. The
officer and the defendant spoke for several minutes, during which the
defendant became “argumentative at times.” Eventually, the defendant
brought Carmella onto the porch for the officer to inspect. The officer observed
that Carmella appeared noticeably less alert than she had appeared in 2016.
She also observed “a large area of weeping skin on [Carmella’s] upper front
shoulder area” and several patches of missing fur. The defendant provided the
officer with a written statement that was in a plastic bag to protect it from the
rain. When the officer opened the bag at the police station, the paper smelled
strongly of urine and feces.
Also in March, the officer obtained a written statement from S.B. about
the conditions in the defendant’s home. S.B. said the smell inside was very
bad and that she had “witnessed [the defendant] dump a bucket of floor
cleaner and water on a plywood floor to clean up urine.” S.B. explained that “it
was never wiped up so everythin[g] would seep into the floor.” A state
employee, who entered the home in March in connection with an unrelated
matter, also informed the officer that there was an intense smell inside the
residence.
On March 22, the officer was informed that the defendant had offered to
sell Carmella to an animal rescue league. On March 24, Carmella’s
veterinarian informed the officer that the defendant intended to rehome
Carmella. On March 25, the officer learned that Carmella had been to the
veterinary office that morning with the defendant, and was observed to be thin
and have scabs, missing fur, very long nails, and very red eyes. The
veterinarian refused to provide the defendant with a health certificate for
Carmella. The defendant left the office momentarily and then returned,
screaming at staff, and saying that she did not need a health certificate in
order to rehome Carmella. Based upon all of the above information, the officer
obtained a warrant on March 25 to seize Carmella and search the defendant’s
home and other animals for evidence of animal neglect.
2
B. Appellate Arguments
The defendant argues under the State and Federal Constitutions that the
trial court erred in denying her motion to suppress. We first address her claim
under the State Constitution and rely upon federal law only to aid in our
analysis. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
Part I, Article 19 of the New Hampshire Constitution requires search
warrants to be supported by probable cause. State v. Page, 172 N.H. 46, 50
(2019). Probable cause exists if a person of ordinary caution would justifiably
believe that what is sought will be found through the search and will aid in a
particular apprehension or conviction. Id. The police must demonstrate in an
application for a search warrant that there is a substantial likelihood that the
items sought will be found in the place searched. Id. The affiant need not
establish with certainty, or even beyond a reasonable doubt, that contraband
or evidence of a crime will be found in a particular place. Id.
Because the trial court in this case made no factual findings, we review
de novo its decision to uphold the magistrate’s probable cause determination.
See State v. Ball, 164 N.H. 204, 207-08 (2012). We assign great deference to
the magistrate’s determination of probable cause, and do not invalidate a
warrant by interpreting the evidence submitted in a hypertechnical sense.
Page, 172 N.H. at 50. Our task as the reviewing court is to examine whether,
given all the circumstances set forth in the affidavit, the magistrate had a
substantial basis for concluding that there was a fair probability that
contraband or evidence of a crime would be found in the particular place
described in the warrant. Id. We apply a totality-of-the-circumstances test to
review the sufficiency of an affidavit submitted with a warrant application. Id.
We interpret such supporting affidavits realistically and with common sense,
and we determine close cases by the preference to be accorded to warrants. Id.
The defendant first argues that the affidavit failed to provide the
magistrate with probable cause to believe that her residence contained
evidence of a crime, specifically, animal cruelty. See RSA 644:8, III(a), (f) (2016)
(providing that the crime of animal cruelty includes negligently depriving or
causing to be deprived an animal in the defendant’s possession or custody of
“necessary care, sustenance or shelter,” and negligently permitting or causing
an animal in the defendant’s possession or custody “to be subjected to cruelty,
inhumane treatment or unnecessary suffering of any kind”). She contends
that: (1) the affidavit established only that Carmella had “chronic medical
issues that persisted over several months and through several owners”; (2)
“issues related to the care given to the dog seemed to improve upon [the
defendant] regaining custody”; (3) the state worker who visited her home in
connection with the other matter “made no observations of dirty or unsanitary
living conditions” or of any animal being treated inhumanely; (4) there was
3