THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0281, In the Matter of Jennifer Faherty
and Kevin Faherty, the court on January 31, 2020, issued the
following order:
Having considered the parties’ briefs and the record submitted on appeal,
we conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R.
18(1). The respondent, Kevin Faherty (Husband), appeals the final decree
entered by the Circuit Court (Introcaso, J.) in his divorce from the petitioner,
Jennifer Faherty (Wife). We affirm.
The trial court has broad discretion in fashioning a divorce decree. In
the Matter of Crowe & Crowe, 148 N.H. 218, 221 (2002). We will not overturn
its decision absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Id. This standard
of review means that we review only whether there is an objective basis
sufficient to sustain the discretionary judgment made, and we will not disturb
the trial court’s determination if it could reasonably have been made. In the
Matter of Kempton & Kempton, 167 N.H. 785, 792 (2015). The trial court’s
discretion necessarily extends to matters such as assigning the weight to be
given evidence and measuring the credibility of witnesses. In the Matter of
Summers & Summers, 172 N.H. 474, 479 (2019). Conflicts in the testimony,
questions about the credibility of witnesses, and the weight assigned to
testimony are matters for the trial court to resolve. Id. The trial court’s factual
findings are binding upon this court if they are supported by the evidence and
are not legally erroneous. Id.
“Our standard of review is not whether we would rule differently than the
trial court, but whether a reasonable person could have reached the same
decision as the trial court based upon the same evidence.” Cook v. Sullivan,
149 N.H. 774, 780 (2003). We will not substitute our judgment for that of the
trial court. See Brent v. Paquette, 132 N.H. 415, 419 (1989). Nor will we
reweigh the equities. In the Matter of Heinrich & Heinrich, 164 N.H. 357, 365
(2012).
Husband first challenges the trial court’s property distribution. See RSA
458:16-a (2018) (amended 2019). In its narrative order, the trial court stated
that it had “made a considerable effort to divide the parties’ assets equitably,
understanding that [Husband] brought assets into the marriage which built a
foundation for the parties’ financial growth, while [Wife] has actively worked to
improve her earning capacity through education and a variety of work
experiences.” The court observed that the “bulk of the marital estate is in
investments,” which are “subject to fluctuations in value,” and, thus, that it
was “nearly impossible” to order an “‘equal’ division.” Nonetheless, the court
stated that it endeavored to award the parties “equitable shares of the marital
estate, as well as some considerable debt obligations.” Based upon the
“moderate length of the parties’ marriage,” the disparity in their earnings, and
other factors, the court determined that it was “fair and equitable to award
both parties an equal share of the marital assets, including those brought into
the marriage by [Husband].” However, with respect to the parties’ debts, the
court decided that because Husband “was always the majority income-earner
during the marriage and likely his earning capacity drove and supported the
parties’ lifestyle,” and because “he maintains a steady base income which
exceeds that of [Wife] by a considerable factor,” it was “reasonable to order that
he be liable for a larger share of the marital debts (excluding [Wife’s] student
loans).” Thereafter, the parties filed motions to reconsider and/or for
clarification, and, as a result, the trial court amended its decree to conform to
its narrative order.
“In a divorce proceeding, marital property is not to be divided by some
mechanical formula but in a manner deemed just based upon the evidence
presented and the equities of the case.” In the Matter of Geraghty & Geraghty,
169 N.H. 404, 417 (2016) (quotation omitted). Under RSA 458:16-a, II, “an
equal division of property is presumed equitable unless the trial court decides
otherwise after considering one or more of the factors designated in the
statute.” Id. (quotation omitted). The statute lists factors that the court may
consider, such as the length of marriage, ability of the parties to provide for
their own needs, the contribution of each party during the marriage, and the
value of property contributed by each party. See RSA 458:16-a, II.
Additionally, the court may consider any other factor it deems relevant. RSA
458:16-a, II(o). The court need not consider all of the enumerated factors or
give them equal weight. Geraghty, 169 N.H. at 417.
Husband argues that the trial court’s property division constitutes an
unsustainable exercise of discretion because the trial court stated that an
equal division was equitable, but then divided the estate unequally. He asserts
that “the total value of the marital estate, excluding the equity in the marital
home, was $434,001,” and, of this, he was awarded 44.7%, while Wife was
awarded 55.3%. With respect to the marital home, he asserts that the equity
in the home was $122,594, and although the parties were each awarded 50%
of the equity, he was required to use his share to pay down certain credit
cards. Thus, according to Husband, Wife was awarded 69% of the equity in the
marital home, while he was awarded only 31%.
Although Wife asserts that these arguments were not preserved for our
review, we disagree. Husband specifically argued in one of his post-decree
motions that the trial court awarded Wife “slightly more than 55% of the
marital assets, which is contrary to the court’s intention of a 50/50 division.”
2
Husband argued in another post-decree motion that the trial court did not, in
fact, allocate 50% of the equity in the marital home to each party because it
ordered him to pay off certain credit cards.
As to the merits of Husband’s arguments, we do not share his
interpretation of the trial court’s order. See In the Matter of Salesky & Salesky,
157 N.H. 698, 702 (2008) (explaining that the meaning of a trial court order
raises an issue of law and that we interpret such orders de novo). The trial
court did not order an equal division of the marital estate. Rather, it
determined that it was equitable to equally divide the marital assets and to
unequally divide the marital debt.
Husband next asserts that an unequal division of the estate is
inequitable because: (1) even though the parenting plan awarded the parties
roughly equal parenting time, he has the children more than 50% of the time;
(2) he earned more income than Wife earned during the marriage; (3) the
parties were married for slightly fewer than ten years; (4) Wife is better
educated than Husband and “arguably” has a more stable job than he does;
and (5) although his base salary exceeds Wife’s salary, his earnings fluctuated
considerably between 2014 and 2017, and he does not expect to earn
“significant commissions (over $500/month) in the months following trial.”
Based upon our review of the record submitted on appeal, we conclude that the
trial court reasonably found that its property division was equitable. See
Kempton, 167 N.H. at 800.
Husband next contends that the trial court erred by ordering him to: (1)
refinance the mortgage on the marital home; (2) pay Wife one-half of the home’s
equity; and (3) pay some of her credit card debt “from his funds.” The trial
court found that the marital residence, valued at $350,000, had a mortgage
totaling $227,406.26, and that it was “fair and equitable that the marital home
net proceeds be divided 50% to [Wife] and 50% to [Husband].” Although
Husband contributed to the down payment for the home, the trial court found
that its upkeep and maintenance “was a joint marital effort that lasted nearly
10 years.” The trial court acknowledged that Husband wanted to retain the
home, and ordered that he could retain it, provided that he refinanced the
mortgage so as to remove Wife’s name from it and paid her “an amount equal
to 50% of the $350,000 value less the payoff of the mortgage loan.” If Husband
were unable to refinance the mortgage in this way, the court ordered that the
home be sold. The court further ordered Husband to use “any proceeds he
may realize [from the home’s sale] or any excess of refinancing funds he may
obtain” to pay off certain credit cards and to pay off the balance of the home
equity line of credit.
Husband argues that this portion of the decree “exceeded the [trial
court’s] authority” as we explained in In the Matter of Beal & Beal, 153 N.H.
349 (2006). In Beal, the trial court found that because the parties had debt
3