THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0668, State of New Hampshire v. Kyle C.
Buffum, the court on October 19, 2021, issued the following
order:
Having considered the defendant’s brief and reply brief, the State’s
memorandum of law, the oral arguments of the parties, and the appellate record
before us, we conclude that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case.
The defendant, Kyle C. Buffum, appeals the order of the Trial Court (Nicolosi, J.)
denying his motion for a new trial. The motion before the trial court asked that
his sentence be vacated and that he be resentenced in accordance with a pretrial
plea offer extended by the State. He argues that the court erred in finding that,
although he “did not receive the legal advice to which he was entitled” from his
trial counsel, he failed to establish “a reasonable probability that he would have
taken the plea offer but for his counsel’s deficient advice.” He asks that we
remand this case to the trial court for resentencing in accord with the plea offer
originally made by the State. He acknowledges that the plea offer addressed only
one of three charges then pending against him and that the “record does not
reflect that the State offered additional time to serve on the two other charges.”
Therefore, he asserts, the court “should remand for a determination of the proper
remedy for those charges.” We decline his request and affirm the order of the
trial court.
The following facts are taken from the record before us. Between
November 2013 and January 2014, the defendant solicited Samantha Heath to
kill the victim; he explained to Heath how to do so and how to dispose of the
victim’s body. In January 2014, Heath attacked the victim. Heath subsequently
pled guilty to attempted first degree murder and received a sentence of twenty
years to life; she later testified at the defendant’s trial.
The defendant was charged with accomplice to attempted murder, see RSA
626:8 (2016); RSA 629:1 (2016); RSA 630:1-a (2016), conspiracy to commit
murder, see RSA 629:3 (2016); RSA 630:1-a, and criminal solicitation of murder,
see RSA 629:2 (2016); RSA 630:1-a. Prior to trial, the State offered the defendant
a plea deal of twenty years to life, the same plea deal that it had offered to Heath.
The defendant rejected the offer and pled not guilty by reason of insanity. On
January 15, 2016, the trial court held a status conference that was converted
into a plea hearing. Prior to conducting the plea colloquy, the court recessed for
an hour and a half during which time the defendant’s trial counsel reviewed his
acknowledgement and waiver of rights with him, and the defendant executed a
stipulation and an acknowledgement and waiver of rights form. The trial court
then held a plea colloquy in which the “defendant indicated that he understood
the elements of the underlying offenses and understood the rights that he was
waiving by pleading not guilty by reason of insanity.” During the colloquy, the
court reviewed the maximum sentences that could be imposed for each of the
three charged offenses. As the defendant states in his brief, he was incorrectly
advised that, if convicted on the accomplice to attempted murder charge, he
faced a possible sentence of thirty years to life in prison. In fact, the applicable
sentencing statute, RSA 629:1, IV, establishes no minimum sentence; it provides
“that in the case of attempt to commit murder the punishment shall be
imprisonment for life or such other term as the court shall order.”
Following a jury trial, the defendant was found guilty on all three charges.
He was then sentenced to serve thirty-five years to life in prison on the attempted
murder charge and given the option to petition the court to reduce his minimum
sentence by seven years if he remained of good behavior in prison. He received
suspended sentences of fifteen to thirty years on the criminal solicitation and
conspiracy charges. These sentences were concurrent to each other but
suspended for forty years; they were consecutive to the sentence imposed for his
attempted murder conviction.
The defendant appealed his convictions; they were affirmed in 2017. In
2019, the defendant filed a motion for a new trial in which he alleged that his
trial counsel’s representation had been ineffective because counsel had failed to
advise him about his maximum sentencing exposure. He argued that he would
have accepted the State’s plea offer of twenty years to life in prison “had he
known that his exposure after trial was a life sentence instead of the 30 to life he
was told.” After holding a hearing at which she heard testimony and argument,
the same trial judge who held the 2016 colloquy denied the motion. The
defendant now appeals, arguing that the trial court erred in finding that he was
not prejudiced by the misinformation that he received from his counsel.
The State and Federal Constitutions guarantee a criminal defendant
reasonably competent assistance of counsel. State v. Wilbur, 171 N.H. 445, 448
(2018). The standard for determining whether a defendant has received
ineffective assistance of counsel is the same under both constitutions. Id.
Consistent with our long-recognized practice, we first examine the constitutional
competency of counsel’s performance under our State Constitution. See State v.
Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983). Because, in this case, the same analysis
applies under the Federal Constitution, we will necessarily reach the same result
under both constitutions. State v. Kepple, 155 N.H. 267, 269 (2007).
To obtain relief on a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel, a defendant
must establish both that his counsel’s representation was constitutionally
deficient and that counsel’s deficient performance prejudiced the outcome of the
case. Id. at 269-70. The performance and prejudice prongs of the ineffectiveness
2
inquiry each present mixed questions of law and fact. Wilbur, 171 N.H. at 448.
We will not disturb the trial court’s factual findings unless they are unsupported
by the evidence or are erroneous as a matter of law. Id. Our review of whether
each prong is met is de novo. Id. If we conclude that the defendant has failed to
satisfy either prong of the inquiry, we need not consider the other one. Kepple,
155 N.H. at 270.
There is no dispute in this case that the defendant’s trial counsel erred in
advising the defendant as to the sentence range applicable to a conviction for
accomplice to attempted murder. See RSA 629:1, IV. However, the defendant
argues that the trial court both misapprehended the scope of his trial counsel’s
deficient performance and erred in finding that he was not prejudiced by it.
We recently addressed the analysis to be applied to determine whether the
prejudice prong has been met when a defendant alleges that the ineffective
assistance of his counsel resulted in his rejection of a plea offer. Fitzgerald, 173
N.H. at 576-78. Because the analysis for an ineffective assistance claim is the
same under both the State and Federal Constitutions, we adopted the approach
developed by the United States Supreme Court in Lafler v. Cooper, 566 U.S. 156,
163-64 (2012). Fitzgerald, 173 N.H. at 576. A defendant can show prejudice if
loss of a plea opportunity based on ineffective assistance of counsel leads to the
imposition of a more severe sentence. Id. at 577. To establish prejudice, the
defendant
must show that but for the ineffective advice of counsel there is a
reasonable probability that the plea offer would have been presented
to the court (i.e., that the defendant would have accepted the plea
and the prosecution would not have withdrawn it in light of
intervening circumstances), that the court would have accepted its
terms, and that the conviction or sentence, or both, under the offer’s
terms would have been less severe than under the judgment and
sentence that in fact were imposed.
Lafler v. Cooper, 566 U.S. at 164.
Here, the defendant contends that the combination of errors committed by
his trial counsel led him to reject the State’s plea offer of twenty years to life in
prison. He identifies the following alleged errors: (1) his counsel’s “assessment
that he would likely get around twenty years after trial”; (2) his counsel’s “failure
to educate” him about the possibility of consecutive sentences; and (3) his
counsel’s misstatement about the sentence range applicable to a conviction for
accomplice to attempted murder. We address each of the alleged errors in turn,
beginning with his counsel’s alleged assessment of the defendant’s sentencing
exposure.
3