THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0372, State of New Hampshire v. Taylor
M. Kenny, the court on June 18, 2020, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
defendant, Taylor M. Kenny, appeals his conviction after a bench trial in the
Circuit Court (Gardner, J.) of driving under the influence (DUI). See RSA 265-
A:2, I (2014). We affirm.
The following facts are derived from the record. At approximately 11:30
p.m. on February 2, 2019, Durham Police Officer Pelletier was parked on
Newmarket Road running stationary radar. The officer saw a vehicle traveling
towards him at “a high rate of speed” and observed on the radar that the car
was traveling 59 miles per hour in the 35 mile-per-hour zone. The officer
turned his cruiser to follow the car, activated the cruiser’s blue lights, and the
car slowed quickly but remained in the travel lane for a short distance before
pulling over to the side of the road.
The officer spoke with the defendant and asked for his license and
registration. While providing his license, the defendant fumbled with his wallet
and nearly dropped it twice. His eyes appeared bloodshot and droopy, and the
officer noticed the odor of “an alcoholic beverage” coming from the vehicle. The
officer asked if the defendant had been drinking and he said he had not. The
officer twice asked the defendant to participate in field sobriety testing but he
declined each request.
The officer asked if he had any medical conditions such as epilepsy or
diabetes, or if he had suffered any recent head injuries, trauma, or
hospitalizations; the defendant answered all of these questions in the negative.
The officer then asked the defendant to step out of the vehicle and, after the
officer’s fourth request, the defendant complied. As the defendant stepped out
of the car and walked to the rear of the vehicle, he was unsteady on his feet.
Determining that the defendant was impaired and unable to safely operate a
motor vehicle, the officer placed him under arrest for DUI.
While transporting the defendant to the police department, the officer
smelled the odor of an alcoholic beverage inside the cruiser that had not been
present before. In the intoxilyzer room at the police department, as they sat
facing each other across a table at a distance of approximately three feet, the
officer continued to smell alcohol. He told the defendant he could smell the
odor of alcohol and again asked the defendant if he drank that night, but the
defendant again denied drinking. After reviewing the administrative license
suspension form with the defendant, the officer asked him if he would submit
to a breath test, but he refused. The defendant marked the form indicating his
refusal and noting that his refusal could be used as evidence against him in
court.
After being read his Miranda rights, the defendant agreed to answer
questions. When asked why he was driving 59 miles an hour in a 35 mile-per-
hour zone, the defendant responded that he had not realized he was going that
fast. As he spoke, his speech was slow and muffled.
Following a bench trial, the trial court found that:
not being aware of the speed; the bloodshot eyes; slow, thick,
muffled speech; dexterity issues; being unsteady on [his] feet -- the
odor of alcohol, obviously, is not a sign of impairment on its own,
but the denial combined with the odor, and refusal, all amount to
any degree, however slight, which is the standard in this state.
Accordingly, the court ruled that the State proved its case beyond a reasonable
doubt.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred by finding that
there was sufficient evidence to convict him of DUI. According to the
defendant, the State’s evidence “was far from overwhelming, and, even when
viewed in the light most favorable to the State, did not support a guilty finding
beyond a reasonable doubt.” The defendant asserts that when compared to
other cases where the officer observed erratic driving, confusion, slurred or
difficult to understand speech, an odor of alcohol, difficulty maintaining
balance, and where the defendant admitted to consuming alcohol, no rational
trier of fact could have found that he was impaired. We disagree.
RSA 265-A:2, I(a) provides that “[n]o person shall drive . . . a vehicle
upon any way . . . [w]hile such person is under the influence of intoxicating
liquor.” To prove that the defendant was “under the influence of intoxicating
liquor,” the State need only prove that the defendant was “impaired to any
degree.” State v. Kelley, 159 N.H. 449, 452 (2009) (quotation omitted). To
prevail in a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, the defendant bears the
burden of proving that no rational trier of fact, viewing the evidence in the light
most favorable to the State, could have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
See id. at 454-55.
2
In reviewing the evidence, we examine each evidentiary item in the
context of all the evidence, not in isolation. Id. at 455. The trier of fact may
draw reasonable inferences from facts proved and also inferences from facts
found as a result of other inferences, provided they can be reasonably drawn
therefrom. Id.; cf. State v. Sage, 170 N.H. 605, 610-11 (2018) (in evaluating
whether there existed reasonable suspicion supporting expansion of traffic stop
to investigate DUI, “we do not consider each of [the officer’s] observations in
isolation; rather we consider them together and in light of the reasonable
inferences that an officer who is experienced in detecting and investigating
impaired drivers may draw”).
Viewing all the evidence and all reasonable inferences that may be drawn
from it in the light most favorable to the State, we conclude that the evidence
was sufficient for a rational trier of fact to find beyond a reasonable doubt that
the defendant was guilty of DUI. The defendant was unaware that he was
driving his vehicle 24 miles per hour over the speed limit. See Sage, 170 N.H.
at 610 (defendant’s inability to maintain correct speed was a factor supporting
the officer’s decision to investigate whether the defendant was driving under
the influence); State v. MacDonald, 156 N.H. 803, 806 (2008) (speeding was
evidence of erratic operation); cf. State v. Blesdell-Moore, 166 N.H. 183, 189
(2014) (finding no indicia of impairment where the defendant was not speeding
or otherwise operating his vehicle in an erratic manner). The defendant’s eyes
were bloodshot and droopy, the odor of alcohol emanated from him, he fumbled
with his wallet and almost dropped it twice, and he was unsteady on his feet.
See Sage, 170 N.H. at 610 (finding reasonable suspicion of DUI where odor of
alcohol emanated from vehicle and defendant’s eyes were red and watery);
Kelley, 159 N.H. at 455 (defendant had difficulty producing her registration,
slowly fiddling through different papers). In addition, the fact finder could infer
from the defendant’s refusal to submit to a breath test that he was conscious of
his guilt. See State v. Parmenter, 149 N.H. 40, 44 (2002); State v. Cormier, 127
N.H. 253, 256-60 (1985); RSA 265-A:10 (2014). Finally, Pelletier testified that,
at the time of the defendant’s trial, he had investigated “[a]pproximately 25”
DUI cases and that he interacted with people impaired by alcohol on an almost
daily basis in the course of his employment as a police officer over the previous
three years.
Considering all of the officer’s observations together and the reasonable
inferences that may be drawn therefrom, we conclude that the defendant has
not demonstrated that no rational trier of fact could have found him guilty of
DUI beyond a reasonable doubt. See Kelley, 159 N.H. at 454-55. Accordingly,
we reject his argument that the evidence was not sufficient to convict him of
DUI.
Characterizing the evidence of impairment in this case as solely
circumstantial, the defendant also argues that the trial court’s guilty finding
should be reversed because the State’s evidence of impairment did not exclude
3