THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0622, Appeal of JoAnn Hoff, the court on
February 24, 2021, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
claimant, JoAnn Hoff, appeals an order of the Compensation Appeals Board
(CAB) reducing her temporary disability compensation benefits to a fixed rate.
She primarily argues that the CAB erred by concluding that a change in
conditions occurred justifying the reduction in benefits. See RSA 281-A:48
(Supp. 2020). We affirm.
The following facts were found by the CAB or are supported by the
record. On October 23, 2017, the claimant was injured while working as a
licensed practical nurse for Valley Regional Hospital, Inc., the employer. She
thereafter reported experiencing lower back pain and numbness in her legs.
An MRI revealed a lumbar disc protrusion. The claimant began receiving
temporary disability benefits in November 2017. See RSA 281-A:28 (2010). On
December 14, 2017, Dr. Pikus performed surgery on the claimant to address
her leg symptoms. During follow-up appointments in early 2018, Dr. Pikus
consistently noted that the claimant’s leg symptoms had resolved, but her back
pain persisted. At a physical therapy appointment in May 2018 the claimant
stated: “I think I could go back to work and do desk work.”
In June 2018, the claimant returned to Dr. Pikus, reporting that her leg
symptoms had returned. He ordered another MRI, which showed no significant
negative changes compared with the previous one. Although the claimant
continued to report back pain, Dr. Pikus noted that the cause of her pain was
uncertain. Accordingly, he referred her to Dr. Mason for a physiatric
evaluation and assistance with returning to work.
The claimant also underwent an independent medical evaluation in June
2018, at the request of the respondent, the employer’s workers’ compensation
insurance carrier. See RSA 281-A:38 (Supp. 2020). Dr. Rudolf, who performed
the IME, reviewed the claimant’s medical records relating to her injury,
interviewed the claimant, and performed a physical examination. He noted
that the claimant reported ongoing back pain and numbness in her left foot
and leg. He also observed that she experienced back discomfort when standing
for short periods of time and walking for a distance longer than thirty feet, and
that she could not lift more than seven to ten pounds or easily climb or
descend stairs. The IME report notes the claimant’s statements that she could
sit for extended periods of time if she adjusted positions and that she sat
comfortably during the interview portion of the IME without displaying any
“obvious pain behavior.” Based upon his evaluation, Dr. Rudolf concluded that
the claimant had “a work capability doing a sit down occupation,” primarily
desk work, and that she should “avoid long periods of standing or walking, no
lifting or carrying greater than [ten] pounds.”
As a result of the IME, on July 11, 2018, the employer offered the
claimant a temporary, full-time position, as a patient access representative,
which would involve completing “a variety of secretarial tasks.” See RSA 281-
A:23-b (2010). A workers’ compensation task analysis, which was completed
by the employer to evaluate the physical requirements of the temporary
position, described the position as requiring occasional — between 1% and
33% of the time — standing and walking, and continuous — between 67% and
100% of the time — sitting, reaching, and fine motor skills. The claimant
testified at a subsequent Department of Labor (DOL) hearing that she neither
returned to work after receiving the offer, nor communicated with her employer
about the offer.
On August 8, Dr. Mason saw the claimant and opined that she could not
return to full duty work or her “regular job” as a licensed practical nurse. At
the DOL hearing, the claimant testified that she did not inform Dr. Mason of
the temporary position that she had been offered.
In September 2018, the respondent sent Drs. Pikus and Mason letters
with the employer’s temporary job offer and workers’ compensation task
analysis attached, requesting their opinion regarding whether the claimant was
capable of performing the job. Dr. Pikus opined that she could perform the job,
with a “sit/stand modification.” Dr. Mason opined that the claimant was
capable of performing the job, and noted: “please allow occasional break to
stand/stretch/reposition.”
In October 2018, the claimant sought and obtained appointments to be
seen separately by both Drs. Pikus and Mason, complaining of back pain. On
December 9, 2018, the claimant completed a functional capacity evaluation
(FCE) to determine her work ability. The report found that the claimant could
not maintain static standing without the support of one hand for more than
one minute, could maintain static standing with upper extremity support for
eight minutes, could tolerate dynamic standing for twenty-five consecutive
minutes, and was able to walk 400 feet with the assistance of a cane. The FCE
also found that she could sit for over an hour at once, and for twenty-minute
intervals thereafter. Based upon the claimant’s performance, the FCE report
concluded that she could not “return to office type nursing like she was doing
prior to [the] injury.” The report further concluded that the claimant “can
tolerate full[-]time employment at a sedentary physical demand level,” with
2
“dynamic standing limited to [twenty-five] minutes at most occasionally in the
course of a work day” and walking “limited to 400[] [feet] at most at a time.”
The respondent requested a DOL hearing to review the claimant’s
benefits eligibility. See RSA 281-A:48. On January 31, 2019, a DOL hearing
officer held a hearing and thereafter concluded that the claimant was capable
of full-time sedentary work and, thus, that a change in conditions occurred
justifying a reduction in benefits. See id. The hearing officer reduced the
claimant’s benefits to a fixed partial rate. Following the DOL hearing, on
February 20, 2019, Dr. Mason saw the claimant and determined that she could
not return to work, but “was made aware of [the] FCE,” and, in the record for
that visit, wrote: “Please refer to this detailed assessment [regarding] work
abilities.”
The claimant appealed the DOL hearing officer’s decision to the CAB,
which conducted a de novo hearing. The CAB concluded that the claimant had
work capacity based upon the FCE, IME, Dr. Pikus’s approval of the job offer,
and Dr. Mason’s deferral to the FCE regarding work capacity. The CAB
therefore granted the respondent’s request to reduce the claimant’s
compensation to a fixed rate. The claimant filed a motion for reconsideration
and rehearing, in which she argued, in part, that any job offer she received
from the employer was not approved by her treating physicians, as required by
the relevant regulation. See N.H. Admin. R., Lab 504.04(g). The CAB denied
her motion, and this appeal followed.
We will not set aside or vacate the CAB’s decision except for errors of law,
unless the court is satisfied, by a clear preponderance of the evidence before it,
that the decision is unjust or unreasonable. Appeal of CNA Ins. Cos., 143 N.H.
270, 272 (1998); see RSA 541:13 (2007). Our review of the CAB’s factual
findings is deferential. Appeal of Hartford Ins. Co., 162 N.H. 91, 93 (2011); see
RSA 541:13 (“[A]ll findings of the [CAB] upon all questions of fact properly
before it shall be deemed to be prima facie lawful and reasonable.”).
The claimant argues that the CAB erred by concluding that a change in
conditions occurred under RSA 281-A:48, justifying a reduction in benefits.
We disagree.
“The two-step analysis for reducing or terminating a claimant’s benefits
is: (1) whether the claimant has experienced a change in conditions; and, if so,
(2) whether that change affected [her] earning capacity.” Appeal of Carnahan,
160 N.H. 73, 79 (2010) (quotations and emphasis omitted). Pursuant to RSA
281-A:48, I, the respondent was entitled to petition to review the claimant’s
award of benefits “upon the ground of a change in conditions.” When
petitioning to reduce the claimant’s benefits, the respondent was required to
“submit along with the petition medical evidence that the injured employee is
physically able to perform his or her regular work or is able to engage in gainful
3