THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0359, Curtis Leach v. Credit One Bank,
N.A., the court on January 31, 2020, issued the following order:
Having considered the brief, memorandum of law, and record submitted
on appeal, we conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See
Sup. Ct. R. 18(1). We affirm.
The plaintiff, Curtis Leach, appeals the decision of the Circuit Court
(Ryan, J.) dismissing his small claim complaint against the defendant, Credit
One Bank, N.A. The plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in concluding
that his complaint, as amended, fails to state a claim upon which relief may be
granted.
The record shows that on December 27, 2018, the plaintiff filed a small
claim complaint against the defendant alleging that the defendant “violated
RSA 358-A and RSA 358-C on multiple occasions.” Although the complaint
form instructed the plaintiff to “clearly state . . . how, when and where the
claim arose,” the plaintiff provided no other information regarding the nature of
his claim. He sought damages of $10,000, the jurisdictional maximum for
small claims. See RSA 503:1, I (Supp. 2019).
On April 25, 2019, the defendant moved to dismiss, arguing that the
plaintiff failed to state any facts to show that it allegedly violated New
Hampshire law. See RSA 503:3 (2010) (providing that the plaintiff “shall set
forth a statement of the claim, including . . . the basis of the claim”). The
defendant also alleged that the claims were barred by the applicable statute of
limitations, asserting that the defendant had no contact with the plaintiff after
charging off the $709.48 unpaid balance in his credit account on April 21,
2013, more than three years before suit was filed. See RSA 508:4, I (2010)
(three year statute of limitations for personal actions).
On May 7, 2019, before the trial court ruled on the motion to dismiss,
the plaintiff filed a motion to amend his complaint, together with an amended
complaint, in an effort to address the deficiencies identified by the defendant.
On May 14, 2019, the trial court granted the plaintiff’s motion to amend and
the defendant’s motion to dismiss. On June 6, 2019, the court denied the
plaintiff’s motion to reconsider.
On appeal, the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in “dismiss[ing]
his complaint while also granting his amended complaint,” arguing that “[a]n
amended complaint supercedes the original complaint,” and that “the new and
amended writ pleads proper causes of action.”
At the outset, we construe the trial court’s dismissal order as a dismissal
of the amended complaint. See In the Matter of Salesky & Salesky, 157 N.H.
698, 702 (2008) (interpretation of trial court orders presents a question of law
for this court). “In reviewing a trial court’s grant of a motion to dismiss, we
consider whether the allegations in the plaintiff’s pleadings are reasonably
susceptible of a construction that would permit recovery.” Clark v. N.H. Dep’t
of Emp’t Sec., 171 N.H. 639, 645 (2019). We assume the allegations in the
plaintiff’s pleadings to be true and construe all reasonable inferences in the
light most favorable to the plaintiff. Id. “We will not, however, assume the
truth or accuracy of any allegations which are not well-pleaded, including the
statement of conclusions of fact and principles of law.” Snierson v. Scruton,
145 N.H. 73, 76 (2000) (quotation omitted). “We will uphold the trial court’s
grant of a motion to dismiss if the facts pleaded do not constitute a basis for
legal relief.” Clark, 171 N.H. at 645.
Upon review of the plaintiff’s amended complaint, we conclude that it
fails to state a basis for legal relief. The plaintiff alleges that “[w]hile the
account was sold and transferred to another debt collect[or], the Defendant
contacted the Plaintiff in order to collect the debt.” Although the plaintiff
provides no specifics, he claims that this conduct violated RSA chapter 358-C,
the Unfair, Deceptive or Unreasonable Collection Practices Act (UDUCPA).
However, the UDUCPA prohibits debt collectors from “collect[ing] or
attempt[ing] to collect a debt in an unfair, deceptive or unreasonable manner.”
RSA 358-C:2 (2009). The plaintiff does not allege facts establishing how the
defendant attempted to collect the debt in an unfair, deceptive, or
unreasonable manner. He does not allege, for example, that the defendant
misrepresented the status of the debt, or that the defendant represented that
the sale of the account would subject him to harsh collection attempts. See
RSA 358-C:3, XII (2009) (prohibiting debt collectors from representing that the
sale of an account will subject the debtor to “harsh, vindictive or abusive
collection attempts”). We conclude that the plaintiff’s allegations do not
constitute a violation of the UDUCPA. See Clark, 171 N.H. at 645.
The plaintiff’s remaining allegations assert numerous violations of the
UDUCPA and RSA chapter 358-A, as well as claims of fraud and
misrepresentation, without providing any description of the conduct that
allegedly supports such claims. Instead, the complaint describes the conduct
prohibited by the applicable laws and alleges that the defendant engaged in
such conduct. The trial court was not required to assume the truth or
accuracy of the plaintiff’s conclusory statements of law and fact. See Snierson,
2
145 N.H. at 76. Because the amended complaint fails to state a basis for legal
relief, we affirm the trial court’s dismissal order. See Clark, 171 N.H. at 645.
Affirmed.
Hicks, Bassett, Hantz Marconi, and Donovan, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3