THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0537, In the Matter of David Bournival
and Eileen Bournival, the court on July 16, 2021, issued the
following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
petitioner, David Bournival (Husband), appeals the final decree entered by the
Circuit Court (Foley, J.) in his divorce from the respondent, Eileen Bournival
(Wife), arguing that the trial court erred by: (1) including his interests in two
discretionary trusts in the marital estate; (2) awarding Wife certain items of
personal property; and (3) granting two of her requests for factual findings.
Wife cross-appeals, arguing that the trial court inequitably divided the marital
estate. We affirm.
I. Facts
The trial court found the following facts. The parties were married in
December 1992. Twenty-four years later, in December 2016, Husband filed the
instant divorce action. At trial, the only dispute between the parties concerned
the division of the marital estate. Of particular focus were Husband’s interests
in two discretionary trusts: (1) the David P. Bournival Life Insurance Trust
dated April 24, 1991 (LIT); and (2) the Richard Bournival GST Family Trust
FBO David P. Bournival (GST).
The LIT refers to Husband as the “Donor,” but he contributed only $10.
Husband created the trust at the direction of his parents, and his parents
funded it. The intent of the trust was to provide Husband with approximately
$1,000,000 in life insurance benefits on his parents’ lives to pay estate taxes
that might be incurred when they died. At the time of the parties’ 2019 trial,
the LIT consisted of a single brokerage account containing $1,252,818, which
Husband managed. The LIT gives the trustees “uncontrolled discretion” to
distribute principal or income to Husband and his children. However, the
primary trustee of the trust, Husband’s longtime accountant, interpreted this
provision as allowing him to make distributions only to Husband. The other
trustee is Husband’s uncle. The LIT requires the trustees to provide an
accounting annually and states that the trust is to be governed by
Massachusetts law.
Husband is also a beneficiary of the GST. Like the LIT, the GST: (1) gives
the trustees “uncontrolled discretion” to make distributions of principal or
income to Husband and his children; (2) requires the trustees to provide an
annual accounting; and (3) provides that the trust shall be governed by
Massachusetts law. As with the LIT, the trustees of the GST are Husband’s
accountant and uncle. At the time of the trial, the GST’s assets, held in an
account with Husband’s investment firm, totaled $675,660.82.
The parties disputed whether Husband’s interests in the two trusts were
part of the marital estate. Husband argued that his interests were too remote
and speculative to be included in the marital estate because the discretion
afforded the trustees insulates him from having access to trust assets. Wife
countered that the discretion afforded the trustees is illusory because the
accountant (the primary trustee) lacks the neutral independence that the law
requires, and the other trustee, Husband’s uncle, has had no involvement in
the management of the trusts or their assets.
Applying Massachusetts law, the trial court determined that Husband’s
interests in the trusts were part of the marital estate. The trial court then
allocated the marital estate pursuant to New Hampshire law. The court found
that the value of the marital estate, including the value of personal property
owned by the parties, the marital homestead valued at $515,000, Wife’s 2016
inheritance of $87,350, Husband’s 2018 inheritance of $2,402,857, and his
interests in the two trusts, totaled $8,159,616. The court acknowledged that,
by statute, an equal division of the marital estate is presumed to be equitable,
but then considered specifically-enumerated statutory factors to determine
whether to deviate from that statutory presumption. See RSA 458:16-a, II
(2018). After considering several of those factors, the court found it equitable
to award Husband $5,142,906 and Wife $3,016,710.
The court acknowledged that Wife’s award constituted “only 37% of the
total marital estate,” but concluded that its distribution was equitable “given
the parties’ current circumstances, [Wife’s] greater contribution to the marriage
and to the marital estate, [Wife] helping [Husband] through graduate school,
and the enormous largely recent family helpfulness of [Husband’s] family.” The
court explained that “aside from inheritances and trust assets, the marital
estate consists of $3,828,380.00, of which [Wife] is receiving . . . 79%.”
The court also explained that, although the LIT became “part of the
marital lifestyle” because of distributions made in 2006 and 2014, “the most
serious funding” of the LIT did not occur until after Husband’s mother died in
2018, long after the parties had separated. In 2018, before Husband’s mother
died, the LIT held $212,827.43; after she died, the LIT gained “another $1
million in funding.” Similarly, it was not until his mother died that Husband
inherited an IRA of $416,255 and a more liquid account that, as of the time of
trial, held $1,986,602. The court reasoned that “none of the assets received”
by the LIT or by Husband in his individual capacity in 2018 “benefitted the
marital lifestyle in any way,” and, therefore, should not be divided equally.
2
Husband moved for reconsideration, and the relevant portions of that motion
were denied. This appeal and cross-appeal followed.
II. Analysis
The trial court has broad discretion in fashioning a final divorce decree.
In the Matter of Spenard & Spenard, 167 N.H. 1, 3 (2014). Its discretion
necessarily encompasses decisions concerning property distribution. Id. We
will not overturn the trial court’s decision absent an unsustainable exercise of
discretion. Id. Our standard of review requires only that we determine
whether the record establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the
discretionary judgment made, and we will not disturb the trial court’s
determination if it could reasonably have been made. In the Matter of
Kurowski & Kurowski, 161 N.H. 578, 585 (2011). If the trial court’s findings
could reasonably have been made on the evidence presented at trial, they will
stand. Spenard, 167 N.H. at 3.
A. Husband’s Interests in Trusts
We first consider Husband’s assertion that the trial court erred when it
determined that his interests in the two trusts constituted marital property
subject to equitable distribution. We review this determination de novo
because it presents a question of law. See In the Matter of Cohen & Richards,
172 N.H. 78, 83 (2019). Because no party argues otherwise on appeal, we
assume without deciding that, as the trial court ruled, Massachusetts law
controls whether Husband’s interests in the LIT and GST constitute marital
property.
Under Massachusetts law, “[a] divorcing spouse’s enforceable right to an
asset generally permits that asset to be included in the marital estate” for the
purposes of equitable division. Pfannenstiehl v. Pfannenstiehl, 55 N.E.3d 933,
938 (Mass. 2016). Although intangible property interests may be part of a
spouse’s estate for the purposes of equitable distribution, “[w]hen interests are
properly characterized as mere expectancies, . . . they may not be included in
the divisible estate of the divorcing parties.” Id. at 939. Rather than
enforceable rights, expectancies “more properly are characterized as
anticipated but indefinite opportunities for the future acquisition of assets or
income,” rather than as enforceable rights. Id. (quotations omitted). “Whether
a trust may be included in the divisible marital estate requires close
examination of the particular trust instrument to determine whether the
interest is a fixed and enforceable property right, or whether the party’s interest
is too remote or speculative to be included.” Id. (quotations and citation
omitted). Making this determination “requires evaluation of the facts and
circumstances of each case” and the “attributes of the specific trust at issue.”
Id. (quotation omitted).
3