THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
9th Circuit-Nashua Probate Division
No. 2019-0743
IN RE J.P.
Argued: June 10, 2020
Opinion Issued: July 31, 2020
McLane Middleton, Professional Association, of Manchester (Ralph F.
Holmes and Jacqueline A. Leary on the brief, and Ms. Leary orally), for the
petitioner.
Law Office of Joshua L. Gordon, of Concord (Joshua L. Gordon on the
brief and orally), for the respondents.
DONOVAN, J. The respondents, the mother and stepfather of J.P., a
minor child, appeal orders of the Probate Division of the Circuit Court (Quigley,
J.): (1) vacating the stepfather’s adoption of J.P. due to lack of notice of the
adoption proceeding to the petitioner, J.P.’s biological father; and (2) awarding
attorneys’ fees and costs, including the cost of a genetic paternity test, to the
petitioner. Because the record supports the trial court’s determination that the
petitioner was entitled to notice of the adoption proceeding under RSA 170-B:6,
I(d) (2014), we affirm its decision to vacate the adoption. We also affirm its
award of attorneys’ fees and costs relating to the petition to vacate the
adoption, but vacate and remand the award of attorneys’ fees and costs
relating to genetic testing.
I. Facts
The trial court found, or the record supports, the following facts. In
2013, following a casual but intimate relationship with the petitioner, the
mother became pregnant. That summer, the mother informed the petitioner of
the pregnancy. In January 2014, the mother gave birth to J.P. While the
mother reached out to the petitioner to request his medical history when J.P.
was born, the mother and petitioner did not otherwise have contact for nearly
two years. The mother did not identify anyone as J.P.’s father on his birth
certificate; instead she gave the child her last name.
In April 2014, the mother sent a letter to the petitioner’s parents, in
which she informed them that J.P. was their grandson, invited them to be
involved in his life, and stated that it was her desire to do “everything in [her]
power to introduce him to both sides of his family.” However, the petitioner
and mother did not communicate until November 2015, when the petitioner
contacted the mother because he wanted to be involved as a father to J.P.
Because the mother was initially reluctant for the petitioner to meet J.P., she
met with the petitioner before allowing him to visit J.P. for the first time in
December 2015.
Between December 2015 and the summer of 2018, the petitioner visited
with J.P. on a regular — often weekly — basis. Although the visits were
subject to the mother’s restrictions, the petitioner’s responsibilities increased
with time. The mother preferred that visits occur at her residence, where she
and J.P. lived with her sister, and she declined the petitioner’s requests to take
J.P. overnight. Thus, the petitioner’s visits usually took place at the mother’s
home, where the petitioner played with J.P., read to him, gave him baths, fed
him, and put him to bed. Eventually, the mother allowed the petitioner to visit
with J.P. at the petitioner’s apartment and take J.P. to visit with the
petitioner’s family members, who accepted J.P. as family. The petitioner also
attended J.P.’s birthday parties at the mother’s residence.
During this period, the petitioner and the mother identified the petitioner
to J.P. as his father. J.P. called him “Dada.” The mother sent the petitioner
Father’s Day and Valentine’s Day cards, which addressed the petitioner as
“daddy” and were signed with J.P.’s name. The mother also sent cards and
photographs of J.P. to the petitioner’s parents, addressing them as “Grandma”
and “Papa.”
Shortly after the petitioner became involved in J.P.’s life, he also began
providing the mother with regular financial support for J.P. Between January
and August 2016, he provided approximately $300 to $400 each month by
checks issued to the mother. Beginning in September, when J.P. started
preschool, he increased the payments to approximately $800 per month. In
2
total, between January 2016 and December 2018, the petitioner gave the
mother at least $25,250.
In October 2017, the mother and the petitioner completed and filed a
Voluntary Acknowledgment of Paternity form with the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts to allow the petitioner’s name to be placed on J.P.’s birth
certificate. The Commonwealth, however, returned the form to the mother due
to several clerical errors, including a discrepancy in the spelling of the mother’s
name, and requested that she and the petitioner submit a corrected form.
Neither parent made an effort to refile the form.
Around this time, the mother and stepfather became romantically
involved. As time progressed, communication between the mother and the
petitioner became increasingly strained, particularly with regard to the
petitioner’s plans with J.P. for the summer of 2018. The mother wanted the
stepfather to be included in any communication she had with the petitioner,
and the stepfather was present during an in-person meeting between the
mother and the petitioner in June 2018 regarding the summer visitation
schedule.
In August 2018, the mother and stepfather were married. Until early
September, the petitioner continued to spend time with J.P. Thereafter,
communication between the petitioner and the mother regarding visits
“completely broke[] down.” The petitioner, nevertheless, continued to send the
mother checks each month, in amounts of up to $860. He also sent J.P. a
Halloween gift in October and a Happy Thanksgiving message in November,
and asked the mother to Facetime with J.P. on Christmas.
Meanwhile, unbeknownst to the petitioner, on October 8, the
respondents signed an adoption petition for the stepfather to adopt J.P., and
subsequently filed it with the probate division on November 8. On November
29, in connection with this petition, the mother filed an Affidavit of Birth
Mother. In the affidavit, she attested that, “[t]o the best of [her] knowledge, no
person holds himself out to be the father of [her] child.” The mother and
stepfather did not provide notice to the petitioner of the pending adoption
petition or alert the court of his identity. On December 31, 2018, the Probate
Division (Quigley, J.) held a hearing on the adoption petition at which only the
mother, stepfather, J.P., and their counsel were present. The trial court
granted the petition after the mother orally consented to the adoption. As the
hearing came to a close, the stepfather asked the court, “If [J.P.’s] biological
father were to ever attempt to show up, would that change anything for me?”
The trial court, in response, asked whether there is an identified father. The
respondents both answered “[n]o.” The trial court then reviewed the file, and,
noting that no father was identified in the affidavit, the birth certificate, or
putative father registry, indicated that the adoption was final.
3
That same day, shortly after the hearing, the stepfather sent a text
message to the petitioner, stating, “we are sending your checks from the last 3
months back to you. Do not send anything else to my family’s home, and do
not contact any of us moving forward.” On January 3, 2019, the petitioner
received three checks that he had previously provided to the mother in
October, November, and December. The petitioner obtained counsel and
subsequently learned that the stepfather had adopted J.P. As a result, the
petitioner filed a petition to reopen and vacate the adoption for lack of