THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0396, State of New Hampshire v. Michael
Bates, the court on November 18, 2020, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
defendant, Michael Bates, appeals his conviction following a jury trial on one
count of securities fraud. See RSA 421-B:5-501(a)(2) (2015); RSA 421-B:3, I(b)
(Supp. 2015) (repealed 2016).1 On appeal, he challenges: (1) the sufficiency of
the evidence to support his conviction; (2) the trial court’s admission of a
transcript of an interview with the defendant; and (3) the trial court’s
admission of evidence pertaining to a prior securities fraud investigation and
settlement agreement. We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. In 2013, the victim
became acquainted with the defendant, who coached the victim’s son’s
basketball team. The defendant and the victim had a friendly relationship. On
at least one occasion, the victim, who owns an air conditioning and heating
company, serviced furnaces at the defendant’s home and business.
On October 21, 2015, the victim and the defendant saw each other at a
local retail store, where they both happened to be shopping that day. The
defendant was shopping for items to sell through his company, which primarily
involved purchasing products and re-selling them online. The defendant and
the victim had a brief discussion in which he told the victim “all about his
business and how much money he was making.”
Later that day, the victim received a text message from the defendant
with an offer to invest in his company, stating, “we are taking one more silent
capital partner / $50k[.] [I]f you have $15/$25/$40 I’ll let you buy in.” The
defendant represented that the company would be bringing in $500,000 to
$600,000 in online sales by January 2016, and that, if the victim invested
$50,000, he would receive dividend checks of $25,000 to $40,000 per month in
twelve months. The victim, believing that the “silent capital partner” referred to
him, told the defendant that he was “def[initely] interested.” Although the
1 The legislature repealed and replaced RSA 421-B:3 with RSA 421-B:5-501, effective January
2016. See Laws 2015, 273:1, :28. The charged activity spanned from October 1, 2015, to March
1, 2016, but the relevant statutory language in the two statutes is identical.
victim had never owned a membership interest or stock in any company, he
was under the impression that the defendant “had a couple businesses and . . .
was making good money,” and thus found the offer enticing. The victim based
his assessment of the defendant’s financial success upon his observations that
the defendant and his wife owned nice cars, had a large house, and dressed
nicely.
During this time, the defendant was in settlement negotiations with the
New Hampshire Bureau of Securities Regulation (BSR), which had found,
following an investigation, that he had committed civil securities fraud in
connection with an unrelated sale of securities to two investors. The defendant
did not disclose the investigation when he made the investment offer to the
victim.
On October 23, the defendant again texted the victim inquiring about his
commitment and the amount he sought to invest. The victim replied that he
was “def[initely] on board.” Later that day, the defendant informed the victim
by text message that he had created a business e-mail address for him and
drafted a contract. He further stated, “To make it clean / I fronted your
$50 . . . [s]o as of tomorrow you are all in.” The victim took this statement to
mean that the defendant had invested $50,000 on the victim’s behalf, which
the victim wanted to pay as soon as possible so he could begin receiving a
return on his investment.
The defendant and the victim signed a one-page investment contract on
October 24, and the victim made his first payment in the amount of $20,000
on October 26, by check made out to “TSG LLC,” the name of the defendant’s
company. On October 30, the victim made a subsequent payment of $5,000.
On November 2, the defendant asked the victim, by text message, when
he planned to make his next payment, and indicated that he would inform his
bookkeeper. The victim responded that he would have the next payment in a
couple of weeks. On November 11, the defendant told the victim that “Karen
(bookkeeper) asked what the payment plan is,” and that she was “by the book.”
The victim told the defendant that he would most likely pay the defendant
$5,000 to $10,000 per month. On November 26 and December 7, the victim
made payments of $5,000 and $2,500, respectively.
The defendant had multiple bank accounts, including personal accounts
in his name and accounts in the names of various entities that he managed or
in which he had the sole signing authority. When he received the victim’s
checks, the defendant did not consistently deposit the checks in the company
account, but rather deposited them into multiple accounts. He also frequently
transferred money between the accounts. As a result, the victim’s money
became commingled with other funds, which the defendant withdrew or spent
on expenses unrelated to the company. For example, on October 30, the
2
defendant paid $2,000 — as part of a private settlement agreement with an
individual who had invested in a Florida property owned by the defendant (the
Florida settlement) — from the same account into which he had deposited the
victim’s first two checks.
On December 8, the defendant informed the victim by text message that
he told “[T]ony [the] bookkeeper” that the victim would be fine with a payment
schedule of $10,000 on January 28 and $5,000 on February 28. He added, “I
just want you done before March [be]cause that’s when we [are] doing the buy
in from [an] investor.” The victim responded that the schedule “should be fine.”
On January 21, 2016, the victim made a payment of $5,000. Approximately
two days later, the defendant entered into a settlement agreement with the BSR
for $50,000.
On February 17, the defendant asked the victim about his upcoming
$10,000 payment, noting that he had to “submit paperwork” before March 1.
On February 26, the victim made a payment of $10,000. On February 29, after
the defendant deposited the victim’s February 26 check, the defendant
provided a check from the same account to the BSR in an amount of $10,000
as payment toward the amount he owed under the settlement agreement.
Throughout this period, the defendant and the victim communicated
frequently and, on occasion, the victim met with the defendant to assist him
with purchases and product development. The victim continued to believe that
the defendant was “making a lot of money” and that the business “was on the
up and up.” However, despite his investment, the victim never received any
payments from the company in return. Eventually, in June, the victim learned
from the defendant’s wife that the defendant was not being truthful with him.
The victim subsequently met with the defendant, who showed him that the
company had only $19,000 in its bank account. The victim demanded that the
defendant return his money, which the defendant failed to do.
In August 2016, the BSR received an anonymous tip that the defendant
had defrauded the victim. The BSR initiated an investigation, and in January
2017, BSR attorneys conducted an interview with the defendant. During the
interview, the defendant admitted that there were no other silent capital
partners in the business at the time of his investment offer to the victim, he
had not fronted the victim $50,000, he did not have a bookkeeper during the
time that the victim invested in the company, and no investor had committed
to buy into the company in March 2016.
The defendant was indicted on one count of theft by deception, see RSA
637:4 (2016), and two counts of securities fraud, see RSA 421-B:3, I(b). One
count of securities fraud alleged that he purposely omitted the material fact
that he was under investigation by the BSR when he proposed an investment
opportunity to the victim. The other count of securities fraud alleged that the
3