THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0277, Appeal of Donna M. Heald & a., the
court on May 22, 2020, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
intervenors, Donna M. Heald, Regis Miller, Matthew and Amanda Fitch, Larry
Gans, Ann Darragh, Tom and Yael DeCapo (collectively, the Durham
Residents), and the Durham Historic Association (Historic Association), appeal
a decision of the New Hampshire Site Evaluation Committee (SEC) granting the
application filed by the petitioner, Public Service Company of New Hampshire
d/b/a Eversource Energy (Eversource), for a “Certificate of Site and Facility”
(Certificate) for the siting, construction, and operation of a new high voltage
electric transmission line between existing substations in Madbury and
Portsmouth (the Project). We affirm.
I. Facts
The following facts were either found by the SEC or are drawn from the
contents of documents submitted as part of the appellate record. In April
2016, Eversource applied to the SEC for a Certificate to install and operate a
12.9-mile transmission line, comprising aboveground, underground, and
underwater segments, traversing portions of Madbury, Durham, Newington,
and Portsmouth. The Project was selected by the Independent System Operator
of New England (ISO-NE) to address identified transmission capacity needs for
the continued reliability of the electric transmission system in the seacoast
region. ISO-NE chose the Project, in 2012, as the preferred solution for
increasing transmission system thermal capacity, increasing transformer
thermal capacity, and improving system voltage performance, because “it is
much less costly than the other alternative and addresses the needs in the
area.” (Quotation omitted.)
The overhead portion of the Project will be located entirely within existing
distribution and transmission rights-of-way. The underground portion will be
located in locally-maintained roads, on property in Durham now owned by
Eversource, and on other property in Durham and Newington where
Eversource has contracted to acquire new easements.
Pursuant to RSA 162-H:9 (2014), the attorney general appointed a
Counsel for the Public, and, in late April 2016, a Subcommittee was appointed
to consider the application (Subcommittee). See RSA 162-H:4-a (Supp. 2019).
After the Subcommittee accepted the application, finding that it contained
sufficient information for the purposes of RSA chapter 162-H, public
information sessions and, later, public hearings, were held in Durham and
Newington. The Subcommittee granted motions to intervene filed by the
intervenors and others.
Beginning in late August 2018, the Subcommittee held adjudicative
hearings, receiving testimony and exhibits from many witnesses. The
Subcommittee heard evidence through November 15, 2018, and deliberated
over six days in November and December 2018. Its narrative decision, totaling
more than 300 pages, was issued on January 31, 2019.
A. Orderly Development of the Region
Relevant to this appeal, before granting the Certificate, the Subcommittee
deliberated about whether the “site and facility will not unduly interfere with
the orderly development of the region with due consideration having been given
to the views of municipal and regional planning commissions and municipal
governing bodies.” RSA 162-H:16, IV(b) (Supp. 2019). In its deliberations, the
Subcommittee observed that Newington and Durham had each entered into a
Memorandum of Understanding with Eversource “addressing, minimizing, and
mitigating” the Project’s “construction impacts.” The Subcommittee
conditioned the Certificate upon Eversource’s compliance with those
Memoranda of Understanding.
In addition, the Subcommittee observed that, as to the Durham
Residents and other intervenors, “the Applicant conducted a comprehensive
outreach campaign where it contacted almost every intervenor who raised
his/her concerns about the Project’s impact and offered [a] variety of avoidance
and mitigation measures that can be implemented to address their concerns.”
Eversource asserted that the Project will not have “an unreasonable
adverse effect” on real estate values in the region. Eversource’s expert, Dr.
James Chalmers, opined that, as to residential properties, given the “small
number of properties” located within 100 feet of the rights-of-way, “there will be
no discernable effects in local or regional real estate markets” as a result of the
Project. Based upon Chalmers’ testimony and report, the Subcommittee found
that the Project will be partially or clearly visible from at least 29 properties,
and that “[i]t is reasonable to conclude, depending on the extent of increase in
visibility of the Project, that the Project will have some effect on values of some
of these properties.”
However, the Subcommittee identified “shortcomings” in the testimony
and report. Specifically, the Subcommittee faulted Chalmers for “limit[ing] the
area of impact” from the Project to properties located within 100 feet of the
2
rights-of-way and for opining that the value of real estate “will be impacted only
if the Project was not previously visible and will become visible from the
property or was partially visible and will become clearly visible.” By so doing,
the Subcommittee determined, Chalmers “failed to account . . . for significant
change in visibility that will not result in clear visibility” and underestimated
the number of properties likely to be impacted by the Project.
In light of those shortcomings, the Subcommittee found “it . . .
reasonable to conclude that the Project will have some effect on values of
additional properties, whether from visibility change or other Project impacts.”
Therefore, the Subcommittee conditioned the Certificate upon the creation of a
voluntary dispute resolution process, described in more detail below, through
which affected property owners could “address and mitigate such impacts.”
Under this process, which will be “available to all property owners who can
verify the impact on the value of their property” and may be initiated up to two
years after the Project’s construction is completed, affected property owners
will be able to mitigate impacts or receive financial reimbursement for them.
Accordingly, considering Chalmers’ “conclusion that only a limited number of
properties [would] be impacted” and that property owners may mitigate those
impacts through the voluntary dispute resolution process, the Subcommittee
found “that the impacts of the Project on the value of real estate will not unduly
interfere with the orderly development of the region.” See id.
B. Public Interest
Also relevant to this appeal, before granting the Certificate, the
Subcommittee deliberated about whether granting the Certificate would serve
the public interest. See RSA 162-H:16, IV(e) (Supp. 2019). In its deliberations
on this subject, the Subcommittee considered the “numerous comments from
the Intervenors and members of the public indicating that the Project will have
an adverse effect on aesthetics, historic sites, water quality, natural
environment, value of real estate, tourism, land use, and public health and
safety.” See N.H. Admin. R., Site 301.16(a)-(j) (identifying the factors that must
be considered “[i]n determining whether a proposed energy facility will serve the
public interest”).
The Subcommittee also considered that Eversource had “agreed to
comply with a comprehensive and unprecedented set of conditions to ensure
that impacts of the Project will be appropriately avoided, minimized, and
mitigated,” had “conducted a comprehensive outreach campaign to identify
concerns raised by various parties,” had “committed to implementing extensive
vegetation measures,” had agreed to place the Project “underground . . . in
some sections . . . to address and mitigate [its] effect on aesthetics,” and had
agreed to “work with all landowners along the Project route that will be affected
by tree trimming, tree clearing, or from the construction of taller structures in
3