THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0042, In the Matter of Karen Kilcup and
Christopher Chimera, the court on October 11, 2019, issued the
following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we conclude
that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1). We affirm.
The respondent, Christopher Chimera (husband), appeals an order of the
Circuit Court (Pendleton, J.) on his post-final-decree “petition to bring forward
and motion for contempt and clarification” in his divorce from the petitioner,
Karen Kilcup (wife). He contends that the trial court erred by: (1) terminating an
evidentiary hearing “without complete testimony from either party”; (2)
misinterpreting the parties’ permanent stipulation, which was incorporated into
the court’s final decree; and (3) denying his motion to amend his petition while
allowing the wife to question him regarding his infidelity.
When reviewing a trial court’s decision rendered after a hearing on the
merits, we uphold the trial court’s factual findings and rulings unless they lack
evidentiary support or are legally erroneous. O’Malley v. Little, 170 N.H. 272,
275 (2017). We do not decide whether we would have ruled differently than the
trial court, but rather, whether a reasonable person could have reached the same
decision as the trial court based upon the same evidence. Id. Thus, we defer to
the trial court’s judgment on such issues as resolving conflicts in the testimony,
measuring the credibility of witnesses, and determining the weight to be given
evidence. Id. We review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de
novo. Id.
We first address whether the trial court erred by terminating the
evidentiary hearing. The husband argues that, because his attorney had not
completed redirect examination or cross-examined the wife, the trial court: (1)
denied him due process under the Federal and New Hampshire Constitutions;
and (2) unsustainably exercised its discretion.
We assume, without deciding, that the husband’s due process argument is
preserved. A party may not prevail upon a due process claim absent a showing of
actual prejudice. McIntire v. Woodall, 140 N.H. 228, 230 (1995). In this case, the
husband failed to show that he was actually prejudiced by the termination of the
hearing because he failed to articulate specifically, either at the close of the hearing
or in his motion for reconsideration, what additional evidence he would have
sought to elicit had he been provided with more time to examine the witnesses.
See Vincent v. MacLean, 166 N.H. 132, 137 (2014) (stating that plaintiff failed to
show prejudice to establish due process violation based upon inability to admit
exhibits or adequately question defendant because he did not identify additional
documents he wished to submit or present substance of any questions he would
have posed to the defendant); In the Matter of Sawyer & Sawyer, 161 N.H. 11, 17
(2010) (stating defendant failed to establish actual prejudice due to domestic
violence petition’s lack of specific dates of abuse because he did not proffer any
evidence indicating that he in fact had a time-based defense that he would have
presented had he known the alleged dates prior to the hearing).
The husband further argues that the trial court unsustainably exercised
its discretion by denying his request to continue the hearing. A trial court has
broad discretion in managing proceedings before it. Achille v. Achille, 167 N.H.
706, 713 (2015). We will disturb decisions about motions to continue only if the
appellant demonstrates that the decision was clearly unreasonable to the
prejudice of his case. Id.
In this case, approximately nine months before the hearing, the husband’s
attorney requested a two-hour hearing; approximately three months before the
hearing, he received notice that the hearing was scheduled for two hours.
However, the husband did not request additional time until the hearing ended.
The hearing, in fact, lasted approximately two hours and 40 minutes; the
husband testified on direct examination for approximately one hour and 20
minutes of that time and on cross-examination and redirect for all but
approximately the final 10 minutes of the hearing. Neither at the end of the
hearing nor in his motion for reconsiderations did the husband identify further
evidence that he intended to elicit from the witnesses.
The husband cites cases from other jurisdictions adjuring trial courts to
“not sacrifice their primary goal of justice by rigidly adhering to time limits in the
name of efficiency.” In re Marriage of Ihle, 577 N.W.2d 64, 68 (Iowa Ct. App.
1998). However, in the case at hand, the trial court did not rigidly adhere to its
schedule, but, in fact, allowed the husband significantly more time to present his
case than he had requested in advance. See id. at 69 (upholding trial court’s
discretion in ending hearing, in part, because appellant failed to identify any
problems in managing allotted trial time, used considerably more time than
opposing party, and failed to make offer of proof to show prejudice).
The husband relies upon the trial court’s comment that it had been
presented with a “rather complex jumble of issues,” but ignores its further
conclusions that the “documents . . . speak for themselves,” and that it
understood the issues and thought they were “fairly simple.” In its order, the
trial court noted that it had “obtained significant documentary evidence and
received significant testimony primar[il]y from the [husband].” Upon this record,
we conclude that the husband has failed to show that the trial court’s decision
not to continue the hearing was unreasonable. See Achille, 167 N.H. at 713.
2
We next address whether the trial court erred in its interpretation of the
parties’ permanent stipulation. At the time of the divorce, both parties were
represented by counsel. The husband testified that he and the wife negotiated
the terms of a final stipulation and that “[t]here were drafts going back and
forth.” Eventually, the parties reached an agreement, and the husband signed
the permanent stipulation, which provided that the parties “believe that this is a
fair and reasonable resolution of all the issues related to our marriage.” The
husband signed the permanent stipulation in October 2015, and the trial court
incorporated it into its final order on February 7, 2016. The husband did not
move for reconsideration of or appeal the final order. He did not move for
clarification or otherwise contest the order until September 2017.
The husband contends that the trial court misinterpreted the stipulation
by concluding that: (1) it awarded the parties’ joint investment accounts to the
wife; and (2) the personalty had been divided, while allowing the husband ten
days from the hearing in which to request any additional personalty, subject to
the wife’s approval.
The husband’s arguments require that we interpret the permanent
stipulation. A stipulated agreement is a contract and, therefore, is governed by
contract rules. In re Taber-McCarthy, 160 N.H. 112, 115 (2010). The
interpretation of a contract is a question of law, which we review de novo. Id.
When interpreting a written agreement, we give the parties’ language its
reasonable meaning, considering the circumstances and the context in which the
agreement was negotiated, and reading the document as a whole. Id. Absent
ambiguity, the parties’ intent will be determined from the plain meaning of the
language used in the contract. Id.
The language of a contract is ambiguous if the parties to it could
reasonably disagree as to the meaning of that language. Id. If the agreement’s
language is ambiguous, it must be determined, under an objective standard,
what the parties, as reasonable people, mutually understood the ambiguous
language to mean. Id. In applying the objective standard, a court should
examine the contract as a whole, the circumstances surrounding its execution,
and the object intended by the agreement, while keeping in mind the goal of
giving effect to the parties’ intention. Id. at 115-16.
We first consider the joint investment accounts. The stipulation required
the wife to pay the husband alimony and to pay for his health and motor vehicle
insurance for five years, and to pay him $618,000 as a property settlement.
Under the caption “Investment Accounts,” it awarded “[e]ach party . . . their
individual investment accounts,” but did not mention jointly held investment
accounts. Under the caption “Checking Savings,” it awarded each party “their
individual checking/savings account,” and awarded the wife “the balance of any
of the jointly held bank/money market accounts as reflected on the attached
exhibit of accounts.” The “exhibit of accounts” was not attached to the
3