THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0718, Jeffrey Thomas Clay v. Newmarket
School District, the court on October 1, 2020, issued the
following order:
Having considered the parties’ briefs and the record submitted on appeal,
we conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R.
18(1). The motion filed by the plaintiff, Jeffrey Thomas Clay, to strike portions
of the brief and appendices filed by the defendant, the Newmarket School
District, is denied.
The plaintiff appeals orders of the Superior Court (Wageling and
Honigberg, JJ.) that: (1) denied his request that the school district’s attorney be
removed from the case; (2) concluded, based upon offers of proof, that the
school district’s redactions to documents produced in response to his July
2016 request did not violate the Right-to-Know Law; (3) denied the plaintiff’s
request that the court review in camera the thousands of documents produced
in response to that request; (4) denied the plaintiff’s request that the school
district be ordered to prepare a “Vaughn” index, see Vaughn v. Rosen, 484 F.2d
820 (D.C. Cir. 1973); and (5) awarded the school district attorney’s fees and
costs because of the dearth of evidence supporting the plaintiff’s allegations
against the school district’s attorney. The school district cross-appeals the trial
court’s determination that the district violated the Right-to-Know Law by
discussing a letter of resignation and the applicants to serve on a
superintendent screening committee in nonpublic sessions. We affirm.
The trial court found the following facts. In July 2016, the plaintiff
requested that the school district provide “any and all email or text
communications sent or received by any school district administrator, school
board member, or superintendent search, screening or selection committee
member occurring between October 1, 2015 and December 31, 2015 which
relates in any manner to the superintendent search undertaken by the school
board/district.” In response, the school district produced approximately
13,000 pages of records, although many of the pages were substantially
redacted. When the plaintiff objected to the redactions, the then-
superintendent of schools informed him that the school district had redacted
“[d]uplicates of e-mails and e-mails unrelated to [his] request,” “[r]outing and IP
address information,” and “personal information, including e-mail addresses of
non-employees.”
In April 2019, the plaintiff requested that the school district produce
invoices from any law firm or attorney with emails or other documents relating
to or concerning him, including his prior allegations of misconduct by the
district. His request included emails between the district or its employees and
legal counsel. The school district provided the requested information, but
redacted information protected by the attorney-client privilege. On appeal, the
plaintiff has not briefed an argument challenging those redactions.
Accordingly, we deem any such argument waived.
Thereafter, the plaintiff brought the instant action, contending, among
other things, that the school district’s response to his 2016 right-to-know
request violated the Right-to-Know Law. He alleged that the numerous
redactions were designed to conceal the wrongdoing he attributes to the school
district and to its attorney in a prior right-to-know case involving the parties.
He also argued that the district violated the Right-to-Know Law by discussing a
letter of resignation and the applicants to serve on a screening committee for
superintendent candidates in nonpublic sessions. Subsequently, the plaintiff
brought a motion alleging that the school district’s attorney had committed
perjury, falsified evidence, and otherwise engaged in improper conduct in the
prior case between the parties and requesting that the court remove her as the
district’s counsel.
The trial court held a hearing in July 2019 to address pending motions
and conduct a hearing on the merits. The trial court denied the plaintiff’s
motion to have the district’s attorney removed from the case, determining that
“there is no competent evidence” that she engaged in improper conduct in the
prior case. In addition, the court awarded the school district the attorney’s fees
and costs it incurred in litigating the plaintiff’s claims against its attorney on
the ground that his claims were frivolous and vexatious. Specifically, the court
found:
Plaintiff has raised his allegations of wrongdoing in multiple
forums, and has had the reasons underlying his confusion
concerning the details of the superintendent search explained to
him on multiple occasions. Plaintiff’s purported evidence of
wrongdoing has been reviewed by several impartial persons or
entities, all of which have concluded that the evidence presented
did not support Plaintiff’s allegations. Nonetheless, Plaintiff has
once again raised these allegations in an attempt to remove his
opponent’s attorney from this case. While Plaintiff is under no
obligation to accept the explanations he has repeatedly been given,
the Court finds and rules that Plaintiff’s decision to litigate [the
attorney’s] alleged wrongdoing in the course of this action, without
any competent evidence in support thereof, was frivolous and
vexatious.
2
On the merits of the plaintiff’s right-to-know claims, the court found that
its review of a sample of the redacted documents responsive to his 2016
request “is consistent with [the school district’s] representations (to Plaintiff[ ]
and to the Court) that only network, IP, or other metadata-type information
was redacted from those documents.” The court further found that even if the
plaintiff had established that personal information, including the email
addresses of non-employees of the school district, was responsive to his
request, redaction of that information was proper. The court described and
then applied the balancing test we use to determine whether disclosure of
public records constitutes an invasion of privacy. See Lamy v. N.H. Pub Utils.
Comm’n, 152 N.H. 106, 109 (2005); see also RSA 91-A:5, IV (2013). The court
determined that there “is a relatively strong privacy interest in the personal
information at issue,” and a correspondingly “very low” public interest in the
disclosure of that information given that the superintendent who was selected
in 2016 no longer holds that post.
The court declined to conduct an in camera review of the documents
based upon the plaintiff’s speculation that the redactions were improperly
made. The court also declined to order the school district to create a Vaughn
index of the documents, reasoning that such an index was not warranted given
the school district’s offer of proof and the evidence that the district “made
careful, exacting redactions rather than routinely withholding entire
documents.” See N.H. Right to Life v. Dir., N.H. Charitable Trusts Unit, 169
N.H. 95, 125 (2016) (explaining that Vaughn index includes general description
of each document withheld and justification for the nondisclosure).
The court found in the plaintiff’s favor on his claim that the school
district violated the Right-to-Know Law by discussing a letter of resignation and
applicants to serve on a superintendent screening committee in nonpublic
sessions. The school district argued that doing so complied with the law
because such discussions might reveal information “which, if discussed in
public, would likely affect adversely the reputation of any person,” other than a
school board member. RSA 91-A:3, II(c) (2013). The district did not suggest
that it had reason to believe that discussing the particular letter of resignation
or specific applicants at issue was likely to involve matters that, if discussed
publicly, would likely cause reputational harm. See id. Rather, the district
suggested that, because it could not know whether such matters would come
up until the discussions actually took place, discussing resignation letters or
applicants for a superintendent screening committee could always take place in
nonpublic sessions. The trial court rejected the school district’s broad
interpretation of the statute, ruling that before entering into nonpublic sessions
on this basis, the school district “must engage in some form of threshold
inquiry in order to determine” whether discussing the specific letter or
applicants at issue would likely adversely affect the reputation of someone not
on the board.
3