THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0343, In the Matter of David Connelly and
Kimberly Kivela, the court on April 1, 2020, issued the following
order:
Because the respondent’s brief does not contain proper citations to the
record and refers to facts that are not supported by the record and evidence
that is not part of the record, the motion to strike the respondent’s brief is
granted. See Sup. Ct. R. 16(3)(d), (4)(a), (9); Mahmoud v. Irving Oil Corp., 155
N.H. 405, 406-07 (2007). Accordingly, the court will not consider the brief filed
by the respondent. Nor will the court consider the reply brief filed by the
petitioner. See Panas v. Harakis & K-Mart Corp., 129 N.H. 591, 617 (1987)
(stating that a reply brief may only respond to the opposing party’s brief).
Having considered the petitioner’s opening brief and the record
submitted on appeal, we conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this
case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1). The petitioner, David Connelly (father), appeals a
final parenting plan entered by the Circuit Court (DalPra, M., approved by
Stephen, J.), following a three-day hearing, governing the parties’ rights and
responsibilities with respect to their two children. In the parenting plan, the
trial court established a routine schedule whereby during the school year, the
father would have parenting time two out of every three weekends from
Thursday after school until Sunday at 7:00 p.m., and during the summer, on
alternating weeks.1 On appeal, he argues that the trial court erred by
establishing a schedule pursuant to which, during the school year, the children
reside primarily with the respondent, Kimberly Kivela (mother), and the father
has “11 consecutive days once per month without parenting time.” We affirm.
The trial court has broad discretion in matters involving parenting rights
and responsibilities. In the Matter of Miller & Todd, 161 N.H. 630, 640 (2011).
Its overriding concern in such matters is the best interest of the child. Id.
1 Since this appeal was filed, the trial court has provided this court with orders addressing
post-appeal motions that amend the final parenting plan, including an order issued on
January 2, 2020 that amends the parenting plan, “pending further hearing,” so as to grant the
father parenting time “two out of three weekends,” from Friday after school until Monday
morning. We note that neither party has argued that, in light of subsequent amendments to
the parenting plan, this appeal is moot. Accordingly, we will assume, without deciding, that
the appeal is not moot. We note further that the only parenting plan that is the subject of this
appeal is the final parenting plan issued on April 18, 2019; we will not consider any post-
appeal amendments to the final parenting plan in deciding this appeal.
RSA 461-A:6, I (Supp. 2019), codifies the best interest standard, setting
forth several factors that the trial court is required to consider, including:
(a) The relationship of the child with each parent and the
ability of each parent to provide the child with nurture, love,
affection, and guidance.
(b) The ability of each parent to assure that the child
receives adequate food, clothing, shelter, medical care, and a safe
environment.
(c) The child’s developmental needs and the ability of each
parent to meet them, both in the present and in the future.
(d) The quality of the child’s adjustment to the child’s
school and community and the potential effect of any change.
(e) The ability and disposition of each parent to foster a
positive relationship and frequent and continuing physical,
written, and telephonic contact with the other parent, including
whether contact is likely to result in harm to the child or to a
parent.
(f) The support of each parent for the child’s contact with
the other parent as shown by allowing and promoting such
contact, including whether contact is likely to result in harm to the
child or to a parent.
(g) The support of each parent for the child’s relationship
with the other parent, including whether contact is likely to result
in harm to the child or to a parent.
(h) The relationship of the child with any other person
who may significantly affect the child.
(i) The ability of the parents to communicate, cooperate
with each other, and make joint decisions concerning the children,
including whether contact is likely to result in harm to the child or
to a parent.
. . .
(l) The policy of the state regarding the determination of
parental rights and responsibilities described in RSA 461-A:2.
(m) Any other additional factors the court deems relevant.
2
RSA 461-A:6, I; see Miller & Todd, 161 N.H. at 640 (stating that trial court
must consider factors under RSA 461-A:6, I, in determining best interest). The
“policy of the state regarding the determination of parental rights and
responsibilities,” RSA 461-A:6, I(l), includes “[s]upport[ing] frequent and
continuing contact between each child and both parents,” “encourag[ing]
parents to share in the rights and responsibilities of raising their children,”
and “grant[ing] parents and courts the widest discretion in developing a
parenting plan.” RSA 461-A:2, I(a), (b), & (d) (2018).
We have recognized “that a child’s best interests are served when a trial
court has broad discretion to consider all factors bearing on the child’s welfare
and is not compelled to treat any single factor as dispositive of the inquiry.” In
re Name Change of Goudreau, 164 N.H. 335, 338 (2012). Moreover, nothing in
the statute, absent a party’s request, obligates the trial court to issue express
findings of fact relative to those factors. See RSA 461-A:6, VII (Supp. 2019)
(requiring trial court, “[a]t the request of an aggrieved party,” to “set forth the
reasons for its decision in a written order” (Emphasis added.)); cf. In the Matter
of Kurowski & Kurowski, 161 N.H. 578, 598-99 (2011) (observing that the
factors considered by the trial court in resolving a parenting dispute were
consistent with the factors set forth in RSA 461-A:6, I). Rather, we generally
assume that the trial court made all subsidiary findings necessary to support
its general ruling, including a finding that a parenting plan is in a child’s best
interest. In the Matter of Kosek & Kosek, 151 N.H. 722, 725 (2005).
We will not overturn the trial court’s ruling on a parenting petition
absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Miller & Todd, 161 N.H. at
630; see State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001) (explaining unsustainable
exercise of discretion standard). This standard of review means that we review
only whether the record establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the
trial court’s discretionary judgments, and will not disturb its determinations if
they reasonably could have been made. Miller & Todd, 161 N.H. at 640;
Lambert, 147 N.H. at 296. To establish that the trial court unsustainably
exercised its discretion, the father must demonstrate that its rulings were
clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Lambert, 147
N.H. at 296.
In reviewing the trial court’s discretionary rulings, we defer to its
judgment on issues such as resolving conflicts in testimony, evaluating the
credibility of witnesses, and determining the weight of the evidence presented.
In the Matter of Aube & Aube, 158 N.H. 459, 465 (2009). The trial court is free
to accept or reject, in whole or in part, the testimony of any witness, and is not
required to believe even uncontested evidence. Id. at 466.
The record establishes that the mother separated from the father in late
2016, and moved with the children approximately an hour away from the
3