THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2019-0732, Peter Potenza & a. v. Joshua
Lanctot & a.; Joshua Lanctot & a. v. Peter Potenza & a., the
court on October 23, 2020, issued the following order:
Having considered the opening and reply briefs filed by Joshua and
Cindy Lanctot (the landlords), the opposing brief filed by Peter and Kelley
Potenza (the tenants), and the record submitted on appeal, we conclude that
oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1). The
landlords appeal orders of the Circuit Court (Gardner, J.) following a merits
hearing on the tenants’ petition alleging that the landlords willfully violated the
tenants’ rights to quiet enjoyment, see RSA 540-A:2 (2007), :4 (Supp. 2019),
and on the landlords’ small claim action alleging that the tenants breached the
lease when they failed to pay rent and abandoned the property. We affirm.
The following facts are either derived from the trial court’s orders or
relate the contents of documents included in the appellate record. On
November 13, 2018, the tenants moved into the subject premises pursuant to a
lease agreement with the landlords. The lease agreement was for a 12-month
term and required the tenants to pay $1,995 in monthly rent.
On November 16, three days after they moved into the home, the tenants
discovered what they believed to be mold in two of the upstairs bedroom
closets. On November 17, the tenants informed the landlords about the mold
growth and the lack of heat on the second floor. The landlords responded on
November 19 that Absolute Resource Associates (ARA) would inspect the home
on November 28. ARA did so on November 30, and issued a report on
December 10 stating that there was visible mold on the closet door in one of
the bedrooms and on the attic roof sheathing. Included in the report was an
analysis of samples from the residence, which showed heavy amounts of the
fungus Cladosporium. ARA recommended that the mold be professionally
remediated. The landlords did not remediate the mold until February 12,
2019. Inspection reports submitted at trial supported the tenants’ contention
that the second floor of the home lacked heat.
The plaintiffs filed their petition on February 5 and moved out of the
premises on February 8. Thereafter, the landlords filed a small claim action
against the tenants alleging that the tenants abandoned the property in
violation of the lease agreement, seeking damages for unpaid rent for the
months of January, February, and March 2019, among other things. The
landlords represented that they would retain the tenants’ security deposit to
“cover[] 1 of the 3 months of unpaid rent.” The tenants subsequently filed a
counterclaim, alleging that the landlords violated statutory requirements
pertaining to security deposits. Each of the parties sought attorney’s fees.
The trial court held a merits hearing on offers of proof on March 11.
With regard to the tenants’ petition, the trial court found that the landlords
willfully violated the tenants’ rights to quiet enjoyment “by not assuring that
there was sufficient heat on the second floor and by failing to remediate the
mold problem in a more prompt manner.” The court found that the landlords
were aware of the mold and heat issues “as early as November 17, 2018,” but
did not do any work to “address the tenants’ concerns” until after the tenants
filed their February 5 petition. The trial court, therefore, assessed the
landlords $1,000 in statutory damages and reasonable attorney’s fees. See
RSA 540-A:4, IX; see also Carter v. LaChance, 146 N.H. 11, 14 (2001) (holding
that a plaintiff prevailing on a claim brought under RSA chapter 540-A is
entitled to the statutory minimum of $1,000 in damages “plus costs and
reasonable attorney’s fees”). As to the landlords’ small claim complaint, the
trial court found that the tenants failed to pay rent for January, February, and
March 2019, and that the landlords, accordingly, were entitled to judgment in
the amount of $2,992.50 representing three months’ worth of one-half of the
$1,995 monthly rent—$997.50.1
In response to the parties’ motions for reconsideration, the trial court
reconsidered the damages awarded to the landlords on their small claim
complaint. Because the tenants vacated the premises on February 8, 2019,
and the landlords sold the property on March 15, the court reduced the
damages awarded to $1,463 “to account for the time until the property was
sold and the restitution which [the] court . . . limited for that time frame as the
landlords had made initial good faith efforts to address the issues raised by the
tenants.”
The tenants subsequently moved for clarification, asking the court to
require the landlords to return $532 from the tenants’ $1,995 security deposit.
The tenants contended that, under the parties’ lease, the landlords are
required to return the unused balance of the security deposit to the tenants.
The tenants explained that $532 is the amount left after subtracting from the
security deposit the $1,463 they owed the landlords on the small claim action.
The court agreed and granted the tenants’ motion.
1 The landlords contend that $2,992.50 does not represent three months’ worth of one-half of
the $1,995 monthly rent. Rather, they argue, $2,992.50 represents two and one-half months’
rent ($4,987.50) less the $1,995 security deposit that the landlords assert the trial court
allowed them to retain and apply toward the unpaid rent. We do not share the landlords’
interpretation of the trial court’s orders. Had the trial court intended to award the landlords
two and one-half months’ rent ($4,987.50), it would have entered a damage award in that
amount. It did not do so.
2
In reviewing a trial court’s decision rendered after a trial on the merits,
we uphold its factual findings and rulings unless they lack evidentiary support
or are legally erroneous. O’Malley v. Little, 170 N.H. 272, 275 (2017). We do
not decide whether we would have ruled differently than the trial court, but
rather, whether a reasonable person could have reached the same decision as
the trial court based upon the same evidence. Id. Thus, we defer to the trial
court’s judgment on such issues as resolving conflicts in the evidence and
determining the weight to be given evidence. Id. Nevertheless, we review the
trial court’s application of the law to the facts de novo. Id.
On appeal, the landlords first contend that the tenants were not
constructively evicted. Given that the trial court did not frame its conclusions
in those terms, we decline the landlords’ invitation to do so on appeal.
The landlords next assert that the trial court erred by finding that they
violated the tenants’ quiet enjoyment by failing to remediate the mold problem
promptly and/or by failing to adequately heat the second floor of the premises.
The tenants counter that the landlords have waived this argument because it
was not included in the landlords’ notice of appeal. We conclude that the
notice of appeal questions fairly comprise the issue of whether the trial court
erred when it determined that they violated the tenants’ rights to quiet
enjoyment. See Sup. Ct. R. 16(3)(b).
A breach of the covenant of quiet enjoyment occurs when the landlord
substantially interferes with the tenant’s beneficial use or enjoyment of the
premises. DiMinico v. Centennial Estates Corp., 173 N.H. ___, ___ (decided
March 11, 2020) (slip op. at 5). To be actionable, the landlord’s interference
need not rise to the level of a constructive eviction, however. Id. at ___ (slip op.
at 5). A tenant’s right to quiet enjoyment is protected both by the common law
and by statute. Id. at ___ (slip op. at 8); see Crowley v. Frazier, 147 N.H. 387,
389 (2001) (“The right to or covenant of quiet enjoyment is a common law
doctrine . . . .”); RSA 540-A:2 (“No landlord shall willfully violate a tenant’s right
to quiet enjoyment . . . .”); see also Adams v. Woodlands of Nashua, 151 N.H.
640, 642 (2005) (explaining that “we rely upon the common law doctrine” in
construing the statutory protection for quiet enjoyment contained in RSA 540-
A:2). Whether the covenant of quiet enjoyment has been breached in a
particular case is a question of fact for the trial court. DiMinico, 173 N.H. at
___ (slip op. at 5). We will not disturb the trial court’s ruling on this factual
issue unless it lacks evidentiary support or is erroneous as a matter of law. Id.
at ___ (slip op. at 5).
The landlords contend that the trial court erred in finding that they
violated the tenants’ rights to quiet enjoyment by failing to remediate the mold
problem more promptly because, they assert, they “promptly engaged [a] mold
remediation service,” which “promptly investigated the site of the claimed
mold,” and “found the mold was not too extensive and could be remediated.”
3