THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2020-0488, Appeal of Anthony Paquet, the
court on August 10, 2021, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
The petitioner, Anthony Paquet, appeals a decision of the New Hampshire
Compensation Appeals Board (board) denying his claim for workers’
compensation benefits on the basis that his injuries are not causally-related to
a workplace incident. He argues that the board’s decision is not supported by
competent medical evidence, and that it is unjust or unreasonable. We affirm.
RSA chapter 541 governs our review of board decisions. RSA 281-A:43,
I(c) (2010). Under RSA 541:13 (2007), we will not set aside the board’s decision
except for errors of law, unless we are satisfied, by a clear preponderance of the
evidence, that it is unjust or unreasonable. See Appeal of LeBorgne, 173 N.H.
488, 493 (2020). As the appealing party, the petitioner has the burden of
demonstrating that the board’s decision was erroneous. Id. The board’s
findings of fact are presumed prima facie lawful and reasonable. RSA 541:13.
In reviewing the board’s findings, our task is not to determine whether we
would have found differently or to reweigh the evidence, but rather, to
determine whether the findings are supported by competent evidence in the
record. Appeal of Phillips, 165 N.H. 226, 235 (2013). Thus, we review the
board’s factual findings deferentially. LeBorgne, 173 N.H. at 493. We review
the board’s rulings on issues of law de novo. See Phillips, 165 N.H. at 230.
To recover workers’ compensation benefits, it was the petitioner’s burden
to establish that his injury arose out of and in the course of his employment.
RSA 281-A:2, XI (Supp. 2020); see Appeal of Redimix Cos., 158 N.H. 494, 496
(2009). To meet this burden, the petitioner was required to prove by a
preponderance of the evidence that his work-related activities probably caused
or contributed to his injury. Redimix Cos., 158 N.H. at 496. The petitioner’s
burden of proof required that he establish, in part, medical causation – that his
injury was actually caused by a work-related event or condition. Id.
The petitioner worked for the New Hampshire Department of Health and
Human Service (DHHS) as a youth counselor from 1991 until April 2018. His
medical records show that, beginning in the 1990s and throughout his
employment with DHHS, the petitioner experienced symptoms associated with,
according to DHHS’s medical expert, “chronic degenerative spondylosis of the
cervical spine with severe degenerative disc disease and uncovertebral joint and
facet hypertrophy and associated foraminal stenosis and lower cervical
radiculopathy.” These symptoms included chronic pain in the neck and right
upper back that radiated into the right arm.
On July 25, 2017, the petitioner physically restrained a resident of the
facility where he worked and brought the resident to the floor in a manner that,
according to the board, did not result “in a soft landing.” This incident caused
the petitioner to suffer pain and bleeding to his nose, and pain to his left wrist,
left knee, and shoulder. An incident report prepared by the petitioner
contemporaneously does not identify any pain or injury to his neck or right
arm as a result of the incident. Although the petitioner did experience some
tingling in his hand on the day following the incident, he did not seek medical
treatment, and continued to work for several more months.
The first time that the petitioner sought medical care following the July
2017 incident was on April 19, 2018. The provider’s treatment notes for that
visit state that the petitioner: (1) had “herniated cervical discs”; (2) had “had
chronic upper back and neck pain for many years”; (3) had declined surgery
after treating with a surgical specialist “many years ago”; (4) had been able to
successfully treat prior “flares” of his symptoms through medication, trigger
point injections, and ice and heat; (5) was trying to avoid surgery; (6) was
presently experiencing “flares” that were worse and more frequent than in the
past; (7) had “started to get intermittent tingling to [his] right fingers” that was
worse than it had been previously; and (8) was “negative for weakness.” The
notes further state that there was “[n]o injury or trauma that triggered [the]
recent flare,” but that the petitioner wondered whether his recent “splitting [of]
some cordwood . . . [may have] triggered it.” The provider observed that the
petitioner’s last cervical MRI in 2006 showed severe degenerative disc disease
“at C5/6 and C6/7,” as well as “neural foraminal narrowing and impressions
on the ventral surface of the anterior subarachnoid space.”
The petitioner subsequently consulted with an orthopedic clinic. On a
preprinted new patient history form, he described his condition as resulting
from an automobile accident, and did not select “Injury at Work,” another
available response to the question. He described the onset of his condition as
“Acute (Sudden),” rather than “Chronic Condition (>3 months),” and identified
the onset date as “4/8/18.” A note on the form states that he disclosed a “long
hx of neck issues” and “increased pain April 8th while stacking wood.” A
treatment note from that clinic dated May 17, 2018 states that he identified a
“motor vehicle accident many years ago” as having caused him “issues with
chronic neck pain,” and disclosed that he had “[r]ecently . . . noticed that his
flare ups are becoming more frequent and more difficult to control,” that
“[e]arly in the spring” he had “started to notice that he was getting increased
right-side hand paresthesias,” and that he “was having difficulty picking things
up and using his right hand.” A physical examination revealed “4+/5 strength
2
in the right deltoid, biceps, and triceps,” and diminished sensation “along the
right lateral hand, medial hand and lateral forearm.”
On July 18, 2018, the petitioner consulted with a neurosurgeon. The
surgeon noted that the petitioner had “a very long-standing over 20 year
history of right-sided neck and arm pain,” that “[m]ore recently over the last
year or so he has been noticing some weakness in his right hand . . . and
severe pain going into his right hand,” and that he “describes some vague
numbness and paresthesias extending to the right arm.” The surgeon
“discussed with [the petitioner] that he does have significant degenerative disc
disease and vital cord and nerve root impingement,” ordered a right arm EMG
and epidural steroid injection “for both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes,”
and determined that he would finalize the petitioner’s treatment plan after he
had reviewed the results of the follow-up testing. The EMG testing confirmed
“a right C6 and C7 radiculopathy,” and the epidural steroid injection provided
the petitioner with pain relief for four days.
On August 15, 2018, the neurosurgeon ordered a second epidural steroid
injection for further “diagnostic and therapeutic purposes,” and determined
that he would discuss surgical options with the petitioner after evaluating the
results of the injection. Prior to undergoing the second injection, however, the
petitioner awoke on August 27, 2018 with numbness in his right arm and was
unable to move it. He presented to the neurosurgeon two days later “with
severe pain in his right arm now and weakness that has been ongoing for
about 1 week in his right arm and hand.” The neurosurgeon examined the
petitioner, noted that he had weakness “in his right triceps and his right hand
intrinsic muscles” and “intolerable pain,” and based on his symptoms,
recommended emergency surgery. The neurosurgeon performed cervical fusion
surgery on August 31, 2018, and based upon the petitioner’s continued pain,
performed a second cervical fusion on October 30, 2018. Due to infection, the
petitioner underwent additional surgeries on November 15 and 21, 2018.
The first reference to the July 2017 incident in any of the petitioner’s
medical records is in a note from his primary care provider dated March 25,
2019. In that note, the provider indicated that at a follow-up visit with the
petitioner for pain management, he stated that he was “applying for SSDI,
medical retirement,” and warned that the provider “should expect a barrage of
papers.” According to the note, the petitioner provided a list of several injuries
he had sustained during the course of his employment with DHHS, including
the July 2017 incident in which he “injured face, wrist, knee and shoulder.
Neck extension injury – restraint with multiple injuries.”
On March 1, 2019, the neurosurgeon completed a portion of the
petitioner’s application for supplemental sick leave. In response to the
question whether the petitioner’s health condition was work-related, the
neurosurgeon checked both boxes stating, “Yes” and “No,” crossed both
3