THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2020-0005
PETITION OF NEW HAMPSHIRE DIVISION OF STATE POLICE
Argued: October 28, 2020
Opinion Issued: March 26, 2021
Gordon J. MacDonald, attorney general (Daniel E. Will, solicitor general,
Matthew T. Broadhead, senior assistant attorney general, and Jessica A. King,
assistant attorney general, on the brief, and Mr. Broadhead orally), for the New
Hampshire Division of State Police.
Davis│Hunt Law, PLLC, of Franklin (Brad C. Davis on the brief and
orally), for Douglas Trottier.
CullenCollimore, PLLC, of Nashua (Brian J.S. Cullen on the brief and
orally), for the Town of Northfield Police Department.
BASSETT, J. The court accepted this petition for original jurisdiction
filed pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 11 by the New Hampshire Division of
State Police (“the Division”) to determine whether the Superior Court (Kissinger,
J.) erred when, in the course of litigation between Douglas Trottier, formerly a
police officer in the Town of Northfield, and the Northfield Police Department
(“Northfield PD”), it ordered the Division — a nonparty — to produce a file
related to the Division’s pre-employment background investigation of Trottier.
The Division argues that the trial court erred because it ordered a nonparty to
produce discovery without a proper “jurisdictional basis,” such as a subpoena.
It also argues that the court erred when it concluded that RSA 516:36, II (2007)
did not bar discovery of the pre-employment background investigation file.
Although the parties never served the Division with a subpoena — the proper
procedure for propounding discovery on a nonparty to a litigation — we find
that the trial court ultimately afforded the Division ample notice and the
opportunity to object to disclosure of the file, and, therefore, there was no
prejudicial error. Because we also hold that RSA 516:36, II does not apply to
the pre-employment background investigation file, and, therefore, the file is not
shielded from discovery, we affirm.
The following facts are supported by the record or are undisputed.
Trottier served as a police officer for the Northfield PD for eleven years until he
resigned in 2002. At some point thereafter, he was employed as a certified
police officer with the Town of Barnstead Police Department. In May 2019,
Trottier filed a complaint in superior court against the Northfield PD. In the
complaint, Trottier alleges that, in 2018, he sought employment as a Trooper
with the Division and that, in the course of the Division’s pre-employment
background investigation, the Northfield PD falsely represented to the Division
that it had a “secret file” about Trottier. Trottier claims that the Northfield PD’s
false representation about the “secret file” damaged his reputation, caused the
Division not to hire him, interfered with his employment prospects with other
law enforcement agencies, and violated a prior agreement between him and the
Northfield PD. As previously noted, the Division was not a named party in
Trottier’s lawsuit.
After filing his complaint, Trottier asked the Division for a copy of its pre-
employment background investigation file. The Division construed the request
as one made under the Right-to-Know Law, and denied it. See RSA ch. 91-A
(2013 & Supp. 2020). Trottier did not challenge the denial by filing a separate
suit under the Right-to-Know Law in the superior court. See RSA 91-A:7
(Supp. 2020). Instead, in his civil suit against the Northfield PD, Trottier filed
an assented-to motion to compel the Division to disclose his pre-employment
background investigation file. He argued that he and the Northfield PD
believed that the file contained information relevant to his claims, and that the
information would impact the Northfield PD’s ability to mount a defense.
Trottier did not issue a subpoena or give notice to the Division. On August 22,
2019, the trial court granted the motion to compel, ruling that it would
reconsider its order “if the [Division] file[s] a motion to reconsider and/or
objection within 10 days of receipt of this order.”
The Division, after receipt on August 27 of a copy of the motion to compel
and the August 22 order, filed a timely objection on September 6 and moved for
a protective order to prevent discovery of the pre-employment file. The
2
Northfield PD filed a reply on September 23, and the Division filed a surreply
on October 10. In its pleadings, the Division argued that, because it was a
nonparty and had not been served with a subpoena, the trial court’s only
justifiable basis for compelling production of the file was the Right-to-Know
Law, RSA chapter 91-A. It further argued that the file, as a record pertaining
to internal personnel practices, was exempt from disclosure under the Right-to-
Know Law. See RSA 91-A:5, IV (2013). Alternatively, the Division argued that,
even if a subpoena were properly issued, the file would be exempt from civil
discovery because of the statutory privilege established by RSA 516:36, II.
The trial court held a hearing on Trottier’s motion to compel on October
25. On October 29, it issued a written order and again granted the motion. It
explained that, although it agreed with the Division that pre-employment files
are exempt from disclosure under the Right-to-Know Law, it needed to address
the distinct question of whether the file is subject to discovery. The court
reasoned that RSA 516:36, II applies only to “internal investigations of people
who are or were employed as police officers — not people who are seeking
employment with the agency involved.” Given this conclusion, and the fact
that Trottier’s claims put any statements made during the pre-employment
investigation directly at issue, the court ordered the Division to produce the file
subject to a protective order. The protective order required the parties to keep
the file confidential and prohibited them from disclosing any portion of the file
“in any public court filing or in open court absent approval by the Court in
advance, with notice to the [Division].” The trial court denied the Division’s
motion to reconsider. The Division then filed this petition for writ of certiorari.
See Sup. Ct. R. 11.
The Division raises two arguments in support of its position that the trial
court erred when it ordered the Division to produce the pre-employment
investigation file. First, it argues that, without service of a valid subpoena or
the filing of a Right-to-Know Law petition naming the Division as a party, the
court had “no jurisdiction over” the Division to order production. Second, the
Division asserts that the file was not discoverable because the file relates to an
“internal investigation into the conduct of any officer.” RSA 516:36, II. None of
the parties challenge the trial court’s ruling that “pre-employment
investigations are exempt from disclosure” under the Right-to-Know Law, and,
therefore, we need not address the issue.
Certiorari is an extraordinary remedy that is not granted as a matter of
right, but rather at the court’s discretion. Petition of State of N.H. (State v.
Lewandowski), 169 N.H. 340, 341 (2016); Sup. Ct. R. 11(1). Our review of the
trial court’s decision on a petition for writ of certiorari entails examining
whether the court acted illegally with respect to jurisdiction, authority or
observance of the law, or unsustainably exercised its discretion or acted
arbitrarily, unreasonably, or capriciously. See Petition of State, 169 N.H. at
341.
3
We review a trial court’s decisions on the management of discovery under
an unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. Petition of Stompor, 165
N.H. 735, 738 (2013). The Division — the nonprevailing party — asks us to
apply this standard when deciding the first issue raised in its petition. We
therefore assume, without deciding, that our unsustainable exercise of
discretion standard of review applies as we analyze the first issue. To satisfy
this standard in the context of this unique case, the Division, a nonparty to the
underlying litigation, must demonstrate that the trial court’s ruling was clearly
untenable or unreasonable to its prejudice. See id.
The Division first argues that the trial court lacked authority to order it
to produce the investigation file. It asserts that there are two procedural
avenues by which the trial court could have exerted authority over it as a
nonparty and ordered production of the file: pursuant to a petition filed under
the Right-to-Know Law or after service of a subpoena. The Division contends
that the trial court did not afford it the procedural safeguards inherent in
either process, thereby depriving it of timely notice of the governing legal
framework and a meaningful opportunity to carry its burden of resisting
disclosure.
As an initial matter, we are not persuaded by the Division’s argument
that the trial court erred when it did not “end[] its analysis at its conclusion
that the records sought are . . . exempt from production pursuant to RSA
[chapter] 91-A.” After the Division, relying upon the Right-to-Know Law,
denied Trottier’s request for the file, Trottier never brought a separate Right-to-
Know Law action in superior court seeking disclosure of the file. See RSA 91-
A:7; Lambert v. Belknap County Convention, 157 N.H. 375, 377 (2008)
(involving petition for declaratory judgment alleging violation of the Right-to-
Know Law filed in superior court after county officials denied petitioners’
request for documents). Rather, Trottier simply filed a motion to compel in the
ongoing civil action, which specified that the parties sought the file because
they believed it might contain information relevant to Trottier’s claims or the
Northfield PD’s defense of such claims. In ruling on the motion, the trial court
reasoned that, although it agreed with the Division that “pre-employment
investigations are exempt from disclosure under the Right to Know statute,
RSA 91-A:5,” that conclusion did “not end the inquiry into the discoverability of
such information.” In other words, the court rejected the Division’s argument
that Trottier’s request should be construed as a Right-to-Know petition and
controlled by the Right-to-Know Law and, instead, construed the pleading as a
discovery request. Given the procedural history and the substance of Trottier’s
motion, the trial court did not err in adopting this approach.
The Division next argues that the trial court erred when, in the absence
of a valid subpoena, it ordered the Division to produce the investigation file. It
is well established that a party may request discovery from a nonparty. See,
e.g., Robbins v. Kalwall Corp., 120 N.H. 451, 452-53 (1980); Therrien v.
4
Company, 99 N.H. 197, 199-200 (1954). The proper procedure for doing so is
for the party to serve the nonparty with a subpoena. See, e.g., Jules Jordan
Video, Inc. v. 144942 Canada Inc., 617 F.3d 1146, 1158 (9th Cir. 2010);
Bueker v. Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Ry. Co., 175 F.R.D. 291, 292 (N.D.
Ill. 1997); Yidi, L.L.C. v. JHB Hotel, L.L.C., 70 N.E.3d 1231, 1238 (Ohio Ct.
App. 2016).
To facilitate third-party discovery under New Hampshire law, a party may
serve a nonparty with a subpoena to provide deposition testimony and with a
subpoena duces tecum to require production of certain documents or other
materials at the deposition. See RSA 516:4 (2007); Super. Ct. R. 26(d). A
subpoena issued for either purpose must conform with the form set forth in
RSA 516:1 and must be signed by a justice or notary. RSA 516:1 (2007), :4;
see also 4 Gordon J. MacDonald, New Hampshire Practice: Wiebusch on New
Hampshire Civil Practice and Procedure § 27.07(1)(c), at 27-4 to 27-5 (4th ed.
2014). Specifically, the subpoena must bear the caption of the case, the
witness’s name, the date and location of the deposition, and the subject of the
testimony or the materials designated for production. RSA 516:1; Super. Ct. R.
26(d); see also 4 MacDonald, supra § 27.07(1)(c), at 27-5. The party must
provide notice to the deponent, either by reading the subpoena to him or her or
by serving the deponent in-hand with an attested copy. RSA 516:5 (2007). The
party must also provide the deponent with travel and attendance fees. See id.
If a party names a governmental agency as the deponent, the subpoena must
describe the matters for examination with “reasonable particularity.” Super.
Ct. R. 26(m). And, when serving a subpoena on a nonparty governmental
agency, a party must advise the nonparty of its duty to designate one or more
officers, directors, managing agents, or other persons who consent to testify on
its behalf. Id. If, after service of a subpoena, a deponent refuses to answer a
deposition question or provide requested materials, the party seeking discovery
may, after providing notice to all persons affected, request that the court
compel an answer or production. See Super. Ct. R. 26(k); see also Super. Ct.
R. 29(e) (governing motions to compel).
Here, a valid subpoena was never served on the Division. Indeed, the
Division was unaware of the discovery request prior to receiving a copy of the
trial court’s initial order granting the motion to compel. The trial court
therefore erred when it required the Division to produce the pre-employment
file despite the fact that it had not received notice of the discovery request by
way of subpoena. However, “[f]or an error to require reversal on appeal, it must
have been prejudicial to the party claiming it.” Giles v. Giles, 136 N.H. 540,
545 (1992) (quotation and brackets omitted). The Division argues that it was
prejudiced because it did not have timely notice and a meaningful opportunity
to oppose disclosure. We disagree.
Although the Division did not receive notice by way of the subpoena
process, it did receive adequate