THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2020-0013, John Lukens v. Kevin Quigley & a.,
the court on January 15, 2021, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
The landlord, John Lukens, appeals, and the tenants, Kevin Quigley and
Patricia Quigley, cross-appeal, orders of the Circuit Court (Carroll, R., approved
by Sadler and Vetanze, JJ.), dismissing the landlord’s summary action for
possession of residential property for nonpayment of rent, see RSA 540:13
(2007), and awarding the tenants: (1) three months’ rent based upon a finding
that the eviction was retaliatory, see RSA 540:13-a, :14, II (2007); (2) $608 for a
“substantial violation of the standards of fitness for health and safety,” see RSA
540:13-d (2007); (3) $1,000 for a violation of the right to quiet enjoyment under
RSA 540-A:2 (2007), see RSA 540-A:4, IX(a) (Supp. 2020); RSA 358-A:10, I
(2009); and (4) attorney’s fees based upon the finding that the landlord violated
RSA 540-A:2,1 see RSA 540-A:4, IX(a). We affirm the award of three months’
rent, reverse the award of $608, vacate the awards of $1,000 and attorney’s
fees, and remand for the entry of judgment in accordance with this order.
We will uphold the trial court’s findings unless they lack evidentiary
support or are erroneous as a matter of law. Colonial Village v. Pelkey, 157
N.H. 91, 92 (2008). We review its legal conclusions, as well as the application
of law to fact, independently for plain error. Id. Thus, our inquiry is to
determine whether the evidence presented at trial reasonably supports the trial
court’s findings, and whether its decision is consonant with applicable law. Id.
We review any questions of law, including the trial court’s interpretation of
statutory provisions, de novo. Id.; Liam Hooksett, LLC v. Boynton, 157 N.H.
625, 628 (2008).
1 The trial court did not expressly articulate the basis for the award of attorney’s fees in its
order. However, the tenants relied upon RSA 540-A:4, IX(a), the provision that authorizes an
award of reasonable attorney’s fees incurred in successfully prosecuting a claim under RSA
540-A:2, as the basis for an award of attorney’s fees in their pleadings. Moreover, the trial
court awarded the tenants their attorney’s fees in its order immediately after announcing that
it had awarded them $1,000 for the landlord’s violation of RSA 540-A:2. The trial court made
no finding in its order of bad faith that would have justified an award of attorney’s fees, and
cited no contractual provision that would have entitled the tenants to an award of fees. In
context, therefore, we construe the trial court’s order as having grounded the award of
attorney’s fees upon its finding of a violation of RSA 540-A:2. See In the Matter of Salesky &
Salesky, 157 N.H. 698, 702 (2008) (stating that the interpretation of a trial court order is a
question of law, which we review de novo).
The property at issue consists of a single-family home with a separate
loft above the garage. The tenants leased the property for a three-year term
beginning on May 1, 2017. The lease required the tenants to pay $1,520 per
month in rent. The lease also allowed the landlord, who resides in Thailand for
a portion of the year, to stay in the loft when he was in New Hampshire, but
required him to “reimburse [the] tenant[s] for electricity and propane used”
during the times that he stayed in the loft. The lease did not articulate how the
landlord’s use of electricity and propane would be calculated.
During the fall of 2018, a dispute arose between the parties regarding
how much the landlord owed for his use of propane and gas. In the course of
the dispute, the tenants asked the landlord whether they could simply deduct
the amount that the landlord owed for his propane usage from their December
rent payment. In response, the landlord stated that, although he preferred to
write a check, “if you’re paying the rent in cash, deduct the excess.”
Thereafter, the tenants sent the landlord a letter showing that they had
deducted from their December rent payment $320 for the landlord’s use of
propane and $300 for his use of electricity. The landlord responded by
thanking the tenants for their December cash payment, stating that he
“disagree[d] with [them] on the propane, but won’t contest it anymore,” and
proposing a different calculation for his electricity usage if the tenants were
“still thinking of re-calculating the shared electricity costs.” At no point did the
landlord demand that the tenants charge less for his electricity usage. At trial,
he testified that he had “given . . . up” his dispute over the propane charge, and
was attempting to negotiate a compromise that would lower the electricity
charge. Around the same time, the tenants notified the landlord that they
intended to vacate the property following the winter, and prior to the expiration
of the lease. The landlord responded by urging the tenants not “to break the
lease.” In a separate e-mail to his real estate agent, the landlord stated that
the background of the tenants’ threat to vacate the property included the
dispute over the landlord’s responsibility for the utilities, and that he had in
fact “paid $620 for three months for electricity and gas.”
A separate dispute arose between the parties regarding a strong sulfur
odor that would emanate from the water when the faucets were turned on, but
would dissipate as the water ran. During the fall of 2018, while he was still
staying in the loft, the landlord eliminated the odor by treating the property’s
hot water tank. In March 2019, however, while the landlord was in Thailand,
the tenants notified him that the odor had returned. They expressed concern
that the water was unsafe, and demanded that he have it tested. If he did not
test the water, the tenants stated that they would have it tested themselves and
deduct the expense from their rent. Although the landlord had a “handyman”
inspect the odor, and although the handyman advised the landlord on
measures to take in order to address it, the landlord neither addressed the
odor nor arranged to have the water tested during the spring of 2019. Nor did
2
the tenants test the water themselves at this time. Nevertheless, the parties
exchanged several e-mails regarding the issue during the spring of 2019.
In May 2019, the landlord told the tenants that he would evict them
because their May rent had been “short” by $18. The tenants responded that
the $18 represented the cost of a water testing kit, and that to avoid eviction,
they would pay the $18. However, they asserted that the landlord was still
responsible for addressing the water issue. They further claimed that the odor
was worsening, and that it caused a burning sensation in their eyes. On May
19, the landlord e-mailed the tenants a demand for rent of $18. After the
tenants paid their June rent, the landlord instructed his real estate agent not
to cash the check because it would “make[] it more difficult to evict” them.
The landlord returned to the property in June 2019, and accused the
tenants of “trespassing.” He admitted at that time that he had “done nothing
about [the tenants’] main complaint, that the water odor was back,” claiming
that the tenants had not provided him with information he “need[ed] to
diagnose the problem.” The landlord claimed that the tenants had “forced” him
to return to New Hampshire early “in order to evict” them. On June 11, the
parties met in order to discuss their dispute. At that meeting, the landlord
served a demand for rent and an eviction notice for the $620 that the tenants
had deducted from the December 2018 rent, the $18 that they had deducted
from the May 2019 rent, and the June 2019 rent. When the tenants pointed
out that they had, in fact, paid both the $18 and the June rent, the landlord
responded that the rent was late because, although the tenants had paid it, he
had not yet deposited the check, and that they thus owed an additional late
fee. The landlord subsequently deposited the June rent check.
On July 3, 2019, the landlord told the tenants that if they paid the $620
they had deducted from their December 2018 rent plus late penalties, he would
address the water odor. On July 8, the tenants advised the landlord that they
had had the water tested, and that it was hard and showed high calcium, iron
bacteria, and hydrogen sulfide levels. The landlord responded by stating that,
“[n]ow that . . . [the tenants] ha[d] finally given [him] most of the information
[he] need[ed],” he would “try to fix” the issue. By the time of trial in September
2019, however, the landlord still had not addressed the issue. Nevertheless, he
introduced at trial the results of testing performed by the New Hampshire
Department of Health and Human Services in July demonstrating that the
water was, in fact, safe for human consumption, and that “[t]he sulfur odor is
not a health hazard. It is just unpleasant.”
On July 6, 2019, the landlord served the eviction notice and demand for
rent underlying this case based only upon the $620 that the tenants had
deducted from the December rent. He filed the possessory action on July 15,
but did not assert a claim for unpaid rent. The tenants pleaded ten separate
“counterclaims” that sought, inter alia, three months’ rent for retaliatory
3