THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2020-0449, ClearChoiceMD, PLLC v. Horace
Henriques, MD, the court on September 14, 2021, issued the
following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
plaintiff, ClearChoiceMD, PLLC (employer), appeals, and the defendant, Horace
Henriques, MD (employee), cross-appeals, a ruling of the Superior Court
(McNamara, J.) upholding a wage claim decision issued by the New Hampshire
Department of Labor (DOL) in favor of the employee. The employer asserts that
the superior court erred in affirming the DOL’s wage claim decision and in
calculating the attorney’s fee award. The employee asserts that the superior
court erred in reversing the DOL’s award of liquidated damages. We affirm the
superior court’s rulings.
The following facts are supported by the record. In August 2016, the
employee accepted an offer from the employer to work as a physician at its
Lebanon Clinic. The employment agreement set out his compensation as “a
salary of $100 hourly” and also provided: “Physicians who average one shift per
week are eligible to participate in [ClearChoiceMD’s] RVU productivity based
bonus pay program. You will have access to your relevant data to insure
financial transparency and accountability.” RVU stands for “relative value
units” under which productivity is measured.
The employee began working in September 2016 and, in December 2016,
he received his first bonus, accompanied by a document that contained the
bonus calculations for the prior quarter. The document listed the base RVU as
3.2. Through February 2017, the employee was paid his quarterly bonus at a
rate of 3.2 RVUs. However, in March 2017, without prior notice and
unbeknownst to him, the employer began to gradually increase the bonus rate
from 3.2 to 4.5, to the employee’s detriment. In April 2018, the employee
inquired about his reduced bonus payout and was told by the employer that
the decline in the RVUs stemmed from a companywide compliance issue having
to do with the proper coding of medical procedures. In January 2019, the
employee discovered that changes had been made to the RVU base rate. In
response to his inquiry seeking clarification regarding how the bonus was
calculated, the employer acknowledged that the base rate had changed,
explaining that the original rate did not take into account costs pertaining to
corporate management services and “[i]nstead of making the fix all at once, [it]
gradually increased the rate to the correct amount.”
In August 2019, the employee filed a wage claim with the DOL, asserting
that he was owed unpaid bonus pay and requesting liquidated damages, plus
interest and attorney’s fees. Following a hearing, the hearing officer found that
“the employer’s conduct established a contract under which [the employee]
would bonus off the 3.2 rate.” Given that it was “uncontested that [the
employee’s] quarterly bonus payments, after the commencement of his
employment, were based on a bonus rate of 3.2,” the officer found that
“[w]ithout receipt of written notification of a change to the bonus rate, it [was]
reasonable for [the employee] to assume that his future bonuses would also be
based on a bonus rate of 3.2.”
Determining that the bonus qualified as a wage, the hearing officer
concluded that there was “no reasonable argument to exclude the bonus
payments from wages in this matter” and, thus, the employee was “owed
$41,284.62 in unpaid wages in the form of unpaid bonus pay.” The hearing
officer also found that the employee notified the employer “of his concerns
regarding bonus pay and provided an opportunity for [the employer] to resolve
the problem before filing a Wage Claim,” but the employer “chose not to take
corrective action.” Thus, the officer concluded, the employer “knowingly
withheld pay, which [the employee] was owed, willfully and without good
cause,” and awarded the employee liquidated damages. However, because “no
evidence was provided with respect to the amount” of attorney’s fees owed, the
officer denied his request for attorney’s fees.
The parties appealed to the superior court. The superior court upheld
the DOL’s wage claim determination, but reversed the DOL’s award of
liquidated damages and its denial of attorney’s fees. The court also awarded
the employee attorney’s fees for the proceedings in superior court. This appeal
and cross-appeal followed.
Any party aggrieved by a DOL wage claim decision may appeal to the
superior court by petition specifying the grounds upon which the decision is
claimed to be in error. Ichiban Japanese Steakhouse v. Rocheleau, 167 N.H.
138, 140 (2014); see RSA 275:51, V (2010). The scope of review by the superior
court shall be limited to questions of law. Ichiban, 167 N.H. at 140. After
hearing and upon consideration of the record, the superior court may affirm,
vacate or modify, in whole or in part, the decision of the commissioner, or may
remand the matter to the commissioner for further findings. Id. We, in turn,
review the superior court’s decisions on questions of law de novo. Id.
In its appeal, the employer argues that the superior court erred in
affirming the DOL’s finding that the “additional bonus amounts” claimed by the
2
employee constituted “wages due,” because the employer “was not obligated to
pay [the employee] any bonus at all.” (Bolding omitted.) The employer asserts
that, in so finding, it was error for the court to consider extrinsic evidence to
“correct so-called ‘ambiguities’ that did not actually exist” because, under the
plain language of the contract, the employee was “simply eligible to participate
in the RVU bonus program” but was not entitled to do so.
The interpretation of a written contract is a question of law for this court,
which we review de novo. See Behrens v. S.P. Constr. Co., 153 N.H. 498, 500
(2006). When interpreting a written agreement, we give the language used by
the parties its reasonable meaning, considering the circumstances, and the
context in which the agreement was negotiated, and reading the document as a
whole. In the Matter of Taber-McCarthy & McCarthy, 160 N.H. 112, 115
(2010). The language of a contract is ambiguous if the parties could
reasonably disagree as to the meaning of that language. Birch Broad. v.
Capitol Broad. Corp., 161 N.H. 192, 196 (2010).
The employment agreement between the parties provided that
“Physicians who average one shift per week are eligible to participate in
[ClearChoiceMD’s] RVU productivity based bonus pay program. You will have
access to your relevant data to insure financial transparency and
accountability.” The ordinary meaning of “eligible” is “qualified to be chosen
. . . : entitled to something.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 736
(unabridged ed. 2002). As the superior court explained, because the bonus
program was discussed in the “Compensation” addendum to the employment
agreement, “it was reasonable for [the employee] to interpret the bonus as
compensation for his services as a physician.” On the other hand, the court
reasoned, “it was also objectively reasonable for [the employer] to interpret
‘eligible’ to mean that it retained the discretion not to award a bonus.” Thus,
the court determined, the hearing officer did not err “by considering the course
of performance as extrinsic evidence of the parties’ intent.” Given that both
interpretations were objectively reasonable, we agree with the superior court
that “the incentive plan provision [was] ambiguous” as to whether the parties
intended that the employee was simply “qualified to be chosen” to participate in
the bonus plan at the employer’s discretion or was “entitled” to participate in
the bonus plan as part of his compensation.
The employer testified that its offer to the employee was that he would be
paid “a base hourly rate of 100 dollars” and was “entitled to participate in the
incentive pay” to increase his total hourly rate. The employee testified that he
accepted the employer’s offer that he would be “compensated at an hourly wage
and with the RVU system.” The record shows that throughout his employment,
the employee was paid an hourly rate and received quarterly bonuses under
the incentive plan accompanied by written statements containing financial
3