THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2020-0556, Wallace Farm, LLC v. Mark Sacco,
the court on July 13, 2021, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
The defendant, Mark Sacco (tenant), appeals a decision of the Circuit Court
(Steckowych, J.) granting possession to the plaintiff, Wallace Farm, LLC
(landlord), of residential property for good cause based upon the tenant’s
failure, following written notice, to remove a satellite dish installed in violation
of the parties’ lease. See RSA 540:2, II(e), III (Supp. 2020). On appeal, the
tenant argues that the trial court erred by not dismissing the case based upon
the federal “Over-the-Air Reception Devices” (OTARD) rule, see 47 C.F.R. §
1.4000(a) (2019). We affirm.
The OTARD rule provides, in relevant part:
Any restriction, including but not limited to . . . any private
covenant, contract provision, [or] lease provision, . . . on property
within the exclusive use or control of the antenna user where the
user has a direct or indirect ownership or leasehold interest in the
property that impairs the installation, maintenance, or use of:
(i) An antenna that is:
(A) Used to receive direct broadcast satellite service,
including direct-to-home satellite service, or to receive or transmit
fixed wireless signals via satellite, and
(B) One meter or less in diameter . . .
. . . is prohibited to the extent it so impairs . . . .
47 C.F.R. § 1.4000(a)(1).
Evidence in the record, including photographs introduced at trial,
establishes that the tenant leases a residential apartment in a large, multi-unit
apartment building containing apartments on three stories with balconies on
the upper-story units and patios on the first-story units. The landscaping on
the side of the building where the tenant’s first floor apartment is located
includes a large grass lawn with some shrubbery immediately adjacent to the
building. Several feet from the side of the tenant’s apartment, on the grass
lawn, is a satellite television dish affixed to a pole that is several feet in height
and secured to the ground. Cable runs from the satellite dish and enters the
apartment building through holes drilled into its exterior wall.
The lease defines the premises as “[a] 2 bedroom apartment located at: 9
BRIDLE PATH #104 Londonderry, NH 03053.” It obligates the landlord to
“maintain the apartment building, the common grounds, the apartment and
[its] equipment . . . in good condition in compliance with . . . all applicable
laws, rules and regulations of the State, its agencies and any applicable
municipal codes.” It obligates the tenant not to “embellish and/or change, nor
make any additions or alterations to the apartment,” or to “install . . . antennas
or other like . . . equipment” without the landlord’s written permission. It also
requires the tenant to keep “[s]idewalks, passages, public halls, stairwells, fire
escapes, etc.” free from obstructions, and prohibits their use “for any purpose
other than ingress and egress to the premises.” The lease prohibits the tenant
from using “[b]alconies and patios . . . as storage areas,” and requires the
tenant to keep “[c]ommon areas including stairwells, landings, balconies and
grounds . . . free of any personal belongings.” The lease specifically provides
that “[s]atellite [d]ishes are NOT permitted.”
On April 29, 2020, the landlord provided written notice to the tenant
advising that on the previous day, the landlord had observed a satellite dish
installed “on the ground outside [of his] apartment,” that the satellite dish
violated the lease, and that he was required to remove and dispose of it and
repair all exterior or interior drilled holes no later than May 8, 2020. If the
tenant failed to comply, the landlord warned that it would commence an
eviction. The tenant did not comply with the