THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2020-0251, Seabrook Onestop, Inc. & a. v.
Town of Seabrook & a., the court on September 16, 2021,
issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
plaintiffs, Seabrook Onestop, Inc. (Seabrook Onestop) and other Seabrook
property owners, including other gas station owners or operators, appeal an
order of the Superior Court (Schulman, J.) upholding decisions of the zoning
board of adjustment (ZBA) and planning board for defendant Town of Seabrook
(Town) regarding the request by defendant Waterstone Properties, Inc.
(Waterstone) to amend its site plan to build a gas station on its property. We
affirm.
I. Facts
The relevant facts follow. Waterstone is a developer, acting on behalf of
ASKJA Real Estate Holdings, LLC (ASKJA). In 2013, ASKJA purchased a 19-
acre lot in Seabrook located in the heart of Seabrook’s commercial strip. The
lot has frontage on U.S. Route 1 and on Provident Way, a class V or better
highway. That section of Route 1 contains box stores, fast food restaurants,
shopping centers, gas stations, and other commercial enterprises. ASKJA’s lot
benefited from a 2004 variance, which made the entire lot part of the
commercial zoning district. Gas stations are permitted uses in the commercial
zoning district.
In 2013, ASKJA received site plan approval from the planning board to
develop a large shopping center on the lot. Four years later, in 2017,
Waterstone, acting on ASKJA’s behalf, obtained approval to subdivide the lot
by carving out a one-acre lot suitable for a commercial use and associated
parking. For ease of reference, we refer to the one-acre lot as the “New Lot”
and the remaining 18 acres as the “Main Lot.”
Before it could obtain subdivision approval, Waterstone needed variances
to render the New Lot buildable. Specifically, Waterstone sought variances
from the requirements that the New Lot have frontage on a public way, that an
existing building on the Main Lot be set back from the New Lot’s boundary, and
that a proposed building on the New Lot be set back from the Main Lot’s
boundary. The ZBA granted these variances in October 2017, and its decision
was not appealed. Thereafter, the planning board approved Waterstone’s
subdivision. As a result, the New Lot was created as a saleable, buildable,
commercial lot with a deeded easement to use the driving lanes of the Main Lot
to access Provident Way. The planning board’s subdivision approval also was
not appealed.
In 2018, Waterstone sought planning board approval to amend the 2013
site plan. Although the 2013 plan indicated that a “retail building” would be
constructed in the area of the New Lot, the amended plan proposed that a gas
station be constructed instead. The gas station would have six gas pumps
under a canopy, underground storage tanks, a 400-square-foot kiosk and
associated generator, a self-service air pump, and nearby parking. BJ’s
Wholesale Club (BJ’s) would operate the gas station. The gas station was
designed to serve only BJ’s members.
The planning board held public hearings on the amended plan. The
plaintiffs objected to it. The planning board rejected the plaintiffs’ arguments
and approved the amended site plan with conditions. Two of the conditions
required that the plan depict all wells that are within 250 feet, and that
Waterstone obtain all requisite approvals from the New Hampshire Department
of Environmental Services or “any other party.”
The plaintiffs simultaneously appealed the planning board’s conditional
approval to the ZBA and the superior court. The ZBA denied the plaintiffs’
appeal and subsequent motion for rehearing. The plaintiffs then appealed the
ZBA’s decision to the superior court. The trial court consolidated the plaintiffs’
appeals. The court issued a 37-page, well-reasoned, detailed order upholding
the planning board and ZBA decisions. The plaintiffs unsuccessfully moved for
reconsideration, and this appeal followed.
II. Analysis
Our review of the superior court’s decision on appeals arising from a
decision of a planning or zoning board is limited. See Girard v. Town of
Plymouth, 172 N.H. 576, 581 (2019) (planning board); Dietz v. Town of
Tuftonboro, 171 N.H. 614, 618 (2019) (ZBA). We will reverse the trial court’s
decision only if it is not supported by the evidence or is legally erroneous.
Trustees of Dartmouth Coll. v. Town of Hanover, 171 N.H. 497, 504 (2018)
(planning board); Rochester City Council v. Rochester Zoning Bd. of
Adjustment, 171 N.H. 271, 275 (2018) (ZBA). We review the trial court’s
decision to determine whether a reasonable person could have reached the
same decision as the trial court based on the evidence before it. Girard, 172
N.H. at 582.
The trial court’s review of ZBA and planning board decisions is also
limited. The trial court must uphold a ZBA or planning board decision unless
there is an error of law or the court is persuaded by the balance of probabilities
2
that the decision was unreasonable. See RSA 677:6, :15, V (2016). The trial
court must treat factual findings of the planning board or ZBA as prima facie
lawful and reasonable. Id. The review by the trial court is not whether it
agrees with the findings of the ZBA or planning board, but whether there is
evidence upon which those findings could have been reasonably based.
Trustees of Dartmouth Coll., 171 N.H. at 504; Rochester City Council, 171 N.H.
at 275.
A. ZBA Decision
On appeal, the plaintiffs first argue that the trial court erred by
upholding the ZBA’s decision because it failed to satisfy RSA 676:3 by stating
only that the ZBA “support[ed] [the] Planning Board decision.” See RSA 676:3
(2016) (requiring a “local land use board” to provide an applicant “with written
reasons” when the board disapproves “an application for a local permit” and
requiring the board’s “written decision containing the reasons therefor” to be
available for public inspection). Here, however, the plaintiffs appealed only
issues of law to the ZBA, which the superior court reviewed de novo. Under
these circumstances, we discern no error in the trial court’s review despite the
ZBA’s failure to further explain its decision. See Kalil v. Town of Dummer
Zoning Bd. of Adjustment, 155 N.H. 307, 313 (2007).
B. Planning Board Decision
The plaintiffs next assert that the trial court erroneously upheld the
planning board’s conditional approval because: (1) the 2017 variances were
void; (2) using the New Lot for a gas station is outside the scope of those
variances; (3) the conditional approval violated RSA 674:41; and (4) the board
failed to sufficiently address the plaintiffs’ concerns about traffic and well
contamination. We consider each argument in turn.
1. Validity of 2017 Variances
The plaintiffs first argue that, because it required fact-finding, the trial
court erred when it decided, in the first instance, that the 2017 variances were
valid even though Seabrook Onestop failed to receive statutory