THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2020-0295, Stanley Emanuel v. Town of Bow,
New Hampshire & a., the court on May 13, 2021, issued the
following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
The plaintiff, Stanley Emanuel, appeals an order of the Superior Court
(Kissinger, J.) granting summary judgment in favor of the defendants, the Town
of Bow, New Hampshire, and Ted Severance, with respect to Emanuel’s claims
that the Town engaged in unfair bidding practices when selling certain real
property. We affirm.
The pertinent facts are as follows. The property at issue is a 28.23-acre
parcel located in the Town’s business development district. Pursuant to RSA
41:14-a, I (2012), the Town’s Conservation Committee, Heritage Commission,
and Planning Board held meetings to approve the proposed sale. The
Conservation Committee recommended that the property be sold subject to the
recommendations of the Heritage Commission, which, in turn, recommended
that the Town retain ownership over a historic mill site and stream flow on the
property. The Planning Board also recommended that the property be sold,
“preferably to a bidder who has immediate plans to develop it and get it back
on the tax roll.”
In March 2019, the Town solicited sealed bids for the property by issuing
a notice of offer to sell town parcel, which described the property, the bidding
process and requirements, and other conditions of the sale. The notice
provided, among other things, that:
 “Bidders must use the Bid Form in this packet”;
 “In the case of a tie bid, the Town reserves the right to use the earliest
post marked date and time on the sealed bid envelope”;
 “The Town retains the right to reject any and all bids and to waive any
formality in the bidding process”;
 “There is an historic mill site on the land. The Quit Claim Deed will
include an easement to the Town for access to the mill site and the right
to maintain and preserve the mill site”;
 “Bidders may provide information regarding their plans for future
development of the Premises. This information may be considered by the
Board of [Selectmen] when evaluating the bid proposals”; and
 “Bidders are advised there is a snow mobile trail across the land . . .
Bidders are encouraged to commit to reach an agreement with Bow
Pioneers for continuation of the trail.”
The notice did not include the minutes of the Conservation Committee,
Heritage Commission, or Planning Board meetings, nor did it detail their
discussions or recommendations.
The Town attached to the notice a summary of the business development
district zoning ordinance, which provides:
The purpose of the Business Development District Ordinance is to
attract environmentally acceptable commercial, industrial,
recreational, and institutional uses to the District; to encourage
diversity in the community tax base through appropriate flexibility
in land use and land use development; to optimize financial return
on public infrastructure investments and expenditures . . . ; to
minimize adverse traffic impacts . . . ; and to preserve valuable
historical, cultural, and natural features within the District and to
minimize adverse environmental impacts to water and air, while
reducing light and noise pollution, flooding, clear cutting of
vegetation, and the blocking of scenic views.
The Town also attached a required bid form, which asked bidders to
submit certain identifying information, the amount of their bid, and to certify,
among other things, that the bidder “understand[s] that the Town reserves the
right to reject any and all bids and to waive any formality in the bidding
process.” The bid form also included a section asking bidders to submit
information about their plans to develop the property, but noted that this
section was “not required.”
In April 2019, the Town received five bids for the property. Emanuel’s
bid offered the highest purchase price, but did not identify any proposed
development plans for the property. Severance’s bid was lower, but stated that
he intended
to develop the premises as quickly as possible into a retail store for
building material. Bidder is a sustained and successful
businessman in the Town and has a vested interest in the future of
the Town. The new store will create new local job opportunities
and create a much needed and convenient place for the people of
the Bow community to purchase building materials. In addition,
2
the Bidder, if successful, will meet with the Bow Pioneers to
discuss terms and conditions for the continuation of [the] existing
snowmobile trail.
In late April 2019, at a meeting of the Town Board of Selectmen, the
board reviewed the submitted bids to determine “which would provide the most
long-term benefit to the Town, including the future use of the land.” Emanuel
objected to the application of that standard, questioning “whether it was
appropriate for the Town to consider future development of the site instead of
only the bid offer.” The vice chair of the board responded that “it has been the
intent of the Business Development Commission to develop that land.”
Thereafter, the board selected Severance’s bid as the winning bid. Emanuel
filed a request to reconsider, which, following a hearing in May 2019, was
denied. Emanuel then sued the Town and Severance in superior court. The
parties filed cross-motions for summary judgment, and, in an order issued in
April 2020, the trial court granted summary judgment in favor of the Town and
Severance. The trial court denied Emanuel’s motion for reconsideration, and
this appeal followed.
“In reviewing a trial court’s rulings on cross-motions for summary
judgment, we consider the evidence in the light most favorable to each party in
its capacity as the non-moving party,” and, “if no genuine issue of material fact
exists, we determine whether the moving party is entitled to judgment as a
matter of law.” Langevin v. Travco Ins. Co., 170 N.H. 660, 663 (2018). “If our
review of that evidence discloses no genuine issue of material fact and if the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, then we will affirm the
grant of summary judgment.” Id. “We review the trial court’s application of the
law to the facts de novo.” Id.
On appeal, Emanuel first argues that the trial court erred by granting
summary judgment in favor of the Town and Severance because Emanuel’s bid
“was the highest bid that conformed to the terms of the auction sale,” and that,
under the “general rule” described in Perry v. West, 110 N.H. 351, 355 (1970),
and the cases cited therein, the property must be awarded to the highest
bidder. See id. We disagree.
Emanuel’s argument is based on the following statement in Perry: “The
general rule that a municipality must accept the highest bid only requires
acceptance of the highest bid which conforms to the terms of the auction sale
consistent with the governing municipal ordinance.” Id. (citations omitted).
However, Perry involved a tax sale, and the issue in that case was “whether a
municipality can be compelled to accept a bid for property sold for taxes
accompanied by a bank draft or a cashier’s check when the municipal
ordinance and the announced terms of the auction sale require[d] the bid to be
accompanied by ‘cash or certified check.’” Id. at 352. Accordingly, the “general
3