THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2020-0190, Matthew Benoit v. ARNE, LLC, the
court on December 7, 2020, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
The defendant, ARNE, LLC (ARNE), appeals orders of the Circuit Court (Kent,
R., approved by Lyons, J.) that: (1) denied its motion to vacate a default
judgment in the amount of $5,000 plus interest and costs entered in favor of
the plaintiff, Matthew Benoit, on a small claim complaint; and (2) granted
Benoit attorney’s fees associated with his defense of a related lawsuit brought
by ARNE in superior court (ARNE II). We affirm the denial of the motion to
vacate the default judgment, but reverse the award of attorney’s fees.
Benoit commenced this litigation by filing his small claim complaint on
March 21, 2018, seeking a final payment of $5,000 pursuant to a framing
subcontract. He asserted that the payment was due upon the completion of an
inspection, that ARNE’s agent, Raymond Donahue, had “repeatedly lied to
[him] about speaking with the building inspector to set up the inspection,” and
that Benoit himself had “confirmed with the building inspector that he has
never been contacted for an inspection.” Pursuant to RSA 503:6 (Supp. 2019),
the trial court served ARNE by mailing written notice of the claim to Donahue
on March 26, 2018. See RSA 503:6, I; Dist. Div. R. 4.2(a). Evidence in the
record establishes that, as early as March 29, 2018, three days after service,
Donahue sent a text message to the building inspector stating that Donahue
“had been sued” by Benoit, and that Benoit had claimed “in court documents”
both that Donahue had “lied to him . . . [that Donahue] couldn’t get a framing
inspection,” and that Benoit “had spoken to you and you were willing to do it.”
The record does not indicate that the notice was returned as undelivered. See
RSA 503:6, III (requiring “service . . . as in all other actions at law” only if the
notice is returned as undelivered); Dist. Div. R. 4.3(b).
ARNE did not respond to the small claim, and on April 27, 2018, the trial
court entered default in favor of Benoit in the amount of $5,000 plus interest
and costs. See RSA 503:6, II; Dist. Div. R. 4.3(c). Also on April 27, the trial
court mailed notice of the default to Donahue. As with the small claim notice,
the notice of default was not returned as undeliverable.
Benoit subsequently moved for periodic payments of the judgment. See
RSA 524:6-a (Supp. 2019). The trial court issued an order of notice for a
payment hearing, which Benoit attempted to serve by certified mail on August
1, 2018, and when he was unable to confirm that Donahue had received it, the
trial court issued a new order of notice, which was served in hand on October
17, 2018. See Dist. Div. R. 4.10(c) (providing that, if the defendant does not
sign the return receipt on an order of notice served by certified mail, in-hand
service shall be required). The order of notice required ARNE to appear at a
payment hearing on November 2, 2018.
ARNE filed ARNE II in superior court on September 24, 2018, alleging
that Benoit had breached the contract, and that on April 5, 2018, after the
small claim had been filed, the framing work had failed inspection. ARNE
failed to appear at the November 2 payment hearing in circuit court, and the
circuit court issued an order stating that an arrest warrant would issue.
Counsel for ARNE then filed an appearance in circuit court, and on November
6, 2018, moved to stay the circuit court case pending ARNE II. In the motion,
ARNE claimed that it had “not been lawfully served with” the small claim
complaint. We note that the record on appeal does not contain any affidavit or
other statement signed under penalty of criminal prosecution attesting to the
truth of the assertion concerning service. See Dist. Div. R. 1.8(B).
On November 7, 2018, counsel for Benoit entered appearances for him in
both matters, and moved to dismiss ARNE II on the basis that it was barred by
the default judgment rendered in the small claim. See Osman v. Gagnon, 152
N.H. 359, 362 (2005). In the motion to dismiss, Benoit specifically argued that
ARNE II was “an evasive litigation tactic amounting to an act of bad faith,” and
requested an award of attorney’s fees pursuant to Harkeem v. Adams, 117 N.H.
687 (1977). On December 5, 2018, the superior court granted the motion to
dismiss ARNE II, but did not expressly rule on the attorney’s fees request.
On the following day, ARNE filed a motion in the circuit court to vacate
the default judgment, claiming that Benoit’s final $5,000 payment was not due
until his work had passed inspection, and that his work had failed inspection
on April 5, 2018. Thus, ARNE claimed that Benoit had “either lied, or
misrepresented the situation in his” March 26, 2018 small claim complaint.
ARNE further argued that the complaint failed to state a claim upon which
relief could be granted, and that Donahue “did not believe he had been properly
served with a viable Complaint.” As to the latter claim, the motion stated that
“Donahue recalls that Mr. Benoit told him he was going to sue him by phone or
in a TXT message,” and that Benoit “failed to alert [Donahue’s attorney] about
the suit as instructed by Donahue.” We note that the record on appeal does
not contain an affidavit or other statement signed under penalty of criminal
prosecution attesting to the truth of these assertions. See Dist. Div. R. 1.8(B).
2
On January 4, 2019, the circuit court denied ARNE’s November 6, 2018
motion to stay, and stated that it would schedule an expedited hearing on the
motion to vacate the default. The trial court held a hearing on the motion to
vacate the default on March 15, 2019. Benoit asserts, and ARNE does not
specifically dispute, that the trial court took offers of proof at the hearing. We
note that ARNE has not provided a transcript of this hearing on appeal. See
Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004) (stating that appealing
party bears burden to provide record sufficient to decide issues on appeal).
The trial court denied the motion to vacate, observing that ARNE had
been served by mail with both the complaint and notice of default, that such
documents were “never returned to the court,” and that Donahue’s March 29,
2018 text exchange with the building inspector demonstrated his knowledge of
the suit. The trial court rejected ARNE’s argument that the complaint failed to
state a claim, observing that the complaint was “clear enough to apprise the
Defendant about the nature of [the] claim and the amount sought.” As to
ARNE’s claim of “fraud,” the trial court determined that the argument was
essentially the same claim ARNE had asserted in ARNE II, and that while the
purported “fraud” may have supported a defense or counterclaim, it did not
justify vacating the default judgment.
Subsequently, Benoit moved for an award of attorney’s fees, arguing in
part that ARNE II was a bad faith attempt to “circumvent this court’s default
judgment,” under Harkeem. The trial court granted the motion, reasoning that
“[p]roper appeals from Small Claims are to the Supreme Court,” and that the
“collateral action in the Superior Court following the Small Claims decision and
subsequent motions, requests and hearings in the District Court . . . was
unreasonable and demonstrates bad faith.” Thus, the trial court awarded
Benoit “all attorney’s fees and costs associated with the Superior Court action,”
and ordered Benoit to “submit a taxation of costs and attorney’s fees.”
On May 29, 2019, counsel for Benoit filed an affidavit of fees in the
circuit court, asserting that Benoit had incurred $2,883.75 in attorney’s fees
“for . . . time billed in the superior court matter.” Counsel further asserted that
ARNE had appealed ARNE II, and that he would supplement the affidavit to
include attorney’s fees incurred in the appeal at a later date. The record
reflects that ARNE timely appealed ARNE II on April 1, 2019, and that Benoit
did not cross-appeal the superior court’s failure to award attorney’s fees. On
August 8, the circuit court, sua sponte, stayed its order on attorney’s fees,
noting that the order “allowed the collection of . . . those [attorney’s] fees
connected with [ARNE’s] filing of an action in the Superior Court to attack the
decision in this case,” and that it had learned of the ARNE II appeal.
3