THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2020-0081, In the Matter of Lenny Pham and
Bichngo Pham, the court on June 7, 2021, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
The petitioner, Lenny Pham (husband), appeals an order of the Circuit Court
(DalPra, M., approved by Stephen, J.), following an evidentiary hearing,
dismissing his petition to annul his marriage to the respondent, Bichngo Pham
(wife), on the basis that he did not prove that the wife was legally married to
another at the time of the parties’ 1987 marriage. See RSA 458:1, :2 (2018).
The husband argues that the weight of the evidence compelled findings that the
wife was married, and knew she was married, to someone else when the parties
married. He further argues that the Trial Court (Alfano, J.) erred by denying
his motion for reconsideration, through which he sought to introduce new
evidence and requested a new hearing. We affirm.
RSA 458:1 provides that “[a]ll marriages . . . where either [party] has a
former wife or husband living, knowing such wife or husband to be alive and
knowing that their marriage had not been legally dissolved, if solemnized in
this state, shall be absolutely void without any legal process.” Under RSA
458:2, “[i]f any doubt exists whether any marriage is void, . . . a petition may be
filed as in other cases, and a decree of divorce or nullity may be made.”
Whether the wife was legally married to another, and knew of this fact, at the
time that the parties married raises questions of fact on which the husband
bore the burden of proof. See Hilliard v. Baldwin, 76 N.H. 142, 143 (1911).
We will uphold the trial court’s findings unless they are unsupported by
the evidence or legally erroneous, In the Matter of Kempton & Kempton, 167
N.H. 785, 798 (2015), deferring to the trial court on matters such as resolving
conflicts in testimony, evaluating credibility, and determining the weight of
evidence, In the Matter of Aube & Aube, 158 N.H. 459, 465 (2009). The trial
court may accept or reject, in whole or in part, the testimony of any witness,
and is not required to believe uncontested evidence. Aube, 158 N.H. at 466.
We will uphold the trial court’s ruling on a motion for reconsideration,
including a decision not to reopen the record and accept new evidence on
reconsideration, absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. In the Matter
of Geraghty & Geraghty, 169 N.H. 404, 419 (2016); In the Matter of Spenard &
Spenard, 167 N.H. 1, 3 (2014). In applying this standard, we examine the
record only to determine whether it contains an objective basis sufficient to
sustain the trial court’s discretionary judgment. Spenard, 167 N.H. at 3.
The record in this case establishes that the parties were married in
Salem in 1987. They had previously emigrated from Vietnam. At the time of
the marriage, the husband was aware that the wife, while living in Vietnam
twelve years earlier, had had a child with another man, Quyen Van Nguyen
(Quyen). Quyen immigrated to the United States with the child in 1983,
married someone else in 1985, and settled in Maryland. Throughout the
course of their marriage, the husband and wife maintained a relationship with
Quyen and the child, and the child visited the husband and wife in New
Hampshire often. The husband and wife attended the child’s wedding in 2008.
The husband filed his petition to annul on May 21, 2019, claiming that,
at the time of the parties’ marriage, the wife was married to two other men, one
of whom had since died, and neither of whom the husband identified. The wife
filed an answer and cross-petition for divorce, disputing the husband’s
allegation that she was married at the time of the marriage, and putting the
husband to his proof. The trial court issued a notice of hearing “on Petition to
Annul Marriage.”
The hearing went forward on November 14 on offers of proof; neither
party objected to proceeding on offers of proof. Over the wife’s objection, the
husband submitted several exhibits, including a number of personal letters in
Vietnamese between the wife and Quyen or others in Vietnam from the 1980s.
In several letters written by Quyen in 1982, he solicited the wife’s assistance to
“sponsor” him and the child so that they might emigrate to the United States.
In those letters, Quyen repeatedly told the wife what his birthday was and
where he was born in Vietnam, and where and when the child was born,
because she would need that information to sponsor them. In one letter, he
requested the wife to write him her date of birth and place of birth as well.
None of the letters submitted by the husband expressly referenced a marriage
relationship between the wife and anyone else.
The exhibits submitted by the husband also included a 1982
sponsorship form and an “affidavit of relationship” signed by the wife,
identifying Quyen and the child as the wife’s husband and son, respectively,
and containing the date and place of birth information that Quyen had
conveyed in his letters. The exhibits additionally included a 2008 wedding
announcement card for the child that listed the names of Quyen and the wife
with the titles, “Mr. & Mrs.” Finally, the documents included an unsworn
statement of a third party from Methuen, Massachusetts, claiming to be a
friend and former neighbor of the wife from Vietnam, and that the wife had
once told the witness that she “had a marriage certificate with [another
Vietnamese man that she had] never signed.”
2
The wife disputed that she had ever been married to anyone other than
the husband. With respect to Quyen and the child, the wife represented that
Quyen had been placed in a “North Vietnamese education camp” following the
Vietnam war, that he was “desperate to get [the child] and himself out of
Vietnam,” and that she had done “her best to sponsor him and get him to this
country.” Although she admitted that she had signed the 1982 sponsorship
form and affidavit of relationship, she asserted that she had not prepared those
documents, but had simply obtained help from someone else in preparing the
documents in order to assist Quyen and the child to get into the United States.
The husband agreed that the form and affidavit had been prepared by someone
else. With respect to the wedding announcement card, the wife represented
that it used the titles “Mr. & Mrs.” before her name and Quyen’s name as a
matter of Vietnamese culture because they were both the parents of the groom.
The wife also submitted, over the husband’s objection, a sworn affidavit
from Quyen stating that (1) although he had dated the wife beginning in 1974
and had had a child with her in Vietnam in 1975, they had never married; (2)
he was detained in a Vietnamese “communist concentration camp” for six years
beginning in 1975; (3) while he was in the concentration camp, the wife lived
with his family for a short time before leaving the child in their care, and he
had lost touch with her; (4) he immigrated to the United States with the son in
1983; (5) he met with the wife and the husband in 1984; (6) he married in
1985; and (7) since immigrating to the United States, the wife and husband
had remained close with his family, and as recently as 2016, they had attended
a wedding of his niece. Finally, with respect to the other Vietnamese man
identified in the unsworn statement submitted by the husband, the wife
represented that the man was simply a friend from Vietnam, that she had
never had a romantic relationship with him, and that he was now deceased.
The trial court issued an order stating that it had reviewed the exhibits
submitted by the husband, the affidavit of Quyen submitted by the wife, and
the parties’ offers of proof. The trial court found, based upon the evidence, that
the wife “is married to the [husband] and was not married to anyone else at the
time of the marriage or any time after.” Although the trial court found that the
husband’s exhibits established “a relationship, [there was] no indication of any
marriage.” Accordingly, the trial court dismissed the petition to annul, and
stated that the case would proceed on the wife’s cross-petition for divorce.
The husband moved for reconsideration. He argued that “the totality of
the weight of the credible evidence substantiates that the [wife] was married to
both individuals as alleged.” He observed that, in Quyen’s affidavit, Quyen had
asserted that he had not known the wife’s whereabouts when he had returned
from the concentration camp in 1982, and he suggested that this was
inconsistent with the correspondence he had submitted. The husband further
emphasized that the affidavit of relationship not only identified Quyen as the
wife’s husband, but identified a date and place of marriage ceremony. With the
3