THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2020-0124, State of New Hampshire v. Roney R.
White, the court on May 3, 2021, issued the following order:
Having considered the parties’ briefs and the record submitted on appeal,
we conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R.
18(1). Following a six-day jury trial in Superior Court (Messer, J.), the
defendant was convicted of: (1) second degree assault (extreme indifference),
see RSA 631:2, I(c) (2016); (2) second degree assault (strangulation), see RSA
631:2, I(f) (2016); (3) criminal restraint, see RSA 633:2 (2016); (4) witness
tampering, see RSA 641:5 (2016); (5) domestic violence, see RSA 631:2-b
(Supp. 2020); and (6) resisting arrest, see RSA 642:2 (2016). He appeals his
conviction for second degree assault (extreme indifference). We affirm.
The second degree assault (extreme indifference) indictment alleged that
the defendant “recklessly caused bodily injury to [the victim], an intimate
partner, under circumstances manifesting extreme indifference to the value of
human life, when he struck [her] in the face and body several times with an
open and closed fist and threw her around the bathroom.” On appeal, the
defendant argues that the evidence was insufficient for the jury to have found,
beyond a reasonable doubt, that he acted with extreme indifference to the
value of human life.
A challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence raises a claim of legal error;
therefore, our standard of review is de novo. State v. Boutin, 168 N.H. 623,
627 (2016). In reviewing a sufficiency of the evidence claim, we view the
evidence presented at trial, and all reasonable inferences drawn therefrom, in
the light most favorable to the State and uphold the jury’s guilty finding unless
no rational trier of fact could have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. See
id. Reviewing the record in the light most favorable to the State “involves
resolving issues of credibility in the State’s favor.” State v. Woodbury, 172 N.H.
358, 364 (2019). The defendant bears the burden of demonstrating that the
evidence was insufficient to prove guilt. Boutin, 168 N.H. at 627.
“Whether a defendant acted with ‘extreme indifference’ is a question of
fact for the jury.” State v. Fischer, 165 N.H. 760, 713 (2013). “[A]n attacker
acts with ‘extreme indifference’ when he inflicts any degree of bodily injury on a
victim and . . . the circumstances of the attack demonstrate a blatant disregard
for the risk to the victim’s life.” Id. (quotation omitted). “The injuries, however,
need not themselves be life-threatening.” Id.
Viewing the evidence and all reasonable inferences in the light most
favorable to the State, we conclude that it was sufficient for a rational trier of
fact to have found, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the defendant acted with
extreme indifference to the value of human life. The victim testified that, while
she stood naked and wet in the shower, the defendant opened the shower
curtain and punched her in the face so hard that she hit the bathroom wall.
When the victim stood back up, “he punched [her] again” on the side of the
face, causing her nose to bleed. After the second punch, the victim “started
slipping.” The defendant stopped the victim’s fall by “grabb[ing] [her] by her
hair” and pulling her out of the shower. He then threw her around by her hair,
causing her body, hip, and arms to hit the toilet, sink, and wall. The victim
was unable to remain standing because her body was wet, and the defendant
“was throwing [her] around so fast.”
The victim ended up lying face up under the bathroom sink. The
defendant then climbed on top her, grabbed her again by the hair, and dragged
her out of the bathroom, across the rug, to one of the beds in the hotel room.
Once the victim was on the bed, the defendant punched her again. She moved
over to the other bed in the room, and the defendant “got on top of [her] and
put his hand over [her] mouth,” telling her “not to say anything.” He then
pulled her by the arm back to the shower, where he rinsed the blood off her.
The victim’s nose was still bleeding.
The defendant took the victim out of the shower and back to the
bedroom, where she crawled over to a chair in the corner of the room. He
struck her in the face with his open hand. The victim told the defendant if he
stopped hurting her and took her to the hospital, she “would lie and tell
somebody [she] got jumped.” The defendant walked over to her, put his hands
on the victim’s cheeks, and said, “[Y]ou’re not leaving this room. I’m going to
kill you.” Believing that she was unable to escape, the victim “got down on
[her] hands and knees,” said that she was sorry, and asked the defendant to
stop. The defendant punched her twice in the face, so hard that she lost her
balance. Photographs introduced at trial showed the victim’s blood in multiple
areas of the shower, on the mirror and hair dryer, and the bathroom wall.
Photographs also showed injuries to the victim’s hips, shoulder, ears, eye,
cheek, lips, leg, elbow, and hand. We conclude that a rational trier of fact,
viewing all of this evidence and all reasonable inferences from it in the light
most favorable to the State, could have found, beyond a reasonable doubt, that
the defendant’s conduct manifested extreme indifference to the value of human
life. See id. at 713.
The defendant next asserts that the trial court erred by granting the
State’s motion to exclude the testimony of a witness whom the defense
disclosed to the State several days after the deadline for doing so. See N.H. R.
Crim. P. 12(b)(4)(B). New Hampshire Criminal Rule of Procedure 12(b)(4)(B)
requires a defendant to provide the State with a witness list and witness
2
statements “[n]ot later than ten calendar days before the final pretrial
conference.” The rule authorizes the trial court to “take such action as it
deems just under the circumstances” for a defendant’s failure to comply
“including, but not limited to . . . prohibiting the [defendant] from introducing
the evidence not disclosed.” N.H. R. Crim. P. 12(b)(4)(B).
The final pretrial conference in this case was held on September 12,
2019. Under Rule 12(b)(4)(B), therefore, the defendant’s witness list and
witness statements were due on September 2. The witness was interviewed by
an investigator in the afternoon of September 12, and, according to the
defendant, later that day, defense counsel orally notified the prosecutor that
the interview had taken place. The defendant avers that on September 14,
defense counsel sent the prosecutor an email with the witness’s name and date
of birth and some “basic information” about her statement. The defendant did
not provide the State with a copy of the statement until September 16, and did
not file an amended witness list with the court until September 18.
According to the report of a September 12, 2019 interview of the witness,
the witness claimed that on August 26, 2018, she and the victim fought, and
she “definitely hit” the victim “in her face.” The witness told the investigator
that she “had [the victim] by the hair with one hand and she was ‘just
swinging’ with her other hand.”
The State moved to exclude the witness’s testimony on the ground that
the defendant had failed to comply with Rule 12(b)(4)(B). Following a hearing,
the trial court granted the State’s motion. The trial court observed that the
defendant offered “no rationale for his failure to timely disclose the witness,”
even though he “not only had the means to contact [her] and identify her as a
witness,” but “he also knew the full content and evidentiary value of [her]
testimony over a year before his disclosure to the State.” The court also noted
that the defendant made “no assertion that the investigator” who spoke with
the witness “had any trouble finding or reaching her,” which suggests “that any
delay was caused by something other than an inability to obtain a statement by
the witness.” Moreover, the trial court questioned the reliability of the
witness’s statement given that during the numerous jailhouse calls between
the defendant and the witness, neither he nor the witness mentioned her
alleged interaction with the victim on the night in question and that neither he
nor the witness ever mentioned the interaction to the police.
After considering the totality of the circumstances, the court found that
excluding the witness’s testimony was “the only appropriate remedy” for the
defendant’s discovery violation. The court found that the “eleventh-hour
disclosure” of the witness prejudiced the State’s ability to present its case to
the factfinder and was “exactly the type of conduct that the rules of criminal
procedure were designed to prevent.”
3