THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2020-0409, In the Matter of Richard
McMenamon and Eileen Rispoli, the court on April 6, 2021,
issued the following order:
The motions by the petitioner, Richard McMenamon, to amend his brief
and appendix, to which the respondent, Eileen Rispoli, has not objected, are
granted. Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
The respondent filed this interlocutory appeal from a ruling of the Circuit Court
(Garner, J.), see Sup. Ct. R. 8, denying her motion for the appointment of a
guardian ad litem (GAL) and for orders relative to GAL fees in a parenting case.
The trial court denied the motion on grounds that the parties are indigent, that
there were no public funds available for the payment of GAL fees, and that the
trial court would not “require a GAL to undertake appointment in this very
contested case without a reasonable likelihood of compensation.” On appeal,
the respondent argues that the trial court erred by not appointing a GAL to be
paid by the State pursuant to RSA 490:26-f (2010).1 We affirm.
We are the final arbiter of the legislature’s intent as expressed in the
words of a statute considered as a whole. In the Matter of Chrestensen &
Pearson, 172 N.H. 40, 43 (2019). We ascribe the plain and ordinary meaning
to the words used in a statute. Id. Moreover, we interpret statutes within the
context of the overall statutory scheme, and do not construe statutory language
in isolation or construe statutes addressing similar subject matter so as to
contradict each other. Id.
1 We note that, following the trial court’s decision to deny the appointment of a GAL, and prior
to filing her interlocutory appeal, the respondent renewed her motion, requesting the
appointment of a specific GAL who represented that he had grant money available to cover his
fee. The respondent suggested that she intended to appeal the earlier order denying her
motion for the appointment of a GAL, and that, should she succeed, the GAL “would seek
reimbursement under the terms of the Order from the appeal.” The trial court granted the
renewed motion, appointing the GAL “on the condition that neither parent will be responsible
for repayment of the GAL fees, which will be paid either through [the GAL’s] grant or by the
State.” Accordingly, it appears that, when the respondent filed this appeal, the issue on appeal
– whether the trial court erred by earlier denying appointment of a GAL on the basis that there
was no available funding – was moot, and that we may have improvidently accepted the appeal.
Nevertheless, because the doctrine of mootness is a matter of convenience and discretion, see
Batchelder v. Town of Plymouth Zoning Bd. of Adjustment, 160 N.H. 253, 255-56 (2010), we
will assume, without deciding, that the appeal is not moot.
RSA 461-A:16, IV(a) (Supp. 2020) provides that, “[w]hen appointing a
guardian ad litem to be paid from a state fund, the court shall establish an
hourly rate and a maximum fee for the appointment,” and that “[n]o funding
from a state fund for guardian ad litem fees shall be available to a party whose
income is 200 percent or more of the federal poverty level.” (Emphasis added.)
Prior to 2011, there was a statutory fund, managed by the judicial council, for
the compensation of GALs appointed under RSA 461-A:16 when the parents
were indigent. See RSA 461-A:17 (Supp. 2010) (amended 2011). Since 2011,
however, that statute has provided that “[t]he judicial council shall have no
responsibility for the payment of the costs of a . . . guardian ad litem for any
party under this chapter.” RSA 461-A:17 (2018). Under RSA 461-A:18, I
(2018), if a GAL has been appointed in a parenting case “and the responsible
party’s proportional share of the expense was ordered to be paid by the judicial
council from the prior special fund established pursuant to RSA 461-A:17 . . . ,
the party shall be ordered by the court to repay the state . . . the fees and
expenses paid on the party’s behalf as the court may order consistent with the
party’s ability to pay.” (Emphasis added.)
The plain language of these statutes concerns the payment of GAL fees
from State funds in a private parenting dispute when a GAL has been
appointed for indigent parents, and the reimbursement of those payments that
were previously made from the now-defunct fund established under RSA 461-
A:17 (Supp. 2010). None of these statutes as presently worded authorizes the
trial court to appoint a GAL at State expense.
Nevertheless, the respondent argues that the trial court was obligated to
appoint a GAL at State expense under RSA 490:26-f, I. In its entirety, RSA
490:26-f provides:
I. Unless otherwise provided by law, whenever a
guardian ad litem is appointed or ancillary services are approved
pursuant to statutory authority or court order and the responsible
party or parents are indigent, the state of New Hampshire shall be
responsible for compensation for such services from the general
fund.
II. Notwithstanding other provisions of law to the
contrary, the State, by the judicial council, may contract with any
person qualified under the supreme court rules to provide
guardian ad litem, ancillary, or legal services pursuant to statutory
authority or court order, or with any organization approved by the
supreme court to provide guardian ad litem, ancillary, or legal
services. No such contract shall be effective for longer than 2
years.
III. Any guardian ad litem or guardian ad litem program
shall be subject to supreme court competence and performance
regulations.
2
IV. Notwithstanding other provisions of law to the
contrary, the supreme court and executive departments statutorily
responsible for compensation of guardian ad litem, ancillary, or
legal services, when the responsible party or parents are indigent
or the court otherwise appoints a guardian ad litem or such
attorney, are authorized to effectuate budgetary transfer of funds
appropriated for such services between and among themselves as
they deem necessary.
V. The executive director of the judicial council, the
commissioner of the department of health and human services, or
the judicial branch, as may be appropriate, may authorize
payments to such persons or organizations provided for under this
section.
RSA 490:26-f (emphasis added).
Read within the context of the statute as a whole and other statutes
addressing GAL services, RSA 490:26-f, I, simply provides that when a GAL is
appointed pursuant to a statute or court order in a case in which the parties
responsible for compensating the GAL are indigent, the State will pay for such
services out of the general fund. Indeed, there are cases to which the State is
the moving party in which the trial court is required to appoint a GAL, or in
which indigent parents are otherwise legally entitled to publicly-funded GAL
services. See RSA 169-C:10, I (2014) (requiring appointment of GAL in child
abuse or neglect cases); RSA 170-C:8 (2014) (requiring appointment of GAL to
represent child’s interests in all termination of parental rights cases); RSA 170-
C:13 (2014) (requiring judicial council to pay cost of GAL in all termination of
parental rights cases brought by the State arising from a child abuse or neglect
case and in those cases in which payment of the GAL fee would work a
hardship on the petitioning party); RSA 604-A:1-a (Supp. 2020) (providing that,
in child abuse or neglect cases, GAL costs will be paid from indigent defense
fund); RSA 632-A:6, V (Supp. 2020) (requiring appointment of GAL for minor
victim in certain criminal sexual assault cases). The plain meaning of RSA
490:26-f, I, does not, however, entitle parties to a private parenting dispute to
publicly-funded GAL services, or otherwise grant trial courts carte blanche
authority to charge the State for GAL services in such cases.
The State Constitution vests the legislative branch with the power to
make appropriations, and vests the executive branch with the power to expend
funds to the extent, and for the purposes, that they have been appropriated by
the legislature. New Hampshire Health Care Assoc. v. Governor, 161 N.H.
378, 386-87 (2011). The respondent cites no statute entitling parties in a
private parenting case to publicly-funded GAL services. Nor does she argue
that the State or Federal Constitutions guarantee her publicly-funded GAL
services in this case. Under these circumstances, we cannot say that the trial
court unsustainably exercised its discretion by denying the motion for
3