THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2020-0044, State of New Hampshire v. Leslie M.
Howe, the court on May 14, 2021, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs and the record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1).
The defendant, Leslie M. Howe, appeals his convictions on one count of
aggravated felonious sexual assault and two counts of felonious sexual assault.
He argues that the Trial Court (Bornstein, J.) erred: (1) by denying defense
counsel’s motion to strike a portion of the State’s closing argument; and (2) by
admitting certain statements made by a police officer during the defendant’s
interrogation. We affirm.
The following evidence was presented to the jury. On July 9, 2017, the
defendant drove an older model sports car to a church service. The ten-year-
old victim, whose home was two houses away from the church, attended the
same church service alone. After the service, the victim asked the defendant
whether he could look at the car. The defendant agreed and they went to the
church parking lot where the victim entered the driver’s seat to examine the
car. After a short time, the victim exited the car whereupon the defendant
lifted him up off the ground. The defendant touched and rubbed the victim’s
genitals and buttocks through his clothing before putting him back on the
ground. When he returned home, the victim told his grandmother what had
happened. His grandmother “struggled” with the disclosure. Two weeks later,
she reported the assault to the wife of the church pastor, who then told the
pastor. Following this report, the victim was interviewed by the pastor, State
Police Trooper Anderson, and a forensic interviewer at the Child Advocacy
Center. On each occasion, the victim described the July 9, 2017 assault.
In September 2017, the defendant voluntarily met with Trooper Anderson
and Detective Stephens for an interview. He initially claimed that the victim
had become panicked while sitting in the sports car and that when he reached
into the car to lift him out, the defendant might have inadvertently touched the
victim’s buttocks and genitals. As the interview continued, the defendant
conceded: “I touched him inappropriately.”
Based on its investigation, the State charged the defendant with one
count of aggravated felonious sexual assault and two counts of felonious sexual
assault. The State’s witnesses at trial included the victim, his pastor, his
grandmother, Trooper Anderson, and Detective Stephens. When the State
sought to introduce excerpts from the defendant’s September interview with the
State Police, defense counsel moved to strike several portions. The trial court
reviewed with counsel the challenged portions of the interview and ruled on
approximately 25 excerpts, granting approximately half of the defendant’s
requests.
Following a jury trial, the defendant was convicted on all three charges.
This appeal followed.
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred in denying his
motion to strike a portion of the State’s closing argument.1 He specifically cites
the following excerpt:
. . . he’s told a number of different people about this embarrassing
situation, even though there’s no corroboration that’s necessary
under the law. . . . And you’ve heard [the victim]’s testimony and
the testimony is important. And he’s been consistent. Otherwise,
you would have heard testimony — you would have heard the
Defense counsel attacking his credibility. You would have heard
that he’s made 50 statements. You didn’t hear any of that because
he’s been absolutely consistent that he was outside of the car,
getting out.
The defendant argues that, although the jury heard testimony that the victim
“spoke to several people about his allegation against [the defendant], that
testimony was not admitted for substantive or credibility-rehabilitation
purposes.” Therefore, he concludes, “when the prosecutor in closing urged the
jury to use those statements for a credibility-enhancing purpose, the
prosecutor argued facts for a purpose for which they were not in evidence. In
that sense, the prosecutor argued facts not in evidence.” The defendant also
contends that the State’s observation about defense counsel’s “failure to
impeach [the victim] with prior inconsistent statements” “improperly shifted the
burden of proof onto the defendant.”
To determine whether the trial court erred in denying the defendant’s
motion to strike, we consider whether the prosecutor’s statements were
impermissible comments and, if so, whether the error requires reversal of the
verdict. See State v. Hearns, 151 N.H. 226, 232-33 (2004). In making this
determination, we balance a prosecutor’s broad license to fashion argument
with the need to ensure that a defendant’s rights are not compromised. Id. at
233.
If we conclude that the prosecutor’s statements were improper, the
defendant asks us to apply the following three factors to determine whether the
improper statement requires reversal: (1) whether the misconduct was isolated
and/or deliberate; (2) whether the trial court gave a strong and explicit
1 We note that, although defense counsel moved to strike a portion of the State’s argument
after the State completed its closing, he did not request a mistrial.
2
cautionary instruction; and (3) whether any prejudice surviving the court’s
instruction likely could have affected the outcome of the case. See State v.
Ellsworth, 151 N.H. 152, 155 (2004). We will assume without deciding that the
test that we apply when determining whether prejudicial comments by a
prosecutor require that the trial court grant a requested mistrial also applies in
the absence of such a request.
We turn first to the question of whether the prosecutor argued facts not
in evidence. As the trial court observed, the jury heard evidence from several
witnesses that the victim reported that he had been inappropriately touched by
the defendant. That the victim made the disclosures was not disputed; rather,
a major factual dispute was whether the victim was inside or outside of the car
when the defendant lifted him up. Even if we assume without deciding that the
prosecutor’s limited statement about the consistency of the victim’s statements
was improper, the misstatement was cured by the trial court’s instruction to
the jury.
Prior to closing arguments, the trial court instructed the jury:
A person accused of a crime has an absolute right not to
take the witness stand to testify. The fact that the Defendant did
not testify must not be considered by you in any way in deciding
this case. The burden is on the State to prove the Defendant guilty
beyond a reasonable doubt. The Defendant has no obligation to
present any evidence or to prove his innocence.
You will hear the lawyers discuss the facts and the law in
their arguments to you. These arguments are not evidence. Their
purpose is to help you understand the evidence and the law. If the
lawyers state the law differently from the law as I explained it to
you, then you must follow my instructions and ignore the
statements of the lawyers. If the lawyers state the evidence
differently from the way in which you recall it, then you should
follow your own memory of what the evidence was.
(Emphasis added.)
We next consider whether the prosecutor shifted the burden of proof to
the defendant when he cited defense counsel’s failure to impeach the victim’s
testimony. The defendant specifically cites the prosecutor’s argument that the
jury would have heard defense counsel attacking the victim’s credibility if the
victim had fabricated the assault; he contends that this argument is “materially
indistinguishable” from the argument that we found improper in Hearns. In
Hearns, we ruled that the prosecutor’s observation in his closing statement
that defense counsel had failed to cross-examine the victim about aspects of
her testimony constituted improper comment. Hearns, 151 N.H. at 233.
3