THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2020-0162, State of New Hampshire v.
Benjamin Boutin, the court on May 14, 2021, issued the
following order:
Having considered the parties’ briefs and the record submitted on appeal,
we conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R.
18(1). The defendant, Benjamin Boutin, appeals his convictions, following a
jury trial in Superior Court (Bornstein, J.), on two counts of selling a controlled
drug and one count of possessing a controlled drug with intent to sell. We
affirm.
On appeal, the defendant first argues that the trial court unsustainably
exercised its discretion by limiting his attorney’s cross-examination of a
witness. The witness worked as a confidential informant for the New
Hampshire Drug Task Force in May 2018, when the events giving rise to the
charges against the defendant occurred. The defendant’s trial counsel cross-
examined the witness about his criminal history, including a 2014 forgery
charge to which he had pleaded guilty, and a September 2019 conviction.
Defense counsel sought to elicit testimony that, as a result of a
September 2019 conviction, the witness had a suspended sentence, and that,
“if he commits another offense,” the Coos County Attorney’s office, which was
prosecuting the defendant, was “the very office . . . that would be responsible
for imposing the [suspended] sentence or bringing it forward.” The State
objected to this inquiry on relevancy grounds. The trial court sustained the
State’s objection in part, and overruled it in part. The court ruled that defense
counsel could question the witness about the fact that he had a sentence,
which was suspended for five years on the condition that he remain in good
behavior, but that defense counsel could not ask the witness “who prosecuted
that matter.” The court explained, “[I]t doesn’t matter who prosecuted it. . . .
[Y]our argument is [the witness has the] motivation to cooperate with the State
because he’s got this suspended sentence that could be imposed on him by
anybody.”
Consistent with the trial court’s ruling, defense counsel elicited the
following testimony:
Q In the 2019 conviction for a felony, you received a suspended
sentence that [is] suspended for five years from September 3rd,
2019?
A Yes, Sir.
Q And that requires that you remain of good behavior?
A Yes, Sir.
Q As part of the Drug Task Force agreement, you are asking the
State for consideration on an additional charge[]?
A Yes, Sir.
On appeal, although he acknowledges that the trial court “was correct
that [the witness] was at risk no matter what office previously prosecuted him,”
the defendant contends that “the court erred in finding no relevance that the
same office for whom he was offering testimony could influence his future
freedom.” The defendant argues that had the jury been informed that “the very
prosecutor’s office at whose behest [he] was currently testifying controlled the
decision whether to move to impose [his] suspended sentence,” the jury “could
reasonably [have] conclude[d] that [the witness] felt an especial need to please
this prosecutor with his testimony.”
A trial court has broad discretion to fix the limits of proper areas of
cross-examination, including attacks upon a witness’s credibility. State v.
Stowe, 162 N.H. 464, 467 (2011). “In determining the limits of cross-
examination, a trial court must balance the prejudice, confusion, and delay of
the proffered testimony against its probative value.” State v. Rodriguez, 136
N.H. 505, 509 (1992). When, as in this case, the defendant does not argue that
those limits violated his constitutional rights to confrontation, we review the
trial court’s decision under our unsustainable exercise of discretion standard.
See State v. Stowe, 162 N.H 464, 467-68 (2011). To prevail under that
standard, the defendant must demonstrate that the trial court’s ruling was
clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. See id. at 468.
Here, we cannot conclude that the trial court struck the wrong balance
by allowing defense counsel to establish that the witness’s sentence was
conditioned on good behavior, but precluding defense counsel from identifying
the prosecuting office. The defendant was allowed an ample level of inquiry as
to the witness’s motive to lie. Moreover, in closing argument, defense counsel
made frequent reference to the witness’s purported lack of credibility:
The case literally comes down to – the two sales cases come
down to [the witness]. And you had the opportunity to watch [the
witness]. In the record, you have his forgery conviction, and you’ll
have the opportunity to remember what he had to say, how he
presented himself. He says he’s an honest, he’s a good, he’s a
trustworthy person, and he’s doing this for the better of the
community.
But he’s a long-time drug user.
. . . .
2
And you also heard that [the witness] had a problem with [the
defendant]. He felt that [the defendant] was, you know, on the
outs, and he felt comfortable saying [the defendant] was the guy.
Now, these folks are – [the witness], in particular, he lied. He
cheats. He steals. This is the guy who says I’m honest. When did
he become honest?
So in 2014, he pled to a forgery. He comes to Court, and he
says he’s honest. He has another felony conviction in 2019. He
looks you in the eye and he says he’s honest. And he says he was
16. The paperwork has the math right there; he wasn’t 16. Like,
he had the audacity to look you in the eye and tell you that to try
to make himself look better. He would say or do whatever he had
to say or do.
Now, he also had consideration for the charges pending, and he
was looking to help someone else with that.
So can you trust him? Would you let him sell you a house, and
on his word say yeah, no radon. I’ll just take your word for it. No
lead paint. It’s a good foundation. The roof is solid. Would you
trust that?
. . . .
If it’s a close race and you can’t tell who the winner is, that is a
reasonable doubt. If you don’t know that you can trust the lab, if
you don’t know if you can trust [the witness], if you don’t know
that you can trust the word and the information that’s getting put
out from somebody who’s a known forgerer and a known felon,
then that’s, maybe, close. And close isn’t good enough.
. . . .
So last things that I want to talk to you about. I think that I –
how we view the credibility of the witness. You heard the Judge
give you an instruction about the credibility of a witness and that
you could accept everything a witness says, you can accept some
of what the witness says, you can disregard all of what a witness
says, based on their credibility. And that’s in the Judge’s
instructions.
But I ask you to be hyper-skeptical. Be like one of those people
from Missouri that says show me. Show me where it is that I can
trust the State’s case. Show me where the reliability is from [the
witness], from the lab, from the various problems that the State
has in this case.
And when you analyze this case, we feel that the State has
provided you with an untrustworthy, unreliable, and inaccurate
presentation. And it’s simply not worthy of finding [the defendant]
guilty of the charges that he stands before you with. Thank you.
3