THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2020-0063, State of New Hampshire v. Scott
Hilliard, the court on October 29, 2021, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. Following
a bench trial, the Circuit Court (Leary, J.) found the defendant, Scott Hilliard,
guilty of aggravated driving while intoxicated (DWI), see RSA 265-A:3 (2014),
and transporting an alcoholic beverage, see RSA 265-A:44 (2014). The
defendant appeals, arguing that the court erred when it found that the taint of
his unlawful arrest was purged and admitted the results of his post-arrest
blood test. He also argues that because the State first raised its argument that
his consent to the blood test purged the taint of the unlawful arrest in its
motion to reconsider, the court erred by failing to consider this argument
under the plain error standard. We affirm.
I
The following facts and procedural history are taken from the trial
transcript or are otherwise established by the record. In August 2019, the
Tilton police responded to a call about a “white Cadillac that was driving
erratically,” “crossing the double yellow line and all over the road.” The caller
also identified the license plate number, that the car was being driven by a
single male with white hair, and that it had pulled into the Ninety Nine
restaurant off of Route 140 in Tilton. The police dispatcher used the license
plate number to determine that the vehicle was registered to the defendant,
Scott Hilliard.
Two officers initially arrived at the Ninety Nine. They observed the
defendant’s car unoccupied and made contact with the defendant as he was
leaving the restaurant with a take-out bag and walking toward the previously
identified vehicle. The officers immediately perceived a strong odor of alcohol
coming from the defendant, and that he exhibited “tired eyes” and slurred
speech. When an officer told the defendant that he smelled of alcohol, the
defendant responded, “yeah, I’m sorry. I really screwed up.” One of the officers
offered to put the defendant’s take-out bag in the car for him, and the
defendant unlocked the passenger door to the car. Upon entering the car, the
officer noticed a tumbler containing ice, lemon, and “partially consumed
liquid,” which the defendant admitted contained vodka and soda water.
Thereafter, Sergeant Kydd-Keeler arrived at the scene. He spoke with the
defendant, who claimed that he had not driven to the restaurant but could not
explain how he got there. The defendant agreed to undergo several field
sobriety tests, which he failed. He then consented to perform a portable breath
test. The breath test revealed that the defendant had a blood-alcohol
concentration over 0.16, and the defendant was placed under arrest for
aggravated DWI. The sergeant did not seek a warrant before making the arrest.
Immediately thereafter, the sergeant took the defendant to the Tilton
police station where he read the defendant his Miranda rights and lines one
through six of the administrative license suspension (ALS) form, which
explained the defendant’s right to refuse consent to one or more tests to
determine his blood-alcohol concentration. The defendant verbally
acknowledged these rights, signed the ALS form, and consented to a blood test.
The defendant moved to suppress the evidence following his arrest,
which he argued was unlawful. Objecting to the defendant’s motion, the State
argued only that the defendant’s arrest was lawful. The court proceeded with
the motion to suppress and the trial simultaneously. On December 19, 2019,
after the first day of trial, the court found that “there was probable cause for
[the defendant’s] arrest, but . . . it was an unlawful arrest because [the
sergeant] did not make even the attempt to get a warrant.” Thus, the court
granted the defendant’s motion to suppress “as to any evidence acquired
subsequent to the arrest.” The State had not yet rested at the conclusion of
the first day, and the trial was scheduled to resume on January 14, 2020.
The State moved for reconsideration on December 30, 2019, arguing, for
the first time, that the defendant’s consent purged the taint of his unlawful
arrest. On January 10, 2020, the trial court ruled that this argument
“appear[ed] to be a valid issue to be considered at trial” and instructed the
parties to “be prepared to litigate its merits” when the trial resumed on
January 14.
On the second day of trial, the defendant argued that the court should
not consider whether his consent purged the taint of the unlawful arrest
because the State failed to raise this issue in its objection to the defendant’s
motion to suppress. The defendant argued that if the court were to consider
the new issue it could do so only under the plain error standard “because no
contemporaneous objection was made” and “[t]here’s no other vehicle through
which to have this evidence considered.” The State countered that it could not
have made its argument about consent purging the taint “until there[] [was] a
determination on whether or not the arrest [was] actually a lawful arrest or
[was] an unlawful arrest.” The court agreed with the State, concluding that its
decision that the arrest was unlawful was “a condition precedent to even [the
State] raising this issue” and relying on the fact that the State had not yet
rested.
2
After hearing the parties’ arguments and evidence, the court found that
the defendant’s consent purged the taint of the unlawful arrest and admitted
the blood test results into evidence. The court found that there was probable
cause for the arrest. Further, it noted “[t]here was no question that any
reasonable magistrate in this State . . . would have issued a warrant.”
Although the court found the arrest was unlawful, absent an attempt to secure
a warrant, it found “there was [not] any kind of flagrancy at all,” and instead
commended the sergeant for his “very professional” conduct.
Following the court’s ruling that the circumstances of the defendant’s
consent purged the taint of the unlawful arrest, each party rested and the
court found the defendant guilty of aggravated DWI, see RSA 265-A:3, and
transporting an alcoholic beverage, see RSA 265-A:44. This appeal followed.
II
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred when it found
that the State demonstrated that the taint of his unlawful arrest was purged by
the circumstances of his consent and admitted the results of his post-arrest
blood test. Before reaching the merits of this argument, we first address
whether the trial court was required to consider this argument under the plain
error standard. Because the State first raised this argument in its motion to
reconsider, the defendant contends that the court “could not have overlooked
or misapprehended” that issue, and thus “plain error was the State’s sole
procedural mechanism” to make this argument. We disagree.
The trial court ruled that the defendant’s arrest was unlawful during the
first day of trial. The State had not yet rested when it filed its motion to
reconsider on December 30, where it argued, for the first time, that the
defendant’s consent purged the taint of his unlawful arrest. The trial court
found that this argument was a valid issue to be considered, and put the
parties on notice that they should be prepared to litigate its merits when trial
resumed in January. Thus, the issue was before the trial court, with
opportunity for the parties to address it, during the ongoing trial.
The defendant’s argument that the court erred by failing to consider the
State’s argument under the plain error standard is premised on the notion that
the court had no discretion to consider the argument, in the first instance,
because it was first raised in a motion to reconsider. However, when a party
first raises an issue to the trial court in a motion to reconsider, the court has
discretion to consider the issue and to re-open the record and allow the parties
to present evidence. See Smith v. Shepard, 144 N.H. 262, 265 (1999). We
review the court’s decision to consider an argument first raised in a motion to
reconsider for an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Mortgage Specialists v.
Davey, 153 N.H. 764, 786 (2006); see also State v. Plantamuro, 171 N.H. 253,
255 (2018). Because the court has discretion to consider arguments first
3