THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case Nos. 2020-0249 and 2020-0250, PPI Enterprises,
LLC v. Town of Windham, the court on June 23, 2021, issued
the following order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, the court
concludes that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. In these
consolidated appeals, the plaintiff, PPI Enterprises, LLC (PPI), appeals orders of
the Superior Court (St. Hilaire, J.) remanding PPI’s application for site plan
approval to the planning board for the defendant, the Town of Windham
(Town), and staying PPI’s appeal of a decision of the Town’s zoning board of
adjustment (ZBA). We affirm in part, vacate in part, and remand.
I. Facts
The following facts either were recited by the trial court or reflect the
content of documents in the appellate record. In 2018, PPI applied for site plan
approval to construct a three-story, 93,000 square foot, self-storage facility on
its 45.57-acre Windham property. After seven public hearings over the course
of thirteen months, during which time the primary issue discussed was PPI’s
proposed use of blasting to develop the site, the planning board denied the
application. The planning board’s sole basis for doing so was that the site plan
was inconsistent with section 100 of the Windham Zoning Ordinance, which
sets forth the purposes of the ordinance. PPI simultaneously appealed the
planning board’s decision to the superior court and the ZBA. PPI asked the
superior court to stay the appeal until the ZBA acted. The superior court
granted that request.
In its appeal to the ZBA, PPI argued that the planning board had
improperly relied upon section 100 of the ordinance. The ZBA agreed with PPI,
reversed the planning board’s decision, and remanded the site plan application
to the planning board for further review. PPI unsuccessfully moved for
reconsideration, and then appealed the ZBA’s decision to the superior court,
arguing that the site plan application met or exceeded the site plan regulations
and should be approved without further proceedings, and asserting that the
ZBA had no authority to remand the application to the planning board.
Meanwhile, after the ZBA reversed the planning board decision, the Town
asked the superior court to remand the site plan application to the planning
board for further proceedings. The trial court granted the Town’s motion in a
margin order. PPI moved the court to reconsider its decision, maintaining that
because the planning board denied PPI’s application solely because it violated
the zoning ordinance, the planning board must have determined that the
application otherwise satisfied the criteria for site plan review. PPI asserted
that in light of the ZBA’s determination that the planning board had relied
improperly upon section 100 of the ordinance to deny the site plan application,
the trial court should not have remanded to the planning board, but instead
should have reversed the planning board’s denial of site plan approval. The
Town moved to stay PPI’s appeal of the ZBA decision pending resolution of PPI’s
appeal of the planning board’s decision. The Town argued that if the trial court
remanded the site plan application to the planning board, PPI’s appeal of the
ZBA decision would be moot and, therefore, should be stayed “indefinitely.”
In an April 6, 2020 order, the trial court denied PPI’s motion to
reconsider and granted the Town’s motion to stay PPI’s appeal of the ZBA
decision. In considering whether to remand PPI’s site plan application for
further review by the planning board, the trial court observed that “the clear
statutory preference is for decisions about land use to be made at the local
level by local boards, particularly when it comes to factual findings that are
often aided by the board’s expertise.” The court observed that the planning
board did not appear to make any factual findings on the necessary site plan
approval criteria or, “[a]t the very least, any findings the Planning Board did
make are not clear on the face of its decision.”
In addition, although the court acknowledged that in a case with a
sufficiently-developed record where the merits of a particular proposal are
clear, it could find, as a matter of law, that the proposal was entitled to site
plan approval, the court concluded that the fact-finding record in the instant
matter was insufficiently developed by the planning board. The trial court
found that the only topic discussed by the planning board before rendering its
decision was the issue of blasting, and the only ground for denying the
application was the application’s purported conflict with section 100 of the
ordinance. Accordingly, the court concluded that “remanding the Application
to the Planning Board to develop a record and make factual findings—or clarify
any factual findings it did make—will allow the Planning Board to perform its
statutory role.”
With regard to the Town’s motion to stay PPI’s appeal of the ZBA’s
decision, the trial court observed that “the procedural posture of [PPI’s appeals]
is unique.” The court stated that “the only decision that the Planning Board
made at this point has already been reversed and there is thus no other
[planning board] decision for the Court to review.” The court noted that “no
party [had] challenged the ZBA’s central ruling that it was improper for the
Planning Board to rely on . . . Section 100 [of the zoning ordinance] in denying
the Application.” The court also explained that although PPI appealed the
ZBA’s decision on the ground that the ZBA had no authority to remand the site
2
plan application to the planning board for further review, “this issue is now
moot because the Court itself remanded the Application.” Therefore, the court
reasoned that because the court was remanding the site plan application to the
planning board for further review, “the ZBA Appeal is superfluous because it
presents no issues that have not already been raised in [PPI’s appeal of the
planning board’s decision].”
The trial court noted that the ZBA appeal and the planning board appeal
could have been heard together in a single action before the superior court —
indeed, PPI had requested that the trial court consolidate the two appeals. The
court explained that “[g]iven that the ZBA Appeal and the [planning board]
Appeal both ultimately hinge on a question that can be resolved in the
[planning board] Appeal, there is no practical difference between the Court
consolidating both appeals and then remanding to the Planning Board or
remanding the [planning board] Appeal and staying the ZBA Appeal,” as it did
in its order.
PPI moved for reconsideration of the April 2020 order, which the trial
court denied. The court allowed the planning board, on remand, to “accept
additional evidence prior to its final determination on the Application.”
However, the court observed that “this matter has been before the Planning
Board for a long period of time, and the Planning Board has had significant
time to gather evidence related to the Application.” Accordingly, the court
stated that it “appreciate[d] the Town’s representation” that, on remand to the
planning board, “the review process will . . . not start anew and the next
meeting will likely be the last before the Planning Board votes on the
Application.” The court urged PPI and the planning board to “engage in good
faith efforts to achieve a final resolution concerning the Application.” We
observe that at oral argument, the Town reiterated that the public hearing on
PPI’s application had already closed and that, on remand, the planning board
would resume its deliberations and issue a final decision.
II. Analysis
In this appeal, PPI challenges both the trial court’s decision to remand
PPI’s site plan application to the planning board and its decision to grant the
Town’s motion to stay PPI’s appeal of the ZBA decision. Our review of the
superior court’s decision on appeals arising from a decision of a planning or
zoning board is limited. See Girard v. Town of Plymouth, 172 N.H. 576, 581
(2019) (planning board); Dietz v. Town of Tuftonboro, 171 N.H. 614, 618 (2019)
(zoning board). We will reverse the trial court’s decision only if it is not
supported by the evidence or is legally erroneous. Mt. Valley Mall Assocs. v.
Municipality of Conway, 144 N.H. 642, 647 (2000). We review the trial court’s
decision to determine whether a reasonable person could have reached the
same decision as the trial court based on the evidence before it. Girard, 172
N.H. at 582.
3