THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Professional Conduct Committee
No. LD-2019-0001
MESMER’S CASE
Argued: October 10, 2019
Opinion Issued: February 21, 2020
Sara S. Greene, disciplinary counsel, of Concord, on the brief and orally,
for the Attorney Discipline Office.
Upton & Hatfield, LLP, of Portsmouth (Russell F. Hilliard and Brooke
Lovett Shilo on the brief, and Mr. Hilliard orally), for the respondent.
BASSETT, J. On February 19, 2019, the New Hampshire Supreme Court
Professional Conduct Committee (PCC) filed a petition in which it found that
the respondent, Joshua N. Mesmer, violated Rules 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 3.3,
8.4(a), and 8.4(c) of the New Hampshire Rules of Professional Conduct while
serving as counsel in a case litigated from December 2015 to November 2016.1
The PCC has recommended that the respondent be suspended from the
practice of law for three years, and, provided that the respondent pays for the
costs of investigating and prosecuting this matter and engages in no further
professional misconduct, that 18 months of the suspension be stayed. The
respondent challenges the recommended sanction, arguing that, because he
was suffering from severe sleep apnea during the period of representation, he
was unable to form the “knowing” state of mind necessary for a number of the
1 In this case, the respondent represented a married couple. For ease of reference, we refer to the
couple as “the client,” “she,” or “her.”
ethical violations, and that his sleep apnea is a significant mitigating factor in
determining the proper sanction. The respondent argues that he should
receive a fully-stayed suspension. We adopt the PCC’s recommended sanction.
The following facts were either found by the PCC or are supported by the
record, which includes testimony from an evidentiary hearing held before a
hearing panel appointed by the chair of the hearings committee of the attorney
discipline system. See Sup. Ct. R. 37A(III)(b)(4). The respondent was admitted
to the Massachusetts Bar in 2006, and the New Hampshire Bar in 2007. He
began his legal career as an assistant county attorney in the Hillsborough
County Attorney’s Office. In 2012, he left that position to become an associate
in his father’s law firm: Mesmer & Deleault, PLLC in Manchester (the Mesmer
law firm).
The conduct code violations at issue arise from the respondent’s
representation of the client in a fraudulent conveyance action between
December 2015 and November 2016. The respondent’s relationship with the
client began in 2012, when the Mesmer law firm represented a company,
owned by the client, that had been sued by Motostar Tire and Auto Products,
Inc. (Motostar). Motostar obtained a judgment of approximately $165,000.
Motostar and the company negotiated a payment plan, but the company failed
to make the required payments. In December 2015, Motostar filed a Petition to
Set Aside Fraudulent Conveyance against the company and the client.
On January 6, 2016, the respondent agreed to accept service on the
client’s behalf. Also on January 6, the respondent e-mailed Paul DeCarolis,
counsel for Motostar, stating, “After reviewing your Petition to Set Aside
Fraudulent Conveyance, I am curious as to what money or assets you’re
referring to as having been transferred fraudulently. Perhaps we can figure
this out together.” The respondent e-mailed a copy of the fraudulent
conveyance petition to the client, and stated that he was “drafting an Objection
to the Petition and a Motion to Dismiss to boot.” The respondent also
represented that he would send the client a copy of the pleadings on January 6
or 7.
On January 8, the client e-mailed the respondent, asking if he had sent
her the motion to dismiss. The respondent replied by e-mail the same day,
stating that he and his colleagues were researching fraudulent conveyance law
“a little further” before filing. On January 22, the client again e-mailed the
respondent, asking if the motion to dismiss had been filed. On January 23, the
respondent replied, “No stress . . . . We are working on it . . . . You can expect
to see some movement on our end by Tuesday.”
Despite these repeated assurances, the respondent did not file a motion
to dismiss, or any other responsive pleading. The respondent’s billing records
2
show no entries after January 15 regarding a response to the fraudulent
conveyance petition. The superior court issued a notice of default on February
26.
On March 14, DeCarolis e-mailed the respondent, asking, “Did
defendants intend to default in the fraudulent conveyance action?” On the
same day, the respondent replied, “Not at all. Did you not receive a copy of the
response?” Just two minutes later, DeCarolis responded, “No, only the default