THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2021-0543, Christopher Andrews & a. v.
Kearsarge Lighting Precinct, the court on August 31, 2023,
issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The
plaintiffs, Christopher and Kelly Andrews, appeal an order of the Superior
Court (Ignatius, J.) affirming a decision by the Kearsarge Lighting Precinct
Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) to uphold citations issued to the plaintiffs
by the intervenor-defendant, the Kearsarge Lighting Precinct Board of
Commissioners (BOC). We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand.
I. Background
The Kearsarge Lighting Precinct (KLP) is a village precinct established in
1957 within the towns of Conway and Bartlett. The plaintiffs own two
properties in the KLP, which they purchased in 2011 and 2013, respectively,
and use for short-term vacation rentals. The plaintiffs’ primary residence is in
Massachusetts.
In September 2017, the BOC held a public hearing on “vacation property
rentals” in response to public complaints about disruptive behavior of visitors
staying in the area. The meeting primarily focused on four properties in the
KLP that were used for short-term rentals, including the plaintiffs’ two
properties. Members of the public commented that local property owners did
not benefit from vacation rentals and that “[n]on owner operated rentals are not
allowed in our zoning ordinance.” The KLP’s zoning ordinance contains a
provision (the Guest Provision) under “Criteria for Permitted Uses” for
residential properties, which states: “All residential properties that offer
sleeping accommodations to transient or permanent guests shall be owner
occupied and operated.”
A ZBA member participated in this meeting as a member of the public
and asked: “Since these rentals have not been enforced in the past does it
make it not enforceable?” The KLP’s counsel responded that the BOC could
enforce the Guest Provision. The son of a ZBA member, Member Wroblewski,
also attended this hearing. The BOC unanimously voted to have the KLP’s
counsel draft citations for the four properties. The BOC approved the citations
at a public meeting in October 2017. The BOC subsequently sent the plaintiffs
two citations stating that they violated the Guest Provision at both of their
properties, as each “[h]ouse [was] being offered for sleeping accommodation to
transient guests without being owner occupied and operated.” The BOC also
sent citations to the owners of the other properties at issue.
Stephen Gleason, one of the other property owners, appealed the BOC’s
decision to the ZBA. At the ZBA hearing addressing the appeal in December
2017, counsel for Gleason requested a poll of the ZBA members “to make sure
that they don’t have an opinion or a public position on this issue.” The
members agreed to poll themselves and responded that none of them had a
preconceived opinion. At a public hearing in January 2018, the ZBA voted to
deny Gleason’s administrative appeal.
In December 2017, the plaintiffs also appealed their citations from the
BOC to the ZBA. In February 2018, the ZBA held a public hearing on the
plaintiffs’ appeal. The plaintiffs were represented by the same counsel as
Gleason. Counsel “referenced his previous arguments from the Gleason
hearing,” including that the Guest Provision was ambiguous and that the BOC
had not historically enforced the provision in this manner. Counsel presented
evidence that many property owners in the KLP used their properties for short-
term vacation rentals. A ZBA member noted that “the ZBA opinion w[ould]
likely be similar to the Gleason appeal.” The ZBA voted to delay deliberations
and a final vote until a subsequent meeting.
At the next meeting a few weeks later, a ZBA member presented a draft
decision denying the plaintiffs’ appeal, which was read aloud and discussed.
The ZBA unanimously voted to uphold the BOC’s citations.
The ZBA subsequently sent a letter to the plaintiffs explaining its
decision. The ZBA maintained that the ordinary meaning of the Guest
Provision’s terms was clear. According to the ZBA, the provision’s purpose was
to “maintain a quiet peaceful neighborhood made up of residents, not
transients,” and it achieved this goal, in part, by requiring “owner[s to remain
at the] residence on the property in order to serve as a check on guest behavior
which might otherwise be incompatible with the neighborhood.” The ZBA
concluded that, even if the Guest Provision were ambiguous, the plaintiffs
failed to identify any previous instance in which the BOC interpreted the Guest
Provision as inapplicable to short-term rentals.
After receiving the letter, the plaintiffs moved for a rehearing. The ZBA
reviewed the plaintiffs’ motion at a public hearing in March 2018 and voted to
deny it. The plaintiffs appealed the ZBA’s decision to the trial court pursuant
to RSA 677:4 (2016). In April 2021, the trial court held a hearing on the
plaintiffs’ appeal. In September 2021, the trial court issued an order affirming
2
the ZBA’s decision. The plaintiffs filed a motion to reconsider, which the trial
court denied. This appeal followed.
II. Analysis
Our review in zoning cases is limited. Dietz v. Town of Tuftonboro, 171
N.H. 614, 618 (2019). “The party seeking to set aside the ZBA’s decision bears
the burden of proof on appeal to the trial court.” Id. (quotation omitted). “The
factual findings of the ZBA are deemed prima facie lawful and reasonable, and
will not be set aside by the trial court absent errors of law, unless the court is
persuaded, based upon a balance of probabilities, on the evidence before it,
that the ZBA’s decision is unreasonable.” Id. (quotation omitted). “The trial
court’s review is not to determine whether it agrees with the zoning board of
adjustment’s findings, but to determine whether there is evidence upon which
they could have been reasonably based.” Id. (quotation omitted). “The trial
court reviews the ZBA’s statutory interpretation de novo.” Id.
“We will uphold the trial court’s decision on appeal unless it is not
supported by the evidence or is legally erroneous.” Id. (quotation omitted). “We
review the trial court’s statutory interpretation de novo.” Id. (quotation
omitted).
A
The plaintiffs argue that the trial court erred in its consideration of their
procedural due process claim. Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution
provides, in relevant part: “No subject shall be . . . deprived of his property,
immunities, or privileges, put out of the protection of the law, exiled or deprived
of his life, liberty, or estate, but by the judgment of his peers, or the law of the
land . . . .” N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 15. “Law of the land in this article means
due process of law.” State v. Veale, 158 N.H. 632, 636 (2009) (quotation
omitted). “The ultimate standard for judging a due process claim is the notion
of fundamental fairness.” Id. at 637 (quotation omitted).
On appeal, the plaintiffs argue that “[w]hile the Trial Court properly
recites the law relative to procedural due process, its consideration of
individual claims constituting the overall due process claim was flawed.”
Citing Appeal of Lathrop, 122 N.H. 262 (1982), the plaintiffs assert that “[i]n
assessing whether there was bias or prejudgment, a court is to look at the
conduct of the board members as a whole, rather than looking at statements or
conduct in isolation.” However, as noted by the ZBA and the BOC in their
memorandum of law, Lathrop does not stand for this proposition. Rather, in
Lathrop, this court determined that “[t]he entire series of events contained in
the record leads us to conclude that the appellants have made a sufficiently
strong showing that the [New Hampshire Water Resources Board] had
determined the outcome prior to the hearing and decision.” Lathrop, 122 N.H.
3