THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Department of Safety
No. 2021-0053
APPEAL OF TRADZ, LLC
(New Hampshire Department of Safety)
Argued: February 17, 2022
Opinion Issued: April 8, 2022
Wadleigh, Starr & Peters, PLLC, of Manchester (Craig Donais and Stephen
Zaharias on the brief, and Stephen Zaharias orally), for Tradz, LLC.
John M. Formella, attorney general, and Anthony J. Galdieri, solicitor
general (Christina M. Wilson, assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally),
for the New Hampshire Division of Motor Vehicles.
DONOVAN, J. The petitioner, Tradz, LLC, appeals a decision of the New
Hampshire Department of Safety, Bureau of Hearings (bureau), affirming a
decision of the respondent, the New Hampshire Division of Motor Vehicles
(DMV), denying the petitioner’s applications for title to ten motor vehicles. The
petitioner argues that the bureau erred by concluding that New Hampshire’s
abandoned vehicle statute, RSA 262:40-a (2014), did not provide a basis for it
to obtain title to the vehicles. We affirm.
I. Facts
The following facts were found by the bureau, are supported by the
record, or are otherwise undisputed. The petitioner is a New Hampshire
company that performs towing and repossession services. In or about early
2020, the petitioner submitted title applications for ten motor vehicles,
claiming that all of the vehicles were abandoned. Six of the vehicles were
subject to liens and were towed by the petitioner at the request of lienholders.
Three of the vehicles were towed by the petitioner from a dealership in
Concord. One of the vehicles was towed by the petitioner from the vehicle
owner’s property in Massachusetts allegedly at the vehicle owner’s request.
The petitioner towed all of the vehicles to its property in New Hampshire.
In its title applications, the petitioner claimed title to the vehicles
pursuant to New Hampshire’s abandoned vehicle statute, asserting that the
vehicles were either abandoned when the petitioner towed them or
subsequently became abandoned. See RSA 262:40-a, I. The petitioner
asserted that, even though it provided notice to the owners and the lienholders
in accordance with RSA 262:34 (Supp. 2021), no one paid the towing or storage
fees, nor did anyone attempt to reclaim the vehicles from its possession. The
petitioner further asserted that, after providing additional notice in accordance
with RSA 262:38 (Supp. 2021), it sold the vehicles to itself at public auction for
one dollar each pursuant to RSA 262:36-a (Supp. 2021) and RSA 262:37
(2014).
Ultimately, the DMV denied the applications. With respect to the six
vehicles that the petitioner towed at the request of the lienholders, as well as
the vehicle it towed from Massachusetts, the DMV determined that the
petitioner had repossessed the vehicles, and, for that reason, the abandoned
vehicle statute did not apply. With respect to the three vehicles that the
petitioner towed from the dealership, the DMV conducted an investigation and
denied the applications on the basis that the property owner did not request
the petitioner to tow the vehicles pursuant to RSA 262:40-a, I.
In December 2020, at the petitioner’s request, the bureau held a hearing
to review the denials. At the hearing, the bureau heard testimony from the
petitioner’s general manager and one of its employees. The bureau also heard
testimony from the DMV’s deputy director and the chief of its title bureau, both
of whom were involved in reviewing and investigating the applications.
Thereafter, the bureau issued an order affirming the denials “on the basis that
the process followed constituted an attempt to circumvent repossession
requirements by attempting to categorize them as abandoned vehicles.”
(Quotation omitted.) The bureau further concluded that “[t]he vehicles cannot
fit the definition of an abandoned vehicle when they are actually repossessed
vehicles.”
2
With respect to the six vehicles that the petitioner towed at the
lienholders’ request, the bureau concluded that the petitioner had engaged in
“a concerted effort to try to turn a repossession process into an abandoned
vehicle.” In addition, with respect to the vehicle that the petitioner towed from
Massachusetts, the bureau characterized the petitioner’s application as
“another work around to avoid the [Massachusetts] titling requirements,”
noting that “this is not the forum to determine if this transaction complied with
[Massachusetts] law.”
With respect to the vehicles that the petitioner towed from the
dealership, the bureau noted that “[t]he DMV investigation revealed that there
was no record of [the dealership] giving notice of removal to a peace officer,” as
required by RSA 262:40-a, I. The bureau further observed that “it strains
credulity that two late model . . . vehicles were parked without permission or
apparently abandoned” at the dealership. (Quotation and ellipsis omitted.)
Thus, the bureau concluded that “[t]his was clearly an attempt to categorize
vehicles as ‘abandoned’ that were actually repossessed vehicles.” The bureau
also concluded that, because the petitioner sold one of the vehicles to a private
buyer prior to the hearing, the issues pertaining to that vehicle were moot.
The petitioner filed a motion for rehearing, which the bureau denied. In
denying the motion, the bureau issued an order with additional findings of fact
and rulings of law and reaffirmed its conclusion that the abandoned vehicle
statute does not apply to repossessed vehicles. With respect to the vehicles
that the petitioner towed from the dealership, the bureau also found, among
other things, that “the General Manager of the dealership disavowed any
knowledge of the tow or having given anyone the authority to arrange for a
tow.” Thus, the bureau concluded that “the preponderance of the evidence is
that the tow was not authorized by the ‘property owner,’” as required by RSA
262:40-a, I. This appeal followed.
II. Standard of Review
RSA chapter 541 governs our review of the bureau’s decision. See RSA
21-P:13, II-a (2020); see also RSA 541:13 (2021). We will not set aside the
decision except for errors of law, unless we are satisfied, by a clear
preponderance of the evidence, that it is unjust or unreasonable. RSA 541:13.
The bureau’s findings of fact are presumed prima facie lawful and reasonable.
See id. The appealing party bears the burden of proving that the decision is
unjust or unreasonable. Id. When reviewing the bureau’s findings, our task is
not to determine whether we would have found differently or to reweigh the
evidence, but, rather, to determine whether the bureau’s findings are
supported by competent evidence. See Appeal of Brown, 171 N.H. 468, 473
(2018). We review the bureau’s rulings on issues of law de novo. See id.
3
Resolving the petitioner’s appeal requires that we interpret several
provisions of the relevant statutory scheme. Statutory interpretation presents
a question of law, which, as explained above, we review de novo. See
Sivalingam v. Newton, 174 N.H. 489, 494 (2021). In matters of statutory
interpretation, the intent of the legislature is expressed in the words of the
statute considered as a whole. See id. We first look to the language of the
statute itself and, if possible, construe that language according to its plain and
ordinary meaning. Id. We interpret statutes as written, and we will not
consider what the legislature might have said or add language that the
legislature did not see fit to include. Id.
III. Analysis
The petitioner argues that the bureau erred by concluding that the
abandoned vehicle statute did not provide a basis for the petitioner to obtain
title to the vehicles. RSA 262:40-a, I, provides, in relevant part:
I. The owner or person in lawful possession of any private
property . . . on which a vehicle is parked without permission
or is apparently abandoned may:
(a) Cause the removal of the vehicle in a reasonable
manner provided he or she gives notice of such removal
to a peace officer as soon as reasonably possible; or
(b) Notify a peace officer that he or she wishes to have
such a vehicle removed from the property, whereupon
the peace officer or another authorized official shall
cause the removal of such vehicle pursuant to the
removal, impoundment, and notice procedures required
by this subdivision.
RSA 262:40-a, I.
When a vehicle is removed from private property pursuant to RSA
262:40-a, I, the vehicle’s registered owner is entitled to notice of the removal.
See RSA 262:34. In addition, the vehicle’s registered owner — rather than the
person who requested the removal — is responsible for the cost of the removal,
including reasonable towing and storage fees. See RSA 262:40-a, IV.
If, within a statutorily-defined period of time, the registered owner fails to
retrieve the vehicle from the company that is storing it, the storage company
may sell the vehicle at public auction, provided that the company gives the
registered owner adequate