THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case Nos. 2021-0349 and 2021-0356, Christ Redeemer
Church v. Town of Hanover; Jeff Acker & a. v. Town of Hanover,
the court on April 14, 2023, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve these consolidated cases by way of this order. See Sup.
Ct. R. 20(2). Plaintiff Christ Redeemer Church (CRC) and plaintiffs Jeff and
Lara Acker (the Ackers) each appeal an order of the Superior Court (Bornstein,
J.) upholding the decision of Town of Hanover’s (Town) Zoning Board of
Adjustment (ZBA) granting CRC a use special exception, subject to certain
conditions, and a wetlands special exception to construct a church. We affirm
in part and reverse in part.
I. Background
The following facts are supported by the record. CRC has operated
within the Town for nearly twenty years, renting space at Hanover High School
to conduct religious services. After more than ten years of searching for
property to purchase in Hanover, CRC acquired a series of lots on Greensboro
Road. Greensboro Road is a two-lane road with a posted speed limit of 30
miles per hour, which sees “approximately 3,100 traveling vehicles per day.”
In 2018, CRC applied to the ZBA for special exceptions to build a 21,250
square foot church on two merged lots, along with a driveway and parking lot.
CRC proposed constructing a church capable of holding up to 415 people, a
parking lot for 120 vehicles, and related infrastructure. One-third of the
proposed project, including the entire footprint of the church building and
approximately 40 parking spaces, was to be located in the Town’s Single
Residence (SR) district. The remaining two-thirds, including the additional
parking spaces and related infrastructure, were to be located in the Town’s
Rural Residence (RR) district. CRC’s proposal required a use special exception,
as churches are permitted in the SR and RR districts only by special exception.
Hanover, N.H., Zoning Ordinance (hereinafter, Ordinance) §§ 405.8, 405.9.
CRC’s proposal also required a wetlands special exception for the wetland
buffer zone along the northwest portion of the property. See Ordinance §
1103.7.
In support of its application, CRC submitted a traffic study, a sound level
assessment, and a property value assessment. In addition, both CRC and the
Ackers hired experts and submitted engineering reports. The ZBA also hired
an independent expert “for a third party technical review of the presentations
submitted in support of and opposition to the application relating to water
resource impacts.”
Between June and October 2018, the ZBA held five public hearings on
CRC’s application. The Ackers, who own property on the opposite side of
Greensboro Road from the proposed church, participated throughout the
proceedings, submitting letters and public comment. After holding
deliberations in November and December 2018, the ZBA granted CRC’s
wetlands special exception and denied the use special exception application.
The Ackers moved for rehearing, which the ZBA denied. CRC also moved for
rehearing on the use special exception, which the ZBA granted.
Upon rehearing in March 2019, the ZBA granted CRC a use special
exception, subject to a number of conditions. The conditions included: (1) a
maximum occupancy on the premises of 300 persons and seating for no more
than 300 persons in the sanctuary; (2) a limit on the hours of operation and
occupancy from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on weekdays and 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. on weekends; (3) a limit of 113 parking spaces and a requirement that
CRC utilize a traffic coordinator; (4) a requirement that the sanctuary windows
“remain closed during all activities except in case of emergency or failure of the
HVAC system”; and (5) the installation of a noise mitigation screen around the
mechanical equipment. CRC and the Ackers each filed motions for rehearing,
which the ZBA denied.
Both CRC and the Ackers brought suit against the Town in superior
court. The Ackers filed two separate appeals pursuant to RSA 677:4 (2016) —
one regarding the use special exception and the other the wetlands special
exception. CRC filed a nine-count complaint. Counts I through VIII raised
challenges to the Town’s ordinance under the “First Amendment,” “Equal
Protection,” and “Substantive Due Process,” and challenged the special use
conditions under the Federal Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons
Act (RLUIPA). See 42 U.S.C. § 2000cc (2000). Count IX challenged, pursuant
to 677:4, the ZBA’s imposition of the occupancy, hours of operation, and
window closure conditions on the use special exception.
CRC moved for summary judgment on Counts I through VI of its
complaint and the Town moved for summary judgment on Counts I through
VIII of CRC’s complaint. Following a hearing, the trial court issued an order on
the summary judgment motions and on the merits of the ZBA appeals. The
court granted the Town’s motion for summary judgment on CRC’s
constitutional claims. With respect to CRC’s RLUIPA claim, the trial court
denied CRC’s motion for summary judgment except as to the window closure
condition and otherwise granted the Town’s motion. With respect to the ZBA
appeals under RSA 677:4, the court affirmed the ZBA’s decision to grant the
2
use special exception except with respect to the window closure condition and
affirmed the ZBA’s decision to grant the wetlands special exception. Following
a separate hearing on CRC’s claims for damages, costs, and attorney’s fees, the
trial court awarded CRC nominal damages in the amount of one dollar and
court costs in the amount of $280.00, but denied its request for attorney’s fees.
The trial court subsequently denied CRC’s motion for reconsideration of its
order addressing the summary judgment motions and the merits of the ZBA
appeals. This appeal followed.
II. Analysis
On appeal, CRC argues that the trial court erred by: (1) not ruling that
the ordinance is unconstitutional “under the First Amendment and Part I,
Article 5 of the New Hampshire Constitution”; (2) not ruling that the special
exception requirement in the ordinance is an “unconstitutional prior restraint”;
(3) not ruling that the ordinance violates “constitutional equal protection”; (4)
not ruling that the Town violated RLUIPA; (5) not vacating the occupancy and
hours conditions under RSA chapter 677; and (6) not granting a builder’s
remedy and attorney’s fees, and awarding only one dollar in damages.
The Ackers argue that the trial court erred by determining that: (1) the
ZBA’s decision to grant a use special exception on rehearing was not unlawful
or unreasonable; (2) the record contained sufficient evidence to support the
adequacy of the conditions imposed by the ZBA; (3) the ordinance only requires
review of the runoff from portions of the project that are in a wetland or
wetland buffer; (4) the record contained sufficient evidence to support the
ZBA’s grant of the wetland special exception; and (5) the record supported the
ZBA’s “creation of a de minimis exception to the prohibition against any
increased stormwater runoff” in the ordinance.
Although CRC raises several constitutional claims, because we generally
decide constitutional questions only when necessary, we first address the
parties’ arguments under RSA chapter 677. See State v. Fogg, 170 N.H. 234,
236 (2017). Our review in zoning cases is limited. Dietz v. Town of Tuftonboro,
171 N.H. 614, 618 (2019). “The party seeking to set aside the ZBA’s decision
bears the burden of proof on appeal to the trial court.” Id. (quotation omitted).
“The factual findings of the ZBA are deemed prima facie lawful and reasonable,
and will not be set aside by the trial court absent errors of law, unless the
court is persuaded, based upon a balance of probabilities, on the evidence
before it, that the ZBA’s decision is unreasonable.” Id. (quotation omitted).
“The trial court’s review is not to determine whether it agrees with the zoning
board of adjustment’s findings, but to determine whether there is evidence
upon which they could have been reasonably based.” Id. (quotation omitted).
“The trial court reviews the ZBA’s statutory interpretation de novo.” Id.
3