THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2021-0161, State of New Hampshire v. Jesse
Warren, the court on September 29, 2022, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs, the record submitted on appeal, and the
oral arguments of the parties, the court concludes that a formal written opinion
is unnecessary in this case. The defendant, Jesse Warren, appeals his
conviction for driving with a suspended license, subsequent offense. See RSA
263:64, I, VI (2014). He argues that the Trial Court (Stephen, J.) erred when,
despite his lack of counsel at the time, it reinstated the complaint for that
charge, which had been placed on file without a finding. He also asserts that
the court erred when it reinstated the complaint as a consequence of his failure
to pay a fine without first making a finding as to his “ability to pay.” Because
we agree with the defendant that he had a right to counsel at the time the
complaint was reinstated, we vacate and remand.
In 2017, the State charged the defendant by complaint with two crimes
arising out of the same incident: one count of driving with a suspended license,
subsequent offense, see id., and one count of disorderly conduct, see RSA
644:2 (2016). The State filed a notice of intent to seek Class A misdemeanor
penalties on the operating after suspension (OAS) charge.
The defendant retained counsel and negotiated a plea agreement in
March 2018. He pleaded guilty on the disorderly conduct charge and the court
sentenced him to 90 days in the house of corrections, with 15 days to serve
and 75 days deferred, and imposed a fine and assessed a penalty totaling
$1860, with $620 to pay and $1240 suspended. In exchange, the court placed
the OAS charge on file without a finding for a period of two years conditioned
upon the defendant’s good behavior and compliance with the terms of the
disorderly conduct sentence. See RSA 262:42 (2014) (authorizing placement of
complaint on file). This disposition of the OAS charge prevented the defendant
from being at risk of becoming certified as a habitual offender. See RSA 259:39
(2014); RSA 262:19 (2014). That same day, the defendant entered into a
payment plan with the court in which he agreed to pay the $620 fine plus an
additional $25 fee within one month.
Because the defendant failed to timely pay the fine and fee, the court
added a $50 fine, bringing the total amount owed to $695. In July 2018, based
on the defendant’s continued failure to pay, the State filed a motion to reinstate
the OAS complaint that had been placed on file without a finding and to
impose the balance of the disorderly conduct sentence. On August 30, the
defendant paid the outstanding fine balance of $695 and the court scheduled a
hearing on the State’s motion for October.
The defendant’s counsel subsequently withdrew, and the defendant
represented himself at the October 2018 motion hearing. At the hearing, the
State acknowledged that resolution of the motion to impose the deferred
disorderly conduct sentence should be postponed so that the defendant could
acquire, or be appointed, counsel. However, notwithstanding the defendant’s
lack of counsel, the State requested that the court reinstate the OAS complaint
effective immediately because, by not timely paying the fine, the defendant had
failed to comply with the terms of the disorderly conduct sentence. After
hearing from both parties, the court granted the motion to reinstate the
complaint. Later that day, the defendant completed a financial affidavit and
the court appointed the Public Defender to represent him.
Appointed counsel thereafter filed an objection to the motion to impose
the deferred disorderly conduct sentence and a motion to reconsider the court’s
reinstatement of the OAS complaint. Before the start of trial on the OAS
charge, the court heard oral argument on the motion to reconsider
reinstatement of that charge and denied the motion. The court found the
defendant guilty of OAS. It sentenced him to 180 days in the house of
corrections, with 20 days to serve and 160 days suspended, and imposed a fine
of $1800, with $450 to pay and $1350 suspended. Immediately after trial of
the OAS charge, the court heard argument on the motion to impose the
deferred disorderly conduct sentence. The court did not impose any of the
deferred jail time and again suspended the remaining fine on the disorderly
conduct charge.
The defendant appealed his conviction to superior court for a de novo
jury trial. See RSA 599:1 (Supp. 2021) (authorizing appeal from Class A
misdemeanor conviction to the superior court for de novo jury trial). However,
he then waived his right to a jury trial and, based on the State’s offers of proof,
the superior court found him guilty and sentenced him. The defendant
appealed that decision to this court. See State v. Warren, No. 2019-0701 (N.H.
Jan. 29, 2021) (non-precedential order). On appeal, the parties agreed that the
superior court had erred when, upon the defendant’s waiver of his jury trial
right, the court did not immediately remand the case to the circuit court. See
id. at 1. Accordingly, we vacated the superior court’s rulings and instructed it
to remand the case to the circuit court for imposition of the sentence. See id.;
RSA 599:1. Upon remand, the circuit court imposed its original sentence on
the OAS conviction, but stayed imposition of that sentence pending appeal.
This appeal followed.
2
As a threshold matter, the State argues that, because the defendant did
not raise his present arguments in his first appeal to this court, he waived
them, and we should dismiss this appeal on that basis. The waiver doctrine
“serves judicial economy by forcing parties to raise issues whose resolution
might spare the court and parties later rounds of remands and appeals.” State
v. Robinson, 170 N.H. 52, 61 (2017) (quotation omitted). In applying the
concept of waiver in the context of a subsequent appeal, we have adopted the
First Circuit Court of Appeals’ approach: “whether ‘there is a waiver depends
not on counting the number of missed opportunities to raise an issue, but on
whether the party had sufficient incentive to raise the issue in the prior
proceedings.’” Id. (quoting United States v. Ticchiarelli, 171 F.3d 24, 32-33
(1st Cir. 1999); ellipses omitted). “This approach requires a fact-intensive,
case-by-case analysis.” Ticchiarelli, 171 F.3d at 33. Here, the parties dispute
whether the defendant had sufficient incentive in his first appeal to raise the
arguments he now advances regarding errors in the circuit court proceeding.
We agree with the defendant that, given the unique procedural history of this
case, the waiver doctrine does not preclude his present appeal.
The defendant’s appeal, under RSA 599:1, of his OAS conviction in
circuit court to the superior court had the effect of “vacat[ing] [that] judgment
and transfer[ing] the whole proceeding to the Superior Court, there to be tried
de novo on the original complaint.” State v. Cook, 96 N.H. 212, 214 (1950). In
short, once the defendant appealed to the superior court, “[t]he parties [stood]
as though there had been no trial.” Id. Following his conviction in the superior
court, the defendant filed his first appeal to this court. See Warren, No. 2019-
0701 (N.H. Jan. 29, 2021) (non-precedential order). At that time, he had no
incentive to challenge deficiencies in the circuit court proceeding because, as a
matter of law, the judgment of the circuit court had been vacated in its entirety
and supplanted by the superior court proceeding and judgment. Instead, the
defendant focused his first appeal on the only judgment against him — the
superior court’s ruling.
The State argues that the defendant should be precluded from pursuing
this appeal because the facts giving rise to his present claims were fully
developed at the time of the prior appeal and appellate counsel in the first
appeal was, or should have been, aware of them. We are not convinced.
Although both of the State’s factual assertions are correct, they do not vitiate
the legal principle that, at the time of the defendant’s first appeal, the circuit
court’s judgment had been nullified. Under these circumstances, we conclude
that the defendant did not have sufficient incentive during his first appeal to
raise the arguments he now advances as to the circuit court’s errors. See
Robinson, 170 N.H. at 61. Accordingly, he has not waived these arguments.
We now turn to the merits of the defendant’s appeal. On several
statutory and constitutional grounds, he asserts that the court erred when it
reinstated the OAS complaint at a time when he was not represented by
3