THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2021-0222, Appeal of Robert Newcomb & a.,
the court on August 5, 2022, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs, the record submitted on appeal, and the
oral arguments of the parties, the court concludes that a formal written opinion
is unnecessary in this case. The petitioners, Robert and Carolyn Newcomb,
appeal a decision of the New Hampshire Wetlands Council (the Council)
dismissing their appeal of an order of the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services (DES) requiring removal of a newly constructed landing
and stairway attached to their waterfront property. See RSA 482-A:10, I (Supp.
2021); RSA 21-O:14, III (2020); RSA 21-O:5-a, V (2020). We affirm in part,
reverse in part, and remand.
The following facts were alleged in the petitioners’ notice of appeal before
the Council, and are accepted as true for the purposes of this appeal, are
undisputed, or are established by the administrative record. The petitioners
own a waterfront house on Lake Winnipesaukee. In 2018 or 2019, the
petitioners completed a construction project on the waterfront side of the
home. They replaced four slider doors with windows, constructed a three-foot
by six-foot landing adjacent to a remaining ground-floor slider door, and
constructed a stairway leading from that landing down to an existing deck.
In February 2019, DES received a complaint about the landing and
stairway and, in April, inspected the property. Approximately one year later,
DES issued an administrative order finding that the petitioners’ construction of
the landing and stairs did not meet the requirements of RSA 482-A:26, III(a)
(2013). That statute provides, in relevant part:
Existing dwellings over water which were constructed or converted
to be made suitable for use as a dwelling in accordance with the
law in effect at the time of construction or conversion, may be
repaired or reconstructed, for maintenance purposes only . . .
provided the result is a functionally equivalent use. Such repair or
reconstruction may alter the interior design or existing cribwork,
but no expansion of the existing footprint or outside dimensions
shall be permitted.
RSA 482-A:26, III(a). DES found that the petitioners violated the statute
because the new construction “expand[ed] the footprint and outside
dimensions of a dwelling over water.” It ordered the petitioners to remove the
landing and stairs.
In May 2020, the petitioners, representing themselves, filed a notice of
appeal with the Council contesting DES’s decision. See RSA 482-A:10, I; RSA
21-O:14, I-a(a) (2020). They set forth two grounds upon which they alleged
DES’s decision was unlawful or unreasonable, see RSA 482-A:10, IV (Supp.
2021): the construction did not result in an expansion of the property’s
footprint and therefore did meet the requirements of RSA 482-A:26, III(a); and
DES should be estopped from enforcing the statute because a DES employee
represented to the petitioners’ builder that “DES does not deal with egress
issues,” and the petitioners relied on that representation in not seeking a
permit. The Council scheduled a hearing on the matter, and the petitioners
retained counsel. Prior to the hearing, DES filed a motion to dismiss the
petitioners’ appeal for failure to state a cognizable claim that DES acted
unlawfully or unreasonably. See RSA 21-O:14, I-a(a). The petitioners objected.
The hearing officer granted DES’s motion and dismissed the appeal. See
RSA 21-M:3, IX(e) (2020) (providing that the hearing officer shall decide all
questions of law). The hearing officer determined that the petitioners had failed
to state a claim that DES acted unlawfully or unreasonably in finding that the
project does not meet the criteria contained in RSA 482-A:26, III(a). He
reasoned that, regardless of whether the construction expanded the property’s
footprint or outside dimensions, the project “did not amount to a repair or
reconstruction of existing landings . . . solely for maintenance purposes,” nor
result in a “functionally equivalent use” within the meaning of the statute.
Additionally, the hearing officer concluded that the petitioners had failed to
adequately allege a claim of governmental estoppel. The petitioners filed a
motion for reconsideration, which the Council denied. This appeal followed.
Our standard of review of the Council’s decision is set forth in RSA
541:13 (2021). Appeal of N.H. Dep’t of Envtl. Servs., 173 N.H. 282, 289 (2020);
RSA 21-O:14, III. Under RSA 541:13, the petitioners have the burden of
demonstrating that the Council’s decision was “clearly unreasonable or
unlawful.” RSA 541:13. We must uphold the Council’s decision except for
errors of law, unless we are satisfied, by a clear preponderance of the evidence
before us, “that such order is unjust or unreasonable.” Id.
Because this case involves an appeal from the Council’s decision on a
motion to dismiss, our standard of review is whether the allegations and
grounds set forth in the petitioners’ notice of appeal before the Council are
reasonably susceptible of a construction that would permit recovery. See Pro
Done, Inc. v. Basham, 172 N.H. 138, 141 (2019). We assume that the facts
alleged in the petitioners’ notice of appeal to the Council are true and construe
all reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to the petitioners. See id.;
RSA 21-O:14, I-a(a). We then engage in a threshold inquiry that tests the facts
2
alleged by the petitioners against the applicable law, and if the allegations
constitute a basis for legal relief — here, that DES’s decision was unreasonable
or unlawful — we must hold that it was improper to grant the motion to
dismiss. Pro Done, 172 N.H. at 141-42; RSA 541:13.
The petitioners first assert that the hearing officer erred when he
concluded that the construction project did not satisfy the requirements of RSA
482-A:26, III(a) in that it did not constitute a repair or reconstruction for
maintenance purposes only and did not result in a functionally equivalent use.
They contend that they alleged sufficient facts showing that their construction
project met the requirements of the statute, and, therefore, their appeal on this
ground should not have been dismissed. DES counters that this argument is
not adequately preserved for our review. We find the petitioners’ argument
preserved and conclude that the petitioners alleged sufficient facts to survive a
motion to dismiss.
The petitioners raised this issue in their notice of appeal to the Council
by alleging that DES’s order was unreasonable or unlawful because the new
landing and stairway were a repair or reconstruction of a “walk-out and
stairway” that had worn and fallen away from the home. DES itself responded
to this claim by arguing in its motion to dismiss that “[t]he construction of new
stairs and a walkout over the public water where no walkout and stairs
previously existed is not a repair nor a reconstruction for maintenance
purposes.” The hearing officer then adopted DES’s reasoning in granting its
motion to dismiss. The petitioners objected to this conclusion in their motion
for reconsideration, arguing that the character of the work —“whether repair,
maintenance or new construction” — raised questions of fact and that, viewing
the facts in the light most favorable to them, this claim should survive. We
therefore conclude that the petitioners adequately preserved this issue for our
review.
Turning to the merits, we agree with the petitioners that they alleged
sufficient facts to support the ground that DES acted unlawfully or
unreasonably when it determined that the construction project was prohibited
because it did not satisfy the requirements of RSA 482-A:26, III(a). RSA 482-
A:26 limits the work that can be done to existing dwellings over water by
providing that such dwellings “may be repaired or reconstructed, for
maintenance purposes only . . . provided the result is a functionally equivalent
use” and that “no expansion of the existing footprint or outside dimensions”
results. RSA 482-A:26, III(a).
Here, the petitioners alleged in their notice of appeal to the Council that
their project met these requirements, making it allowable under the statute.
The petitioners adequately alleged that the property is an existing dwelling over
water and that the project constituted a repair of part of the property. In their
notice of appeal, the petitioners alleged that “there was a walk-out and stairway
3