THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2021-0015, Avanru Development Group, Ltd.
v. Town of Swanzey, the court on August 16, 2022, issued the
following order:
The plaintiff, Avanru Development Group, Ltd. (Avanru), seeks to build a
76-unit multi-family dwelling on a parcel within the Town of Swanzey’s
Business District. To do so, it needs to obtain a special exception under the
Town’s zoning ordinance. The Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) denied
Avanru’s request. The Superior Court (Ruoff, J.) vacated the ZBA’s denial and
remanded for further proceedings. The Town now appeals. Avanru cross-
appeals the trial court’s denial of its request for a builder’s remedy.
This case presents three issues—whether the trial court erred: (1) in its
construction of Swanzey, N.H., Zoning Ordinance (hereinafter, Ordinance)
§ XII(C)(2)(a); (2) in its construction of Ordinance § XII(C)(2)(b); and (3) in failing
to grant Avanru a builder’s remedy. The court is unanimous that the trial
court did not err with respect to the denial of the builder’s remedy and its
interpretation of Ordinance § XII(C)(2)(b). The court, however, is equally
divided as to whether the trial court erred in its interpretation of Ordinance
§ XII(C)(2)(a). Accordingly, the trial court’s order is affirmed. See PK’s
Landscaping, Inc. v. N.E. Telephone Co., 128 N.H. 753, 758 (1986) (affirming
order granting summary judgment by an equally divided court); Katherine
Frederick v. New Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services, No.
2019-0156 (N.H. March 12, 2021) (non-precedential order) (affirming the trial
court’s dismissal of a case as barred by the statute of limitations by an equally
divided court).
As an initial matter, we address Avanru’s cross-appeal. In an effort to
avoid further proceedings before the ZBA, Avanru asks us to reverse the trial
court’s denial of its request for a builder’s remedy. A builder’s remedy is the
granting of a right to complete a proposed project. Cmty. Res. for Justice v.
City of Manchester, 157 N.H. 152, 155 (2008). This is an extraordinary
remedy, the denial of which we review for an unsustainable exercise of
discretion. Id.
As we will subsequently discuss, in considering Avanru’s special
exception application, the ZBA conducted an improper analysis. In remanding
to the ZBA, the trial court determined that the proper remedy was for the ZBA
to reconsider the application in a manner consistent with its order. As the
granting of a builder’s remedy is within the discretion of the trial court, and
Avanru has not demonstrated that the trial court’s order constitutes an
unsustainable exercise of discretion, we deny the relief requested in Avanru’s
cross-appeal. See id.; Soares v. Town of Atkinson, 129 N.H. 313, 316 (1987).
We now turn to the issues that involve the interpretation of the Swanzey
Zoning Ordinance. The interpretation of a zoning ordinance is a question of
law, which we review de novo. Batchelder v. Town of Plymouth Zoning Bd. of
Adjustment, 160 N.H. 253, 256 (2010). The traditional rules of statutory
construction govern our review. Id. Therefore, we construe the words and
phrases of an ordinance according to their common and ordinary usage. Id.
We determine the meaning of a zoning ordinance from its construction as a
whole, not by construing isolated words and phrases. Id. at 257. We will not
guess what the drafters of the ordinance might have intended, or add words
that they did not see fit to include. Id. at 256-57.
The Ordinance divides the Town into districts and defines permitted uses
within each district. The Business District “is intended to provide for the
development of commercial uses that are oriented to the traveling public or are
traffic generators of such size as to be more properly located on a highly
accessible highway network.” Ordinance § II(A)(4). Section V of the Ordinance
provides that, in the Business District, “no buildings or premises shall be
erected, altered or used and no land shall be used for any purpose except” for
fourteen specific “uses permitted.” Ordinance § V(B)(1). Among the permitted
uses are the following: a hotel, motel, inn or bed and breakfast facility, a
nursing home, a restaurant, a warehouse, and a function hall. Id. In addition,
six uses are permitted only if the ZBA grants a special exception. One of these
uses is the multi-family dwelling use. Ordinance § V(B)(2). Thus, the
Ordinance creates two tiers of uses that are permitted in the Business District:
the fourteen uses permitted as of right and the six uses conditioned on the
grant of a special exception. Ordinance § V(B).
Section XII of the Ordinance provides that the “[ZBA] shall have the
power to hear and decide Special Exceptions to the terms of this Ordinance,
and in doing so, may grant approval in appropriate cases and subject to
appropriate conditions and safeguards for the protection of the public health,
safety, and welfare.” Ordinance § XII(C)(2). In order to receive a special
exception, the applicant has the burden of presenting sufficient evidence to
support a favorable finding on each of the specified requirements. McKibbin v.
City of Lebanon, 149 N.H. 59, 61 (2003). The Ordinance establishes the
following requirements for approval of a special exception:
a. The proposed use is similar to one or more of the uses already
authorized in that district and is in an appropriate location for such a
use; b. Such approval would not reduce the value of any property within
the district, nor otherwise be injurious, obnoxious, or offensive to the
2
neighborhood; c. There will be no nuisance or serious hazard to vehicles
or pedestrians; d. Adequate and appropriate facilities will be provided for
the proper operation of the proposed use.
Ordinance § XII(C)(2).
The ZBA found that the application did not satisfy the requirements of
subsection (a) or (b). We will address subsection (b) first because the court is
unanimous on this issue. We will then address subsection (a), on which the
court is equally divided.
Subsection (b) requires that Avanru’s proposed project “would not reduce
the value of any property within the district, nor otherwise be injurious,
obnoxious, or offensive to the neighborhood.” With respect to this requirement,
a majority of the ZBA determined that the project was “offensive to the
neighborhood,” and, therefore, that Avanru failed to satisfy the requirement.
The superior court concluded that, as used in the Ordinance, “offensive”
refers to the proposed use of the property, not the physical structure of the
proposed project, and that the ZBA, by relying on public comments, improperly
based its conclusions on the project’s aesthetics. Additionally, the trial court
found that, although the ZBA must give public comments some weight, here
the ZBA “erred in judging the application solely on its popularity.”
On appeal, the Town argues that the trial court erred when it ruled that
the ZBA should not take into account the physical characteristics and
aesthetics of the project. Avanru counters that “offensive” cannot mean that
the project is generally unpopular. We agree that equating “offensive” with
“unpopular” is not consonant with the overall design and purpose of the
Ordinance. See Batchelder, 160 N.H. at 256; Bethlehem v. Robie, 111 N.H.
186, 188 (1971) (“[T]he zoning ordinance was designed to protect
neighborhoods and land values, and the granting or denial of a permit is not
dependent upon the consent or objection of present owners of adjoining
property.”). By its terms, the Ordinance deems a multi-family dwelling use in
the Business District to be “essentially desirable,” yet it also requires the
proposed “location must be considered in light of special restrictions or
conditions tailored to fit the unique problems which the use may present.”
Ordinance §§ XII, V(B)(2)(b); see also 3 Sara C. Bronin & Dwight H. Merriam,
Rathkopf’s The Law of Zoning and Planning § 61:6, at 61-17 to 61-18 (4th ed.
2017) (describing the use of special exceptions and noting “because the use in
some places or in some respects might be incompatible with the uses permitted
as of right in the particular district, a special permit with discretionary review
and the ability to condition the approval, is warranted”).
Thus, the Ordinance requires the ZBA to identify the “unique problems”
a multi-family dwelling use may present if constructed in its proposed location
3