THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2021-0473, Appeal of Town of Windham, the
court on October 4, 2022, issued the following order:
Having considered the parties’ briefs, oral arguments, and the record on
appeal, we conclude that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case.
The petitioner, Town of Windham (Town), appeals an order of the Housing
Appeals Board (HAB) vacating and remanding a decision by the Town’s
planning board. The decision denied the request of the respondent, Ten Harris
Road, LLC, for a waiver of the workforce housing requirement set forth in the
Town’s zoning ordinance. The Town argues that the HAB erred by vacating
and remanding the decision to the board with instructions to address an
appropriate percentage of workforce housing for the proposed project. We
conclude that the HAB reasonably vacated the board’s denial of the waiver
request. However, we decline to review whether the HAB acted unlawfully or
otherwise exceeded the scope of its authority by remanding the matter with
instructions because the Town has not preserved that issue for our review and
the respondent has not appealed it. Accordingly, we affirm.
The following facts are supported by the record or are otherwise
undisputed. The respondent owns property located in the Town’s rural zoning
district. The property is approximately six acres and is improved by a single-
family residence. The respondent seeks to redevelop the property with a multi-
unit condominium complex comprised of a mix of workforce and market-rate
housing. In September 2020, the respondent submitted a site plan application
to the board proposing to develop sixteen single-family condominiums, which,
together with the existing single-family house, would result in seventeen total
units on the property. The respondent submitted the site plan application as a
workforce housing project under the Town’s zoning ordinance, which
authorizes the development of workforce housing in the rural district under
certain circumstances. See Windham, N.H., Zoning Ordinance § 619.3 (2020).
Relevant to the respondent’s site plan application, the Town’s ordinance
requires that, for any workforce housing project in the rural district, at least 50
percent of the units “must qualify as workforce housing.” Windham, N.H.,
Zoning Ordinance § 619.7.3.3 (2020); see also RSA 674:58, IV (2016) (defining
“workforce housing”). The ordinance provides that, “[i]f this percentage creates
a financial burden and makes the development not financially viable, a waiver
can be sought from the [board] to reduce this percentage.” Windham, N.H.,
Zoning Ordinance § 619.7.3.3 (2020). It further states that any “request for a
waiver must be accompanied by financial documentation justifying such waiver
request.” Id.
In its site plan application, the respondent proposed that four of the
seventeen units — or 23.5 percent of the total development — qualify as
workforce housing. Accordingly, the respondent requested a waiver of the 50
percent workforce housing requirement set forth in the Town’s ordinance. See
id. In support of its request, the respondent submitted a workforce feasibility
analysis from an independent engineering firm, which concluded that
developing 50 percent of the units as workforce housing would not be
financially feasible and would likely generate a financial loss of approximately
$130,000. The firm further concluded that a 25 percent rate would generate “a
positive bottom line.”1 In its application to the board, the respondent also
submitted a letter from a municipal planner citing the need for workforce
housing in Windham and explaining that 25 percent was within the “norm” of
workforce housing required by other communities in the state.
Between December 2020 and February 2021, the board conducted a
series of hearings and a site walk at which it discussed, among other things,
the respondent’s site plan application and accompanying waiver request.
During the hearings, board members expressed their disagreement with the
financial data set forth in the respondent’s workforce feasibility analysis
submitted as part of its application. The board also took issue with the
respondent’s failure to identify other variations at different percentages for the
feasibility of the project. The board did not retain a financial expert to review
the respondent’s workforce feasibility analysis, but, rather, requested that the
Town’s engineer review the report. Following his review, the engineer agreed
with the report’s conclusion that if the respondent is required to satisfy the 50
percent requirement the proposed development would not be financially
feasible.
Ultimately, the board denied the respondent’s waiver request,
concluding, inter alia, that the respondent’s financial information did not
support the request. Thereafter, the respondent appealed to the HAB, arguing
that the board’s decision to deny the waiver request was unlawful and
unreasonable. Specifically, the respondent argued, in part, that the board
erred by relying upon its own “personal knowledge” in rejecting the conclusions
set forth in the workforce feasibility analysis and determining that the reports
submitted by the respondent did not support granting the workforce housing
waiver.
In July 2021, the HAB issued an order vacating and remanding the
board’s decision. The HAB determined that the reports submitted by the
1 The 25% workforce housing rate was calculated based upon the proposed plan’s development of
16 new units, as opposed to 17 units which included the existing building on the property.
2
respondent, as well as the Town engineer’s review, demonstrated “that at 50
percent the project would not be economically viable.” Further, the HAB
determined that the board’s members unreasonably disregarded the findings of
the reports submitted in support of the application based upon their own
personal knowledge. Accordingly, the HAB concluded that the board’s decision
to deny the respondent’s waiver request for a workforce housing percentage
reduction was unreasonable and inconsistent with RSA 674:58, III and the
Town’s ordinance. The HAB vacated the board’s denial of the waiver and
remanded the matter to the board with specific instructions that the board
“reconsider an appropriate workforce housing percentage” in light of both RSA
674:58 and the Town’s workforce housing ordinance.
The Town moved for rehearing, arguing that the HAB’s decision to
remand with specific instructions to address the issue of the appropriate
percentage of workforce housing was unlawful because the planning board
does not have authority to propose particular workforce housing percentages
as instructed by the HAB. Rather, in its view, the board may only reject or
accept percentages that the applicant has proposed. The HAB denied the
Town’s request for rehearing, finding that “[t]he Certified Record makes clear
that the 50% requirement could not be economically met and, rather than
investigate, adapt, recommend, or discuss a reasonable workforce housing
percentage . . ., the Town balked even after indicating that a lesser percentage
was probably needed.” This appeal followed.
When reviewing a planning board’s decision, the HAB must uphold the
decision unless there was an error of law or the HAB is persuaded by the
balance of probabilities that the decision was unreasonable. See RSA
677:6, :15, V (2016); RSA 679:9, II (Supp. 2021); see also RSA 679:9, I (Supp.
2021) (“Appeals to the [HAB] shall be consistent with appeals to the superior
court pursuant to RSA 677:4 through RSA 677:16.”). The party seeking to set
aside the board’s decision bears the burden of proving that the decision was
unlawful or unreasonable. RSA 677:6; see RSA 679:9, I. The HAB must treat
the planning board’s factual findings as prima facie lawful and reasonable. See
Trustees of Dartmouth Coll. v. Town of Hanover, 171 N.H. 497, 504 (2018); see
also RSA 677:6; RSA 679:9, I. The HAB’s review is not to determine whether it
agrees with the planning board’s findings, but, rather, whether there is
evidence in the record upon which the planning board could have reasonably
based its findings. See Trustees of Dartmouth Coll., 171 N.H. at 504.
Our review of the HAB’s decision is governed by RSA chapter 541. See
RSA 679:15 (Supp. 2021) (“Decisions of the [HAB] may be appealed to the
supreme court by any party in accordance with the provisions of RSA 541 as
from time to time amended.”). We will not set aside the HAB’s order unless we
are satisfied, by a clear preponderance of the evidence, that it is unjust or
unreasonable. See RSA 541:13 (2021).
3