THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2021-0614, State of New Hampshire v. Scott
LeBlanc, the court on June 22, 2023, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The defendant, Scott LeBlanc, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Nicolosi, J.) denying his motion for a new trial based upon
ineffective assistance of counsel, and an order of the Superior Court (Messer,
J.) denying his appointed post-conviction attorney’s motion to withdraw. We
affirm.
The trial court found the following relevant facts. In July 2013, a grand
jury indicted the defendant on twelve counts of aggravated felonious sexual
assault for assaults allegedly occurring between 1995 and 2000 perpetrated
against his stepdaughter, who was younger than thirteen at the time. The
defendant failed to appear at his August 2013 arraignment, and a bench
warrant was issued for his arrest. The defendant was abroad until May 2015,
when he was apprehended in Jamaica.
The defendant was tried by a jury in Superior Court (Ruoff, J.) over four
days in April 2016. The defendant’s two trial attorneys called no witnesses,
but rather elicited exculpatory facts from the State’s witnesses, and, consistent
with their theory that the defendant’s stepdaughter had fabricated the
allegations, attempted to undermine her credibility through cross-examination
and the presentation of exhibits contradicting her claims. The defendant chose
not to testify. The jury convicted him on five of the twelve indictments. We
affirmed his convictions on appeal in a non-precedential order. See State v.
LeBlanc, Case No. 2016-0353, 2017 WL 4770564 (N.H. Sept. 20, 2017).
The defendant filed a motion for a new trial as a self-represented party
on October 16, 2018, alleging that his two trial attorneys had rendered
constitutionally ineffective assistance. His request for appointed post-
conviction counsel was granted; his new attorney filed a substitute motion for a
new trial and a supplemental motion for a new trial on the defendant’s behalf.
The defendant’s motion for a new trial was heard over several days in Superior
Court (Nicolosi, J.). The day before the third day of hearing was to occur, the
defendant’s post-conviction attorney filed a motion to withdraw. The Superior
Court (Messer, J.) denied the motion to withdraw. Thereafter, the Superior
Court (Nicolosi, J.) denied the defendant’s motion for a new trial and his
subsequent motion for reconsideration. This appeal followed.
I. Motion for New Trial
The State and Federal Constitutions guarantee a criminal defendant
reasonably competent assistance of counsel. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 15;
U.S. CONST. amend. VI. To demonstrate a violation of this right, the defendant
must show that his trial attorneys’ conduct so undermined the proper
functioning of the adversarial process that the trial cannot be relied on as
having produced a just result. State v. Marden, 172 N.H. 258, 262 (2019). We
first address the defendant’s claim under the State Constitution and rely upon
federal law only to aid our analysis. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
To prevail upon his claim of ineffective assistance of counsel, the
defendant must demonstrate, first, that his trial attorneys’ representation was
constitutionally deficient and, second, that their deficient performance actually
prejudiced the outcome of the case. State v. Collins, 166 N.H. 210, 212 (2014).
A failure to establish either prong requires a finding that his trial attorneys’
performance was not constitutionally defective. Id.
To satisfy the performance prong, the defendant must show that his trial
attorneys’ representation fell below an objective standard of reasonableness.
Id. To meet this first prong, the defendant must show that his trial attorneys
made such egregious errors that they failed to function as the counsel that the
State Constitution guarantees. Id. We afford a high degree of deference to the
strategic decisions of trial counsel, bearing in mind the limitless variety of
strategic and tactical decisions that counsel must make. Id. at 212-13. The
defendant must overcome the presumption that his trial attorneys reasonably
adopted their trial strategy. Id. at 213. Accordingly, a fair assessment of
attorney performance requires that every effort be made to eliminate the
distorting effects of hindsight, to reconstruct the circumstances of counsel’s
challenged conduct, and to evaluate the conduct from counsel’s perspective at
the time. Id.
To satisfy the second prong, the prejudice prong, the defendant must
establish that there is a reasonable probability that, but for his trial attorneys’
unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been different.
Id. A reasonable probability is a probability sufficient to undermine confidence
in the outcome. Id. In conducting the prejudice inquiry, we consider the
totality of the evidence presented at trial. Id.
Both the performance and prejudice components of the ineffectiveness
inquiry are mixed questions of law and fact. Id. Therefore, we will not disturb
the trial court’s factual findings unless they are not supported by the evidence
2
or are erroneous as a matter of law, and we review the ultimate determination
of whether each prong is met de novo. Id.
The defendant first argues that his two trial attorneys were ineffective
because they failed to prepare him adequately to testify. The defendant relies
upon Turner v. Duncan, 158 F.3d 449, 457 (9th Cir. 1998), where the defense
attorney spent “at most forty-five minutes” with a defendant before trial, and
United States v. Ray, 735 F. App’x 290, 293 (9th Cir. 2018), where the attorney
was alleged to have never met the defendant outside the courthouse and to
have met him only immediately before or after a court appearance. The facts of
this case are not analogous to those in Turner or Ray.
The record supports the trial court’s finding that the defendant’s two trial
attorneys “spent hours with him” on his case. The trial court credited notes
prepared by the defendant’s trial attorneys, which included a list of prepared
questions or points of interest for his direct examination, referenced
discussions with him about testifying, and noted information he gave them,
including the names of people with whom he thought they should speak. The
court also credited testimony that trial counsel spoke with the defendant on a
number of occasions about his direct testimony. As the trial court found, and
as the record supports, the defendant’s claim that he decided not to testify
because his attorneys had failed to prepare him simply lacked credibility. In
light of this record, we agree with the trial court that the attorneys’ preparation
of the defendant to testify did not fall below an objective standard of
reasonableness. See Collins, 166 N.H. at 212.
The defendant next asserts that the trial court erred as a matter of law
because it applied a subjective, instead of an objective, standard of
reasonableness. We do not share the defendant’s interpretation of the trial
court’s order. See State v. Kay, 162 N.H. 237, 242 (2011) (“Our interpretation
of a trial court order is a question of law, which we review de novo.”). Contrary
to the defendant’s assertions, the trial court did not rest its ineffective
assistance analysis upon a determination of his subjective satisfaction, at the
time of trial, with his attorneys. Rather, the trial court cited and applied the
correct legal standard, see Collins, 166 N.H. at 212-13, determining that the
degree to which the defendant’s trial attorneys prepared him to testify at trial,
should he have decided to do so, was objectively reasonable under the
circumstances. To the extent that the defendant implies that his trial
attorneys’ performance fell below an objective standard of reasonableness
because they advised him not to testify, he fails to develop that argument
sufficiently for our review. See State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 49 (2003).
Accordingly, we decline to address it. See id.
The defendant next contends that his trial attorneys were ineffective for
failing to introduce certain testimony and other evidence to rebut the State’s
case. Specifically, the defendant faults his trial attorneys for failing to
3