THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2021-0547, State of New Hampshire v.
Christopher Harrington, the court on November 14, 2023,
issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The
defendant, Christopher Harrington, appeals his convictions, following a jury
trial in the Superior Court (Wageling, J.), on three counts of aggravated
felonious sexual assault, RSA 632-A:2 I(l), III (2016), and one count of felonious
sexual assault, RSA 632-A:3, III(a)(1) (Supp. 2022). He argues that the trial
court erred when it granted the State’s pretrial motion to admit evidence of
uncharged conduct, see N.H. R. Ev. 404(b), and, in the alternative, that he was
denied effective assistance of counsel. We conclude that the trial court erred
by granting the State’s pretrial motion to admit evidence of certain uncharged
conduct and that this error was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
Accordingly, we reverse and remand.
The record supports the following facts. The complainant and her
mother were close friends of the defendant, his wife, and their child. When the
complainant was four years old, she and her mother resided for eight months
with the defendant and his family at the defendant’s home. After she and her
mother moved to their own residence, the complainant continued to spend
nights and weekends at the defendant’s home.
In October 2018, when the complainant was twelve years old, she told a
friend that she had been sexually assaulted. The friend told one of the
complainant’s teachers what the complainant had said to her. The teacher told
the complainant that the teacher was required to report this to the school
resource officer, which she did the next day. Shortly thereafter, the
complainant was interviewed at a Child Advocacy Center (CAC).
During the CAC interview, the complainant stated that she had been
sexually assaulted repeatedly by the defendant when she was between the ages
of nine and eleven. She recounted that, on several occasions when she visited
the defendant’s home, he fondled, groped, and digitally penetrated her. She
said that, when she was eleven years old, the assaults stopped for
approximately one year. However, she stated that there was an additional
incident that occurred in autumn of 2018, shortly before the CAC interview:
the complainant and the defendant had attended the funeral of the defendant’s
stepfather in Massachusetts. She told the interviewer that the defendant
approached her at the funeral and gave her a hug and, in so doing, he touched
her buttocks and breast.
In May 2019, a grand jury indicted the defendant on three counts of
aggravated felonious sexual assault (AFSA), RSA 632-A:2, I(l), III, and three
charges of felonious sexual assault (FSA), RSA 632-A:3, III(a)(1), for assaults
that the complainant alleged occurred within the defendant’s home. The State
filed no charges related to the defendant’s conduct at his stepfather’s funeral
(“the funeral incident”).
Before trial, the State filed a motion in limine to admit evidence regarding
the funeral incident. At a hearing on the motion, the State argued that this
evidence was admissible under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 404(b). It
sought to introduce testimony about the funeral incident to explain to the jury
why the complainant disclosed the assaults one year after the last charged
assault occurred. The defense argued that evidence of the funeral incident was
inadmissible because it did not satisfy the requirements of Rule 404(b). The
trial court granted the State’s motion, and the complainant testified about the
funeral incident at trial without further objection.
Following the four-day jury trial, the jury convicted the defendant on the
three AFSA counts and one count of FSA, acquitting him on the other two FSA
counts. This appeal followed.
The defendant raises two issues on appeal: first, whether the trial court
erred when it granted the State’s pretrial motion to admit evidence of
uncharged conduct, see N.H. R. Ev. 404(b); and second, whether the
defendant’s trial counsel was ineffective for failing to move to strike the
complainant’s trial testimony about the funeral incident and to move for a
mistrial. We begin by addressing the trial court’s decision to grant the State’s
pretrial motion. Rule 404(b) provides:
(b) Other Crimes, Wrongs, or Acts.—
(1) Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to
prove the character of a person in order to show that the person
acted in conformity therewith. It may, however, be admissible for
other purposes, such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent,
preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, or absence of mistake or
accident.
(2) Evidence of other crimes, wrongs or acts is admissible under this
subsection only if:
2
(A) it is relevant for a purpose other than proving the person’s
character or disposition;
(B) there is clear proof, meaning that there is sufficient evidence to
support a finding by the fact-finder that the other crimes, wrongs
or acts occurred and that the person committed them; and
(C) the probative value of the evidence is not substantially
outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice.
N.H. R. Ev. 404(b). The State bears the burden of demonstrating the
admissibility of uncharged conduct under Rule 404(b). State v. Nightingale,
160 N.H. 569, 574 (2010).
On appeal, the defendant argues that, because the evidence does not
satisfy any of the three prongs of Rule 404(b)(2), the trial court erred in ruling
that the evidence of the funeral incident was admissible. The defendant also
argues that, at a minimum, the trial court should have waited until trial to rule
on the State’s motion. The State counters that the court sustainably exercised
its discretion when it concluded that the State had satisfied all three prongs of
Rule 404(b)(2) with respect to evidence of the funeral incident and ruled the
evidence admissible before trial. The State also argues that, even if the court
erred in admitting the evidence, any error was harmless beyond a reasonable
doubt.
We review the trial court’s ruling for an unsustainable exercise of
discretion and will reverse only if it was clearly untenable or unreasonable to
the prejudice of the defendant’s case. Id. at 573. Because the trial court ruled
before trial regarding the admissibility of the challenged evidence, we consider
only the arguments and evidence presented at the pretrial hearing. Id. “We so
limit our review to avoid the pitfall of justifying the court’s pretrial ruling upon
the defendant’s response at trial to the evidence.” Id. (quotation omitted). We
agree with the defendant that the trial court erred when it ruled that testimony
about the funeral incident was admissible at trial. Specifically, we conclude
that there was insufficient evidence presented at the pretrial hearing to support
the trial court’s conclusion that the third prong of Rule 404(b)(2) was satisfied
— that the probative value of the evidence of the funeral incident was not
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice. See N.H. R. Ev.
404(b)(2)(C).
To address the parties’ arguments regarding the third prong of Rule
404(b)(2), we must employ the same analysis that we employ under Rule 403.
State v. Roy, 167 N.H. 276, 288 (2015); see also N.H. R. Ev. 403 (“The court
may exclude relevant evidence if its probative value is substantially outweighed
by a danger of . . . unfair prejudice.”). We accord considerable deference to the
trial court’s determination in balancing prejudicial impact and probative worth.
See State v. Thomas, 168 N.H. 589, 602 (2016). “In determining whether a
3