THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Grafton
Nos. 2020-0216
2020-0352
TEJASINHA SIVALINGAM
v.
FRANCES NEWTON & a.
Argued: February 11, 2021
Opinion Issued: October 5, 2021
The Law Offices of Martin & Hipple, PLLC, of Concord (Stephen T. Martin
on the brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
Gallagher, Callahan & Gartrell, P.C., of Concord (Charles P. Bauer and
Anne E. Jenness on the brief and orally), for defendants Frances Newton and
Leigh Sharps.
Mitchell Municipal Group P.A., of Laconia (Laura Spector-Morgan on the
brief and orally), for defendant Town of Ashland Board of Selectmen.
DONOVAN, J. The plaintiff, Tejasinha Sivalingam, sued Frances Newton
and Leigh Sharps (Selectwomen) and the Town of Ashland Board of Selectmen
(Board), seeking the Selectwomen’s dismissal from and injunctive relief against
the Board. The plaintiff alleged that, after the Board discussed in nonpublic
session a complaint that he had submitted, information relating to that
complaint was wrongfully disclosed in public session. The Superior Court
(MacLeod, J.) granted the Selectwomen summary judgment, concluding that
they had not improperly disclosed any information, but denied their motions
for judgment on the pleadings and attorney’s fees. The court also denied the
Board’s motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim, determining that the
Board was required to notify the plaintiff of the nonpublic session. Relying
upon Superior Court Rule 46(c), the court then severed the adjudicated claim
against the Selectwomen from the plaintiff’s pending claim against the Board.
In these consolidated appeals, the plaintiff appeals the superior court’s grant of
summary judgment in favor of the Selectwomen; the Selectwomen cross-
appeal, arguing that the court erred by denying their motions for judgment on
the pleadings and attorney’s fees; and the Board, on an interlocutory basis
pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 8, appeals the denial of its motion to dismiss.
For the reasons that follow, we affirm the superior court’s decision denying the
Selectwomen attorney’s fees. However, we reverse its decisions denying the
Selectwomen’s motion for judgment on the pleadings and the Board’s motion to
dismiss.
I. Facts
The following facts are undisputed or supported by the record. The
plaintiff was a selectman on the Board from March 2017 until January 2018.
The Selectwomen served on the Board at all relevant times. On May 12, 2018,
the plaintiff submitted to the Board a “Citizen Inquiry” form, a method
developed by the Board to address public grievances, in which he complained
that, during his tenure on the Board, the Selectwomen treated him with
“derision” following an interview that he conducted with a candidate for the
Ashland zoning board. His complaint requested “a public apology on
television” from the Selectwomen and that the Board “vote to formally censure”
them.
On June 4, 2018, the Board unanimously voted to enter nonpublic
session to discuss matters which “would likely affect adversely the reputation
of any person” if discussed in public. See RSA 91-A:3, II(c) (2013). The
minutes of the nonpublic session reveal that the Board discussed “[h]ow to deal
with complaints from [the plaintiff and] others” and decided that, moving
forward, it would “not address personal attacks in public.” Determining that
the divulgence of the nonpublic session minutes and decisions reached in
nonpublic session would likely “[a]ffect adversely the reputation of any person
other than a” Board member, the Board unanimously voted to seal the minutes
of the nonpublic session.1 See RSA 91-A:3, III (Supp. 2020). After reentering
1 Based upon the record, it is unclear whether the Board’s vote to seal the minutes and decisions
reached in nonpublic session itself occurred in nonpublic session. We observe that RSA 91-A:3,
III requires that such a vote be “taken in public session.” Because neither party raised the issue,
2
public session, the town administrator read the plaintiff’s Citizen Inquiry form
and a portion of a response from the Town of Ashland’s legal counsel, and
Selectwoman Newton noted that the Board had decided to no longer address
criticisms of the Board in public.
On June 18, 2018, in public session, a majority of the Board agreed to
eliminate the Citizen Inquiry form. According to the plaintiff, between June 11,
2018 and July 3, 2018, he submitted another Citizen Inquiry form and various
Right-to-Know Law requests seeking information as to what transpired during
the nonpublic session at the June 4 meeting. See RSA ch. 91-A (2013 & Supp.
2020). On August 6, 2018, in response to the plaintiff’s requests, the Board
unanimously voted to unseal the minutes from the June 4 nonpublic session.
The plaintiff thereafter filed suit against the Selectwomen and the Board.
He sought the dismissal of the Selectwomen from the Board, arguing that they
violated their oaths of office by causing information to be divulged at the June
4 meeting that the Board had previously voted to withhold and that “adversely
affected [his] relationships with members of the community.” See RSA 42:1-a,
II(a) (2012). He also requested, in part, that the trial court enjoin the Board
from entering nonpublic session to discuss a person without providing notice of
its intent to do so. See RSA 91-A:3, II(c). After submitting a response, the
Selectwomen filed a motion for judgment on the pleadings, arguing that the
information disclosed during the June 4 public session was not harmful to the
plaintiff’s reputation. Before the trial court ruled on that motion, the
Selectwomen filed a motion for summary judgment. Attached to the motion for
summary judgment were affidavits from the Selectwomen and Kathleen
DeWolfe, who was a selectwoman in June 2018, averring that at the June 4
meeting they believed that the plaintiff’s Citizen Inquiry form, a portion of the
town counsel’s response, and the Board’s decision to change the Citizen
Inquiry process could be disclosed in public session. See RSA 91-A:3, III.
The trial court denied the Selectwomen’s motion for judgment on the
pleadings, but granted summary judgment in their favor, reasoning that they
did not improperly divulge any information and therefore did not violate their
oaths of office. The Selectwomen filed a motion for attorney’s fees, which the
trial court denied. Separately, the Board filed a motion to dismiss for failure to
state a claim, which the trial court denied. These appeals followed.
II. Discussion
A. The Selectwomen’s Motion for Judgment on the Pleadings
We begin by addressing the Selectwomen’s argument that the trial court
erred by denying their motion for judgment on the pleadings. In general, a
we do not address it.
3
motion seeking judgment based solely on the pleadings is in the nature of a
motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim upon which relief may be granted.
LaChance v. U.S. Smokeless Tobacco Co., 156 N.H. 88, 93 (2007). In reviewing
a motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim, we assume the truth of the facts
alleged by the plaintiff and construe all reasonable inferences in the light most
favorable to the plaintiff. Id. We need not, however, assume the truth of
statements in the plaintiff’s pleadings that are conclusions of law. Clark v.
N.H. Dep’t of Emp’t Sec., 171 N.H. 639, 645 (2019). We then engage in a
threshold inquiry that tests the facts in the complaint against the applicable
law. Id. In conducting this inquiry, we may consider documents attached to
the plaintiff’s pleadings, documents the authenticity of which are not disputed
by the parties, official public records, or documents sufficiently referred to in
the complaint. Automated Transactions v. Am. Bankers Ass’n, 172 N.H. 528,
532 (2019). If the alleged facts do not constitute a basis for legal relief, we will
reverse the denial of the motion for judgment on the pleadings. See LaChance,
156 N.H. at 93.
The Selectwomen argue that the plaintiff failed to adequately allege that
the disclosed information would adversely affect his reputation as required to
state a claim under RSA 42:1-a, II(a). We agree.
Resolving the Selectwomen’s argument requires that we interpret RSA
42:1-a’s language. Statutory interpretation presents a question of law, which
we review de novo. Clark, 171 N.H. at 650. In matters of statutory
interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the intent of the legislature as
expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole. Id. at 650-51. We
first look to the language of the statute itself and, if possible, construe that
language according to its plain and ordinary meaning. Id. at 651. We interpret
legislative intent from the statute as written, and will not consider what the
legislature might have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit
to include. Id. When statutory language is plain and unambiguous, we need
not look beyond the statute itself for additional evidence of legislative intent.
Id.
We begin with the language of the statute. As relevant here, RSA 42:1
(2012) provides that any town officer who violates his or her oath of office “shall
be . . . dismissed from the office involved.” RSA 42:1-a allows the superior
court to entertain petitions to dismiss a town officer for violating the oath. RSA
42:1-a, I (2012). The statute further provides, in relevant part:
[I]t shall be considered a violation of a town officer’s oath for the
officer to divulge to the public any information which that officer
learned by virtue of his official position, or in the course of his
official duties, if:
4
(a) A public body properly voted to withhold that information
from the public by a vote of 2/3, as required by RSA 91-A:3, III,
and if divulgence of such information . . . would adversely affect
the reputation of some person other than a member of the public
body . . . .
RSA 42:1-a, II(a).
Accordingly, to state a claim under RSA 42:1-a, II(a) in this case, the
plaintiff was required to plead that: (1) the Selectwomen divulged information
to the public which they learned by virtue of their official positions or in the
course of their official duties;2 (2) the Board “properly voted to withhold that
information from the public by a vote of 2/3, as required by RSA 91-A:3, III”;3
and (3) “divulgence of such information would . . . adversely affect the
reputation” of the plaintiff. Id. For purposes of this appeal, we will assume,
without deciding, that the plaintiff sufficiently pled the first two requirements.
We therefore focus our analysis upon whether the plaintiff adequately alleged
that the information divulged would adversely affect his reputation. See id.
Because “adversely” is not defined for purposes of RSA 42:1-a, we turn to
the dictionary for guidance. See In re J.P., 173 N.H. 453, 463 (2020). The
American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language defines “adverse” as
“[c]ontrary to one’s interests” or “harmful or unfavorable.” American Heritage
Dictionary of the English Language 25 (5th ed. 2011). The New Oxford
American Dictionary similarly defines “adverse” as “harmful” or “unfavorable.”
New Oxford American Dictionary 24 (3d ed. 2010). Thus, divulged information
“would adversely affect” the plaintiff’s reputation if the information would be
harmful or unfavorable to his reputation. RSA 42:1-a, II(a).
2 Neither the Selectwomen, in their motion for judgment on the pleadings, nor the trial court, in its
decision on that motion, expressly addressed whether the Selectwomen “divulged” information
under RSA 42:1-a, II. The plaintiff’s complaint alleges, based “upon information and belief,” that
the Selectwomen “caused the information they discussed to be divulged to the public,” but that
the town administrator “publicly divulged the matters that the [Board] discussed in the non-public
session.” Because neither the parties nor the trial court expressly raised the issue, we will
assume, without deciding, that the plaintiff sufficiently alleged that the Selectwomen divulged
information under RSA 42:1-a, II.
3 RSA 91-A:3, III does not explicitly state that a recorded vote is required before previously
withheld information may be disclosed. The statute requires that a recorded vote occur before a
public body may withhold minutes and decisions reached in nonpublic session from public
inspection. RSA 91-A:3, III. However, the statute requires no similar vote before withheld
information may be disclosed. It provides only that the “information may be withheld until, in the
opinion of a majority of members, the aforesaid circumstances no longer apply.” Id. Although we
need not, and do not, decide whether principles of statutory interpretation compel a recorded vote
to occur before withheld information may be disclosed under the statute, and therefore whether
the Board complied with the statutory process in this case, the legislature may wish to examine
RSA 91-A:3, III and clarify whether a recorded vote is necessary.
5
In his complaint, the plaintiff alleges that the information disclosed at
the June 4 public session adversely affected his reputation, in part because it
“enable[d] the public to identify the subject of the meeting, the individual
discussed during that meeting, and connect [the plaintiff’s] name to the
[Board’s] policy changes, which impacted the entire public.” During the public
session at the June 4 meeting, the town administrator read the plaintiff’s
Citizen Inquiry and a portion of the town counsel’s response, and Selectwoman
Newton noted the Board’s “decision to no longer address criticisms of the Board
. . . in public.”
By reading the plaintiff’s Citizen Inquiry, the Board merely revealed that
he took issue with the Selectwomen’s treatment of him and voiced his
grievance to the Board. We conclude that the disclosure of this information is
insufficient, as a matter of law, to be harmful or unfavorable to a person’s
reputation, particularly given the facts and circumstances in this case. The
plaintiff’s complaint implies that, given the opportunity, he would have
requested an open meeting such that the Board’s discussion of his Citizen
Inquiry would have occurred in public session, revealing the nature of his
Citizen Inquiry, if not its substance. Similarly, had the Board or Selectwomen
acceded to the plaintiff’s demands set forth in his Citizen Inquiry — that the
Board censure the Selectwomen and the Selectwomen issue the plaintiff a
televised apology — the fact that the plaintiff submitted the Citizen Inquiry and
the Citizen Inquiry’s contents would have become public knowledge. We
cannot conclude that the disclosed information, which the plaintiff himself took
actions to make public, would be harmful or unfavorable to his reputation
under RSA 42:1-a, II(a).
Furthermore, that the Board sought, received, and publicly disclosed the
town counsel’s advice regarding the plaintiff’s Citizen Inquiry demonstrates
that the Board took the plaintiff’s concerns seriously and sought to
appropriately and adequately address them. The June 4 public session
minutes reveal that the town administrator explained that the town counsel’s
“main point was that [the Selectwomen] strongly disagreed with [the plaintiff]
which is not formal censure and therefore does not warrant a public apology.”
Disclosing that the Board ensured the plaintiff’s complaint was properly
responded to by seeking legal advice would not be harmful or unfavorable to
the plaintiff’s reputation. Accordingly, we conclude that public disclosure of
the plaintiff’s own words and the town counsel’s response to his demands did
not adversely affect the plaintiff’s reputation. RSA 42:1-a, II(a); cf. Touma v. St.
Mary’s Bank, 142 N.H. 762, 765 (1998) (concluding, in the defamation context,
that a foreclosure notice improperly implying that the plaintiff was suffering
“financial problems serious enough to warrant foreclosure would injure the
plaintiff’s reputation in the community”).
Nor are we persuaded by the plaintiff’s conclusory allegation that his
reputation was adversely affected because the Selectwomen divulged the
6
information in a manner “that would enable the public to . . . connect [his]
name to the [Board’s] policy changes, which impacted the entire public.” At the
June 4 meeting at which the plaintiff’s Citizen Inquiry was read, Selectwoman
Newton simply announced the Board’s decision to no longer publicly address
criticisms directed at the Board, while also noting that the Board would
“handle [such criticisms] in another way.” The minutes of the June 18
meeting, at which the Board actually decided to eliminate the Citizen Inquiry
process, do not reveal that the Board mentioned the plaintiff’s name at all in
connection with its decision. Thus, the plaintiff’s identity was not linked to the
Board’s conclusion to eliminate the Citizen Inquiry process.
Although the Board ultimately decided to eliminate the Citizen Inquiry
process, other means by which citizens could lodge grievances with the Board
remained available to the public. Selectwoman Sharps explained at the June
18 meeting that these avenues included “contact[ing] the Town Administrator,
fil[ing] a Right-to-Know [Law] request, or ask[ing] to be on the agenda and
attend[ing] a meeting.” Accordingly, even assuming that the basis for the
Board’s policy change could be connected to the plaintiff, the change had no
impact on the public’s ability to lodge complaints with the Board. Any
association between the policy change and the plaintiff’s identity, therefore,
would not be harmful or unfavorable to his reputation.
The plaintiff also suggests that, because the Board voted to seal the
minutes of the nonpublic session under RSA 91-A:3, III, divulgence of the
information necessarily violated RSA 42:1-a, II(a). However, the Board’s
decision to withhold information from public inspection under RSA 91-A:3, III
because it believed that such information “likely would affect adversely” a
person’s reputation has no bearing on our analysis of whether information
disclosed was capable, as a matter of law, of adversely affecting a person’s
reputation under RSA 42:1-a, II(a). See Clark, 171 N.H. at 650-51 (explaining
that in matters of statutory interpretation, this court is the “final arbiter[]” of
the legislature’s intent); see also Trustees of Dartmouth Coll. v. Town of
Hanover, 171 N.H. 497, 508 (2018) (observing that the court is not bound by a
town planning board’s interpretation of the board’s own regulations). Thus,
public bodies should continue to vote to withhold information under RSA 91-
A:3, III when warranted. Nonetheless, the scope of our review is not bound by
a public body’s incorrect conclusion that disclosure of certain information
would likely harm an individual’s reputation.
In sum, because we conclude that the information disclosed did not
adversely affect the plaintiff’s reputation, he failed to state a claim under RSA
42:1-a, II(a). The Selectwomen’s motion for judgment on the pleadings
therefore should have been granted.
7
B. The Selectwomen’s Motion for Attorney’s Fees
We now turn to the Selectwomen’s argument that the trial court erred by
denying their motion for attorney’s fees. We review the trial court’s decision
concerning attorney’s fees for an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Fat
Bullies Farm, LLC v. Devenport, 170 N.H. 17, 30 (2017). To warrant reversal,
the discretion must have been exercised for reasons clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of the Selectwomen. Id. In evaluating the trial
court’s ruling on attorney’s fees, we give “tremendous deference” to its decision
on whether to award fees. Id. (quotation omitted).
The general rule in New Hampshire is that parties pay their own
attorney’s fees. Id. at 29. However, there exist two judicially-created
exceptions to this rule: the bad faith litigation and substantial benefit theories.
Id. at 30. The Selectwomen argue that they are entitled to attorney’s fees
under either theory.
Attorney’s fees may be awarded under the bad faith litigation theory
against a party who has acted in bad faith, vexatiously, wantonly, or for
oppressive reasons, when the party’s conduct can be characterized as
unreasonably obdurate or obstinate, and when it should have been
unnecessary for the prevailing party to have brought the action. Id. The
purpose in awarding attorney’s fees against a party who has acted in bad faith
is to do justice, vindicate rights, and discourage frivolous lawsuits. Id.
In support of their argument that the plaintiff acted in bad faith, the
Selectwomen allege that the plaintiff sought to remove them from office through
the electoral process, singled them out for litigation without bringing suit
against the other Board members who were involved with the June 4
disclosure, and engaged in “substantial discovery,” including “lengthy
interrogatories,” “extensive” document production requests, and “protracted
depositions.” The trial court, however, after engaging in a “dispassionate
review of the evidence,” found that “[a]ll of the parties have litigated this case
vigorously” and concluded that insufficient grounds existed to award attorney’s
fees under the bad faith litigation theory. In light of the record, which includes
only a portion of the parties’ interrogatories, document production requests,
and depositions, and the deference we accord trial courts in deciding whether
to award fees, we cannot conclude that the trial court acted unreasonably by
denying the Selectwomen attorney’s fees under the bad faith litigation theory.
See Grenier v. Barclay Square Commercial Condo. Owners’ Assoc., 150 N.H.
111, 118 (2003) (affirming trial court’s decision not to grant fees under the bad
faith litigation theory because the record supported the trial court’s decision).
We observe that the plaintiff did not sue the town administrator or any of
the other three Board members who were present at the meetings with which
the plaintiff takes issue and on which his action is based. Although bringing
8
suit solely against the two Selectwomen suggests that animus may have
motivated this litigation, our prior cases make clear that “[a] plaintiff’s motive
in bringing an action . . . does not determine whether an action is frivolous”
and that simply “bear[ing] the opposition ill will” provides an insufficient basis
upon which to award fees against a party. Kukene v. Genualdo, 145 N.H. 1, 6
(2000).
The Selectwomen next argue that the substantial benefit theory entitles
them to attorney’s fees. Under the substantial benefit theory, attorney’s fees
may be awarded when a litigant’s action bestows a substantial benefit not only
on the party who litigated the action, but on the public as well. See Jesurum v.
WBTSCC Ltd. P’ship, 169 N.H. 469, 482 (2016); Bedard v. Town of Alexandria,
159 N.H. 740, 744 (2010).
We first recognized the substantial benefit theory in Silva v. Botsch, 121
N.H. 1041 (1981). There, we found it appropriate to award fees to a selectman
who “expended his own funds” to successfully bring an action against other
select board members who attempted to remove him from a town planning
board. Id. at 1042-43. Likening the case to a situation in which a trustee is
entitled to fees for successfully litigating for the benefit of the trust as a whole,
we reasoned that fees were justified because the selectman’s actions “conferred
a ‘substantial benefit’ on the” town and State. Id. at 1043. We have since
applied the theory to other instances in which a public official has successfully
prevented his or her removal from office. See Town of Littleton v. Taylor, 138
N.H. 419, 421, 424-25 (1994) (requiring a town to pay fees, under the
substantial benefit theory, to a selectwoman who successfully defended against
an action to declare her simultaneous employment as a town librarian and
service as a selectwoman illegal); Foster v. Town of Hudson, 122 N.H. 150, 152
(1982) (requiring a town to pay fees, under the substantial benefit theory, to a
police chief who successfully challenged an attempt to oust him from office).
Although the Selectwomen have successfully defended against an
attempt to remove them from public office, we have rejected previous entreaties
to apply the substantial benefit theory as a basis for awarding fees to
government bodies or against private individuals. See Jesurum, 169 N.H. at
482-83; Bedard, 159 N.H. at 746. In Bedard, 159 N.H. at 746, we explained
that “[a] governmental entity’s responsibilities include protection of the public
interest, and therefore, the award of attorney’s fees for successfully meeting
this responsibility is neither necessary nor warranted.” Id. Accordingly, we
declined to award fees under the theory to a town that successfully defended a
declaratory property action brought by individual property owners. Id. at 741-
42, 746. In Jesurum, 169 N.H. at 473-74, 482-83, an action between two
private parties, we refused to grant fees under the theory to a plaintiff who won
a judgment declaring that both he and the public had a prescriptive easement
9
over land owned by the defendant trust, observing that “such an award would
be a substantial departure from our case law, as we generally do not grant fees
against a private litigant absent a showing of bad faith.”
Thus, although we agree that the Town of Ashland’s residents benefited
from the Selectwomen’s successful defense of the plaintiff’s attempt to remove
them from public office, see Silva, 121 N.H. at 1043, it does not follow that they
are entitled to fees under the substantial benefit theory. The Selectwomen seek
to invoke the theory to justify an award of fees against a private party, an
outcome we rejected in Jesurum. See Jesurum, 169 N.H. at 483. As we
explained in Jesurum, “the cases in which attorney’s fees have been imposed
against a losing party under a public benefit theory generally involve situations
in which the party bearing the fees is able to spread such costs amongst the
persons who receive the benefit of the litigation.” Id.; see, e.g., Claremont
School Dist. v. Governor (Costs and Attorney’s Fees), 144 N.H. 590, 596, 598
(1999) (awarding fees under the substantial benefit theory to a group of
plaintiffs who sued the State and successfully established a constitutional right
to an adequate education because the plaintiffs “conferred a significant benefit
upon the general public, and it is thus the general public that would have had
to pay the fees incurred if the general public had brought the suit”).
The plaintiff sued the Selectwomen in their official capacities and,
according to the Selectwomen, the Town of Ashland paid for their defense.
Thus, because the public, which has benefited from the Selectwomen’s defense,
has already funded that defense, the rationale underlying the substantial
benefit theory is already fulfilled. Cf. Silva, 121 N.H. at 1042-43 (awarding fees
to a selectman who used his own funds to successfully prevent his removal
from public office). Furthermore, because the Town of Ashland covered their
costs, granting the Selectwomen fees under the theory would essentially be
granting the town fees, which is “neither necessary nor warranted” when a
town satisfies its responsibility to protect the public interest. Bedard, 159 N.H.
at 746. Accordingly, we affirm the trial court’s conclusion that the
Selectwomen are not entitled to fees under either the bad faith litigation or
substantial benefit theories.
C. The Board’s Motion to Dismiss
Finally, we address the Board’s argument that the trial court erred by
denying its motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim. As explained above,
in reviewing a trial court’s ruling on a motion to dismiss, we consider whether
the allegations in the pleadings are reasonably susceptible of a construction
that would permit recovery. Clark, 171 N.H. at 645. We assume the
allegations in the plaintiff’s pleadings to be true and construe all reasonable
inferences in the light most favorable to him. Id. We will reverse the trial
court’s denial of a motion to dismiss if the facts pled do not provide a basis for
legal relief. See id.
10
In his complaint, the plaintiff alleges that, before the Board entered
nonpublic session, he was entitled to some form of notice that the Board
intended to discuss matters which it believed would likely adversely affect his
reputation, so that he could request an open meeting. See RSA 91-A:3, II(c).
The Board asserted in its motion to dismiss that RSA 91-A:3, II(c) does not
impose upon it the obligation to provide such