THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2021-0383, Joy Street, LLC v. Town of
Chesterfield, the court on May 2, 2023, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The plaintiff, Joy Street, LLC, appeals a decision of the
Superior Court (Ruoff, J.) affirming a decision of the Town of Chesterfield’s
Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA). We affirm.
I
The following facts are drawn from the certified record or are otherwise
supported by the record. This case concerns a deck and walkways constructed
out of “permeable pavers” located within the Chesterfield residential and
Spofford Lake zoning districts. In April 2019, the plaintiff received a permit
from the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services (NHDES) to
replace 504 square feet of deck and walkway with permeable pavers.
Thereafter, the plaintiff installed additional permeable pavers, increasing the
total square footage of pavers on the property to 2,071 square feet. NHDES
inspected the installation on October 15, 2019, and on November 21, 2019,
granted a permit allowing the plaintiff to “retain impacts associated with the
installation of 2,071 square feet of pervious permeable patios and walkways.”
On October 17, 2019, the Town of Chesterfield (the Town) notified the
plaintiff that, under the relevant zoning ordinances, the pavers were
impermeable structures which, together with the existing structures on the lot,
exceeded the allowed impervious lot coverage. On November 7, 2019, the Town
issued a “Notice of Violation and Cease and Desist Order” for violation of the
Chesterfield Zoning Ordinance (CZO), notifying the plaintiff that it would be
subject to statutory fines for each day that “violations continue.” Specifically,
the Notice advised that only the initial 504 square feet of pavers were permitted
and all others needed to be removed as violative of the 20% coverage limitation
under CZO 203.4. The plaintiff promptly filed an “Appeal From an
Administrative Decision” seeking to have the November 7 decision reversed.
The ZBA held a hearing to review the plaintiff’s appeal on February 18,
2020. During the hearing, the ZBA heard testimony on the nature of the
pavers. There was also discussion about the maintenance and efficacy of the
product over its 25-year lifespan. The ZBA also discussed the definition of
“impermeable” under the CZO, the reason that pavers like the ones at issue do
not fall under that definition, and the proper process for receiving permitting
from the Town.
The ZBA continued the hearing to its May 12, 2020 meeting. The scope
of the May hearing was limited to whether the definition of “impervious” under
the Shoreland Water Quality Protection Act (Shoreland Protection Act), RSA ch.
483-B (2013), or the CZO controlled. There was no dispute that under the CZO
the pavers are considered “impermeable coverage” and that the construction
brought the total impermeable coverage over the “20% of the area of the lot”
allowed by the ordinance. Thereafter, the ZBA continued the hearing to June
11, 2020. Most of the discussion during the June 11 hearing concerned
whether the definition in the Shoreland Protection Act or the CZO controlled
under the circumstances. After some discussion about the evidence presented
during the three hearings, the ZBA unanimously voted to deny the plaintiff’s
appeal. The plaintiff moved for rehearing, which was denied.
The plaintiff appealed the ZBA’s decision to the superior court. The trial
court first addressed whether the definition of “impermeable” contained in RSA
chapter 483-B preempts the definition contained in the CZO and, therefore,
controls. The court concluded that RSA chapter 483-B does not preempt the
CZO because RSA 483-B:3, II expressly “allows stricter local laws to control
over state laws,” and RSA 483-B:8 “encourages towns to ‘adopt land use
control ordinances [relative] to all protected shorelands which are more
stringent than the minimum standards [contained] in [RSA chapter 483-B].’”
(Quoting RSA 483-B:8, I.) As a result, the trial court determined that the ZBA
was correct in concluding that the more stringent definition of “impermeable”
under the ordinance applied. It ultimately affirmed the decision of the ZBA,
finding that the plaintiff’s “pavers were clearly impermeable under [CZO] 203.6
and thus the lot exceeded the total allowable impermeable coverage.” This
appeal followed.
II
Our review in zoning cases is limited. Dietz v. Town of Tuftonboro, 171
N.H. 614, 618 (2019). The party seeking to set aside the ZBA’s decision bears
the burden of proof on appeal to the trial court. Id. The factual findings of the
ZBA are deemed prima facie lawful and reasonable, and will not be set aside by
the trial court absent errors of law, unless the court is persuaded, based upon
a balance of probabilities, on the evidence before it that the ZBA’s decision is
unreasonable. Id. The trial court’s review is not to determine whether it agrees
with the ZBA’s findings, but to determine whether there is evidence upon which
they could have been reasonably based. Id. The trial court reviews the ZBA’s
statutory interpretation de novo. Id. We will uphold the trial court’s decision
on appeal unless it is not supported by the evidence or is legally erroneous. Id.
We review the trial court’s statutory interpretation de novo. Id.
2
III
The present dispute concerns the relationship between RSA chapter 483-
B and CZO 203.6.1 Resolution of this dispute requires us to engage both in
statutory interpretation and the interpretation of a zoning ordinance. The
interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de novo. Avery
v. Comm’r, N.H. Dep’t of Corr., 173 N.H. 726, 733 (2020). In matters of
statutory interpretation, we first look to the language of the statute itself, and,
if possible, construe that language according to its plain and ordinary meaning.
Id. We interpret the statute as written and will not consider what the
legislature might have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit
to include. Id. We construe all parts of a statute together to effectuate its
overall purpose and to avoid an absurd or unjust result. Id. We do not
consider words and phrases in isolation, but rather within the context of the
statute as a whole, which enables us to better discern the legislature’s intent in
light of the policy or purpose sought to be advanced by the statutory scheme.
Id. Absent an ambiguity, we will not look beyond the language of the statute.
Id.
Likewise, the interpretation of a zoning ordinance is a question of law
that we review de novo. Batchelder v. Town of Plymouth Zoning Bd. of
Adjustment, 160 N.H. 253, 256 (2010). The traditional rules of statutory
interpretation generally govern our review. Id. Thus, the words and phrases of
an ordinance should be construed according to the common and approved
usage of the language. Id. When the language of an ordinance is plain and
unambiguous, we need not look beyond the ordinance itself for further
indications of legislative intent. Id. Moreover, we will not guess what the
drafters of the ordinance might have intended, or add words that they did not
see fit to include. Id. at 256-57. We determine the meaning of a zoning
ordinance from its construction as a whole, not by construing isolated words or
phrases. Id. at 257.
The plaintiff asserts that, although it “does not now contend or ever
contended that the enactment of RSA 483-B preempted the impervious or
impermeable coverage issue,” the zoning ordinance “expressly included wording
that preempts those provisions in its ordinance which conflict with the
provisions of RSA 483-B.” The plaintiff’s argument relies on language in CZO
203.6, which states in relevant part:
1 The parties have not provided a copy of the zoning ordinance for our review; nonetheless, they
do not dispute that the language articulated by the trial court is accurate. For this reason, we
rely on the ordinance language provided by the trial court wherever applicable.
3