THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2021-0282, In the Matter of Mary Braun and
Terry Braun, the court on August 11, 2022, issued the following
order:
The respondent’s motion to expand the record is denied for the reasons
stated in the petitioner’s objection, and because the evidence he seeks to admit
was not presented to the trial court. See Sup. Ct. R. 13; Lake v. Sullivan, 145
N.H. 713, 717 (2001) (“On appeal, we consider only evidence and documents
presented to the trial court.”).
Having considered the briefs and record submitted on appeal, we conclude
that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1). The
respondent, Terry Braun, appeals an order of the Circuit Court (LeFrancois, J.),
following a hearing, denying his petition to modify the property distribution and
alimony award set forth in the parties’ 2015 mediated final divorce decree. He
argues primarily that the trial court erred by denying his petition because the
petitioner filed a fraudulent financial affidavit undervaluing her retirement
accounts, and failed to correct that information. We affirm.
We review the trial court’s order on the petition to modify the final property
distribution and alimony award for an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See
In the Matter of Arvenitis & Arvenitis, 152 N.H. 653, 654 (2005); In the Matter of
Birmingham & Birmingham, 154 N.H. 51, 57 (2006). We will affirm the findings
and rulings of the trial court unless they are unsupported by the evidence or are
legally erroneous. See Shafmaster v. Shafmaster, 138 N.H. 460, 464 (1994).
“Property distributions or stipulations decreed by a court are not retained under
the continuing jurisdiction of the court and will not be modified unless the
complaining party shows that the distribution is invalid due to fraud, undue
influence, deceit, misrepresentation, or mutual mistake.” Id. “To obtain an order
modifying a support obligation, a party must show that a substantial change in
circumstances has arisen since the initial award, making the current support
amount either improper or unfair.” Laflamme v. Laflamme, 144 N.H. 524, 527
(1999) (quotation omitted). “Changes to a party’s condition that are both
anticipated and foreseeable at the time of the decree cannot rise to the level of a
substantial change in circumstances sufficient to warrant modification of an
alimony award.” Id. at 528-29.
In this case, the parties signed a mediated final divorce decree on May 1,
2015. On the same day, the petitioner submitted a financial affidavit, in which
she represented that one of her assets was a 401(k) retirement account valued at
$157,000 — the same value as that set forth in her prior financial affidavit,
submitted on January 28, 2015. As part of the distribution of marital property
set forth in the final decree, the respondent was awarded $55,000 of the
petitioner’s retirement account. He was also awarded alimony in the amount of
$700 per month for a period of approximately four years.
In March 2020, the respondent petitioned the trial court to modify the
property distribution and alimony award. In May 2021, following a hearing, the
trial court denied the respondent’s petition. In its order, the trial court agreed
with the respondent that, as of May 1, 2015, when the petitioner signed her
financial affidavit, the credible evidence established that the petitioner actually
had two retirement accounts — a 401(a) and a 403(b); not a 401(k) — and that
the value of those accounts totaled approximately $180,000, not $157,000.
Nonetheless, the trial court found that the respondent had failed to demonstrate
that the petitioner had intentionally deceived him — a necessary showing for the
trial court to modify the property distribution on the basis of fraud, see
Shafmaster, 138 N.H. at 464 (“Having alleged fraud, the plaintiff must prove that
the defendant made a fraudulent representation for the purpose or with the
intention of causing the plaintiff to act upon it.” (quotation omitted)). The trial
court explained that, rather than being fraudulent, the petitioner’s May 1, 2015
financial affidavit was inaccurate as a result of her confusion as to the type of
account(s) she held, and her “fail[ure] to update the amount when she signed the
. . . affidavit, which was based on a previously filed financial affidavit [that] had
used the September 2014 retirement account value.” The court noted that the
record contained an account statement for the period ending September 2014,
which listed the value as $157,308.43.
Additionally, the trial court found that there was evidence of substantial
communication between counsel for the parties, as well as the attorney who was
retained to prepare the qualified domestic relations order (QDRO), regarding the
type and value of the petitioner’s retirement accounts. Accordingly, the trial
court concluded:
The evidence does not establish that [the petitioner] deceived [the
respondent] about the value of her retirement account or that [the
respondent] solely relied on the value listed on the May 1, 2015
financial affidavit as the basis for agreeing to the property
settlement. As early as January 2015, [the petitioner] provided a
value of the retirement account of $182,459.89.[1] The evidence
established that the confusion about the retirement account was
clarified before the execution of the [QDRO]. Both parties and their
1 Here, the trial court is referring to a document provided by the petitioner as part of her initial
disclosures under Family Division Rule 1.25-A. The respondent argues that the document was
simply a transaction history, and does not support a finding that the value of the retirement
account(s) was $182,459.89. We will address this argument later in the order.
2
respective counsel reviewed and signed the proposed [QDRO] which
was approved by the court in February 2016.
Looking at the totality of the evidence, [the respondent] failed
to prove fraud and his petition to reopen the property distribution of
the final decree is denied.
Having found that the petitioner did not commit fraud, and finding no other
unanticipated or unforeseeable substantial change in circumstances, the trial
court also denied the respondent’s request to modify the alimony award. See
Laflamme, 144 N.H. at 527-29.
We first consider the respondent’s arguments that the trial court’s findings
are contrary to RSA 458:15-b, I (2018) — which he contends required him to
trust and rely on the value stated in the petitioner’s financial affidavit — and
Shafmaster — which he contends required the trial court to find that the
petitioner intentionally deceived him by allowing him to rely on financial
information which she knew was outdated and false. We are not persuaded.
Contrary to the respondent’s argument, Paragraph I of RSA 458:15-b does
not require him to trust and rely on the petitioner’s financial affidavit. Rather,
that provision — which provides, in pertinent part, that “[t]he financial affidavits
shall be accepted as prima facie evidence of the facts reflected therein unless
challenged by a party” — clearly contemplates, by its plain language, that a party
may challenge the accuracy of the other party’s financial affidavit. See RSA
458:15-b, I. In any event, the evidence demonstrates that the respondent did
not, in fact, trust the value stated in the petitioner’s affidavit because he himself
submitted two financial affidavits, in January 2015 and May 2015, asserting that
her retirement account was worth $170,000 to $180,000, not $157,000 as she
had disclosed.
With respect to Shafmaster, the respondent is correct that, in that case, we
held that the defendant, the husband, had fraudulently induced the plaintiff, his
wife, to sign a permanent stipulation for property distribution, because he had
“failed to provide the plaintiff with updated financial statements in violation of his
duty to do so,” thereby allowing her to rely on information “which he knew was
dated and false” when she signed the agreement. Shafmaster, 138 N.H. at 467.
However, key to our decision in that case was the considerable evidence of the
defendant’s intentional deception, and his “eleventh hour change of negotiating
posture from cooperation to combat.” Id. at 463, 465-67, 468 (noting the
defendant’s intentional withholding of his newest financial statement — showing
a significant increase in the value of his assets — and his “eleventh hour refusal
to warrant the reliability of his financial information”).
Unlike in Shafmaster, here, as the trial court found, the evidence in the
record does not establish that the petitioner intentionally misled the respondent
3