THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2021-0344, Martin Woodford and Jennifer
Woodford, Trustees of the Woodford Family Trust v. Bradford A.
Knight d/b/a Knight Custom Homes, the court on April 7,
2023, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The
defendant, Bradford A. Knight d/b/a/ Knight Custom Homes, appeals and the
plaintiffs, Martin Woodford and Jennifer Woodford, Trustees of the Woodford
Family Trust, cross-appeal rulings of the Superior Court (Anderson, J.)
resolving a dispute arising out of alleged deficiencies in a custom home that the
defendant constructed and sold to the plaintiffs. We affirm.
I. Background
The following facts are supported by the record. The plaintiffs and the
defendant executed a purchase and sale agreement in October 2015, whereby
the defendant agreed to construct a dwelling in the Victoria Ridge subdivision
in Amherst and sell it to the plaintiffs. After moving into the home in October
2016, the plaintiffs observed problems including gapping in the hardwood
floors, gapping of countertops, floor squeaking, loose grout in the tile flooring,
the propane tank pit filling with water, and problems with the HVAC system.
After the defendant disclaimed responsibility for the problems, the
plaintiffs hired an engineer, John Turner, to inspect the home. In his report,
Turner identified several areas of concern including issues with the
construction of the foundation and with the floor and roof framing. As a result,
the plaintiffs hired a structural engineer, Joaquin Denoya, to further
investigate the structural components of the home. In his initial report,
Denoya identified several potential concerns, recommended a full structural
analysis, and provided a rough cost of repair estimate. The plaintiffs also hired
an expert in flooring inspection, David Buss, to examine the flooring in the
home and he reported that the hardwood and tile flooring had been installed
improperly.
In June 2017, the plaintiffs sent a notice letter and notice of warranty
claims to the defendant pursuant to RSA chapter 359-G. In early July, the
plaintiffs hired a landscaper to cut down trees on the property. On July 13,
the defendant emailed the plaintiffs’ counsel with the heading “Cease and
Desist Order,” explaining that the plaintiffs’ tree-cutting activities had violated
the Victoria Ridge covenants and that he would be pursuing legal action, and
recommending that the plaintiffs start researching the cost of “sourcing 80+
trees, crane service etc.” The defendant also hired a structural engineer, Linda
McNair Perry, who authored a preliminary report reviewing the reports
submitted by Turner and Denoya, in which she disagreed with both experts’
conclusions, although she stated that she had not inspected the residence nor
done an independent structural analysis.
In early 2018, the plaintiffs had Denoya conduct a full structural
engineering analysis. In his report, Denoya analyzed the foundation, basement
columns, floor joists and beams, and the roof framing system, and prepared a
conceptual plan to be used to estimate the cost of repair. The plaintiffs also
had Turner investigate problems they were having with water pooling in the
backyard. Turner’s report detailed the reasons he believed the drainage system
needed to be replaced.
In May 2018, the plaintiffs sued the defendant for: (1) breach of
contract/implied warranty of workmanlike construction; (2) breach of
contract/express warranties; and (3) violation of the New Hampshire Consumer
Protection Act, RSA chapter 358-A (CPA). The defendant counterclaimed for
breach of the Victoria Ridge covenant pertaining to tree cutting. Following a
thirteen-day bench trial, which included a view, the court found in favor of the
plaintiffs on the breach of contract claims, in favor of the defendant on the CPA
claim, and in favor of the plaintiffs on the defendant’s counterclaim. Both
parties sought reconsideration. The trial court denied the defendant’s motion,
and granted in part and denied in part the plaintiffs’ motion. This appeal and
cross-appeal followed.
In reviewing a trial court’s decision rendered after a trial on the merits,
we will uphold the trial court’s factual findings and rulings unless they lack
evidentiary support or are legally erroneous. O’Malley v. Little, 170 N.H. 272,
275 (2017). We do not decide whether we would have ruled differently than the
trial court, but rather, whether a reasonable person could have reached the
same decision as the trial court based upon the same evidence. Id. Thus, we
defer to the trial court’s judgment on such issues as resolving conflicts in the
testimony, measuring the credibility of witnesses, and determining the weight
to be given evidence. Id. We review the trial court’s application of the law to
the facts de novo. Id.
II. Defendant’s Appeal
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred when it denied his
counterclaim alleging that the plaintiffs violated a Victoria Ridge covenant
2
when they cut down trees in 2017 without the required approval. The
covenant provided:
No “clear cutting” of the lots will be allowed. No more than 15
trees per year can be removed with out [sic] the developers [sic]
written consent. Replacement of any trees (above 15) cut will be at
the lot owners [sic] expense (same approx. size). It will be at the
developers [sic] sole discretion as to approvals on tree cutting.
In rejecting the defendant’s counterclaim, the trial court reasoned that
“‘provisions in a contract which require waiver or modification of contract
provisions to be in writing cannot completely restrict the parties’ ability to
orally alter the contract.’” (Quoting Prime Financial Group, Inc. v. Masters,
141 N.H. 33, 37 (1996)). Accordingly, the trial court determined that it “must
look to the intent of the parties to determine whether they intended to waive
the in-writing provision and give effect to their intent,” noting that the waiver of
an in-writing provision “‘may itself be implied from the conduct of the parties.’”
(Quoting id.).
The trial court found that in December 2015 the plaintiffs discussed with
the defendant which trees on the property needed to be cut to accommodate
the house and yard. Plaintiff Martin Woodford testified that when he and his
wife spoke with the defendant about the yard, the defendant recommended
that they cut the trees back to a rock wall at the edge of the property. At that
time, the plaintiffs chose not to cut all the way to the rock wall because they
did not want to be responsible for the landscaping that such an extensive
cutting would require. Martin testified that when they undertook tree removal
in July 2017, he believed they had the consent of the defendant based on the
defendant’s prior recommendation that they cut back to the rock wall.
The court found credible Martin’s testimony that the defendant “not only
agreed but encouraged” the plaintiffs to cut trees back to the rock wall, and it
found that the defendant did nothing to limit or revoke his consent in the
intervening years. The court did not find credible the defendant’s testimony in
which he denied that he encouraged the plaintiffs to cut back to the rock wall.
The court also noted that a promotional video for the Victoria Ridge subdivision
introduced at trial “reflect[ed] poorly” on the defendant’s credibility. In that
video the defendant, walking into the back yard of another lot in the
subdivision, which was a large grassy area bordered by a rock wall, states:
[W]e had a lot of trees growing all the way up and down around
here. It was a much closer area. They opted to have a really big
yard for their kids, so we actually took down about 200 trees all
the way around the outside of the yard to give a nice big yard.
Their plan is to put a pool in back here, and obviously, there’s
plenty of room for all that.
3