THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2021-0088, State of New Hampshire v. Kevin
Porter, the court on September 2, 2021, issued the following
order:
Having considered the memoranda of law and oral arguments of the
parties, we conclude that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case.
The defendant, Kevin Porter, is charged with criminal threatening, criminal
mischief, resisting arrest, possession of a controlled drug, falsifying physical
evidence, and being a felon in possession of a dangerous weapon. He appeals
an order of the Superior Court (Temple, J.) denying his request for bail, arguing
that the court erred by: (1) continuing his preventive detention on the grounds
that he poses a danger to himself and the public; and (2) concluding that
continued pretrial detention does not violate his due process rights. We affirm.
The following relevant facts are supported by the record or are otherwise
undisputed. On the morning of June 14, 2020, the defendant was arrested
following an incident that occurred at a sober living facility where he had been
staying. The next day, the Superior Court (Colburn, J.) ordered him
preventively detained. The defendant requested an evidentiary bail hearing,
which the Superior Court (Temple, J.) held on July 16, 2020. At the hearing,
the court heard testimony from one of the officers who was involved in the
investigation of the incident. He testified that, on the morning of the
defendant’s arrest, several officers were dispatched to the sober living facility in
response to a report of an argument between the defendant and two female
residents at the facility, H.S. and P.S. Upon their arrival, the officers asked the
defendant if they could frisk him for weapons, at which point the defendant
reached for his waistband. One of the officers immediately attempted to
restrain the defendant, but the defendant resisted this effort and continued
reaching for his waistband. The officers eventually restrained the defendant,
and, after arresting him, found two small plastic bags that appeared to contain
powder and crack cocaine as well as a four-inch fixed-blade knife that was
strapped to his waistband. The defendant was then transported to the police
station, where he ripped a sprinkler from the ceiling of his holding cell. He
then produced another small plastic bag that appeared to contain drugs and
put the contents in his mouth, informing the officers that he intended to
overdose. The officers called emergency medical services, and the defendant
was transported to the hospital.
Following the defendant’s arrest, the officer who testified at the hearing
interviewed H.S. and P.S. as well as the manager and an employee of the sober
living facility. Both H.S. and P.S. reported that they had spent time with the
defendant the evening before, but that he “started to become more and more
difficult” as the night progressed, repeatedly entering their bedroom
unannounced. They further reported that after they asked the defendant to
stop entering their room, the defendant kicked in their door, displayed the
knife that was strapped to his waistband, and threatened to either “hit” or
“stab” them. H.S. also reported that she witnessed the defendant ingest
cocaine earlier that evening and that she felt “in fear for her life” during the
incident. According to the officer’s testimony, the employee at the facility
reported that, upon learning about the incident, she attempted to deescalate
the situation, but decided to call the police when she “saw [that] the situation
was out of control” and “that [the defendant] would not calm down.”
The court also heard testimony about the defendant’s criminal record,
which included, among other things, escape, resisting arrest, breaking and
entering, possession of a controlled substance, possession of a firearm without
a permit, and multiple assault and battery convictions. In 2011, the defendant
was convicted in Massachusetts of manslaughter, resulting in a period of
incarceration that lasted approximately ten years. Most recently, in 2013, he
was convicted in Massachusetts of vandalism and assault and battery and
received another two and one-half year sentence. At the time of the incident
giving rise to this case, the defendant had two outstanding arrest warrants in
Massachusetts for home invasion and a parole violation.
Based upon this evidence, the State asked the court to order preventive
detention, arguing that the defendant posed a risk of flight and a danger to
himself and the public. The defendant countered that the evidence did not
support preventive detention, arguing, among other things, that his behavior
resulted from his mental health and substance use issues and that, if released,
those issues could be controlled with treatment. The court ultimately
concluded that preventive detention was warranted based upon the officer’s
testimony regarding the underlying incident as well as the defendant’s criminal
history, mental health issues, and substance use disorder. The court also
ordered that the defendant “receive the appropriate level of medical, mental
health, and substance use disorder treatment” while incarcerated.
In August 2020, the defendant requested another hearing to address
bail, alleging, among other things, “unconstitutional and punitive conditions”
at the house of corrections. The trial court granted the motion and held
another bail hearing. At the hearing, the defendant argued that he was not
receiving appropriate mental health or substance use treatment while
incarcerated and that he was languishing while waiting for his trial, which had
been delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Accordingly, he asked to be
released so that he could receive in-patient treatment at a recovery center. The
2
State countered that release was inappropriate and that the defendant could
obtain additional treatment through the Substance Abuse Treatment
Community for Offenders (SATCO) program. The court again denied bail,
concluding that the SATCO program was more appropriate than release.
In January 2021, the defendant requested a third hearing to address
bail. The defendant primarily argued that he was not receiving appropriate
mental health treatment and that his prolonged detention during the COVID-
19 pandemic had exacerbated his mental health conditions, in part because he
was in lockdown for twenty-two hours per day in the restrictive housing unit.
After holding a hearing, the court again denied bail. In its written order, the
court construed the defendant’s argument as asserting a claim that the
excessive length of his detention violated his due process rights under the
Federal Constitution. Citing decisions by the First and Second Circuit Courts
of Appeals, the court analyzed the defendant’s due process claim by weighing
the following six factors:
(1) the seriousness of the charge; (2) the strength of the
government’s proof that defendant poses a risk of flight or a
danger to the community; (3) the strength of the government’s
case on the merits; (4) the length of the detention; (5) the
complexity of the case; and (6) whether one side or the other has
needlessly added to the complexity or delay.
See United States v. Zannino, 798 F.2d 544, 547 (1st Cir. 1986) (outlining all
six factors); United States v. Briggs, 697 F.3d 98, 101 (2d Cir. 2012) (adopting
three out of six factors). In applying these factors, the court concluded that the
fourth factor — the length of the detention — weighed in the defendant’s favor,
but that the remaining five factors weighed against his claim. Nonetheless,
despite finding no due process violation, the court noted that continued
detention in the restrictive housing unit “may alter the balance of the due
process analysis.” This appeal followed.
On appeal, the defendant first argues that the trial court erred by
continuing his preventive detention on the grounds that he poses a danger to
himself and the public. RSA 597:2, III(a) (Supp. 2020) provides, in relevant
part, that “the court may order preventive detention without bail . . . only if [it]
determines by clear and convincing evidence that release will endanger the
safety of [the defendant] or the public.” It further provides that “[i]n
determining whether release will endanger the safety of [the defendant] or the
public, the court may consider all relevant factors presented” to the court by
the parties. Id.
We review the trial court’s decision under our unsustainable exercise of
discretion standard. State v. Spaulding, 172 N.H. 205, 207 (2019). In
determining whether the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion, we
3