THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2021-0441, David Pelletier & a. v. Town of
Rye, the court on April 27, 2023, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The
appellants, David and Karen Pelletier, appeal an order of the Superior Court
(Honigberg, J.) upholding a decision of the Town of Rye Planning Board that
approved the site plan and special permit application of the Samonas Realty
Trust (the Developer). We affirm.
The trial court’s order recites, or the record establishes, the following
facts. In May 2018, the Developer began discussing a project proposal with the
planning board. The property is next to a tidal marsh and currently contains
ten rental cottages, a house, and a commercial building. The Developer
proposed razing the existing structures and constructing four new buildings,
each containing two townhouse units.
The Developer filed applications with the Town of Rye Zoning Board of
Adjustment (ZBA) for height and set-back variances. The ZBA granted the
variances and the appellants filed a motion for rehearing, which the ZBA
denied. The appellants then appealed the ZBA’s decision to the superior court.
The Developer moved to dismiss the appeal, arguing that the appellants lacked
standing. The Superior Court (Wageling, J.) denied the Developer’s motion,
concluding, among other things, that the visual impact of the project was a
cognizable injury sufficient to establish standing. After considering the merits
of the appeal, the superior court affirmed the ZBA decision.1
In January 2019, the Developer applied for a special use permit from the
Planning Board pursuant to section 304.6 of the Town of Rye Zoning
Ordinance. See Rye, N.H., Zoning Ordinance § 304.6(B) (2019). Section 304.6
is titled “Tourist Accommodation Uses” and its stated purpose is “to allow land
housing tourist accommodation uses which may have become economically or
functionally obsolete to be redeveloped in residential use at densities
compatible with the density of the surrounding area.” Id. § 304.6(A). Over the
1 Although the parties have not provided a copy of the court’s decision, the Developer represented
in its brief and at oral argument that, following a hearing on the merits, the court affirmed the
ZBA decision, a point which the appellants do not dispute.
next two years, the planning board held six public hearings to receive input on
the project. The trial court found that the planning board received multiple
written reports regarding “surface water, flooding, traffic management,
impervious surfaces, use and density, the existing natural wetlands, and every
other relevant aspect of the proposed development.” The appellants or their
counsel often appeared at the hearings and site-walk and submitted comments
in opposition to the project. At the request of the planning board, the
Developer ultimately reduced the number of buildings from four to three, and
the total number of units from eight to six.
At the January 2020 hearing, the planning board voted that the proposal
satisfied Town of Rye Zoning Ordinance § 304.6(H). That section directed the
board to “determine, by a vote on the record,” that the proposed redevelopment
satisfied six standards, including that “[t]he granting of the Special Use Permit
will not be detrimental to adjacent property or the neighborhood,” and that
“[t]he architecture of the proposed dwellings is compatible with the architecture
of dwellings located within 300 feet of the site.” Id. § 304.6(H)(2), (5). After
voting that the standards were met, the planning board voted to grant
conditional approval for the Developer’s special use permit, including thirty-
four conditions to be satisfied.
In February 2020, the appellants submitted a petition to the superior
court appealing the conditional approval pursuant to RSA 677:15. See RSA
677:15 (2016). The Developer intervened in the action. In their petition, the
appellants argued that conditional approval was unreasonable and unlawful
because it precluded public input and consideration of unresolved issues. The
appellants also contended that the decision was unlawful because the project
was modified such that the variances were no longer valid. And lastly, the
appellants asserted that “the Record will demonstrate that there was no
evidence” to support the planning board’s conclusion that Town of Rye Zoning
Ordinance § 304.6(H)(2) and (5) were satisfied. In September 2020, the
appellants filed a memorandum of law which reiterated these arguments.
The superior court determined that it lacked jurisdiction, stayed the
case, and remanded it to the planning board to determine whether the
conditions were satisfied. Following a compliance hearing in February 2021,
the planning board found that the conditions were met and rendered final
approval. The superior court lifted the stay and held a hearing in April 2021.
And in August 2021, the superior court affirmed the planning board’s decision
to grant final approval of the project. The appellants filed a motion for
reconsideration, which the court denied. This appeal followed.
As a preliminary matter, the Developer and the Town of Rye filed a
motion to strike portions of the appellants’ appendix that they assert contain
2
material not submitted to the planning board or superior court.2 Because the
disputed materials do not affect our analysis, however, we need not address
whether they are properly part of the record.
The trial court’s review of a planning board’s decision is limited.
Trustees of Dartmouth Coll. v. Town of Hanover, 171 N.H. 497, 503-04 (2018).
The trial court must treat the factual findings of the planning board as prima
facie lawful and reasonable and cannot set aside its decision absent
unreasonableness or an identified error of law. Id. at 504. The appealing party
bears the burden of persuading the trial court that, by the balance of
probabilities, the board’s decision was unreasonable. Id. The trial court
determines, not whether it agrees with a planning board’s findings, but rather
whether there is evidence upon which its findings could have been reasonably
based. Id.
Our review is similarly limited. We will reverse a trial court’s decision on
appeal only if it is not supported by the evidence or is legally erroneous. Id.
We review the trial court’s decision to determine whether a reasonable person
could have reached the same decision as the trial court based on the evidence
before it. Id. (quotation omitted).
On appeal, the appellants first argue that the trial court’s order is
“unreasonable and illegal” because its findings “violate collateral estoppel.”
The appellants rely on the earlier decision by the Superior Court (Wageling, J.)
in the separate ZBA appeal, which found that the visual impact of the project
was a cognizable injury and that the appellants therefore had standing to
challenge the ZBA decision. They assert that this decision on standing
conclusively established that there was a “detrimental impact” in violation of
Town of Rye Zoning Ordinance § 304.6(H)(2). We disagree.
Collateral estoppel applies when, among other requirements, “the first
action resolved the issue finally on the merits.” Tyler v. Hannaford Bros., 161
N.H. 242, 246 (2010). A finding that a party has standing to appeal from a
ZBA decision, however, is not a final resolution on the merits. See City of Hope
Nat. Medical Ctr. v. Healthplus Inc., 156 F.3d 223, 228 (1st Cir. 1998) (“The
standing inquiry does not focus on the merits of the dispute. It focuses only on
‘whether the litigant is entitled to have the court decide the merits of the
dispute.’” (quoting Warth v. Seldin, 422 U.S. 490, 498 (1975))); see also Town of
Londonderry v. Mesiti Dev., 168 N.H. 377, 381 (2015) (noting that “standing is
a question of subject matter jurisdiction”). Rather, “[s]tanding is the
determination of whether a specific person is the proper party to bring a
2 We denied the motion without prejudice to the Developer and Town making the same argument
in their brief, but the Developer and Town submitted their brief before the issuance of our order.
We note that on appeal, we consider only the “papers and exhibits filed and considered in the
proceedings in the trial court.” Sup. Ct. R. 13; Lake v. Sullivan, 145 N.H. 713, 717 (2001).
3