THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2021-0268, State of New Hampshire v. Samuel
Marino, the court on February 24, 2023, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The
defendant, Samuel Marino, appeals an order of the Superior Court (Honigberg,
J.) denying his motion for a new trial on grounds of ineffective assistance of
counsel. We affirm.
I. Background
The following facts are supported by the record. Marino and the victim’s
father were long-time friends, and Marino and the victim had a “close, almost
familial” relationship. During the relevant time period, the victim was eleven
years old, and her parents were separated and going through a divorce. The
victim divided her time between her parents’ residences.
The victim had a phone, which her parents frequently monitored.
According to Marino’s Verizon phone records, Marino and the victim
communicated via texts in March and early April 2018. On April 25, 2018, the
victim and her father had dinner with Marino and his wife at Marino’s home.
The victim’s father and Marino’s wife both testified that they did not see
anything unusual that evening. However, the victim testified that during the
evening Marino kept trying to get close to her, and at one point asked if she
wanted to go upstairs with him.
In the days after the dinner party, Marino began messaging the victim via
Snapchat from the user account “blenderrodrigo.” Police identified this
account as Marino’s by linking Snapchat records to Marino’s Verizon cell phone
number. According to those records, over the next three days, Marino sent the
victim 27 images and three videos. In that same time frame, the victim sent
Marino 32 photos. The content of most of these messages, images, and videos
are no longer available due to Snapchat’s “autodelete” functionality.
The victim testified that although the messages were “normal” at first,
Marino began to ask her about “intimate details” including how she felt about
him. She further testified that Marino sent her photos of his body, both while
he was wearing clothes and while he was not. She testified that these photos
included at least one photograph of Marino’s genitals, which the victim received
while at her mother’s home. The victim recognized Marino in at least some of
the inappropriate photographs. The victim also testified that shortly after
sending the inappropriate messages, Marino invited her over to his house via
Snapchat. She understood him to be asking her to go without her parents.
While the victim’s mother was going through the victim’s phone on April
28, 2018, the victim received a Snapchat message from Marino asking the
victim whether she had “naughty thoughts” about him. This message
prompted the victim’s mother to ask the victim what had been going on with
Marino, and to report Marino’s behavior to the victim’s father and the police.
Detectives from the local police department conducted an investigation. The
victim was interviewed at the Child Advocacy Center (CAC) a few days after her
mother made her initial report to police.
During the investigation, police reviewed the Snapchat application on the
victim’s phone. Police also obtained Marino’s Verizon records, as well as
Snapchat records for both Marino and the victim. Notably, no forensic analysis
or extraction of the victim’s cell phone was ever conducted by police, despite
officers having access to and permission to search her phone. It is undisputed
that such an analysis would have recovered communications that took place
between Marino and the victim outside of Snapchat, and may have recovered
any actual screenshots taken of Snapchat messages.
Marino was ultimately charged with two felonies: one count of indecent
exposure and one count of certain uses of computer services prohibited. See
RSA 645:1 (2016); RSA 649-B:4 (2016). The trial court conducted a two-day
bench trial in 2019. The State called six witnesses: the victim’s mother and
father, the victim, two detectives from the local police department, and the
director of the victim assistance program at the local county attorney’s office.
The State also entered six exhibits into evidence.
Exhibit 2 was a graphic prepared by the State to summarize the content
of the Snapchat messages between Marino and the victim. Specifically, Exhibit
2 claimed to show “Screen Shots from 4/28/2018” between two Snapchat
accounts. The exhibit depicted Marino as saying: “Do you dream about me?,”
“Or rather do you have dreams about me,” and “And has that ever [led] to
naughty thoughts about me?” The exhibit did not contain actual screenshots
of messages. Defense counsel did not object to Exhibit 2 being admitted or
otherwise challenge the authenticity of the Snapchat evidence it purported to
summarize.
Defense counsel focused on the victim’s credibility and tendency to
“embellish” stories, as well as inconsistencies between her CAC interview, her
statements to prosecutors, and her testimony at trial. Defense counsel called
2
Marino’s wife and a former friend of the victim’s mother as witnesses, and
submitted no further exhibits. Counsel also cross-examined both detectives
about their investigative choices, and one detective about the failure to do a
forensic analysis of the victim’s phone.
The trial court found Marino guilty on both counts. Specifically, the trial
court found that Marino sent the victim, an eleven-year-old, photos of his
genitals while she was at her mother’s home, in violation of RSA 645:1, II(a).
Further, the trial court found that Marino solicited the victim to come to his
residence for the purpose of having sexual relations with her, in violation of
RSA 649-B:4.
Marino then retained new counsel and moved, prior to sentencing, for a
new trial based on constitutionally ineffective assistance of counsel. Marino
also retained a digital forensics expert who analyzed the evidence and record
and furnished a report of his findings. The trial court held a hearing on the
motion, at which this expert testified. Marino argued that his trial counsel was
constitutionally ineffective because counsel (1) failed to educate himself on the
nature of the digital evidence or failed to consult with an expert, and (2) failed
to challenge the “screenshot” evidence, particularly Exhibit 2, and the State’s
forensic investigation as a whole. The State argued that trial counsel’s defense
strategy was objectively reasonable in light of the evidence available to him
and, with that strategy, no expert consultation was needed. Without conceding
the point, the State also argued that even if trial counsel’s performance was
deficient, it did not prejudice the outcome of Marino’s case.
The trial court denied Marino’s motion for a new trial. In its order, the
trial court “assum[ed] for purposes of this decision that counsel’s performance
fell below the objective constitutional standard of reasonableness,” but found
that trial counsel’s “failure to adequately educate and/or to consult an expert,
and his resulting failure to challenge the State’s screenshot evidence, does not
call into question or ‘undermine confidence in the outcome’ of the trial.” The
trial court reasoned that the State “established every element of both offenses
through the testimony of the victim, whom the Court found credible.” The trial
court concluded that Marino was not prejudiced. This appeal followed.
II. Analysis
The State and Federal Constitutions guarantee a criminal defendant
reasonably competent assistance of counsel. N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 15; U.S.
CONST. amend. VI. To demonstrate a violation of this right, the defendant
must show that his counsel’s conduct so undermined the proper functioning of
the adversarial process that the trial cannot be relied on as having produced a
just result. State v. Marden, 172 N.H. 258, 262 (2019). To prevail upon a
claim of ineffective assistance of counsel, the defendant must demonstrate,
3