THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2021-0114, Ajit Kumar v. SNHS Management
Corporation, the court on March 9, 2022, issued the following
order:
Having considered the briefs and oral arguments of the parties, we
conclude that a formal written opinion is unnecessary in this case. The
plaintiff, Ajit Kumar, appeals an order of the Superior Court (Temple, J.)
entering judgment for the defendant, SNHS Management Corporation, on the
plaintiff’s petition to quiet title by adverse possession. The plaintiff argues that
the trial court erred by denying his adverse possession claim because his use
of the defendant’s property was not continuously adverse for the requisite
twenty-year statutory period. We affirm.
The trial court found the following facts. The plaintiff owns a single
family home on a parcel of property located in Nashua. The defendant owns an
abutting parcel, which it uses for commercial purposes. At issue here is a
narrow strip of land located at the boundary of the two properties (disputed
parcel). The disputed parcel contains a retaining wall and a chain-link fence,
as well as part of a bulkhead that is attached to the rear of the single family
home. The wall, the fence, and the bulkhead were installed before the parties
purchased their properties, and it is uncertain who installed them or when
they did so. The defendant is the record owner of the disputed parcel.
The defendant purchased its property from a trust in 2001. The
purchase and sales agreement was contingent upon the defendant obtaining a
variance and site plan approval from the city’s zoning and planning boards. In
February 2001, prior to obtaining those approvals, the defendant’s former
development director (director) met with neighboring property owners,
including the plaintiff’s predecessors-in-title, the Buckmires. At the meeting,
the director informed the Buckmires that the wall, the fence, and the bulkhead
were part of the property that it intended to purchase. The director also stated
that the defendant would not take any action against the Buckmires regarding
the disputed parcel so long as the Buckmires did not object to its zoning and
planning applications. The Buckmires verbally agreed. The defendant
subsequently obtained the necessary approvals and completed the purchase in
May 2001.
In 2003, the Buckmires sold the property to an intervening owner, from
whom the plaintiff purchased the property in 2012. At the time of the
purchase, the plaintiff believed that the retaining wall reflected the rear
boundary of his property. In 2016, the defendant contacted the plaintiff about
the disputed parcel, informing him of the encroachment issues and expressing
concern about the deteriorating condition of the retaining wall. Shortly
thereafter, the plaintiff listed his property for sale. The defendant offered to
purchase the property, but the plaintiff ultimately decided not to sell it. The
parties also discussed improvements to the disputed parcel, but those
discussions proved unsuccessful. At some point thereafter, the plaintiff leaned
a stockade fence against the chain-link fence.
In February 2020, the plaintiff filed an action to quiet title, claiming title
to the disputed parcel by adverse possession. The defendant filed an answer
denying most of the allegations. The defendant also filed a counterclaim
seeking a declaration that it owns the disputed parcel and an injunction
enjoining the plaintiff from using its property. In February 2021, following a
bench trial, the court denied the plaintiff’s petition to quiet title.
The court based its decision upon its finding that, at the February 2001
meeting, the defendant “gave permission to the [Buckmires] . . . to use the
disputed area.” The court determined that, although the defendant did not yet
own the disputed parcel in February 2001, the defendant’s “permission was to
take effect and remain in effect after it closed on the sale” in May 2001. The
court therefore concluded that “[b]ecause the Buckmires’ use was permissive
beginning in May 2001 . . . , the plaintiff [could not] show a period of twenty
years of continuous adverse use from that date going forward, as twenty years
ha[d] not elapsed since that time.” Thus, the court determined that the
plaintiff failed to satisfy his burden of proving that his use of the disputed
parcel was continuously adverse for the twenty-year statutory period.
With respect to the defendant’s counterclaim, the court determined that
the defendant owns the disputed parcel, including the retaining wall and the
chain-link fence, explaining that “those improvements are located on [the
defendant’s] property and there is no evidence as to who built them.” The
court further determined that the plaintiff owns the bulkhead and the stockade
fence, “both of which are currently encroaching on [the defendant’s] property.”
The court did not, however, order the plaintiff to remove the bulkhead or the
stockade fence, noting that the defendant “stated at the trial that it was not
seeking such relief at this time.” Instead, the court encouraged the defendant
“to consider allowing the bulkhead to remain in its current location under a
grant of permission” and stated that “if the parties are unable to reach an
amicable agreement regarding the fate of the encroachments, [the defendant]
may move for relief” pursuant to its counterclaim. The plaintiff filed a motion
for reconsideration, which the court denied. This appeal followed.
When reviewing a trial court’s decision rendered after a trial on the
merits, we will uphold the trial court’s factual findings and rulings unless they
2
lack evidentiary support or are legally erroneous. Loon Valley Homeowner’s
Ass’n v. Pollock, 171 N.H. 75, 78 (2018). We do not decide whether we would
have ruled differently than the trial court, but, rather, whether a reasonable
person could have reached the same decision based upon the same evidence.
Id. We defer to the trial court’s judgment on such issues as resolving conflicts
in the testimony, measuring the credibility of witnesses, and determining the
weight to be given the evidence. Id. It is within the province of the trial court
to accept or reject, in whole or in part, whatever evidence was presented. Id.
We review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de novo. Id.
To acquire title by adverse possession, the plaintiff must show twenty
years of adverse, continuous, exclusive, and uninterrupted use of the land
claimed so as to give notice to the record owner that an adverse claim is being
made. Id. Adverse means that the use is without license or permission; it is
trespassory in nature. Id. at 79. A use of land is adverse when made under a
claim of right where no right exists. Id. To satisfy the adverse use
requirement, the nature of the use must have been such as to show that the
record owner knew or ought to have known that the right was being exercised,
not in reliance upon the owner’s toleration or permission, but without regard to
the owner’s consent. Id. Thus, if the plaintiff uses the property pursuant to
the record owner’s permission, the plaintiff’s use is not adverse. See id.
In the context of adverse possession, permission can be either explicit or
implied. O’Malley v. Little, 170 N.H. 272, 278 (2017). The nature of the use,
whether adverse or permissive, may be inferred from the manner, character,
and frequency of the exercise of the right and the situation of the parties. Id.
The purpose of the adverse use requirement is to alert the record owner that he
or she has a cause of action before that action is foreclosed by the statute of
limitations. Hewes v. Bruno, 121 N.H. 32, 34 (1981); see RSA 508:2, I (2010).
Thus, in order to satisfy the adverse use requirement, the plaintiff’s use of the
property “should, regardless of the basis of the occupancy, alert the [record]
owner of his cause of action.” Hewes, 121 N.H. at 34. This standard is
objective; the plaintiff’s subjective intent to use land adversely is irrelevant.
See id.
To establish a prima facie case of adverse use, the plaintiff must produce
evidence of acts of such a character that they create an inference of non-
permissive use. Loon Valley, 171 N.H. at 79. Once the plaintiff satisfies this
initial burden, the burden shifts to the record owner to produce evidence that
the plaintiff’s use was, in fact, permitted. Id. However, the burden of
persuasion remains at all times on the plaintiff. O’Malley, 170 N.H. at 278.
Whether a use of property is adverse or permissive is an issue of fact. Id.
We agree with the trial court that the plaintiff failed to meet his burden of
proving twenty years of continuously adverse use of the disputed parcel. See
id. at 276. The trial court found, and the record supports its finding, that the
3