THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2021-0585, Petition of Colonial Green
Products Distributors, LLC, the court on June 29, 2023, issued
the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
to us, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has determined to
resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The petitioner,
Colonial Green Products Distributors, LLC (Colonial), challenges orders issued
by the New Hampshire Insurance Department (Department) responding to
Colonial’s petition for declaratory ruling. See N.H. Admin. R., Ins 209.01. We
affirm.
I
The following facts are supported by the record. In 2021, Colonial filed a
petition for declaratory ruling with the Department. The issues raised in
Colonial’s petition pertained to an insurance premium audit dispute with
respondent Travelers Property Casualty Company of America (Travelers)
regarding workers’ compensation coverage, and to Colonial’s request for access
to respondent National Council on Compensation Insurance, Inc. (NCCI) rating
manuals and rules (manuals). Colonial’s petition presented eight questions:
I. Whether the NCCI rules are incorporated and binding in
workers’ compensation policies, even though the NCCI
rules are “literally inaccessible” to Colonial and other
policyholders?
II. Whether the non-disclosure of NCCI rules to policyholders
violates RSA 412:1 X which states that the purpose of this
chapter is “to protect policyholders and the public against
the adverse effects of any policy provision that is not in the
public interest or is contrary to public policy.”? And/or a
violation of RSA 412:5 I, which states, “Every insurer and
advisory organization shall file policy forms, endorsements,
and other contract language. . . The commissioner may
disapprove such form if it contains a provision that does
not comply with the requirements of law, is not in the
public interest, is contrary to public policy, is inequitable,
misleading, deceptive, or encourages misrepresentation of
such policy.”?
III. Whether the NCCI rules are part of the “Our Manuals”
language contained in the Policy?
IV. Whether the NCCI rules are administrative rules adopted
by the Department of Insurance?
V. Whether the practice of charging and attempting to collect
disputed premiums by incorporating the disputed amounts
into a subsequent policy period violates RSA 417:4 XII
and/or RSA 417:4 XIV?
VI. Whether the NCCI Dispute Resolution Process violates RSA
412:5 V and/or RSA 417:4 XVII(d) in that the Process does
not provide “reasonable means” to “be heard” considering
the NCCI rules are not provided to policyholders?
VII. If the NCCI rules are incorporated into the workers’
compensation policies, and said rules are adopted and
approved by the New Hampshire Department of Insurance,
is it a violation of policyholders’ constitutional safeguards of
fundamental fairness and due process rights, under Part I,
Article 15 of the State Constitution when said NCCI rules
are not provided to policyholders when requested, free of
charge in order to [begin] the Dispute Resolution Process?
VIII. Whether the inclusion of payroll for vacation, sick days and
holiday pay into the premium, where there is no exposure
for a workers’ compensation claim, violates RSA 412:35
whereby “A final premium shall be charged based upon
actual exposure existing during the term of the policy
coverage.”
(Footnote and bolding omitted.)
In response, the Department issued an order determining that: (1) NCCI
manuals, which “assist insurers in calculating workers’ compensation rates in
New Hampshire,” apply to workers’ compensation policies once the insurer’s
rates are “approved by the Department,” and the manuals are “reasonably
accessible to insureds” given the “regulatory framework and Department
practices”; (2) NCCI manuals are not administrative rules; (3) the “regulatory
framework for rate approval and rate disputes associated with workers’
compensation policies, which includes prior approval by the Department, the
mandatory auditing process for these policies, and the dispute resolution
process with a de novo appeal to the Department, does not involve unfair
insurance trade practices”; (4) insureds have “a reasonable means to be heard
through the dispute resolution process,” including “the ability to request a
2
hearing at the Department if they are not satisfied with rate information
provided by NCCI or their insurer”; (5) the “regulatory procedures involved in
workers’ compensation rate requirements and disputes provide reasonable
notice and protections for insureds”; and (6) Colonial’s substantive claims
about premium collections were not ripe for review because the NCCI dispute
resolution process requires that such claims be presented to the New
Hampshire Compensation Appeals Board (Board) prior to review by the
Department.
Colonial moved for reconsideration, asserting that, inter alia, “[t]he
regulatory framework as outlined by the Department’s Order is in violation of
the contract clause of the United States Constitution, Art. 1, Sec. 10 and the
New Hampshire Constitution, Pt. 1, Art. 23” and that the NCCI dispute
resolution process approved by the Department violates the due process
provision of Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution. The Department
declined to rule on Colonial’s constitutional claims and otherwise denied the
motion. Colonial’s request for our review followed.
II
As a preliminary matter, we address the jurisdictional basis for our
review. Colonial filed its appeal pursuant to RSA 541:6, New Hampshire
Administrative Rule, Ins 207.04(e), and Supreme Court Rule 10. Appeals from
administrative proceedings may be taken under RSA chapter 541 only “[w]hen
so authorized by law.” RSA 541:2 (2021). We have interpreted the phrase
“when so authorized by law” to mean that the provisions of chapter 541 do not
provide an appeal from the determination of every administrative agency in the
state. Petition of Hoyt, 143 N.H. 533, 534 (1999). Unless some reference is
made to chapter 541 in a given statute, an appeal under the provisions of
chapter 541 is not authorized by law. Id.
An appeal from the Department “shall be taken only from an order on
hearing, or as to any matter on which the commissioner has refused or failed to
hold a hearing after application therefor under RSA 400-A:17 . . . .” RSA 400-
A:24, I (2018). Once that statutory requirement is met, “[a]ny appeal shall be
in accordance with RSA 541.” RSA 400-A:24, II (2018). Pursuant to RSA 400-
A:17, the commissioner “may hold hearings for any purpose within the scope of
this title as he may deem advisable.” RSA 400-A:17, I (2018) (emphasis added).
The commissioner “shall hold a hearing” if required by any provision of RSA
chapter 400-A or “upon written application for a hearing by a person aggrieved
by any act or impending act, or by any report, rule, regulation, or order of the
commissioner . . . .” RSA 400-A:17, II (2018) (emphasis added). There does
not appear to be any requirement in RSA chapter 400-A that a hearing be held
on a petition for declaratory ruling, nor does the administrative rule relating to
petitions for declaratory rulings require that a hearing be held. See N.H.
3