THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2021-0219, Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. v. Barbara
Hagan, the court on August 24, 2023, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The defendant, Barbara Hagan, and the intervenors, Peter
and Janet Saunders (the Saunders), appeal orders of the Superior Court
(Nicolosi, J.) relating to the granting of a declaratory judgment in favor of the
plaintiff, Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. (Wells Fargo). We affirm.
The trial court found the following facts undisputed or “not adequately
contested with contradictory facts” on summary judgment. We recite only the
facts relevant to disposition of this appeal. In March 2004, the Saunders
bought the property at issue (the Property). In February 2005, the Saunders
executed a mortgage on the Property identifying First Magnus as the lender
and MERS as the mortgagee, as nominee. Janet Saunders executed the
corresponding note to First Magnus the same day. In December 2009, MERS
assigned its interest in the mortgage to Wachovia Bank, N.A., which entity later
merged with Wells Fargo.
In 2010, Wells Fargo began foreclosure proceedings on the Property,
which the Saunders sought to enjoin. After an initial grant of temporary relief,
the Saunders were denied an injunction and their claim for promissory
estoppel was decided against them on summary judgment. We affirmed. See
Saunders v. Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., No. 2014-0265 (non-precedential order),
2015 WL 11071265 (N.H. Feb. 12, 2015).
Wells Fargo then began the foreclosure process again, and bought the
Property at the foreclosure sale on December 4, 2015. On November 30,
however — four days prior to the foreclosure sale — the Saunders deeded the
Property to Hagan for “Love and Affection and No Other Consideration.” Hagan
has allowed the Saunders to continue to live at the Property.
In 2016 and 2017, the Saunders sued Wells Fargo and others in federal
court, raising challenges related to the 2005 note and mortgage. After the first
federal suit was dismissed voluntarily, the second was dismissed for failure to
state a claim.
On May 14, 2018, Wells Fargo filed the instant action against Hagan
alleging claims for a plea of title, abuse of process, conversion, tortious
interference with contractual relations, civil conspiracy, and slander of title.
The trial court dismissed the claims for abuse of process, conversion, and
tortious interference with contractual relations, but found the remaining claims
sufficiently pled. The court also allowed the Saunders to intervene.
In March 2020, the trial court granted Wells Fargo’s motion for summary
judgment on its claim for a plea of title, “declar[ing] Wells Fargo’s title to the
Property free and clear of any interest or claim of Ms. Hagan.” Citing the
previous state and federal lawsuits, the court found that the doctrines of res
judicata and collateral estoppel barred Hagan and the Saunders from
relitigating issues related to the 2005 note and mortgage, and that “any
complaints about the noticing of the sale or the validity of [the] foreclosure
process” were barred as untimely.
In April 2021, the court granted Wells Fargo’s request for a voluntary
nonsuit of its remaining claims with prejudice, allowing the case to proceed to
an appealable final judgment. Following denial of their motions to reconsider,
Hagan and the Saunders brought the instant appeal.
Hagan and the Saunders argue that the trial court erred in finding that
Wells Fargo had standing to bring the instant action, and, as a result, erred in
finding that the court had jurisdiction. “Standing under the New Hampshire
Constitution requires parties to have personal legal or equitable rights that are
adverse to one another, with regard to an actual, not hypothetical, dispute,
which is capable of judicial redress.” Avery v. Comm’r, N.H. Dep’t of Corr., 173
N.H. 726, 737 (2020). “In evaluating whether a party has standing to sue, we
focus on whether the party suffered a legal injury against which the law was
designed to protect.” Id.
Hagan and the Saunders assert that Wells Fargo “cannot demonstrate
concrete injury” because “at no time had there been any nexus between [the
Saunders and Wells Fargo] through any assignment of the debt.” (Bolding
omitted.) The trial court found, however, that “the doctrines of res judicata and
collateral estoppel bar the Saunders and their successor in interest, Ms.
Hagan, from relitigating issues relative to events that happened before the
resolution of the prior lawsuits.” As the United States District Court found
when it ruled that the Saunders were “collaterally estopped from re-litigating
the propriety of the loan transaction” in the federal litigation, “the validity of
the transfer of the note and mortgage assignment . . . were considered and
rejected by the New Hampshire Superior and Supreme Courts.” Saunders v.
First Magnus Fin. Corp., No. 17-CV-27-JL, 2018 WL 3432721, at *8 n.37
(D.N.H. July 16, 2018); see also Saunders, No. 2014-0265 (non-precedential
order), 2015 WL 11071265.
2
Hagan and the Saunders do not challenge the merits of the trial court’s
res judicata and collateral estoppel rulings. Accordingly, those same doctrines
preclude Hagan and the Saunders from relitigating the validity of the
assignment in this appeal. For the same reason, we reject Hagan’s and the
Saunders’ argument that Wells Fargo “had no legal interest to protect as a
result of the void assignment, and, thus, no standing.” (Bolding omitted.)
Hagan and the Saunders next argue that the trial court “erred in failing
to address rescission effected under the Truth in Lending Act (TILA), pursuant
to 15 U.S.C. § 1635 et seq.” See 15 U.S.C. § 1635 (2018) (providing right of
rescission with respect to certain transactions). The court did address that
issue, however, and was “unpersuaded that the mortgage on the property was
validly rescinded,” because “the Saunders’ right to rescind the mortgage
expired, at the latest, on or about February 8, 2008,” but “their rescission letter
was not submitted until May 4, 2015.”
On appeal, Hagan and the Saunders assert that shortly after February
2015, Janet Saunders learned that a two percent yield spread premium had
been charged and “concealed through the hiking of the locked interest rate.”
Hagan and the Saunders contend that rescission was effected “within the time
frame specified in the implementing regulations” because “Janet received
monthly statements bearing the manipulated interest rate until November,
2015” and that “[t]hose statements constituted discrete continuing violations
as to concealment, even under NH ‘debt’ law.” We disagree.
The TILA’s “conditional right to rescind does not last forever. Even if a
lender never makes the required disclosures, the ‘right of rescission shall
expire three years after the date of consummation of the transaction or upon
the sale of the property, whichever comes first.’” Jesinoski v. Countrywide
Home Loans, Inc., 574 U.S. 259, 262 (2015) (quoting 15 U.S.C. § 1635(f)).
Accordingly, “the three year period for TILA rescission claims is an ‘absolute’
statute of repose that cannot be tolled,” Pratap v. Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., 63 F.
Supp. 3d 1101, 1112 (N.D. Cal. 2014), or “prolong[ed] . . . under a ‘continuing
violation’ theory,” King v. State of Cal., 784 F.2d 910, 914 (9th Cir. 1986)
(rejecting continuing violation theory with respect to statute of limitations for a
damages claim under the TILA based, in part, on ground that it is unavailable
under § 1635(f)).
Hagan and the Saunders next assert that the trial court erred in denying
Hagan’s pleas in bar, in which she claimed that “[o]wnership and possession
are vested in [her]” by virtue of a writ of possession issued to her in 2017.
Specifically, on April 14, 2017, Hagan brought a landlord and tenant action
against Wells Fargo in the circuit court, alleging that Wells Fargo was in
possession of the Property without right and certifying, in an “affidavit of
ownership,” that she owned the Property. Wells Fargo apparently either failed
to appear or failed to file an answer, and a notice of default issued.
3