THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0688, John Doe v. New Hampshire
Division of State Police & a., the court on January 7, 2025,
issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The plaintiff, John Doe, appeals an order of the Superior
Court (Kissinger, J.) dismissing his complaint seeking declaratory judgment
pursuant to RSA 105:13-d (2023) and injunctive relief to remove his name from
the Exculpatory Evidence Schedule (EES). On appeal, the plaintiff argues that
the trial court erred by: (1) failing to consider differences between hearings
before the New Hampshire Personnel Appeals Board (PAB) and the superior
court, and (2) denying him the opportunity to challenge the underlying conduct
that led to his placement on the EES. We conclude that the trial court properly
limited its review to determining whether information in the plaintiff’s
personnel file constitutes “potentially exculpatory evidence.” RSA 105:13-d, I.
Accordingly, we affirm.
The following facts are derived from the plaintiff’s complaint and
accompanying documentation and are assumed to be true for the purposes of
this appeal. See Boucher v. Town of Moultonborough, 176 N.H. 271, 272
(2023). While employed as a trooper by defendant New Hampshire Division of
State Police (Division), the plaintiff cared for his elderly aunt and was the
successor trustee of his aunt’s trust. In April 2015, the plaintiff and his aunt
sought to change the trust from a revocable trust to an irrevocable trust. They
consulted with an attorney who proposed that the aunt resign as trustee and
name the plaintiff as the new trustee of the trust. The aunt signed a
“Resignation of Trustee form,” the plaintiff signed an “Acceptance of Trustee
form,” and the plaintiff became the trustee of the aunt’s trust. Soon thereafter,
however, the branch manager of the bank where the trust was located
contacted the aunt and expressed concern that the plaintiff was “withdrawing
large amounts of funds” from the trust. According to the plaintiff, his aunt
responded by closing the account at the bank and transferring the assets to a
different bank where she made herself the trustee of the trust.
The branch manager at the bank where the trust was originally located
also contacted defendant New Hampshire Attorney General’s Office (AGO)
regarding the plaintiff’s depletion of the trust’s funds, and the AGO opened an
investigation. The AGO interviewed the plaintiff and asked him several times
whether he was the trustee of his aunt’s trust. The plaintiff responded that he
was not. At the conclusion of the investigation, the AGO “cleared the [plaintiff]
of any criminal wrongdoing.” However, the AGO contacted the Division based
upon its belief that the plaintiff lied during the investigation and recommended
that the Division submit the plaintiff’s name for placement on the EES.
The Division conducted an internal investigation into the plaintiff’s
“alleged untruthfulness” during the AGO’s investigation. Prior to being
interviewed, the plaintiff asked the branch manager at the second bank
whether his aunt was the trust’s current trustee. The branch manager
responded that the aunt was the trustee and the plaintiff was the successor
trustee.
During an interview, the plaintiff represented to the Division that he was
not the trustee of his aunt’s trust and that his aunt remained the trustee. The
investigating officer confronted the plaintiff with the “Resignation of Trustee”
and “Acceptance of Trustee” forms that the plaintiff and his aunt had signed
and the plaintiff’s email communications with the attorney. The plaintiff
responded that he did not recall signing the document or sending the email
communications. The investigating officer determined that the plaintiff
“intended all along to take over as trustee and that he planned [his aunt’s]
resignation and his acceptance of the role of trustee” and recommended
disciplinary action. The Division concluded that the plaintiff’s responses
during the interview were “deceptive and obstructive to the investigation,” and
it terminated the plaintiff’s employment “for lack of integrity in violation of the
professional conduct standards.” The Division also notified the plaintiff that
his name would be added to the EES.
The plaintiff subsequently appealed the termination of his employment to
the PAB. Following an evidentiary hearing at which the plaintiff and other
witnesses testified, the PAB upheld the Division’s termination of the plaintiff’s
employment. The PAB “found it incredulous that [the plaintiff] had no
recollection of the email messages that he sent or of such important documents
that he signed” and did not find the plaintiff’s testimony credible on this point.
The PAB explained that the plaintiff’s “refusal to authorize [the Division] to
speak with the officers at [the original bank] and to view the transactional
records” demonstrated that the plaintiff knew “what he was doing and why.” It
also observed that the plaintiff admitted that “he did not contact [the attorney
with whom he and his aunt had originally consulted] who would have been the
obvious best source of definitive information about his and his aunt’s status
and roles in the trust.” The PAB ultimately concluded that the plaintiff “was
seeking plausible deniability by only contacting [the second bank’s branch
manager], who [the plaintiff] would have reason to know was not fully informed
about the . . . changes to the trust.” The plaintiff unsuccessfully moved for
rehearing and filed an appeal in this court, which we dismissed as untimely.
2
In March 2022, the plaintiff filed a complaint in the superior court
requesting declaratory judgment that “his name is not appropriate for inclusion
on the EES” and a permanent injunction to remove his name from the EES.
The defendants moved to dismiss the complaint, and the court granted their
motion. The court determined that it did not need to “decide whether the
[plaintiff] lied to the AGO or [the Division] during his internal investigation”
because the PAB had “already decided that he did so in affirming his
termination,” and the court did not have jurisdiction to review the PAB’s factual
findings. The court reasoned that “three different entities (the AGO, the
Division, and the PAB) all came to the same conclusion that the [plaintiff] lied
during his investigation,” and that the “sustained instances of untruthfulness
during official investigations bear on the [plaintiff’s] general credibility,
potentially triggering a prosecutor’s obligation to disclose the evidence to a
criminal defendant in a case where the [plaintiff’s] credibility is at issue.”
Accordingly, it concluded that the plaintiff’s placement on the EES is
appropriate. The plaintiff unsuccessfully moved for reconsideration, and this
appeal followed.
The standard of review in considering a motion to dismiss is whether the
plaintiff’s allegations are reasonably susceptible of a construction that would
permit recovery. Barufaldi v. City of Dover, 175 N.H. 424, 427 (2022). This
threshold inquiry involves testing the facts alleged in the pleadings against the
applicable law. Id. The trial court may also consider documents attached to
the plaintiff’s pleadings, documents the authenticity of which no party
disputes, official public records, or documents sufficiently referred to in the
complaint. Id. We will uphold the trial court’s dismissal if the facts pled do not
constitute a basis for legal relief. Id.
The plaintiff argues that the trial court erred by failing “to properly review
[his] alleged misconduct in light of the different standards by which the PAB
and Superior Court operate.” He claims that, due to differences in hearings
before the PAB and the superior court, the court should have allowed him to
relitigate the PAB’s findings because “all the evidence” supported his “position
that he did not deliberately lie to investigators,” contrary to the PAB’s
conclusion. Specifically, he argues that because the superior court, unlike the
PAB, adheres to the Rules of Evidence, and because “the Division would have
the burden of persuasion” in a civil hearing, he should be given the opportunity
to “demonstrate that the alleged misconduct . . . did not occur as outlined in
the records.”
The defendants disagree, arguing that the court properly declined the
plaintiff’s request to review the PAB’s factual findings because the court lacked
jurisdiction to do so. In addition, they contend that “[e]ven if a subsequent
tribunal were to disagree with the PAB’s conclusions,” the PAB decision is
potentially exculpatory.
3