THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2022-0259
LARISSA TROY
v.
BISHOP GUERTIN HIGH SCHOOL & a.
Argued: April 19, 2023
Opinion Issued: August 10, 2023
Law Office of Joshua L. Gordon, of Concord (Joshua L. Gordon on the
brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
Airdo Werwas, LLC, of Chicago, Illinois (Michael A. Airdo and Brian J.
Hingston on the brief), and Winer and Bennett, LLP, of Nashua (David K.
Pinsonneault and John M. Edwards on the brief, and John M. Edwards orally),
for the defendants.
DONOVAN, J. The plaintiff, Larissa Troy, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Temple, J.) granting summary judgment in favor of the
defendants, Bishop Guertin High School (BGHS) and Brothers of the Sacred
Heart of New England, Inc. (BSHNE), based upon the court’s finding that the
plaintiff’s claims are barred by the statute of limitations. On appeal, the
plaintiff argues that the trial court erred because the plaintiff did not obtain
personal knowledge of the causal connection between her alleged injury and
the defendants’ hiring practices until 2017, which, pursuant to the discovery
rule set forth in former RSA 508:4-g, II (2010) (amended 2020), tolled the
statute of limitations to permit her 2018 lawsuit. Viewing the evidence in the
light most favorable to the plaintiff, we conclude that there is a material factual
dispute as to when the plaintiff knew, or in the exercise of reasonable diligence,
should have known, that her injury was proximately caused by the defendants’
conduct. Accordingly, we reverse the trial court’s grant of summary judgment
and remand.
I. Facts
The following facts are supported by the summary judgment record.
BGHS is a private Catholic school owned and operated by BSHNE. In 1988,
Shawn McEnany was convicted in Maine of unlawful sexual conduct with a
fifteen-year-old female student while McEnany was teaching at another school
that BSHNE owned and operated. Despite knowledge of this conviction, in
1990, BSHNE hired McEnany to teach at BGHS. Leo Labbe, the official
responsible for the hiring, “believed that it was safe” to hire McEnany “because
it was, at the time, an all-boys school.” Prior to hiring McEnany, Labbe did not
consult with a psychological or mental health professional as to whether
McEnany would pose a risk to female students. In 1992, BGHS admitted
female students. Nevertheless, BGHS did not take any action to limit
McEnany’s contact with female students and did not alert the parents or
students of his prior conviction.
The plaintiff attended BGHS from 1992 to 1996. In the fall of 1995,
when the plaintiff was seventeen years old and a senior at BGHS, the plaintiff
alleges that McEnany sexually assaulted her on two occasions on the BGHS
campus. The first incident occurred in the student locker area while the
plaintiff sat on a radiator near her sister. Afterwards, the plaintiff told her
sister, who witnessed the incident, to “stay away” from McEnany. The second
incident occurred in a classroom while students were taking an exam.
The plaintiff testified in her deposition that she reported the second
assault to the BGHS Dean of Students. The plaintiff recounted that the Dean
accused her of lying and told her that if she continued to repeat the story, she
would be in trouble. The plaintiff also informed her mother of the sexual
assault, who did not believe her. Following these alleged incidents and
disclosures, McEnany continued to teach at BGHS. The plaintiff graduated
from BGHS in 1996 and attended college in New England that fall.
In November 1997, McEnany was charged in New Hampshire “with
teaching as a convicted sex offender and failing to register as a sex offender.”
In response, Labbe, BGHS’s headmaster at that time, addressed the faculty
and student body and confirmed that McEnany had been convicted of unlawful
2
sexual contact with a fifteen-year-old female student while teaching in Maine
and that BGHS hired McEnany despite knowing of his prior conviction. BGHS
also sent two letters to BGHS families concerning McEnany’s criminal history.
The first letter disclosed the details of McEnany’s prior conviction, claimed that
McEnany did not engage in any improper conduct at BGHS, and explained that
due to his pending criminal charges, McEnany had been reassigned. The
second letter acknowledged BGHS’s prior knowledge of McEnany’s conviction
when it hired him, but explained that Labbe personally believed that McEnany
had been rehabilitated such that he could return to teaching. At that time, the
plaintiff’s two younger sisters attended BGHS. Nevertheless, the plaintiff
asserts that she had no knowledge at that time of BGHS’s public disclosures,
that her sisters never discussed these events with her, and that the plaintiff’s
mother denied receiving the second letter.
Rather, the plaintiff asserts that she first became aware of BGHS’s public
disclosures and of McEnany’s prior conviction in May 2017. That spring, the
plaintiff received a message from her brother-in-law discussing a Facebook
post by the school acknowledging her athletic career at BGHS. Further, the
plaintiff read a newspaper article detailing sexual abuse at another private
school. She alleges that these two events caused her to start “thinking about
McEnany’s abuse” and motivated her “to Google search his name.” She also
alleges that upon reading newspaper articles on the website
“bishopaccountability.org,” she first learned of McEnany’s history of abuse and
that BGHS “had previously been sued by other students relative to sexual
abuse they had endured at the hands of [BGHS’s] faculty members.” She
claims that she “did not make any connection in her mind between the sexual
abuse by McEnany and the psychological problems she was experiencing,”
until her internet search in 2017.
In 2017, McEnany passed away. In May 2018, more than twenty-two
years after the alleged assaults, the plaintiff brought two common law claims
alleging that the defendants were: (1) negligent in hiring, retaining, and
supervising McEnany; and (2) negligent in that they failed to protect her while
she was a student at BGHS. According to her expert, the plaintiff reported that
while at college, between 1996 and 2000, she struggled with her grades
because she was “preoccupied with [her] bad feelings and memories of the
assault.” Moreover, during college, she suffered from panic attacks that were
often followed by “days of traumatic memories” related to the assaults and that
these “intrusive memories” have continued into the present.
Thereafter, the parties filed cross-motions for summary judgment
addressing the question of whether the application of the statute of limitations
barred the plaintiff’s claims. The plaintiff argued that it was undisputed that,
until 2017, she had no knowledge either of the letter that Labbe sent in 1997
to the parents of BGHS students, or that BGHS knowingly hired a convicted
sex offender. Therefore, in her view, because she did not make the causal
3
connection between her alleged injuries, the alleged sexual abuse by McEnany,
and the defendants’ prior knowledge of McEnany’s conviction until 2017, both
of her claims are within the three-year statute of limitations set forth in the
discovery rule of former RSA 508:4-g, II. The defendants argued that the
plaintiff failed to satisfy her burden of proving that the discovery rule applied to
her claims. Instead, in their view, summary judgment was proper pursuant to
former RSA 508:4-g, I (2010) (amended 2020) because the statute of limitations
expired on the plaintiff’s thirtieth birthday, in 2008.
In February 2022, the trial court issued an order granting the
defendants’ motion for summary judgment and ruling that the plaintiff’s claims
are barred by the statute of limitations as set forth in RSA 508:4-g, I. The trial
court found that the record “conclusively demonstrates” that the plaintiff “did
not bring this action by her thirtieth birthday,” see RSA 508:4-g, I, and failed to
satisfy her burden of proving that the discovery rule applied because she knew
or should have known: “(1) that she has been abused; (2) the identity of her
abuser; (3) that the defendants employed the abuser; and (4) that the abuse
occurred on the employer’s property,” see RSA 508:4-g, II. The plaintiff moved
for reconsideration, which the court denied. This appeal followed.
II. Analysis
On appeal, the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in its application
of the discovery rule when granting the defendants’ motion for summary
judgment. When reviewing a trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we
consider the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn
from them, in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. See Peerless
Ins. v. Vt. Mut. Ins. Co., 151 N.H. 71, 72 (2004). If there is no genuine issue of
material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law,
the grant of summary judgment is proper. Id. We review the trial court’s
application of the law to the facts de novo. Id.
The narrow question raised in this appeal is whether the statute of
limitations barred the plaintiff’s claims. As relevant here, former RSA 508:4-g
provided that a person “alleging to have been subjected to any offense under
RSA 632-A” and who was under 18 years of age when the alleged offense
occurred, may commence a personal action based on the incident within the
later of:
I. Twelve years of the person’s eighteenth birthday; or
II. Three years of the time the plaintiff discovers, or in the exercise of
reasonable diligence should have discovered, the injury and its
causal relationship to the act or omission complained of. 1
1 We note that RSA 508:4-g was amended in 2020 to allow a party alleging to have been subjected
to any offense under RSA chapter 632-A (2016 & Supp. 2022) and RSA 639:2 (2016) to
4
The effect of Section I is to provide a longer statute of limitations for
personal actions alleging sexual assault of a minor than the general rule for
“Personal Actions” in RSA 508:4 (2010). On the other hand, Section II
incorporates the so-called “discovery rule” exception applicable to all personal
actions. See RSA 508:4. Here, the plaintiff alleges that the defendants’
employee, McEnany, committed an “offense” against her enumerated in RSA
chapter 632-A (2016 & Supp. 2022), that the alleged offense occurred when the
plaintiff was under eighteen years of age, and that it is not disputed that she
did not file suit before her thirtieth birthday in 2008. Therefore, the issue we
must decide is narrow: whether the trial court erred by granting summary
judgment to the defendants on the basis that the plaintiff failed to satisfy the
discovery rule by bringing this action within “[t]hree years of the time the
plaintiff discovers, or in the exercise of reasonable diligence should have
discovered, the injury and its causal relationship to the act or omission
complained of.” RSA 508:4-g, II.
“The purpose of the discovery rule is to provide injured parties an avenue
of relief when they did not and reasonably could not know of the harm or its
causal link to a wrongful act or omission by another party.” Petition of N.H.
Div. for Children, Youth & Families, 173 N.H. 613, 618 (2020). The discovery
rule is a two-pronged rule requiring both prongs to be satisfied before the
statute of limitations begins to run. Beane v. Dana S. Beane & Co., 160 N.H.
708, 713 (2010). First, a plaintiff must know or reasonably should have known
that the plaintiff has been injured; and second, a plaintiff must know or
reasonably should have known that the plaintiff’s injury was proximately
caused by conduct of the defendant. Id. “Thus, the discovery rule exception
does not apply unless the plaintiff did not discover, and could not reasonably
have discovered, either the alleged injury or its causal connection to the alleged
negligent act.” Perez v. Pike Inds., 153 N.H. 158, 160 (2005). Once the
defendant has established that the statute of limitations would bar the action,
the plaintiff has the burden of proving that the discovery rule applies. Beane,
160 N.H. at 713. Here, because the plaintiff filed this action in May 2018, she
had the burden to establish that at least one of these prongs was not satisfied
at any point prior to May 2015.
As to both prongs, although the discovery rule tolls the limitations period
until a plaintiff discovers, or should reasonably have discovered, the causal
connection between the harm and the defendant’s negligent or wrongful act,
this rule “is not intended to toll the statute of limitations until the full extent of
the plaintiff's injury has manifested itself.” Furbush v. McKittrick, 149 N.H.
426, 431 (2003). “Rather, that the plaintiff could reasonably discern that [she]
“commence a personal action at any time.” RSA 508:4-g (Supp. 2022). However, in this case, the
parties agreed that the applicable statute of limitations is the version of RSA 508:4-g in effect
when the action was filed in 2018. This opinion assumes the parties’ positions are legally
accurate and will limit its analysis accordingly.
5
suffered some harm caused by the defendant’s conduct is sufficient to render
the discovery rule inapplicable.” Id. (quotation omitted). A plaintiff need not be
certain of this causal connection; the possibility that it existed will suffice to
obviate the protections of the discovery rule. Beane, 160 N.H. at 713.
A party attempting to invoke the discovery rule will be held to a duty of
reasonable inquiry. Portsmouth Country Club v. Town of Greenland, 152 N.H.
617, 624 (2005). The discovery rule applies only when a plaintiff “did not have,
and could not have had with due diligence, the information essential to
bringing suit.” Id. (quotation omitted). Moreover, as the plaintiff concedes,
“the discovery rule employs an objective standard.” Accordingly, the plaintiff’s
subjective knowledge is not dispositive of her claim. Rather, the standard is
what a plaintiff “in the exercise of reasonable diligence should have
discovered.” RSA 508:4-g, II; see also Beane, 160 N.H. at 713. “Whether the
plaintiff exercised reasonable diligence in discovering the causal connection
between the injury and the defendant’s alleged act or omission is a question of
fact.” Balzotti Global Grp., LLC v. Shepherds Hill Proponents, LLC, 173 N.H.
314, 321 (2020) (quotation omitted).
We begin our discussion by noting that the parties agree that the plaintiff
knew or should have known that she suffered an injury as a result of the
assaults prior to May 2015. Accordingly, we consider whether the plaintiff
knew or should have known of the causal connection between her injuries and
the defendants’ conduct prior to May 2015. The trial court found that the
plaintiff knew or should have known of the causal connection between her
injury and the defendants’ conduct immediately following the alleged assaults.
In reaching this conclusion, the trial court relied primarily on the fact that, at
the time of the abuse, the plaintiff knew that McEnany was employed by the
defendants. In so finding, the trial court erred. We cannot conclude that,
based only upon McEnany’s employment, the plaintiff should have become
aware of the causal connection between her injury and the two common law
claims that she now brings in her action against the defendants. Simply put,
the plaintiff’s knowledge that she had been injured and that her assailant was
employed by the defendants differs from her knowing of the causal connection
between the injury and the defendants’ alleged acts or omissions in hiring,
retaining, and supervising McEnany.
The trial court relied on a number of out-of-state cases to conclude that
an employment relationship between the abuser and the defendants is
sufficient to put the plaintiff on