THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0020, State of New Hampshire v. Ronnie
J. Robichaud, the court on June 21, 2024, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The defendant, Ronnie J. Robichaud, appeals his conviction
for misdemeanor driving under the influence (DUI), first offense, see RSA 265-
A:2 (2014), following a bench trial in the Circuit Court (Keating, J.). The
defendant argues that: (1) the evidence was insufficient to support his DUI
conviction; and (2) his state and federal constitutional rights to due process,
produce all proofs favorable, and confrontation were denied by the trial court’s
decision to hold an ex parte hearing regarding potentially exculpatory evidence.
Because we agree with the State that the evidence presented was sufficient for
a DUI conviction and that the defendant’s constitutional challenges fail, we
affirm.
The following facts are supported by the record or are undisputed. At
approximately 8:10 p.m. on June 15, 2019, a State police officer stopped the
defendant in Weirs Beach after observing him driving erratically on a crowded
road. As the officer asked for the defendant’s license and registration, he could
smell alcohol and observed that the defendant had red, glassy eyes, and spoke
with a “thick tongue.” The defendant admitted to having one alcoholic drink
shortly before driving, as well as “some beers” earlier in the day. The officer
asked the defendant to step out of the vehicle and perform field sobriety tests,
and the defendant consented. The officer administered a horizontal gaze
nystagmus test and observed signs that the defendant was impaired. The
officer then attempted to administer the walk and turn test, but the defendant
failed to follow the officer’s instructions and the officer stopped the test. The
officer asked the defendant whether he would be able to complete the third test
— the “one leg stand” test — and the defendant responded that he would not
and that the officer “should arrest him.” The officer then arrested the
defendant. On June 21, 2019, the State charged the defendant with one class
B misdemeanor DUI.
On July 8, 2020, the officer, through counsel, intervened in the DUI
proceeding and filed a motion in limine and request for a hearing. According to
the defendant, on that same day, the State notified the defendant’s attorney via
email that the officer involved in the case may have engaged in conduct subject
to disclosure under the exculpatory evidence schedule and that such material
may be forthcoming. See RSA 105:13-d, I (2023) (“The exculpatory evidence
schedule shall consist of a list of all current or former law enforcement officers
whose personnel information contain potentially exculpatory evidence.”).
On July 30, 2020, the Trial Court (Vetanze, J.) held a confidential ex
parte hearing attended by an attorney for the State, the officer’s counsel, and
the officer himself. The court reviewed the confidential records at issue in
camera. Following the hearing, the court issued a sealed order to the
individuals present at the hearing. It also issued a public order informing the
parties that the court had held the ex parte hearing to “assess whether the
State ha[d] a duty to disclose possibly exculpatory ‘Laurie’ material.” See State
v. Laurie, 139 N.H. 325 (1995); RSA 105:13-b (2023). The court explained
that, having reviewed the alleged facts and the applicable law, it concluded that
the evidence at issue was neither exculpatory nor did it implicate the general
credibility of any witness. The court, accordingly, did not order the State to
disclose the evidence to the defendant. The defendant did not file a motion to
reconsider.
The defendant subsequently filed a motion to dismiss on the ground that
the trial court’s decisions to hold an ex parte hearing and to determine the
evidence to be non-exculpatory — without notifying the defendant beforehand
— violated the defendant’s constitutional rights to due process, to produce all
proofs favorable, and to confrontation. The court denied this motion. In so
doing, the court noted the defendant’s right to seek an interlocutory appeal.
The defendant subsequently filed a motion seeking interlocutory appeal.
While working with the parties to formulate an interlocutory appeal statement,
the Trial Court (Garner, J.) noted that it had offered to re-review the sealed
documents, but that the parties had reached an “impasse about the question of
how” or “what procedure” the court “might follow in looking at the sealed
documents.” The defendant represented that he could not “in good conscience
. . . agree to the procedure that’s being suggested as far as having [the court]
review the material that was submitted as potentially exculpatory or
impeaching, and therefore covered by Laurie.” He sought to preserve his
objection to his lack of notice of and opportunity to participate in the ex parte
hearing — in essence, he objected to the use of an ex parte proceeding under
the circumstances. The defendant subsequently filed an interlocutory appeal,
which we declined to accept.
On November 16, 2021, the Trial Court (Keating, J.) held a bench trial
and found the defendant guilty. This appeal followed.
On appeal, the defendant raises two challenges to the trial court’s
rulings. First, he asserts that the evidence was insufficient to support his DUI
conviction. Second, he argues that the process the trial court employed to
review potentially exculpatory evidence — including the ex parte hearing —
2
violated his constitutional rights to due process, to produce all proofs
favorable, and to confrontation as guaranteed by Part I, Article 15 of the New
Hampshire Constitution and the Fifth, Sixth, and Fourteenth Amendments to
the United States Constitution.
We first address the sufficiency issue. See Chapman v. Douglas, 146
N.H. 209, 211 (2001) (noting our “established policy against reaching a
constitutional issue in a case that can be decided on a non-constitutional
ground”). As a threshold matter, the State asserts that the defendant did not
fully brief his insufficiency argument on appeal, and thereby waived his
sufficiency of the evidence challenge. See Mountain View Park, LLC v. Robson,
168 N.H. 117, 121 (2015). After reviewing the defendant’s appellate pleadings,
we conclude that he adequately briefed this issue for our review. We now turn
to the merits.
To prevail in a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, the defendant
bears the burden of proving that no rational trier of fact, viewing the evidence
in the light most favorable to the State, could have found guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt. See State v. Kelley, 159 N.H. 449, 454-55 (2009). The trier
of fact “may draw reasonable inferences from facts proved and also inferences
from facts found as a result of other inferences, provided they can be
reasonably drawn therefrom.” State v. Sanborn, 168 N.H. 400, 413 (2015)
(quotation omitted). When reviewing the evidence, we examine “each
evidentiary item in the context of all the evidence, and not in isolation.” State
v. Saintil-Brown, 172 N.H. 110, 117 (2019). We review a challenge to the
sufficiency of the evidence de novo because it raises a claim of legal error. Id.
Here, because the defendant chose to present a case, we review the entire trial
record to assess the sufficiency of the evidence. State v. Dion, 164 N.H. 544,
548 (2013).
To convict the defendant of DUI, the State had to prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that the defendant drove or attempted to drive a vehicle on a
way while he was “under the influence of intoxicating liquor.” RSA 265-A:2,
I(a); Kelley, 159 N.H. at 452. To prove that the defendant was “under the
influence of intoxicating liquor,” RSA 265-A:2, I(a), the State had to prove
beyond a reasonable doubt that he was impaired to any degree, Kelley, 159
N.H. at 452.
The defendant argues that the State’s evidence of impairment was wholly
circumstantial and that the evidence was insufficient because it did not
exclude all reasonable conclusions other than guilt. See, e.g., State v. Castine,
173 N.H. 217, 220 (2020) (stating that, when evidence as to an element of proof
is solely circumstantial, the evidence “must exclude all reasonable conclusions
except guilt” (quotation omitted)). However, we agree with the State that the
evidence introduced to prove the defendant’s impairment, discussed below, was
not solely circumstantial. See Kelley, 159 N.H. at 454 (explaining that, in DUI
3