THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0553, Appeal of Michael G. Cross, the
court on May 14, 2024, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The
petitioner, Michael G. Cross, appeals a decision of the New Hampshire Board of
Claims (Board) that his negligence claim against the respondents, the New
Hampshire Office of Professional Licensure and Certification (OPLC), the New
Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), and the New
Hampshire Department of Administrative Services (DAS), for injuries he
sustained when he slipped and fell on ice in the parking lot adjacent to the
OPLC, was barred by discretionary function immunity. We reverse and
remand.
The record supports the following facts. Just before 8 a.m. on February
18, 2019, the petitioner slipped and fell on black ice covered by a light dusting
of snow in the parking lot next to the OPLC building, sustaining a serious head
injury. The petitioner was there to drop off licensing paperwork. That day was
a state holiday, and, unbeknownst to the petitioner, OPLC was closed.
On February 3, 2021, the petitioner filed a claim with the Board, alleging
negligence on the part of the OPLC. Upon learning that DAS had entered into a
Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) with DHHS, under which the petitioner
claims DAS assumed, among other things, DHHS’ responsibility for snow and
ice removal for the parking lot where he fell, the petitioner successfully moved
to add DHHS and DAS as parties.
The Board held a merits hearing on December 10, 2021. At the hearing,
the DAS Superintendent of Grounds (Superintendent) for the Governor Hugh
Gallen Office Park — the location where the petitioner fell — testified that
treatment priority of the parking lots depends on, among other factors, the
timing and severity of the snowstorm.
In January 2022, the Board issued an order finding that the OPLC’s
negligent failure to treat the parking lot was the cause of the petitioner’s
injuries, and that discretionary function immunity did not bar his claim. OPLC
moved for rehearing. In May 2022, the Board reversed its initial determination
that discretionary function immunity did not apply. The Board found that,
based on a review of the Superintendent’s testimony, there was sufficient
evidence to conclude that discretionary function immunity was applicable. The
Board reasoned that the Superintendent’s testimony demonstrated that he and
his crew “had the discretion, via policies and procedures, to determine when
and how to salt and sand on a Federal holiday after a dusting of snow.” The
petitioner subsequently moved for rehearing, which the Board denied. This
appeal followed.
On appeal, the petitioner argues that the Board misinterpreted and
misapplied our discretionary function immunity law. The respondents counter
that the Board did not err when it determined that the Superintendent’s
decisions about how and when to treat the parking lots were immune
discretionary functions. We agree with the petitioner.
Our standard of review is set forth by statute. “[T]he burden of proof
shall be upon the party seeking to set aside any order or decision of the [Board]
to show that the same is clearly unreasonable or unlawful, and all findings of
the [Board] upon all questions of fact properly before it shall be deemed to be
prima facie lawful and reasonable.” RSA 541:13 (2021). “[T]he order or
decision appealed from shall not be set aside or vacated except for errors of
law, unless the court is satisfied, by a clear preponderance of the evidence
before it, that such order is unjust or unreasonable.” Id.
Under discretionary function immunity, the State and its agencies are
immune from liability for conduct that involves “the exercise or performance or
the failure to exercise or perform a discretionary executive or planning function
or duty on the part of the state or any state agency or a state officer, employee,
or official acting within the scope of his office or employment.” RSA 541-B:19,
I(c) (2021). Discretionary function immunity is premised upon the notion that
certain essential, fundamental activities of government must remain immune
from tort liability so that our government can govern. Ford v. N.H. Dep’t of
Transp., 163 N.H. 284, 294 (2012).
In resolving discretionary function immunity questions, we distinguish
between planning or discretionary functions and functions that are purely
ministerial. Appeal of N.H. Dep’t of Transp., 159 N.H. 72, 74 (2009). When the
particular conduct which caused the injury is one characterized by the high
degree of discretion and judgment involved in weighing alternatives and
making choices with respect to public policy and planning, governmental
entities should remain immune from liability. Opinion of the Justices, 126
N.H. 554, 563 (1985). In particular, we distinguish between policy decisions
involving the consideration of competing economic, social, and political factors
on the one hand, and operational or ministerial decisions required to
implement the policy decisions on the other hand. Everitt v. Gen. Elec. Co.,
156 N.H. 202, 211 (2007). Ministerial functions are functions that are
absolute, certain, and imperative, involving merely the execution of a set task.
2
Maryea v. Velardi, 168 N.H. 633, 638 (2016). Immunity extends only to
decisions, acts, and omissions for which attaching liability would permit
judicial second-guessing of the governing functions of another branch of
government. Everitt, 156 N.H. at 211.
The respondents argue that because the Superintendent had discretion
to determine how best to allocate limited State resources between various
government buildings and could prioritize, in the interest of public safety, the
sequence in which the parking lots were treated, the decision to make the
parking lot where the petitioner fell a “low priority” involved the evaluation of
economic and political considerations entitled to discretionary function
immunity. The petitioner, however, asserts that the MOA established a formal
State policy regarding snow and ice removal, and that the Superintendent’s
actions were merely ministerial. We find that independent of whether there
was a State policy regarding maintenance of the parking lot, the
Superintendent’s decisions are not entitled to discretionary function immunity.
Although the Superintendent’s decisions about how to prioritize certain
areas based on the severity and the timing of a storm involved discretion, the
exercise of that discretion, even to a significant degree, is not the sole factor for
determining whether government conduct constitutes a discretionary function.
Everitt, 156 N.H. at 213. We find Everitt instructive. There, we held that
discretionary function immunity did not preclude liability for police officers’
decision not to detain an individual, even though the decision required the
officers to use “their trained judgment, experience and discretion” and “[t]heir
decision was not menial, rote or automatic.” Id. at 213-14, 222. In Everitt, we
reasoned that, because the officers’ decision did not involve municipal
governing, subjecting the town to liability would not be “tantamount to judicial
interference with legislative or executive decision-making” and, therefore,
discretionary function immunity did not apply. Id. at 214.1
Here, as in Everitt, although the Superintendent’s decisions as to the
timing and sequence of snow removal and treatment involved the exercise of
discretion, they did not involve the exercise of either legislative or executive
decision-making, the judicial interference with which would compromise our
system of separation of powers. Id. Deciding the order in which to treat the
parking lots does not involve the high degree of discretion and judgment with
1 Unlike State discretionary function immunity, municipal discretionary function immunity has
not been codified by statute. Nonetheless, the standards governing the two are not materially
different; in fact, we have previously found decisions in one area instructive in the other. See
Gardner v. City of Concord, 137 N.H. 253, 257 (1993) (municipal discretionary function immunity
case citing DiFruscia v. N.H. Dept. of Public Works, 136 N.H. 202, 203 (1992), a State
discretionary function immunity case); Ford v. N.H. Dep’t of Transp., 163 N.H. 284, 294-96 (2012)
(State discretionary function immunity case relying on Everitt v. Gen. Elec. Co., 156 N.H. 202, 220
(2007), a municipal discretionary function immunity case); Bergeron v. City of Manchester, 140
N.H. 417, 421 (1995) (addressing the city and the State’s immunity questions together).
3