THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0084, Albert S. Brandano v.
Superintendent of New Hampshire School Administrative Unit
16 & a., the court on November 3, 2023, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The
plaintiff, Albert S. Brandano, appeals an order of the Superior Court (Ruoff, J.)
dismissing his complaint under the Right-to-Know Law, RSA chapter 91-A
(2023). We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand.
I. Background
The following facts either were found by the trial court or reflect the
content of documents in the appellate record. On July 4, 2021, the plaintiff
sent a Right-to-Know Law request to defendant Superintendent David Ryan,
in his capacity as Superintendent of New Hampshire School Administrative
Unit 16 (SAU 16), requesting the following documents relating to Diversity,
Equity, Inclusion and Justice (DEIJ) committees and activities between July
1, 2019 and June 30, 2021 “in SAU16 or any School District in SAU16.”
a. Request No 1: All charters, member lists, or other records establishing
or setting out the purposes, goals, or objectives of all DEIJ
Committees;
b. Request No 2: All postings, agendas, materials distributed to
committee members, presentations, work products, videos, chat logs,
and minutes, for all meetings of all DEIJ Committees;
c. Request No 3: All emails or other written communications, between
any DEIJ Committee Chairperson or other group leader or facilitator,
and any SAU16 Officer, concerning a DEIJ Committee or DEIJ
Activity;
d. Request No 4: All records of any DEIJ Activity of any School Board or
Committee of a School Board. Such records include but are not
limited to postings, agendas, materials distributed to members,
presentations, work products, videos, chat logs, and minutes;
e. Request No 5: All records of any DEIJ Activity of any SAU16 Officer;
f. Request No 6: All contracts, agreements, or grant applications that, in
whole or in part, concern a DEIJ Committee or seek to enable DEIJ
Activity;
g. Request No 7: All records of expenses incurred in support of a DEIJ
Committee or DEIJ Activity, and the budgets from which they were
paid or will be paid; and
h. Request No 8: All records of any DEIJ-Activity-related curriculum
materials, for example books, that were distributed, assigned,
recommended, or suggested to any SAU16 teachers or students.
Ryan emailed the plaintiff on July 7, 2021, acknowledging receipt of the
requests, explaining that most of the information the plaintiff sought was
available on the SAU 16 website, and indicating that SAU 16 would need an
additional five days to respond to Request Nos. 6 and 7, and an additional
45 days to respond to Request No. 3. Ryan emailed the plaintiff again on
July 16, 2021, attaching documents responsive to Request Nos. 6 and 7 and
indicating that budget information for the DEIJ position could be found on
the SAU 16 website. In the same email, Ryan indicated that he still intended
to provide documents responsive to Request No. 3 within “the 45 days
previously indicated.”
On August 16, 2021, the plaintiff emailed Ryan and, among other
things, informed him that he believed that SAU 16 had not provided certain
documents responsive to his requests because he had obtained responsive
documents from other sources. He provided specific examples of documents
that he believed were responsive to his requests but which had not been
provided by Ryan. Ryan did not respond to the email.
On August 23, 2021, the plaintiff again emailed Ryan and others. In
the email, titled, “SAU 16 – RIGHT TO KNOW 91A’s – July 4, 2021 – Notice
of Delinquency,” the plaintiff reminded Ryan of the 45-day deadline to
respond to Request No. 3 and of his August 16 email.
On August 27, 2021 the plaintiff again emailed Ryan and others,
stating:
Public notice
REF: Notice of Delinquency Aug 23, 2021
Superintendent Ryan you are now in Violation of Section 91-A:4.
Your inaction as well as violation of the spirit of the law for full
disclosure, leaves me no other option than to proceed under NH
2
State Law; 91-A:7 Violation and 91-A:8 Remedies.
On September 28, 2021, the plaintiff filed a Right-to-Know Law complaint
requesting that the court order Ryan and SAU 16 to immediately produce
the information he had requested, and to award him attorney’s fees and
costs.
On October 14, 2021, Ryan sent an email to the plaintiff stating:
Please find attached three invoices, which we have requested
and obtained from the following schools and districts: Newfields
School District, East Kingston Elementary School, Kensington
Elementary School, and Swasey Central School. The SAU
neither contracted with, nor paid for the services provided by,
2revolutions. We have been informed by the schools that there
do not exist any written contracts relating to these invoices or
2revolutions. These documents are being produced to you as a
courtesy. Although they may be “governmental records” of
entities other than the SAU, they are not within the scope of the
SAU’s obligations under RSA 91-A.
On October 18, 2021, the defendants filed a verified motion to dismiss,
to which the plaintiff objected. A hearing was held on October 20, 2021.
The defendants had not yet produced any documents in response to Request
No. 3 as of the date of the hearing. Nevertheless, the trial court granted the
motion to dismiss on December 9, 2021, stating, in relevant part:
[T]he Court provisionally GRANTS Defendants’ motion to
dismiss pending Defendants’ production of documents, in their
possession, responsive to Plaintiff’s Request No. 3 within 45-
days of the Clerk’s Notice of Decision accompanying this Order.
If Defendants comply with this deadline, the instant action will
be dismissed. Should Defendants fail to comply with the
deadline, the Court will be open to rehearing argument related
to the costs and fees related to securing such documents.
The clerk’s written notice of decision was dated December 9, 2021. The
plaintiff filed a motion to reconsider, which the trial court denied on January
14, 2022.
The defendants provided additional documents to the plaintiff on
December 16, 2021. Ryan sent an email to the plaintiff which read, in part:
In response to your July 4, 2021 RSA 91-A request, specifically
#3, we have searched the SAU 16 email accounts of all SAU 16
3