THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0587, Appeal of New Hampshire
Department of Corrections & a., the court on December 13,
2023, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The
petitioners, the New Hampshire Department of Corrections (DOC) and DOC’s
third-party administrator, Constitution State Services, appeal a decision of the
New Hampshire Compensation Appeals Board (CAB) upholding the decision of
the respondent, the coordinator of the State Special Fund for Second Injuries
(Second Injury Fund), declining to reimburse the petitioners for benefits paid to
the claimant. See RSA 281-A:54, I (2023). The petitioners argue that the CAB
erred by: (1) applying the wrong standard and requiring that the petitioners
prove that the claimant suffered a second injury, rather than a “subsequent
disability by injury”; (2) failing to provide findings regarding the issue of a
greater combined disability and, instead, relying on the opinions of doctors who
opined on the uncontested issue of causation; and (3) failing to consider
another doctor’s opinion on the issue of greater combined disability. The
petitioners also argue that the CAB’s finding of an absence of a “subsequent
disability by injury” was unsupported by the evidence. We conclude that the
CAB applied the incorrect standard as set forth in RSA 281-A:54, I, and Appeal
of CNA Insurance Cos., 143 N.H. 270 (1998), and accordingly, we vacate the
CAB’s ruling and remand.
The following facts are agreed upon by the parties or otherwise relate to
the contents of the documents in the certified record before us. On May 8,
2019, the claimant, who was employed by DOC, suffered an accidental head
injury while attending a work-related barbeque. Emergency responders
transported the claimant by ambulance to the hospital, where the emergency
room doctor diagnosed her with an unspecified head injury. Later that month,
the claimant’s primary care provider (PCP) diagnosed the claimant with a
concussion and whiplash. The claimant’s PCP noted that the claimant could
not return to work until she was re-evaluated. The claimant began weekly
follow-up visits with her PCP, and in June, she resumed working at DOC on a
part-time basis. In July, the claimant experienced persistent concussion
symptoms; her PCP diagnosed her with post-concussion syndrome and referred
her for a neurology evaluation. From August to September, the claimant’s PCP
gradually increased the claimant’s work hours. In September, the claimant
met with a neurologist, Dr. Engstrand, who confirmed the post-concussion
syndrome diagnosis, noting light sensitivity, headache, personality change,
cognitive changes, and poor short-term memory. In October, the claimant’s
PCP noted that the claimant’s prognosis was “good” and released the claimant
to full-time work duty. The claimant followed up with Engstrand in November,
who again noted headaches and cognitive changes. In December, the
claimant’s condition worsened, and her PCP reduced the claimant’s hours to
half-time. In early January 2020, Engstrand placed the claimant out of work.
Prior to the dispute in this case, the claimant and DOC litigated a
causation dispute related to the claimant’s underlying workers’ compensation
claim. As part of that dispute, Engstrand and the DOC’s medical expert, Dr.
Saris, filed opposing reports. In his March 2020 report, Saris concluded that
the claimant’s ongoing symptoms were no longer related to her May 2019
injury. In her April 2020 report, Engstrand disagreed and concluded that the
claimant’s ongoing symptoms were caused by her May 2019 injury. The CAB
considered these reports when determining whether the claimant incurred a
“subsequent disability by injury” pursuant to RSA 281-A:54, I.
In August 2021, the third-party administrator for DOC applied for
reimbursement from the Second Injury Fund pursuant to RSA 281-A:54, I,
contending that the claimant suffered a “subsequent disability by injury” in
January 2020. This application included an employer statement, a schedule of
payments issued, and a medical report entitled “Second Injury Fund
Certification by Physician,” completed by Dr. Bourne, DOC’s medical expert. In
his report, Bourne opined that the claimant incurred two distinct impairments:
(1) head injury with mild concussion and post-concussion syndrome; and (2)
adjustment disorder with anxiety and depression. He also opined that the
“combination of the two impairments cause[d] a substantially greater disability
than would have been caused by the subsequent injury alone.”
In October 2021, the Second Injury Fund denied the application, stating
that:
The Fund disagrees with [DOC and its third-party administrator’s]
position that [the claimant] had a subsequent disability by injury
on 1/3/2020. The documentation submitted supports an ongoing
issue that arose out of the 5/8/19 injury and doesn’t support that
a subsequent disability by injury that arose out of and in the
course of employment occurred.
The Fund disagrees with [DOC and its third-party administrator’s]
position that [the claimant’s] subsequent disability by injury
resulted in a compensation liability for a disability that is greater
by reason of the combined effects of the preexisting impairment
than that which would have resulted from the subsequent injury
alone.
2
DOC and its third-party administrator appealed the denial to the CAB.
The CAB considered two issues: “(1) [w]as there a subsequent disability by
injury on January 3, 2020, or not; and (2) [w]hether there was compensation
liability for a disability that is greater by reason of the combined effects of the
pre-existing impairment than that which would have resulted from the
subsequent injury alone.”1 After a hearing, the CAB answered both questions
in the negative and denied the application for reimbursement from the Second
Injury Fund. In its decision, the CAB explained that:
We find that the medical opinions of Dr. Engstrand as being much
more reasonable, logical and persuasive than those of Dr. Saris,
the IME doctor, in determining whether there was a second injury
or disability from an injury after May 8, 2019.
On April 29, 2020 Dr. Engstrand wrote that she believed
that there was only one disability from an injury (May 8, 2019).
The CAB denied DOC’s motion for rehearing. This appeal followed.
Our standard of review of CAB decisions is established by statute.
Appeal of The Lawson Group, 175 N.H. 397, 399 (2022); see RSA 541:13
(2021). All findings of the CAB upon all questions of fact properly before it are
deemed prima facie lawful and reasonable. Appeal of The Lawson Group, 175
N.H. at 399; RSA 541:13. Accordingly, our review of the CAB’s factual findings
is deferential. Appeal of The Lawson Group, 175 N.H. at 399. As the appealing
parties, the petitioners have the burden of demonstrating that the CAB’s
decision is reversible. See id. We will not disturb the CAB’s decision absent an
error of law, or unless, by a clear preponderance of the evidence, we find it to
1 Additionally, to qualify for reimbursement from the Second Injury Fund, the employee must have
a “permanent physical or mental impairment, as defined in RSA 281-A:2, XIV,” and the employer
must have “knowledge of the employee’s permanent physical or mental impairment at the time
that the employee was hired or at the time that the employee was retained in employment after
the employer acquired such knowledge.” RSA 281-A:54, I & III (2023). The Second Injury Fund,
in its denial letter, only addressed two elements: (1) whether the claimant “had a subsequent
disability by injury”; and (2) whether the claimant’s “subsequent disability by injury resulted in a
compensation liability for a disability that is greater by reason of the combined effects of the
preexisting impairment than that which would have resulted from the subsequent injury
alone.” See RSA 281-A:54, I. DOC and its third-party administrator filed a motion in limine with
the CAB requesting that the CAB limit the issues on appeal to these two issues. Over the Second
Injury Fund’s objections, the CAB granted the motion, explaining that the Second Injury Fund
“may contest any elements of the carriers’ claims that it has set out in its denial letters, but is
precluded from contesting any different elements of the carriers’ respective claims for
reimbursement that are not set out in the [denial letters].” Accordingly, the CAB did not consider
whether the claimant had a “permanent physical or mental impairment” or whether DOC had
knowledge of such impairment, and thus, such questions are not before us on appeal.
3