THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0334, State of New Hampshire v. Kathleen
Bossi, the court on January 19, 2024, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(2). The defendant, Kathleen Bossi, appeals her conviction for criminal
trespass. See RSA 635:2, III(b)(2) (Supp. 2023). She argues that the Trial Court
(Stephen, J.) erred: (1) “by taking jurisdiction over a civil dispute”; and (2) “by
refusing to recognize the irrevocable license of the defendant, an invitee, to enter
and remain in a public accommodation during normal business hours.” We
affirm.
The record contains the following evidence. The Timberlane Regional
School Board scheduled an in-person school board meeting at the Timberlane
Regional High School performing arts auditorium on May 20, 2021. In May
2021, the school board required that anyone entering school property, including
the auditorium, wear a mask. This requirement was posted on the doors to the
performing arts center. The agenda for the meeting also stated: “Attendees are
asked to wear appropriate face coverings and practice social distancing
protocols.” The school board and superintendent requested police officers be
posted “in case there was an issue” and to enforce the mask policy.
Plaistow Police Officer Schiavone was assigned to “keep the peace at the
meeting.” When Schiavone arrived at the arts center, he observed people in the
entryway attempting to enter the auditorium without masks. He “stopped them,
stood in front of them, and said to them, I’m sorry, you can’t come in unless you
have a mask.” People in the entryway told him that he could not enforce the
mask policy.
Sergeant Porter was also assigned to patrol the performing arts center due
to the likelihood that protesters would attend to protest “the wearing of masks
and personal protection.” When he arrived on site, Schiavone called him and
requested assistance in the entryway with eight or nine people, including the
defendant, who were trying to enter without masks. Porter testified that the
crowd was “boisterous,” repeatedly telling the officers that “it wasn’t right” that
they could not enter without masks.
When Porter explained to the defendant that she “was not allowed into the
performing arts center without wearing a mask,” she told him that she was going
to enter without a mask and that he could not stop her. As Porter saw the
defendant walking toward the auditorium, he said, “you can’t go in there” and
reached out and grabbed either her arm or a sign that she was holding. She
responded “you can’t touch me” and forced her way into the auditorium. Porter
then told her that she was under arrest. When she pulled her arms away as he
was attempting to handcuff her, he advised her that he would also arrest her for
resisting arrest if she “continued on.” After she then allowed herself to be
handcuffed, she was placed inside a cruiser where she refused to give her name.
While Porter was attempting to book the defendant, he received a call for backup
at the performing arts center. He responded and learned that the meeting was
now being held on Zoom.
As a result of her actions, the defendant was charged with two offenses:
class B misdemeanor criminal trespass and class B misdemeanor disorderly
conduct. Following a bench trial, the court ruled that the State had met its
burden of proof to establish that the defendant was guilty of criminal trespass:
The meeting was proper[ly] held in a place, here a public building,
and the Defendant was ordered twice by a police officer to not enter
without a mask pursuant to a posted requirement. Sergeant Porter
had sufficient authority to keep everyone masked to allow for the
meeting to be conducted in a safe and peaceful manner. The
Defendant defied the order and walked a few feet into the auditorium
in defiance of an order not to enter without a mask and personally
communicated to her by Sergeant Porter.
The court then found the defendant guilty on both charges but
“conditionally dismissed” the disorderly conduct charge until such time as
appellate rights are exhausted “because these facts are very similar to the facts
alleged in the criminal trespass charge and, much like an alternative theory case,
the Court deems it just to enter a conviction and sentence on only one charge.”
This appeal followed.
In her challenge to the trial court’s ruling, the defendant advances two
main arguments: (1) the trial court “erred by taking jurisdiction over a civil
dispute that was misclassified by the arresting officer as a crime”; and (2) the
court erred “by refusing to recognize the irrevocable license of the defendant, an
invitee, to enter and remain in a public accommodation during normal business
hours.” Although the State contends that the defendant has failed to sufficiently
brief her challenge, we will address her main arguments on the merits.
RSA 635:2 (Supp. 2023) provides:
I. A person is guilty of criminal trespass if, knowing that he is
not licensed or privileged to do so, he enters or remains in any place.
2
II. Criminal trespass is a misdemeanor for the first offense and a
class B felony for any subsequent offense if the person knowingly or
recklessly causes damage in excess of $1,500 to the value of the
property of another.
III. Criminal trespass is a misdemeanor if:
(a) The trespass takes place in an occupied structure as
defined in RSA 635:1, III; or
(b) The person knowingly enters or remains:
(1) In any secured premises;
(2) In any place in defiance of an order to leave or
not to enter which was personally communicated to
him by the owner or other authorized person;
. . . .
A challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence raises a claim of legal
error; therefore, our standard of review is de novo. State v. Bell, 175 N.H. 382,
385 (2022). To prevail on this challenge, the defendant must establish that no
rational trier of fact, viewing all of the evidence and all reasonable inferences from
it in the light most favorable to the State, could have found guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt. Id.
Citing State v. Jones, 172 N.H. 774 (2020), the defendant first argues
that her conviction cannot stand because the State did not establish that she
“had any reason to know or believe that she was not licensed or privileged to
patronize Timberlane Regional School Board since [she] had consent to be on
the premises during its normal business hours, as an invitee, as were other
patrons at the time.” Our decision in Jones does not provide support for her
argument. In Jones, we were asked to determine whether the defendant was
seized during an encounter with the arresting officers. Jones, 172 N.H. at 775.
Because the officer who interacted with the defendant at the time of the stop
did not testify at the suppression hearing, we concluded that the trial court
had insufficient evidence to determine whether the officer “explicitly
communicated that he was restraining the defendant’s freedom through a show
of authority.” Id. at 777-78.
In contrast, in this case, the evidence, viewed in the light most favorable
to the State, establishes that the defendant knew that she was not licensed or
privileged to enter the performing arts auditorium without a mask. In its
agenda, the school board asked attendees to wear masks. There was a sign
stating this requirement posted on the door to the performing arts center.
3