THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0705, In the Matter of Susan Swartz and
Robert Swartz, the court on March 18, 2024, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The respondent, Robert Swartz, appeals a final decree
entered by the Circuit Court (Lown, J.), following a three-day final hearing, in
his divorce from the petitioner, Susan Swartz. On appeal, the respondent
challenges the sufficiency of the evidence to support the trial court’s findings
that he engaged in adultery and treated the petitioner in a manner that
seriously injured her health or endangered her reason for purposes of RSA
458:7 (Supp. 2023), that the petitioner was “the innocent party” under the
statute, and that his conduct caused the breakdown of the marriage. The
respondent additionally raises numerous arguments challenging the trial
court’s decisions ordering him to pay the petitioner 57% of the petitioner’s
reasonable attorney’s fees, 57% of the debts she incurred, and alimony for a
term of fifteen years. Finally, the respondent challenges the trial court’s
decisions not to credit him with certain student loan debt incurred by the
parties’ adult children for which he co-signed or to order the petitioner to share
such debt, and to require that he obtain life insurance benefitting the
petitioner. We affirm.
The trial court has broad discretion in fashioning a final divorce decree.
In the Matter of Spenard & Spenard, 167 N.H. 1, 3 (2014). Its discretion
includes decisions concerning alimony and property distribution. Id. Its
discretion likewise includes whether to award attorney’s fees when the court
finds need on the part of one party and the ability to pay on the part of the
other party. In the Matter of Hampers & Hampers, 154 N.H. 275, 289-90
(2006). We will not overturn the trial court’s rulings on such matters absent
an unsustainable exercise of discretion, reviewing the record only to determine
whether it contains an objective basis to sustain its discretionary judgments.
Spenard, 167 N.H. at 3. We assume that the trial court made all findings of
fact necessary to support its general rulings. See In the Matter of Dube &
Dube, 163 N.H. 575, 579 (2012); Hampers, 154 N.H. at 290.
If the trial court could reasonably have reached its findings, including its
implied findings, on the evidence before it, they will stand. Spenard, 167 N.H.
at 3; Dube, 163 N.H. at 579; Hampers, 154 N.H. at 290. We defer to the trial
court’s judgment in resolving conflicts in testimony, evaluating the credibility of
witnesses, and determining the weight of the evidence, mindful that the trial
court may accept or reject, in whole or in part, the testimony of any witness,
and is not required to believe even uncontested testimony. In the Matter of
Aube & Aube, 158 N.H. 459, 465-66 (2009). This standard of review applies
both to direct and circumstantial evidence. Cf. Renovest Co. v. Hodges
Development Corp., 135 N.H. 72, 77 (1991) (“The trial court . . . was not bound
to view [the evidence] in a light most favorable to the plaintiff, with all
attendant favorable presumptions, but was bound to take an unbiased view of
all the evidence, direct and circumstantial, and accord it such weight as he
believed it entitled to receive.” (Quotation and brackets omitted.)).
We first address the respondent’s arguments that the trial court erred by
finding that he engaged in adultery and conduct that seriously injured the
petitioner’s health or endangered her reason, that his conduct caused the
breakdown of the marriage, and that the petitioner was the “innocent party.”
RSA 458:7 authorizes the granting of divorce in favor of “the innocent party” on
various fault grounds, including “[a]dultery of either party” and treatment by
one party of the other party so “as seriously to injure health or endanger
reason.” RSA 458:7, II, V. “Adultery” means “voluntary sexual intercourse
between a married person and someone other than that person’s spouse.” In
the Matter of Blaisdell & Blaisdell, 174 N.H. 187, 194 (2021). Treatment of the
complaining spouse “as seriously to injure health or endanger reason” is
conduct that in fact seriously injures the complaining spouse’s health or
endangers his or her reason, regardless of whether it would have affected an
average or reasonable person similarly, whether the conduct was directed
toward the complaining spouse, or whether the guilty spouse acted with
malevolent intent. In the Matter of Henry & Henry, 163 N.H. 175, 178, 180-81
(2012). An “innocent party” under RSA 458:7 is a spouse who is not guilty of
an offense against the other spouse that would constitute a fault-based ground
for divorce under RSA 458:7. See In the Matter of Ross & Ross, 169 N.H. 299,
302 (2016). Whether a party to a divorce has engaged in conduct constituting
fault under RSA 458:7, and whether such conduct caused the breakdown of
the marriage, are questions of fact. See Dube, 163 N.H. at 579; Henry, 163
N.H. at 178; Hampers, 154 N.H. at 279.
In finding that the respondent committed adultery, the trial court relied
upon evidence in the record establishing, among other things, that (1) when the
petitioner discovered a relationship between the respondent and co-
respondent, the respondent was untruthful regarding who the co-respondent
was, and he concealed her identity in his cell phone contacts; (2) when the
petitioner confronted the respondent about the relationship, he admitted that
he had “cheated” on her; (3) in numerous emails to the petitioner prior to the
divorce, the respondent apologized for his relationship with the co-respondent;
(4) although the respondent and petitioner had not been sexually intimate for
years, the respondent began purchasing Viagra prior to the divorce; (5) in one
text exchange between the co-respondent and respondent, the co-respondent
2
said, “goodnight, handsome,” that she had his underwear, that his underwear
“smelled so good and just like him,” and that she could not wait to see him
again; (6) the respondent moved into an apartment, to which the co-respondent
had access, across the street from where the co-respondent lived; (7) the
respondent and co-respondent were seen together in public on multiple
occasions, and on one occasion, they were photographed walking arm-in-arm;
(8) the respondent and co-respondent took at least two trips together, sharing a
hotel room on one of the trips; and (9) the same month that the petitioner
discovered the relationship, the co-respondent’s husband filed for divorce
believing that the co-respondent and respondent were having an affair. Based
on this evidence, the trial court found the denials of both the respondent and
co-respondent of a sexual relationship not credible.
With respect to whether the respondent treated the petitioner as
seriously to injure her health or endanger her reason, and whether his conduct
caused the breakdown of the marriage, the trial court relied upon evidence
establishing that, following the petitioner’s discovery of the respondent’s
infidelity, she was severely depressed, twice attempted suicide, and required
multiple hospitalizations and mental health treatment over the course of years.
According to the trial court, the petitioner “testified credibly” that she “had
never had any mental health problems, diagnoses or treatment at any time
prior to” her discovery of the respondent’s extra-marital relationship, and that
“the discovery of the relationship between the respondent . . . and [the co-
respondent] was the proximate cause of her distress and suffering.” The trial
court additionally noted the petitioner’s testimony that, prior to discovering the
respondent’s infidelity, they had had a “good” life together, and that her
discovery of the infidelity devastated her.
Finally, with respect to the respondent’s claim that the petitioner was not
an “innocent party” because she had herself engaged in “extreme cruelty” for
purposes of RSA 458:7, III when she “seriously injured him by pushing him
down the stairs,” the trial court observed that the respondent submitted no
evidence substantiating his claimed injuries. We note that the petitioner
disputed the respondent’s claim that she hit him or pushed him down the
stairs during the incident. After considering the testimony of the respondent
and the parties’ daughter concerning the incident, the trial court concluded
that the respondent had not met his burden to prove that the petitioner had
forcibly pushed him down the stairs. See In the Matter of Guy & Guy, 158
N.H. 411, 412 (2009) (extreme cruelty generally requires proof of actual or
threatened bodily injury).
Based upon our review of the record, we find ample support for the trial
court’s findings that the respondent engaged in adultery and conduct that
seriously injured the petitioner’s health or endangered her reason, that such
conduct caused the breakdown of the marriage, and that the petitioner was the
“innocent party” under RSA 458:7. Although the respondent emphasizes
3