THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0628, State of New Hampshire v. Bradley
Caprarello, the court on April 10, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The
defendant, Bradley Caprarello, was convicted after a jury trial in Superior
Court (Delker, J.) on four counts of aggravated felonious sexual assault (AFSA),
RSA 632-A:2 (Supp. 2024), and six counts of nonconsensual dissemination of
private sexual images (dissemination), RSA 644:9-a (Supp. 2024).1 On appeal,
the defendant argues that the trial court erred by denying his motion to sever
the AFSA charges from the dissemination charges, and by failing to dismiss
one of the dissemination charges for insufficient evidence. We conclude that
the trial court did not err. Accordingly, we affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. In September 2016, the
victim began dating the defendant. She moved in with him about six months
later. The victim, who was a very heavy sleeper, believed that the defendant
was engaging in nonconsensual sexual penetration with her while she was
asleep. In March 2018, the victim broke up with the defendant. In February
2019, she received a Facebook message from a man she did not know
informing her that there were images of her online and providing two links.
Using the links, the victim discovered photos and videos that were sexual in
nature, including videos of the defendant having sex with her while she was
asleep, on two websites: PornHub and XVideos. The postings had been made
without her knowledge or consent, and included her full name and sexually
derogatory hashtags as well as hashtags indicating that the victim was asleep
at the time the videos were taken. The PornHub posting also included the
victim’s Snapchat account and cellphone number and invited viewers to send
pictures of their genitalia to the victim.
The police were notified. Detective Flanagan discovered that the IP
address provided by PornHub was linked to the defendant’s residence. He
interviewed the defendant in April 2019. The defendant admitted uploading
the images, stating that he did not think the victim would care. When asked if
1 Because several of the charges were alternative AFSA theories, the trial court did not sentence
the defendant upon them and held them in abeyance, stating that if the defendant’s convictions
are affirmed on appeal, those convictions will be dismissed.
PornHub and XVideos were the only two sites on which he posted the images,
he responded: “That’s it.”
The defendant was charged with four counts of AFSA and five counts of
dissemination. In May 2020, the victim informed the police that she found
many of the same photos posted on another website — Tumbex. The website
indicated that the images had been posted “one year ago.”
At a scheduling conference on June 22, 2020, the State informed the
court in the defendant’s presence that it was investigating “similar conduct”
involving the victim. Although the State did not identify Tumbex, when the
police attempted to access that site the next day, the webpage containing
images of the victim was no longer there. The defendant was subsequently
charged with an additional count of dissemination related to the images posted
on Tumbex. The trial court joined the AFSA charges with the dissemination
charges for trial.
Prior to trial, the defendant moved to sever the AFSA charges from the
dissemination charges. The trial court denied the motion. The defendant was
convicted on all of the charges. The defendant moved to set aside the verdicts
and for a mistrial, arguing that he was prejudiced by the trial court’s failure to
sever the charges because the evidence presented inflamed the jury and caused
the jurors to “render[] an emotional verdict rather than one based on due care
and fairness in their deliberations.” The trial court denied the motion. This
appeal followed.
The defendant raises two issues on appeal: first, whether the trial court
erred by joining the ASFA and dissemination charges; and second, whether the
trial court erred by failing to dismiss the dissemination charge related to
Tumbex for insufficient evidence. We begin by addressing the trial court’s
decision to join the charges.
We will uphold the trial court’s decision to join charges unless it
constitutes an unsustainable exercise of discretion. State v. Brown, 159 N.H.
544, 550 (2009). To establish an unsustainable exercise of discretion, the
defendant must demonstrate that the trial court’s ruling was clearly untenable
or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Id. We note that the State does
not contend that trial events are irrelevant to our review of the trial court’s
pretrial decision on joinder. Accordingly, we consider the defendant’s
arguments that, in part, are based upon trial events. See id. at 556.
Under New Hampshire Rule of Criminal Procedure 20, if the State
requests that the trial court join charges alleging multiple “related offenses”
brought against a single defendant, the court “shall join the charges for trial
unless the trial judge determines that joinder is not in the best interests of
justice.” N.H. R. Crim. P. 20(a)(2). Accordingly, our review of permissive
2
joinder of offenses involves two steps. State v. Rivera, 175 N.H. 496, 498-99
(2022). First, we must determine whether the trial court erred in concluding
that the offenses are related. See N.H. R. Crim. P. 20(a)(1)-(2); Rivera, 175 N.H.
at 499. If the court properly found the offenses related, we then consider
whether it nevertheless erred in joining the offenses for trial because their
joinder was not in the best interests of justice. See N.H. R. Crim. P. 20(a)(2);
Rivera, 175 N.H. at 499.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in concluding
that the AFSA and dissemination charges were related and that joinder would
not offend the best interests of justice. We disagree.
We turn first to the issue of relatedness. Two or more offenses alleged to
have occurred during separate criminal episodes are “related” if they “are
logically and factually connected in a manner that does not solely demonstrate
that the accused has a propensity to engage in criminal conduct.” N.H. R.
Crim. P. 20(a)(1)(C). Whether multiple offenses are “logically and factually
connected” is a matter that “is largely determined by the close relationship
among the offenses with respect to both the underlying charged conduct and
the evidence to be used to prove the charges.” Brown, 159 N.H. at 551. The
following factors are relevant in assessing relatedness:
(1) the temporal and spatial relationship among the underlying charged
acts; (2) the commonality of the victim(s) and/or participant(s) for the
charged offenses; (3) the similarity in the defendant’s mode of operation;
(4) the duplication of law regarding the crimes charged; and (5) the
duplication of witnesses, testimony and other evidence related to the
offenses.
Id. at 551-52. No single factor is dispositive on the question of relatedness. Id.
at 552. Rather, the factors outlined above are intended to serve as guidelines
that must be sensibly applied in accord with the purposes of joinder. Id.
The purposes of joinder are “to avoid the duplication of evidence required
by separate trials, to reduce the inconvenience to victims and witnesses, to
minimize the time required to dispose of the offenses, and to achieve a variety
of other economies in connection with prosecutorial and judicial resources.”
Id. at 552 (quotation omitted). Or, in other words, joinder is intended “to
achieve efficiency and economy for both the government and the defendant.”
Id. at 554.
The defendant argues that the trial “court overweighted the fact that the
victim and law-enforcement witnesses would have testified at separate trials
and underweighted the significant differences between the charges in their
spatial and temporal relationship, mode of operation, and applicable law.” We
disagree.
3