THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
CASE NO. 2022-0184
Theresa Norelli & a. v. Secretary of State & a.
REPORT AND PLAN OF
THE SPECIAL MASTER
May 27, 2022
Nathaniel Persily
559 Nathan Abbott Way
Stanford, CA 94305
1
REPORT AND PLAN OF
THE SPECIAL MASTER
By order dated May 12, 2022, this Court appointed me as Special Master in the
above captioned matter. See App. A at A2.1 In the order, this Court directed me to prepare
and issue to the Court “a report and a recommended congressional redistricting plan for
New Hampshire.” The Court instructed me to modify existing congressional district lines
“only to the extent required to comply with the [Court’s] criteria and ‘least change’
standards.” Id.
Contained herein is my report and proposed congressional redistricting plan for the
State of New Hampshire. Exhibit 1 presents a statewide map showing the two
congressional districts comprising the Special Master’s Plan. Exhibit 2 highlights the
Plan’s proposed changes in the boundaries from the existing congressional districts.
Exhibit 3 presents a table of racial demographic data for each district in the Special
Master’s Plan. Exhibit 4 presents a list of towns in each proposed congressional district in
the Special Master’s Plan. Exhibit 5 presents statewide maps of the different proposals
submitted in this case. Exhibit 6 presents a table comparing the Special Master’s Plan to
the submitted proposals on the criteria specified in the Court’s order. Exhibit 7 presents,
for comparison, maps of the existing congressional districts. For ease of reference, relevant
orders, submissions, and transcripts are attached as appendices. Appendix A includes the
order appointing me as Special Master. Appendix B includes the submission from the
1 All page references to the Appendix refer to the repagination of the combined materials as indicated in the
bottom right corner of each page in the Appendix.
2
Plaintiffs. Appendix C includes the submission from the President of the New Hampshire
Senate and Speaker of the New Hampshire House. Appendix D includes the submission
from the Minority Leaders of the Senate and House. Appendix E includes the Plaintiffs’
reply brief. Appendix F includes a transcript of the hearing held before me on May 19,
2022, for which the full video is available at
https://livestream.com/nhjb/events/10045798/videos/231209113. In addition to this Report
and Plan, the Clerk of the Court has been provided a census block equivalency file of the
Special Master’s Plan for public distribution.
I. Introduction
The Court’s May 12th order directed me to fashion a congressional redistricting
plan for the state to be submitted to the Court no earlier than May 27, 2022. App. A at A2.
Through its order, the Court notified the public of an in-person hearing that would be held
at the Court on May 19, 2022, at 1:00 p.m. Id. at A3. Parties, intervenors, and amici curiae
were directed to submit by 5:00 p.m. on May 16, 2022, any proposed redistricting plans,
accompanied by supporting documentation, data, and memoranda. Id. Responses to any
proposed redistricting plan were to be submitted by 1:00 p.m. on May 18, 2022. Id.
The Court’s order instructed me to consider certain factors, while ignoring others,
in drawing the plan for New Hampshire’s congressional districts. In particular, the Court
instructed:
3