THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0718, State of New Hampshire v. Vincent
Chaney, the court on May 3, 2024, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has determined to
resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The defendant, Vincent
Chaney, appeals two orders from Superior Court (Nicolosi, J.) denying his motions
to suppress and for a new trial. The defendant argues that the court erred in
denying: (1) his motion to suppress based on misrepresentations or omissions
contained within the search warrant affidavit that were sufficiently material to
undermine a finding of probable cause; and (2) his motion for a new trial due to
ineffective assistance of counsel with respect to the hearing on his motion to
suppress. We conclude that the affidavit did not contain material
misrepresentations or omissions and that the alleged error by defense counsel at
the suppression hearing could not have prejudiced the outcome of the case.
Accordingly, we affirm.
The following facts are taken from the trial court’s orders on the defendant’s
suppression motion and his motion for a new trial or are otherwise supported by the
record. In 2018, the defendant and Castro traveled to Florida and purchased three
pieces of jewelry: (1) a necklace worth $63,138 (hereinafter, the large necklace); (2) a
necklace worth $4,500 (hereinafter, the small necklace); and (3) a bracelet worth
$16,050. The defendant and Castro share a home. Following the purchases, the
defendant took out an insurance policy with Phoenix Insurance Company, also
known as Travelers Insurance, on all three pieces of jewelry.
In January 2019, the defendant filed an insurance claim with Travelers
Insurance for the small necklace and bracelet. He stated that he removed the two
pieces of jewelry while showering at a friend’s house and mistakenly left the jewelry
behind. When he later returned to retrieve the two items, he discovered that they
were missing. Travelers Insurance paid the claim in March. In May, the defendant
filed a second claim with Travelers Insurance alleging that the large necklace had
been stolen during an armed robbery in Boston.
Travelers Insurance ultimately denied the second claim due to the defendant’s
non-cooperation and referred the case to the New Hampshire Insurance Department
(Department), indicating that it believed the insurance claim to be suspicious. After
reviewing the claims file, an investigator with the Department opened a criminal
investigation. During the investigation, the investigator learned that Castro had
twice pawned a bracelet identical to the one reported missing in the first insurance
claim. At the time of the investigation, the bracelet remained at the pawn shop.
In December 2019, the investigator interviewed Castro after he obtained
approval for a one-party intercept in order to record the interview. Castro described
the three pieces of jewelry and alleged that they were all either missing or stolen.
She stated that she had an older bracelet at her house similar to the one that went
missing but that she had never insured the older bracelet due to its age. She also
stated that she had never pawned the older bracelet. Once confronted with the
evidence obtained from the pawn shop, however, Castro changed her story and
stated that the bracelet at the pawn shop was the older bracelet that she previously
claimed was at her house. At that point, Castro’s demeanor changed, and she
became less responsive to the investigator’s questions. The investigator challenged
Castro’s story, noting that the pawned bracelet was identical to the bracelet that
had been reported missing and that Castro’s story about the two identical bracelets
was difficult to believe. Castro began rummaging in her purse for her keys and the
interview ended soon thereafter.
The investigator referred his investigation to the New Hampshire Department
of Justice (DOJ). He documented his investigation in an affidavit that the DOJ used
to apply for a warrant to search the defendant, Castro, and their residence for the
two missing necklaces. In January 2020, the application was granted and the
warrant was executed. During the search, officers discovered drugs in the
defendant’s bedroom. The search was halted and an expanded warrant was
obtained, seeking drugs and other instrumentalities of drug distribution.
Thereafter, officers discovered additional drugs, drug paraphernalia, multiple
firearms, and one of the missing necklaces. The defendant was subsequently
charged with possession of a controlled substance with intent to sell and numerous
counts of being a felon in possession of a deadly weapon. The defendant was
separately charged with three counts of insurance fraud in connection with the
claims he made to Travelers Insurance.
In both cases, the defendant filed motions to suppress the evidence discovered
during the searches.1 The defendant argued that the affidavit supporting the first
search warrant was deficient for several reasons, including that it contained
material misrepresentations or omissions, and when such challenged portions were
excised, the affidavit failed to establish probable cause. The State objected to both
motions. Following a hearing, the court issued an order in June 2021 denying both
1 The defendant was represented by two different attorneys on the criminal charges; one represented
the defendant on the insurance fraud charges, and the other represented the defendant on the
unlawful possession charges. Both attorneys filed separate, yet similar, motions to suppress the
evidence obtained through the execution of the search warrant. The trial court held one hearing
addressing both motions and the parties agreed that the court would issue one order that would
address the two motions to suppress. Following the defendant’s convictions, the State nolle prossed
the insurance fraud charges. Therefore, only the trial court’s ruling on the suppression motion filed
in the possession case is at issue on appeal.
2
motions to suppress. In July, after a three-day jury trial, the defendant was
convicted on one count of possession of a controlled drug with intent to sell and
seven counts of felon in possession of a firearm.
In April 2022, the defendant, represented by different counsel, moved for a
new trial on the ground that his trial counsel for the possession charges was
constitutionally ineffective by failing to introduce certain evidence in connection
with the pretrial suppression proceeding. The State objected. In July, the court
held a hearing on the motion and, the following month, issued an order concluding
that the defendant’s trial counsel was not constitutionally ineffective and denying
the defendant’s motion. This appeal followed.
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred in denying his motion to
suppress because “[t]he search warrant affidavit contained misrepresentations and
omissions sufficiently material to undermine the finding of probable cause,” in
violation of his state and federal constitutional rights. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art.
19; U.S. CONST. amend. IV. We first address the defendant’s claim under the State
Constitution and rely upon federal law only to aid in our analysis. State v. Ball, 124
N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
Part I, Article 19 of the New Hampshire Constitution requires that search
warrants be supported by probable cause. State v. Page, 172 N.H. 46, 50 (2019).
To establish probable cause, the affiant need only present the magistrate with
sufficient facts and circumstances to demonstrate a substantial likelihood that the
evidence or contraband sought will be found in the place to be searched. State v.
Zwicker, 151 N.H. 179, 185 (2004). We review the trial court’s ruling on probable
cause de novo, except with respect to any controlling factual findings. Id. We
assign great deference to the court’s determination of probable cause and do not
invalidate a warrant by interpreting the evidence submitted in a hypertechnical
sense. Id.
“[A] facially sufficient but misrepresentative affidavit cannot be the basis for a
search warrant as the magistrate will not have been able to make the requisite
determination of probable cause.” State v. Spero, 117 N.H. 199, 204 (1977). To
suppress evidence seized under a search warrant, the defendant must show that the
misrepresentations in the supporting affidavit were material and were “made
intentionally or recklessly.” Id. at 205. In addition to misstatements, omissions can
also be construed as misrepresentations. State v. Gubitosi, 151 N.H. 764, 768
(2005). Materiality is determined by whether, if the omitted statements were
included, there would still be probable cause. Id. Whether an affidavit contains a
misrepresentation and whether the misrepresentation was material are questions of
law, which this court decides de novo. State v. Stern, 150 N.H. 705, 710-11 (2004).
The defendant argues that the trial court erred in concluding that there were
no material misrepresentations or omissions sufficient to undermine a finding of
probable cause. The defendant argues that the affidavit failed to reference a police
3