THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0362, Lauren C. Shearer v. Town of
Richmond, the court on October 24, 2023, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The motion filed by the plaintiff, Lauren C. Shearer, to strike
the brief filed by the defendant, the Town of Richmond (Town), is denied. The
plaintiff appeals an order of the Superior Court (Leonard, J.) granting the Town’s
summary judgment motion on his complaint seeking the layout of a class V
highway, see RSA 231:38 (2009), and denying his cross-motion for summary
judgment. We reverse the grant of summary judgment to the Town and remand.
The following facts are undisputed. On June 7, 2021, the plaintiff filed a
petition with the Town to lay out a class V highway. The Town scheduled a
public hearing for November 17 and, in October, sent the plaintiff notice of the
hearing. On November 5, the plaintiff filed the instant action in superior court,
alleging that, under RSA 231:38, the Town had neglected to lay out the class V
highway and petitioning the superior court to have the road laid out.
On November 15, the plaintiff emailed the Town, informing it that he
would not be present at the November 17 hearing because the Town notified him
of the public hearing only 29 days prior to the hearing, rather than 30 days as
required by statute. See RSA 231:9 (2009). The Town thereafter cancelled the
November 17 hearing, and provided notice on December 13, 2021 that it would
hold the hearing on January 26, 2022. Following that hearing, the Board of
Selectmen (Board) issued a written decision on March 3, 2022, denying the
plaintiff’s petition.
Meanwhile, on January 11, 2022, the Town filed a motion for summary
judgment in the superior court case that the plaintiff filed in November 2021.
On February 10, 2022, the plaintiff filed a cross-motion for summary judgment.
On March 8, 2022, following the Town’s denial of the plaintiff’s June 7, 2021
petition, the Town filed a supplemental affidavit containing the Board’s decision.
In addition, the Town filed an objection to the plaintiff’s cross-motion in which it
asserted that “[t]o the extent Plaintiff seeks affirmative relief of a finding of
‘neglect’ or ‘refusal,’ [the Town] objects . . . . Moreover, Plaintiff has failed to
demonstrate a material factual dispute on the issue of neglect or refusal.”
By order dated May 2, 2022, the trial court granted the Town’s motion for
summary judgment and denied the plaintiff’s cross-motion. In its recitation of
the facts, the court noted that the Town had rescheduled the hearing on the
plaintiff’s petition to lay out the road for January 26, 2022, but the court did not
note that the Board had issued a decision in March 2022 denying that petition.
The court then undertook a detailed analysis as to whether the Town neglected
the plaintiff’s petition, ruling that the Town did not do so. In the final paragraph
of its analysis, the court stated: “In conclusion, the Court finds as a matter of
law the Town did not neglect or refuse [the plaintiff’s] petition. Therefore,
because RSA 231:38, I only gives the Superior Court the power to determine
whether occasion exists if the Town refused or neglected a petition, the Court
does not have the power to hear [the plaintiff’s] petition.” (Emphasis added.)
The plaintiff filed a motion to reconsider, arguing that the trial court had
overlooked the March 2022 decision of the Board denying his June 7, 2021
petition to lay out the road. The plaintiff contended: “Given that the Town was
petitioned to layout a road, and after the Town’s process, per the Return, no
road was laid out, the Town has formally refused to lay out the road.” Therefore,
the plaintiff concluded, the court had “authority to consider the Petition relief
sought by Plaintiff under RSA 231:38, I, via the Town’s refusal to lay out the
road.” (Footnote omitted.) The trial court denied the motion, stating: “The Court
did not overlook or misapprehend any points of law or facts.” This appeal
followed.
In reviewing the trial court’s rulings on cross-motions for summary
judgment, we consider the evidence in the light most favorable to each party in
its capacity as the nonmoving party and, if no genuine issue of material fact
exists, we determine whether the moving party is entitled to judgment as a
matter of law. Bovaird v. N.H. Dep’t of Admin. Servs., 166 N.H. 755, 758 (2014).
If our review of that evidence discloses no genuine issue of material fact and if
the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, then we will affirm
the grant of summary judgment. Id. We review the trial court’s statutory
interpretation and its application of the law to the facts de novo. See id.
The plaintiff argues that the trial court erred when it concluded it lacked
jurisdiction under RSA 231:38. The statute provides:
Petitions for laying out or altering class IV, V or VI highways may be
filed in the office of the clerk of the superior court in the following
cases:
I. When selectmen have neglected or refused to lay out or alter
the highway;
II. When having been laid out by the selectmen, it is
discontinued by the town within 2 years thereafter.
RSA 231:38 (emphasis added). On appeal, the plaintiff asserts that the trial
2
court had jurisdiction on the grounds that the Town both neglected and refused
“to lay out . . . the highway.” RSA 231:38, I.
We begin by assessing the plaintiff’s argument that the trial court had
jurisdiction because the Town refused to lay out the highway. The plaintiff
argues that the Board’s decision to deny his petition on March 3, 2022
constitutes a “refusal” within the meaning of RSA 231:38, I. The Town counters
that the plaintiff failed to preserve this argument, the Board’s decision to deny
his petition does not constitute a “refusal” to lay out the road, and the plaintiff’s
argument is foreclosed by the time limit contained in RSA 231:34.
We are not persuaded by the Town’s assertion that the plaintiff’s refusal
argument is unpreserved. The Town correctly observes that the plaintiff alleged
in his complaint only that the Town neglected to lay out the highway, not that
the Town refused to do so. The plaintiff alleged for the first time in his motion
for reconsideration that the Town refused to lay out the road. However, the
basis for the plaintiff’s argument that the Town refused to lay out the road was
the denial by the Town of his petition in March 2022 — obviously, the plaintiff
could not have made this claim in his complaint, which was filed in November
2021. Furthermore, prior to the trial court’s decision, the Town itself filed a
supplemental affidavit averring that the Board denied the plaintiff’s petition in
March 2022 and addressed the issue of refusal in its objection to the plaintiff’s
cross-motion, contending that there was no material factual dispute on the issue
of refusal and that the Town was entitled to summary judgment on that issue.
Finally, although the trial court did not set forth its analysis on the issue, it
ruled that, as a matter of law, the Town did not refuse the plaintiff’s petition.
Although we recognize our long-standing rule that parties may not have
judicial review of matters not raised at the earliest possible time, the rationale
behind the rule is that trial forums should have an opportunity to rule on issues
and to correct errors before they are presented to the appellate court. State v.
Tselios, 134 N.H. 405, 407 (1991). Here, the trial court had an opportunity to
consider and rule on the issue of “refusal”: the Town raised the issue in its
pleadings and filed an affidavit informing the trial court of the Board’s vote
denying the petition; the court ruled that the Town did not refuse the plaintiff’s
petition; the plaintiff raised the issue of refusal in his motion for reconsideration;
and the court denied the motion, stating that it had not overlooked or
misapprehended any points of law or facts.
The Town argues that the plaintiff was required to move to amend his
complaint “to add a new substantive claim” of refusal after the Board’s denial of
his petition. It asserts that, by raising refusal in his motion for reconsideration,
the plaintiff improperly attempted to “add new claims, advance new arguments
or add new evidence.” We disagree. In the plaintiff’s motion for reconsideration,
he neither raised a new issue that had not been considered by the trial court nor
inserted new facts not previously before the trial court. Rather, the plaintiff
3