THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0276, City of Laconia v. Robert
Kjellander, the court on August 10, 2023, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, considered the oral arguments of the parties, and determined to
resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The defendant,
Robert Kjellander, appeals orders of the Superior Court (O’Neill, J.; Houran, J.),
which: (1) required him either to register or to restore for legal use on a public
highway all but one of the unregistered vehicles on his property and to remove
all “scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris” from his property; (2) ruled
that the plaintiff, the City of Laconia (City), was entitled to a civil penalty of
$275 per day for each day the defendant failed to comply with the court’s
orders; and (3) awarded the City prevailing party attorney’s fees and costs. See
RSA 676:15, :17, I-II (2016). We affirm.
I. Relevant Facts
The following facts either were found by the trial court or reflect the
content of documents in the record. The defendant owns two lots on both sides
of Roller Coaster Road in Laconia where he stores a variety of motor vehicles,
sailboats, farm equipment, and miscellaneous scrap items.1 The defendant’s
property is located in the “residential rural corridor district,” where junkyards
are not permitted as accessory uses. The City’s zoning ordinance defines a
“junkyard” as:
Any business or any place of storage or deposit, whether in
connection with another business or not, which has stored or
deposited at the business or place: two or more unregistered motor
vehicles which are no longer intended or in condition for legal use
on the public highways; used parts of motor vehicles or old iron;
metal, glass, paper, cordage, or other waste or discarded or
secondhand material which has been a part, or is intended to be a
part, of any motor vehicle, the sum of which parts or material shall
be equal in bulk to two or more motor vehicles; or scrap, waste,
reclaimable material or debris, whether or not stored, for sale or in
1 At oral argument, the defendant’s attorney represented that the property contained 50-55 motor
vehicles and at least 35-40 boats.
the process of being dismantled, destroyed, processed, salvaged,
stored, baled, disposed or other use or disposition.
Since 2004, the City has sent the defendant more than ten letters
informing him that he is using his property as a junkyard in violation of the
ordinance. In 2019, the City brought an action under RSA chapter 676 to
enjoin the defendant from so doing. See RSA 676:15. The trial court granted
the City’s request for a preliminary injunction and ordered the defendant either
to “cease adding items or material of any sort to contribute to the junkyard
conditions on the property” or to obtain a variance from the City’s zoning board
of adjustment, site plan approval from the City’s planning board, and a license
from the City Council “to legally operate as a junkyard.”
Following a two-day bench trial in the fall of 2021, the Superior Court
(O’Neill, J.) found that the defendant’s property constituted a junkyard under
the ordinance because it contained “two or more unregistered motor vehicles
that are no longer intended or in condition for legal use on the public
highways.” The court noted that the vehicles on the defendant’s property
“either cannot be driven in their current [state] or have not been moved in
years.” The court determined that the “photographic evidence of vegetation
growing in and around” some of the vehicles did not support the defendant’s
assertion that he intended “to restore or use [them] in the future.” Although
the defendant asserted that some of the vehicles were farm vehicles or were
used for blacksmithing, the court ruled that “neither claim satisfies the
requirement of the Ordinance that [the vehicles] be intended or in condition for
legal use on the public roadways.” (Quotation and emphasis omitted.)
The court further determined that “registration alone removes a vehicle
from the purview of the Ordinance,” and, therefore, the defendant’s registered
vehicles did “not contribute to a determination as to the existence of a junk
yard.” The court also concluded that the defendant’s sailboats did not
contribute to the junkyard determination because sailboats are not self-
propelled and, therefore, are not “motor vehicles.” The court ordered the
defendant either to register or restore to a condition for legal use on a public
highway all but one of his unregistered vehicles within thirty days.
In March 2022, the trial court granted the City’s subsequent motion for
reconsideration. On reconsideration, the court determined that “miscellaneous
scrap stored throughout the defendant’s property” contributed to the finding
that his property constituted a junkyard, and ordered the defendant to remove
such material within thirty days. On reconsideration, the court also ruled that,
because the City brought its action under RSA chapter 676, the City was
entitled to a civil penalty of $275 for each day of non-compliance and to
prevailing party attorney’s fees and costs. See RSA 676:15, :17, I-II.
2
Thereafter, the defendant moved for reconsideration of the court’s March
2022 order and objected to the City’s affidavit of attorney’s fees. The Superior
Court (Houran, J.) denied the defendant’s motion for reconsideration. The
court also denied the defendant’s request that the court reverse its order
allowing the City to recover its prevailing party fees and costs, noting that such
fees and costs are mandatory under the pertinent statute. See RSA 676:17, II.
To decide whether the defendant was correct that the amount requested
was unreasonable, the court examined a range of factors before concluding
that, with one exception, each of the billing line items “constituted reasonable
and necessary actions by counsel for the City, billed at a reasonable rate.”
After subtracting the single objectionable line item, the court awarded the City
$12,503.03 in attorney’s fees and costs. This appeal followed.
II. Appellate Arguments
A. Meaning of the Word “Scrap” Under the Ordinance
On appeal, the defendant first argues that the trial court
mischaracterized his personal property as “scrap” and, in so doing, violated his
state and federal constitutional rights to possess such property. See N.H.
CONST. pt. I, art. 2; U.S. CONST. amend. V. Because the defendant does not
sufficiently develop his constitutional arguments for appellate review, we
confine our analysis to whether the trial court erred when it ruled that certain
of the defendant’s property constituted “scrap” within the meaning of the City’s
zoning ordinance. See Keenan v. Fearon, 130 N.H. 494, 499 (1988) (explaining
that “off-hand invocations” of constitutional rights supported by neither
argument nor authority “warrant[] no extended consideration”).
“When a trial court renders a decision after a trial on the merits, we
uphold its factual findings and rulings unless they lack evidentiary support or
are legally erroneous.” Vention Med. Advanced Components v. Pappas, 171
N.H. 13, 28 (2018). “Thus, we defer to the trial court’s judgment on such
issues as resolving conflicts in the testimony, measuring the credibility of
witnesses, and determining the weight to be given evidence.” Id. (quotation
omitted). We review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de novo.
Id. We also review de novo the trial court’s statutory interpretation and its
interpretation of a municipal zoning ordinance. See Town of Lincoln v.
Chenard, 174 N.H. 762, 765 (2022).
Our traditional rules of statutory construction govern our interpretation
of a zoning ordinance. Id. “We construe the words and phrases of an
ordinance according to the common and approved usage of the language, but
where the ordinance defines the terms in issue, those definitions will govern.”
Working Stiff Partners v. City of Portsmouth, 172 N.H. 611, 615-16 (2019)
3