THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0070, State of New Hampshire v. Genaro
Claussells-Vega, the court on November 15, 2023, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The
defendant, Genaro Claussells-Vega, appeals his convictions on one count of
aggravated felonious sexual assault (AFSA), see RSA 632-A:2, I(m) (2016), one
count of second degree assault by strangulation, see RSA 631:2, I(f) (2016), one
count of kidnapping, see RSA 633:1, I (2016), two counts of domestic violence
simple assault, see RSA 631:2-b, I(a) (2016), and one count of criminal
threatening, see RSA 631:4, I(d) (2016). The defendant argues that the
Superior Court (Nicolosi, J.) erred by admitting the victim’s testimony that the
defendant held anti-police views and by declining to conduct an in camera
review of the victim’s counseling records dated after the charged offenses. We
affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand.
I
The pertinent facts are as follows. The defendant and the victim met
online in December 2020 and began a romantic relationship. The defendant
was then living out of state, but soon moved in with the victim in her
apartment in New Hampshire. The victim’s family lived downstairs. According
to the victim, problems developed in their relationship. She alleged that, as the
relationship progressed, the defendant became more violent and threatened to
hurt her family if she made him leave her apartment. The victim previously
worked as a corrections officer and her brother was an out-of-state police
officer, which were law enforcement roles that the defendant disparaged.
The victim underwent surgery in early 2021. The charged conduct began
several weeks later on the night of March 22, 2021, at which point the victim
was still recovering from her surgery. The victim first reported the assaults to
her doctor on March 24, 2021, during an office visit for follow-up care
regarding her prior surgery. While with her doctor and outside the presence of
the defendant, the victim disclosed that the defendant had sexually assaulted
her and held her hostage in her apartment. The victim waited to report the
assaults to her doctor because she knew it would be her first opportunity to be
away from the defendant. She described to her doctor the defendant’s close
monitoring of her whereabouts and phone use as well as his threats to break
her phone. She also wrote a letter to her brother, put postage on the letter,
and gave it to the doctor’s office to mail. In the letter, she expressed fear of the
defendant’s retaliation against her or law enforcement because he told her on
multiple occasions that he was “anti-police and government.”
The victim asked that her doctor admit her to the hospital and allow the
defendant to drive her there so as not to raise his suspicion. However, contrary
to the victim’s understanding, the hospital’s COVID-19 policy had recently
changed, and the defendant was permitted to visit her until 8:00 p.m.
Disgruntled with the hospital admission, the defendant told her he would
return the next morning to take her home “no matter what.” After he left, the
victim explained the situation to a nurse, who contacted the police. At
approximately 8:50 p.m., the police interviewed the victim at the hospital. The
defendant was later arrested and charged with four counts of AFSA (including
two alternative theories), two counts of domestic violence simple assault, and
one count each of kidnapping, second degree assault, criminal threatening,
and obstructing the report of a crime.
In September 2021, the defendant filed a motion for, inter alia, in camera
review of the victim’s counseling records dated after the alleged assaults. The
defendant emphasized that “a central issue at trial will be the credibility of [the
victim]” and that, according to discovery, she attended counseling both before
and after the alleged assaults. Specifically, the defendant alleged that
discovery showed that the victim was “‘working intensively with her therapist’
because the alleged assaults have exacerbated her previous [posttraumatic
stress syndrome (PTSS)] and anxiety symptoms.” Therefore, the defendant
contended that “[i]t is reasonable to believe that she made statements to a
counselor regarding the alleged assaults after March 25, 2021.” He also
asserted that because she made inconsistent statements about her relationship
with the defendant and named her home life as a “life stressor[ ]” to health care
providers, it is reasonable to believe she also discussed such subjects in
counseling.
The State objected to the defendant’s motion, specifying that the victim’s
positive statements to medical providers about her relationship took place
before the alleged assaults and were made in a medical context. The State
argued that, while the defendant “will likely seek to impeach [the victim] with
these purported inconsistencies,” they “do[ ] not trigger an in camera review to
try and find ‘more’ based on defense counsel’s speculation that more
statements exist.”
The trial court granted the defendant’s motion “as to [the victim’s]
counseling records from December 30, 2020 through March 24, 2021 from [her
counseling provider].” On November 10, 2021, the trial court issued an order
2
explaining that it had received correspondence from her counseling provider
indicating that the victim “had not been seen at its office between the dates of
December 30, 2020 through March 24, 2021. No records, therefore, were
produced.”
In October 2021, the defendant filed a motion in limine to exclude, inter
alia, testimony that the defendant harbored anti-police, anti-government
beliefs. The defendant argued that this evidence is irrelevant and must be
excluded as improper character evidence, as it would “serve no purpose at trial
other than painting [the defendant] as a dangerous, violent individual, and that
he acted in accordance with these traits during the incidents alleged.” See
N.H. R. Ev. 401, 404(a). The defendant further asserted that the probative
value of the evidence is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair
prejudice, confusion of the issues, and misleading the jury. See N.H. R. Ev.
403.
The State objected to the defendant’s motion. While the State conceded
that the challenged evidence “is at least somewhat prejudicial,” it argued that
such prejudice is outweighed by its high probative value in helping the jury
understand the particular circumstances of this relationship as well as why the
victim feared the defendant and waited to report the sexual assaults until she
was no longer in his presence.
Upon request of the trial court after a hearing on the motion, the State
provided the court with copies of relevant police reports. These police reports
indicated that the victim “kept saying how scared she was for her own safety
and the concern she had for her family if [the defendant] got released, citing the
numerous threat[s] he had made to her in the past.” She reported that the
defendant is very “anti-police” and “anti-government” and that he had referred
to law enforcement as “pigs” and “oppressors.” (Capitalization omitted.) The
victim explained that the defendant “is extremely combative with law
enforcement and he has made statements saying he will kill any cop he sees
and will succumb to suicide by cop if he has to.” She was concerned because
she kept two pistols in a small safe in her apartment, and the defendant
“repeatedly asked her for the combination to the safe so that he could access
the guns, but she refused to tell him as she did not want anyone to get hurt by
him.”
The trial court denied the motion in limine with respect to the challenged
“anti-police” testimony. The court agreed with the State’s objection that the
evidence “is relevant to show the [victim’s] fear of the defendant and her
concern for law enforcement if she reported, and that her delay in reporting the
defendant’s assaultive and other criminal conduct and the ultimate plan she
implemented to report to her medical provider was causally related to this
fear.” The court noted that “[a]n obvious question at trial will be why, if the
3