THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0214, John Doe v. New Hampshire
Division of State Police & a., the court on December 3, 2024,
issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The plaintiff, John Doe, appeals an order of the Superior
Court (Schulman, J.) granting the motion to dismiss filed by the defendants,
the New Hampshire Division of State Police and the New Hampshire Attorney
General’s Office (AGO). The plaintiff sought declaratory judgment that his
name is not appropriate for inclusion on the Exculpatory Evidence Schedule
(EES) and injunctive relief to remove his name from the EES. See RSA 105:13-
d (2023). He argues that the conduct which led to his placement on the EES,
that is, his intentional misrepresentation of facts to a tribunal, does not rise to
the level of potentially exculpatory evidence due to the passage of time. We
affirm.
I. Background
The following facts are derived from the complaint, which we accept as
true, or from documents sufficiently referred to in the complaint and whose
authenticity no party disputes. See Beane v. Dana S. Beane & Co., 160 N.H.
708, 711-12 (2010). Over fourteen years ago, the plaintiff, a state trooper,
received an email from the Department of Safety, Bureau of Hearings directing
him to appear at an Administrative License Suspension (ALS) hearing. The
plaintiff did not attend the hearing, and the case was dismissed due to the
State’s failure to appear. The Bureau of Hearings notified the plaintiff by email
that he would have ten days to request that the case be re-opened. The
plaintiff requested that the case be re-opened because he had “never received a
hearing notice in this case.” At a subsequent hearing, and while under oath,
the plaintiff testified that he
was never notified for the first hearing, never received notice. Our
notices go out through the e-mail system and is not problem proof.
We do have our issues with the e-mail. The first e-mail I got on
this was the e-mail that there was a hearing and I wasn’t there, so
I was notified that I had ten days to respond to that and my
response was I was never notified through the e-mail system of this
hearing . . . of the first hearing, this being the reason I was not
there. I sent an e-mail back immediately saying that, again, I was
never notified and to reopen the case.
The State Police investigated whether the plaintiff was untruthful in his
testimony, concluded that he was, and notified the plaintiff that he would be
suspended without pay for eleven days. The plaintiff appealed the matter to
the New Hampshire Personnel Appeals Board (PAB). Following a hearing, the
PAB found that when the plaintiff testified that he had not received any email
regarding the ALS hearing before receiving the email that “there was a hearing
and [he] wasn’t there,” the plaintiff knew that an earlier email existed, that it
was delivered, that someone had opened the email, and that he himself later
deleted that email. The PAB concluded that “the [plaintiff’s] assertion, under
oath, that he never received [an] email notifying him of the [first] ALS hearing
constitutes an intentional misrepresentation of facts.” The plaintiff filed an
appeal with this court, which we declined to accept. The plaintiff’s name was
added to the EES on or about June 3, 2010. Since then, the circuit court in
two separate criminal cases has ruled that the plaintiff’s conduct was not
exculpatory and his personnel information was not disclosed to the defendants.
Thereafter, the plaintiff filed suit, seeking his removal from the EES
pursuant to RSA 105:13-d, II. The plaintiff requested a ruling that the
information in his personnel file “is no longer exculpatory or probative in value
for any future litigation,” or, in the alternative, a hearing on the “underlying
facts and circumstances that were relied upon in determining the necessitation
of inclusion of [his] name on the EES.” Defendant Division of State Police
moved to dismiss the complaint, and defendant AGO joined the motion. The
trial court granted the motion to dismiss, ruling: (1) that the plaintiff was not
entitled to any further evidentiary proceedings because “the plaintiff was
afforded with a panoply of due process rights at the time his conduct was
adjudicated with finality”; and (2) that the plaintiff “shall remain on the EES”
because, despite the age of the misconduct and the plaintiff’s exemplary career,
“in a case in which guilt or innocence will turn on the plaintiff’s credibility, the
plaintiff’s history of providing false testimony will have significant probative
value.” The trial court denied the plaintiff’s motion for reconsideration, and this
appeal followed.
II. Analysis
The plaintiff does not challenge the trial court’s ruling that he was not
entitled to any further evidentiary proceedings, but argues that the trial court
erred when it ruled that he should remain on the EES. When reviewing a trial
court’s ruling on a motion to dismiss, we consider whether the allegations in
the pleadings are reasonably susceptible of a construction that would permit
recovery. N.H. Ctr. for Pub. Interest Journalism v. N.H. Dep’t of Justice, 173
N.H. 648, 652 (2020). We assume the pleadings to be true and construe all
reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to the plaintiff. Id. We then
2
engage in a threshold inquiry that tests the facts in the complaint against the
applicable law. Id. We will uphold the granting of a motion to dismiss if the
facts pled do not constitute a basis for legal relief. Barufaldi v. City of Dover,
175 N.H. 424, 427 (2022).
RSA 105:13-d provides that the New Hampshire Department of Justice
“may voluntarily maintain” an EES which “shall consist of a list of all current
or former law enforcement officers whose personnel information contain
potentially exculpatory evidence.” RSA 105:13-d, I; see N.H. Ctr. for Pub.
Interest Journalism, 173 N.H. at 651 (noting that the EES is “a list of police
officers who have engaged in misconduct reflecting negatively on their
credibility or trustworthiness”). The statute further provides that the
individual’s name and corresponding information on the EES will become
public unless “a court issues an order finding that the underlying misconduct
is not potentially exculpatory” or “[a] court issues an order finding that the law
enforcement agency erred in recommending that the officer be placed on the
[EES].” RSA 105:13-d, II(d)(1)-(2).
The plaintiff asserts that the New Hampshire Rules of Evidence recognize
that evidence which is over ten years old may no longer be material, relevant or
probative in value, and that this is “important when examining potentially
exculpatory evidence in a police officer’s personnel file that is more than ten
years old, because the passage of time has made that evidence stale.” New
Hampshire Rule of Evidence 609(b) imposes a heightened standard for
admitting evidence of a prior criminal conviction as impeachment evidence
when the conviction is more than ten years old. See N.H. R. Ev. 609(b)
(providing in part that evidence of a prior criminal conviction that is more than
ten years old is admissible as impeachment evidence only if its probative value
substantially outweighs its prejudicial effect). The plaintiff urges us to “adopt
the concepts of the New Hampshire Rules of Evidence, Rule 609” and hold that
an officer’s name should be removed from the EES after ten years have passed
from the date of the conduct which led to the officer being added to the list,
provided there are no further incidents bearing upon the officer’s general
credibility.
We addressed the same argument in a recent opinion, in which we held
that “within the context of RSA 105:13-d, ‘potentially exculpatory evidence’ is
evidence, including impeachment evidence, that is reasonably capable of being
material to guilt or to punishment.” Doe v. N.H. Attorney Gen. (Activity Logs),
176 N.H. ___, ___ (2024), 2024 N.H. 50, ¶19. In Doe v. N.H. Attorney Gen.
(Activity Logs), we stated that we “agree[d] with the plaintiffs that
considerations made to determine the admissibility of evidence, such as the age
of the conduct and its materiality to an officer’s general credibility, should
factor into the determination of whether information in an officer’s personnel
file warrants his or her inclusion on the EES.” Id. at ___, 2024 N.H. 50, ¶20
(emphasis added). However, we did not adopt a per se rule that an officer’s
3