THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0588, State of New Hampshire v. Amuri
Diole, the court on July 11, 2024, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The
respondent, Amuri Diole, was charged with, inter alia, four counts of
aggravated felonious sexual assault. He was found not competent to stand
trial, not reasonably likely to be restored to competency within 12 months, and
dangerous. Thereafter, the State sought to civilly commit him pursuant to RSA
chapter 135-E, which provides for the involuntary civil commitment of sexually
violent predators. The respondent moved for a jury trial, governed by the rules
of evidence, to determine whether he committed the acts charged. See RSA
135-E:5, II (2021). The Superior Court (Nicolosi, J.) denied the motion.
Thereafter, following a two-day bench trial, the trial court found beyond a
reasonable doubt that the respondent committed at least three sexually violent
offenses and that his incompetence did not greatly impact the outcome of the
proceeding. See id. The respondent appeals. We affirm.
On appeal, the respondent argues that RSA 135-E:5 violates: (1) the due
process clauses of the State and Federal Constitutions, see N.H. CONST. pt. I,
art. 15; U.S. CONST. amend. XIV, by subjecting incompetent defendants to a
determination of whether they committed the acts charged without a jury trial,
the protections of medical privilege, and the safeguards of the rules of evidence;
and (2) the equal protection clauses of the State and Federal Constitutions, see
N.H. CONST. pt. I, arts. 1, 12, 14; U.S. CONST. amend. XIV, by denying
incompetent defendants the aforesaid protections, all of which are afforded to
competent defendants.
The respondent’s arguments pose facial challenges to the
constitutionality of RSA 135-E:5 and :10.
When reviewing a legislative act, we presume it to be constitutional and
will not declare it invalid except upon inescapable grounds. In other
words, we will not hold a statute to be unconstitutional unless a clear
and substantial conflict exists between it and the constitution. When
doubts exist as to the constitutionality of a statute, those doubts must be
resolved in favor of its constitutionality. The party challenging a statute’s
constitutionality bears the burden of proof.
State v. Ploof, 162 N.H. 609, 614 (2011) (quotations omitted). We first consider
the respondent’s arguments under the State Constitution. See State v. Ball,
124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
A “[s]exually violent predator” is defined as any person who “[h]as been
convicted of a sexually violent offense” and who “[s]uffers from a mental
abnormality or personality disorder that makes the person likely to engage in
acts of sexual violence if not confined in a secure facility for long-term control,
care, and treatment.” RSA 135-E:2, XII (2021). “Convicted of a sexually violent
offense” means a person who has been: (1) adjudicated guilty of a sexually
violent offense after a trial, guilty plea, or plea of nolo contendere; (2)
adjudicated not guilty by reason of insanity of a sexually violent offense; or (3)
found incompetent to stand trial on a charge of a sexually violent offense and
the court makes the finding required pursuant to RSA 135-E:5. RSA 135-E:2,
III (2021).
RSA 135-E:5, in turn, provides that when a defendant charged with a
sexually violent offense is declared incompetent to stand trial and the attorney
general seeks to civilly commit the defendant, the court
shall first hear evidence and determine whether the person did commit
the act or acts charged. The hearing on this issue shall comply with all
the procedures specified in this section. After hearing evidence on this
issue, the court shall make specific findings on whether the person did
commit the act or acts charged beyond a reasonable doubt. In
determining whether the state has met its burden, the court shall
consider the extent to which the person’s incompetence or developmental
disability affected the outcome of the hearing, including the person’s
ability to assist his or her counsel by recounting the facts, identifying
witnesses, testifying in his or her own defense, or providing other
relevant information or assistance to counsel or the court. If the person’s
incompetence substantially interferes with the person’s ability to assist
his or her counsel, the court shall not find the person committed the act
or acts charged unless the court can conclude beyond a reasonable
doubt that the acts occurred, and that the strength of the state’s case,
including physical evidence, eyewitness testimony, and corroborating
evidence, is such that the person’s limitations could not have had a
substantial impact on the proceedings. If, after the conclusion of the
hearing, the court finds, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the person did
commit the act or acts charged, the court shall enter a final order,
appealable to the supreme court on that issue.
RSA 135-E:5, II. The rules of procedure and evidence applicable to the hearing
include those set forth in RSA 135-E:10, which states:
2
In all civil commitment proceedings for sexually violent predators under
this chapter:
I. The rules of evidence, the doctor-patient privilege under RSA 329:26,
privileged communications pursuant to RSA 330-A:32, or other similar
statutes or rules shall not apply in proceedings under this chapter.
II. The court may consider evidence of the person’s prior conduct if such
evidence is relevant to the issue of whether the person is a sexually
violent predator.
III. Reports by a member of the multidisciplinary team or reports
provided on behalf of the multidisciplinary team shall be inadmissible in
proceedings under this chapter unless the court finds the report’s
probative value substantially outweighs its prejudicial effect.
IV. Notwithstanding the general inapplicability of the rules of evidence,
hearsay evidence is not admissible unless it falls within one of the
recognized exceptions to the hearsay rule or unless the court finds that
the hearsay evidence contains circumstantial guarantees of
trustworthiness and the declarant is unavailable to testify at the civil
commitment proceedings. Hearsay evidence shall not be used as the sole
basis for committing a person under this chapter.
The respondent contends that these statutes violate due process by permitting
a “conviction” without a jury trial, denying the application of the rules of
evidence, denying the protection of medical and therapist privileges, and
allowing “conviction” based upon propensity evidence.
As the respondent recognizes in his brief, we have previously held that
jury trials are not required in civil commitment proceedings under RSA chapter
135-C. See In re Sandra H., 150 N.H. 634, 636-37 (2004). The respondent
argues, however, that unlike civil commitment proceedings under RSA chapter
135-C, the determination made in RSA 135-E:5 hearings is “quasi-criminal”
because “the fact finder determines whether the defendant is guilty or innocent
of a sexually violent offense.” We disagree.
The purpose of the RSA 135-E:5 hearing is not to adjudicate guilt or
innocence — the primary inquiry for the court is to determine whether the
respondent “did commit the act or acts charged.” RSA 135-E:5, II. As the
State observes, “RSA 135-E:5 contains no mens rea requirement because,
unlike the criminal laws, RSA chapter 135-E is not concerned with whether [a
sexually violent predator] harbored a guilty mind when they committed a
3