THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0342, Laurie A. Ortolano v. City of
Nashua, the court on April 2, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The
defendant, the City of Nashua, appeals two orders in which the Superior Court
(Temple, J.) concluded that the defendant violated RSA chapter 91-A (2023),
New Hampshire’s Right-to-Know Law, and ordered it to disclose certain records
to the plaintiff, Laurie A. Ortolano, and to pay a portion of her attorney’s fees
and costs. On appeal, the defendant challenges the merits of the trial court’s
ruling only to the extent that it requires disclosure of recordings or transcripts
of police interviews. The defendant also challenges the trial court’s award of
attorney’s fees. We conclude that the trial court erred when it ruled that the
recordings or transcripts must be disclosed, and remand for further fact
finding. We further conclude that the trial court erred when it awarded
attorney’s fees. Accordingly, we reverse in part, vacate in part, and remand for
further proceedings consistent with this order.
The trial court found the following facts. In 2018, the defendant’s
Assessing Department (the Department) began conducting a semi-annual
reevaluation of property values. The plaintiff sought disclosure of numerous
documents pursuant to RSA chapter 91-A related to that work, including
certain field data collection cards. On August 7, 2019, the plaintiff visited the
Department’s office to inspect certain documents, and she later requested the
August 7, 2019 security surveillance footage from the Department’s office
pursuant to RSA chapter 91-A.
In 2019, the plaintiff provided information to the Nashua Police
Department regarding potential misconduct of a Department employee, and it
investigated the matter. Several Department employees were interviewed
during that investigation. The plaintiff sought disclosure of audio and video
recordings and transcripts of those police interviews pursuant to RSA chapter
91-A. The defendant disclosed written summaries of the police interviews,
while refusing to disclose the field data collection cards, the August 7, 2019
security surveillance footage, and the audio and video recordings or transcripts
of the police interviews (collectively, the records on appeal).
The plaintiff filed suit, alleging that the defendant had violated RSA
chapter 91-A by failing to disclose certain records, including the records on
appeal. The defendant responded that the security surveillance footage and
police interview recordings and transcripts were exempt from disclosure
because disclosure would invade the privacy of the persons recorded in the
footage and transcripts, RSA 91-A:5, IV (2023) (records are exempt from
disclosure if disclosure “would constitute [an] invasion of privacy”), and that
the field data collection cards were exempt as preliminary drafts, RSA 91-A:5,
IX (“[p]reliminary drafts” are exempt from disclosure). After the trial court
reviewed the security surveillance footage — but not the police interview
recordings or transcripts — in camera, it ruled that the privacy interests in the
security surveillance footage and in the police interview recordings and
transcripts were insufficient to outweigh the public interest in disclosure. The
court further ruled that the field data collection cards did not fall into the
preliminary draft exception. Accordingly, the trial court ruled that the items
must be disclosed pursuant to RSA chapter 91-A, and specifically ruled that
“[t]he City must provide the footage [of the police interviews and,] [i]f the
footage is not reasonably available, the City must provide the transcripts.” The
trial court also ordered the defendant to pay the plaintiff’s attorney’s fees and
costs incurred while seeking disclosure of the records on appeal, concluding
that the plaintiff’s lawsuit was necessary to enforce compliance with RSA
chapter 91-A and that the defendant “knew or should have known” that its
conduct violated RSA chapter 91-A. The defendant moved for reconsideration.
The trial court denied the motion. This appeal followed.
On appeal, the defendant challenges the trial court’s merits ruling only
as to the ordered disclosure of the audio and video recordings and transcripts
of the police interviews. The defendant argues that the trial court erred in
concluding that the witnesses’ and the defendant’s privacy interests in the
recordings and transcripts are insufficient to outweigh the public interest in
disclosure. The plaintiff argues that the trial court correctly balanced the
interests. In addition, after oral argument, the plaintiff filed a notice
maintaining that certain merits of this appeal may be moot or, alternatively,
that the defendant waived its privacy interests.
We first address the plaintiff’s arguments that the merits of this appeal
may be moot or waived. The plaintiff argues that the defendant’s privacy
arguments are waived because some of the personally identifying information
of the witnesses was released in the summaries and in police reports. The
plaintiff also filed a notice after submission of this case informing us that
transcripts of all eleven of the police interviews, and audio or video recordings
of five of them, had been disclosed to the plaintiff during discovery in a federal
court action. The plaintiff argues that if the defendant had a privacy interest in
the interviews, it waived that interest by producing those records to the
plaintiff. Accordingly, the plaintiff maintains that the defendant’s privacy
arguments may be moot or waived. We disagree.
2
Generally, a matter is moot “when it no longer presents a justiciable
controversy because issues involved have become academic or dead.” Appeal of
Hinsdale Fed. of Teachers, 133 N.H. 272, 276 (1990) (citations omitted).
“Usually, unless a pressing public interest is involved, or the question is
‘capable of repetition yet evading review,’ an issue that has already been
resolved is not entitled to judicial intervention.” Id. (citations and quotations
omitted). Here, according to the plaintiff’s notice, six of the recordings that the
trial court ordered the defendant to disclose to the plaintiff have not been
disclosed. Accordingly, there remains a live controversy, and the dispute is not
moot.
Next, the defendant’s privacy arguments are not waived either by the
limited disclosure of some of the recordings or transcripts of the police
interviews in the federal action or by the defendant’s disclosure of some of the
personally identifying information of the witnesses in the summaries and police
reports. The defendant argues that disclosure of the recordings and
transcripts would invade the witnesses’ privacy. Federal courts interpreting
the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) have recognized that when the
exemption asserted is that disclosure could invade an individual’s privacy
interests, those privacy interests can be waived only by the individual. See,
e.g., Sherman v. U.S. Dept. of Army, 244 F.3d 357, 362-64 & n.12 (5th Cir.
2001) (“only the individual whose informational privacy interests are protected
by exemption 6 [of FOIA] can effect a waiver of those privacy interests” and
collecting case law holding same for exemption 7(C) (citations omitted)); cf. N.H.
Right to Life v. Dir., N.H. Charitable Trust Unit, 169 N.H. 95, 103 (2016)
(explaining that we may look to federal courts’ interpretation of FOIA for
guidance when interpreting RSA chapter 91-A). Here, the witnesses involved
have not waived their privacy interests, and the defendant’s limited disclosure
of the recordings and transcripts or some of the information in those records
does not waive the privacy interests of the witnesses. Accordingly, we must
reach the merits.
We defer to the trial court’s findings of fact unless they are unsupported
by the evidence or erroneous as a matter of law. See Brown v. Grafton Cnty.
Dep’t of Corr., 177 N.H. ___, ___ (2025), 2025 N.H. 2, ¶8. We review the
interpretation of the Right-to-Know Law and its application to facts de novo.
Id.
RSA 91-A:4, I (2023) provides that “[e]very citizen . . . has the right to
inspect all governmental records . . . except as otherwise prohibited by statute
or RSA 91-A:5.” RSA 91-A:5, IV establishes an exemption from disclosure for
records “whose disclosure would constitute invasion of privacy.” To best
effectuate the statutory and constitutional objectives of facilitating public
access to documents, we construe the exemptions narrowly. Id. at ___, 2025
N.H. 2, ¶9. When a public entity seeks to avoid disclosure of material under
3