THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0414, State of New Hampshire v.
Jonathan A. Perfetto, the court on September 8, 2023, issued
the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The
State appeals an order of the Superior Court (Anderson, J.) granting the motion
of the defendant, Jonathan A. Perfetto, for transfer pursuant to RSA 651:10
(2016) from the Montana State Prison to the Secure Psychiatric Unit (SPU) of
the New Hampshire State Prison. See Sup. Ct. R. 7. We reverse and remand.
The following facts are supported by the record. In 2011, the defendant
pled guilty to five counts of possession of child sexual abuse images and seven
counts of failure to register online identifiers. RSA 649-A:3 (2009); RSA 651-
B:4-a (2009). The defendant received two consecutive ten to twenty-year
committed sentences and a number of suspended sentences. In 2017, the
defendant was transferred to the Montana State Prison under the Interstate
Corrections Compact. See RSA 622-B:2 (2001).
In November 2020, the defendant, self-represented, moved for transfer to
the SPU. He argued that he was in need of mental health treatment not
provided at the Montana State Prison. The trial court denied the motion,
noting that the defendant had not cited any authority for the transfer. After
the defendant filed an appeal in 2021, the State moved to stay the appeal so
that the defendant could renew his motion in the trial court with the assistance
of counsel and with citation to RSA 651:10. RSA 651:10 provides:
The governor and council or the superior court may discharge any such
person from prison, or shall transfer any prisoner who is insane to the
secure psychiatric unit, to be kept at the expense of the state, whenever
they are satisfied that such discharge or transfer will be conducive to the
health and comfort of the person and the welfare of the public.
This court granted the motion to stay. On June 15, 2022, the defendant
filed in the trial court a memorandum of law in support of his motion for
transfer to the SPU. To his motion he attached an expert evaluation from
Daniel Lampignano, a certified psychiatrist. In his report, Lampignano
diagnosed the defendant as having bipolar 1 disorder, borderline personality
disorder, and anti-social personality traits. Lampignano opined that the
defendant’s mental illnesses would benefit from treatment not available at the
Montana State Prison. The State objected to this motion.
The trial court held a hearing on June 21, 2022. The State, represented
by an assistant county attorney, argued that RSA 651:10 does not address
“specific mental health conditions outside of the scope of when the person’s
been found [not] guilty by reason of insanity [NGRI]” and that, absent an NGRI
determination, the statute does not apply. The State asserted that it was “not
disputing that [the defendant is] in need of mental health services” but that
because no new criminal offense had been committed, the defendant is not
“actually insane.” When asked if the State had any questions for Lampignano
about his report, counsel replied: “No, I don’t. I actually stipulate to the
findings that are made in the report.” The trial court clarified:
THE COURT: So your argument is really a pure legal argument. You’re
saying that – the State’s argument is simply that because he’s not in the
system by virtue of an NGRI plea, [RSA] 651:10 is inapplicable. That’s it?
[STATE]: Correct.
Defense counsel then sought clarification:
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: I want to be clear. I think the State stipulated to
a finding that the doctor is an expert and to enter his report?
THE COURT: He’s stipulating moreover to the findings in his report,
which is essentially a stipulation that there’s a pressing mental health
issue that warrants transfer to SPU, and that he won’t receive the
benefits in Montana that he’s receiving – will receive at SPU. That’s, in
short, what’s being included in the doctor’s report. And so the question
then becomes simply whether or not the statute applies.
The State did not object to this characterization of its argument. The trial
court excused Lampignano from the hearing.
The trial court granted the defendant’s motion to transfer. In its order,
the trial court stated that “[t]he State thus agreed during the June 21, 2022
hearing that Defendant should be deemed insane for purposes of RSA 651:10
but maintained that the statute does not apply to Defendant because he was
never found not guilty by reason of insanity.” The trial court rejected the
State’s legal argument and concluded that “[a]s the State has chosen not to
challenge Defendant’s assertion that he meets the definition of ‘insanity’ under
RSA 651:10 or Lampignano’s conclusion that Defendant will not receive
adequate services at the Montana State Prison, the Defendant is entitled under
RSA 651:10 to the transfer to S.P.U. that he seeks.” The State did not file a
motion to reconsider. This appeal by the State followed. After our acceptance
of this appeal, we dismissed the defendant’s 2021 appeal as moot.
2
On appeal, the State first argues that the trial court “erred in finding that
the [assistant] county attorney agreed that the defendant should be deemed
insane under RSA 651:10.” (Capitalization and bolding omitted.) The State
further argues that the trial court erred: “(1) in granting the defendant’s motion
to transfer without deciding whether the defendant was, in fact, ‘insane’ within
the meaning of RSA 651:10; (2) in finding that the defendant is ‘insane’ based
on the psychiatric report admitted at the hearing; and (3) in concluding that
the term ‘insane’ within RSA 651:10 meant nothing more than the presence of
a mental illness that would benefit from additional treatment available at the
Secure Psychiatric Unit.” (Capitalization and bolding omitted.) Similarly, the
State argues that the trial court erred in granting the motion to transfer
because the defendant failed to present evidence that transfer to the SPU was
“conducive to the health and comfort of the person and the welfare of the
public” as required by RSA 651:10. Finally, the State argues that the trial
court erred “when it did not comply with New Hampshire Rule of Criminal
Procedure 29(j), by providing notice to the warden so that the warden could file
a response to the defendant’s motion to transfer and to participate in the
hearing on the motion.” (Capitalization and bolding omitted.)
The defendant contends that: (1) “none of the arguments advanced by
the State on appeal were preserved”; (2) “the Superior Court accurately
understood the scope of the State’s stipulation at the June 21 hearing”; (3) “on
the merits, the Superior Court sustainably concluded that Perfetto is insane
within the meaning of RSA 651:10, and that Perfetto’s health and comfort, and
the interests of the public, require his return to SPU”; and (4) “applying plain
error review, this Court must reject the State’s Rule 29(j) argument.”
Ordinarily, we will not review arguments that were not timely raised
before the trial court because trial courts should have an opportunity to rule
on issues and to correct errors before they are presented to the appellate court.
Camire v. Gunstock Area Comm’n, 166 N.H. 374, 377 (2014) (citation omitted).
This rule, however, is not absolute. Id. As we have previously recognized,
preservation is a limitation on the parties to an appeal and not the reviewing
court. Id. Resolving this appeal requires that we interpret RSA 651:10 and
New Hampshire Rule of Criminal Procedure 29(j). We review the trial court’s
interpretation of both the statute and the rule de novo. St. Onge v. Oberten,
LLC, 174 N.H. 393, 395 (2021); State v. Munroe, 173 N.H. 469, 472 (2020).
Additionally, this case presents issues of public concern, including the process
and criteria for admission to the SPU, the impact that transferring the
defendant may have on staffing and patient care at the SPU, and the well-being
of the defendant himself. In light of these concerns, we will consider the State’s
arguments and the defendant’s counter-arguments. See Camire, 166 N.H. at
377.
We turn first to the State’s arguments under RSA 651:10. When
engaging in statutory interpretation, we first look to the language of the statute
3