THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0445, In the Matter of Andrew Cullen
and Jacqueline Cullen, the court on February 8, 2024, issued
the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). Andrew Cullen (father) and Jacqueline Furlone (mother),
f/k/a Jacqueline Cullen, were divorced in 2019 and are the parents of one
child. The mother sought to modify the parenting plan by adjusting the
parenting schedule and by granting her sole decision-making responsibility.
The father moved to prevent the child from receiving certain vaccines that
conflict with his religious beliefs. The Circuit Court (Ryan, J.) granted the
mother sole decision-making responsibility with respect to vaccines only but
otherwise denied the mother’s request as well as the father’s motion. The
father appealed and the mother cross-appealed. We affirm.
I
The following facts were found by the trial court or are supported by the
record. The parties divorced by final decree in 2019. The parties have one
child, who was three years old at the time of the divorce. Under the parenting
plan, the parents had joint decision-making authority. The parents disagreed
about vaccines for the child and were unable to resolve the dispute. In April
2022, the mother filed a motion to modify the parenting plan seeking, inter
alia, a change to the parenting schedule and an order granting her sole
decision-making responsibility. The father filed a motion objecting to the child
receiving certain vaccines that conflict with his religious beliefs.
Following a hearing, the trial court issued a detailed order ruling on the
parties’ motions. First, the court found that the mother failed to “establish[ ]
the existence of [a] necessary predicate circumstance” for modification of the
parenting schedule. See RSA 461-A:11, I (2018). Regarding the mother’s
request for sole decision-making responsibility, the court considered the best
interest factors under RSA 461-A:6 and denied the mother’s request for sole
decision-making responsibility generally. See RSA 461-A:6, I (Supp. 2022).
However, the court found that “it is in [the child’s] best interest to allow [the
mother] to make the final decision with respect to vaccinations after
consultation with [the child’s] primary care physician.” Consequently, the
court denied the father’s motion.
Both parties filed motions to reconsider. The court “decline[d] to
reconsider its Order with respect to medical decision-making regarding
vaccines” as well as the parenting schedule. This appeal and cross-appeal
followed.
II
When reviewing a trial court’s decision on parenting rights and
responsibilities, our role is limited to determining whether it clearly appears
that the trial court engaged in an unsustainable exercise of discretion. In the
Matter of Kurowski & Kurowski, 161 N.H. 578, 585 (2011). This standard
means that we review only whether the record establishes an objective basis
sufficient to sustain the discretionary judgment made, and we will not disturb
the trial court’s determination if it could reasonably have been made. In the
Matter of Summers & Summers, 172 N.H. 474, 479 (2019). The trial court’s
discretion necessarily extends to matters such as assigning weight to evidence
and assessing the credibility and demeanor of witnesses. Id. Conflicts in the
testimony, questions about the credibility of witnesses, and the weight
assigned to testimony are matters for the trial court to resolve. Id. The trial
court’s factual findings are binding upon this court if they are supported by the
evidence and are not legally erroneous. Id.
Our standard of review is not whether we would rule differently than the
trial court, but whether a reasonable person could have reached the same
decision as the trial court based upon the same evidence. Id. We will not
substitute our judgment for that of the trial court. Id.
III
We first address the father’s appeal. He argues that the trial court
violated his religious rights in awarding the mother sole decision-making
responsibility regarding vaccines.
The parents, who had joint decision-making responsibility, were at an
impasse. As we have previously observed, the legislature has established a
procedure for courts to resolve disputes between parents regarding parental
rights and responsibilities. Kurowski, 161 N.H. at 589 (citing RSA 461-A:4, :6,
:11). Specifically, RSA 461-A:11, II authorizes a court to modify, inter alia, the
section of a permanent parenting plan addressing decision-making
responsibility “based on the best interest of the child.” RSA 461-A:11, II
(2018); see Summers, 172 N.H at 483. Because the parties were at an
impasse, the trial court was confronted with awarding decision-making
responsibility, applying the best interest standard. See Summers, 172 N.H. at
483; cf. Kurowski, 161 N.H. at 589 (“Because the parties could not reach a
joint decision and father sought resolution in court, the trial court was left to
2
decide the dispute, guided by the best interests standard set forth in RSA 461-
A:6, I.”).
On appeal, “[o]ur only role is to decide whether the trial court committed
legal error or unsustainably exercised its discretion.” Kurowski, 161 N.H. at
581. We are not called upon to decide the merits of the underlying
disagreement between the parties with regard to certain vaccines. For
example, in Kurowski, the parties were at an impasse over whether the child
should attend public school or be home-schooled. Id. We observed, “[w]hile
[this case] involves home schooling, it is not about the merits of home versus
public schooling.” Id. Similarly, this appeal is not about religion or childhood
vaccination. Rather, our role is to determine, under the highly deferential
standard of review set forth above, whether the trial court’s conclusion that
reallocation of decision-making responsibility was in the child’s best interest
was supported by the record and reasonable. See Summers, 172 N.H. at 479.
We have stated that “resolution of the best interests of a child depends to
a large extent upon the firsthand assessment of the credibility of witnesses,
and the findings of the trial court are binding upon this court if supported by
the evidence.” Kurowski, 161 N.H. at 585. Here, the trial court found that “it
is in [the child’s] best interest to allow [the mother] to make the final decision
with respect to vaccinations after consultation with [the child’s] primary care
physician,” “whose position on vaccinations is unknown to this Court.” Based
on our review of the record, we conclude that under these circumstances, the
evidence provides an objective basis sufficient to sustain the trial court’s
finding. Because the father’s remaining arguments were either not preserved
or were not sufficiently developed for appellate review, we decline to address
them. See State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 49 (2003).
IV
We next turn to the mother’s arguments in her cross-appeal. First, the
mother argues that “the trial court applied the incorrect legal standard when
ruling on the [mother’s] petition for modification of a final parenting plan.”
(Capitalization and bolding omitted.) The mother invokes our plain error rule.
See Sup. Ct. R. 16-A.
The plain error rule allows us to correct errors not raised in the trial
court under certain limited circumstances. Kurowski, 161 N.H. at 591. We
use this rule sparingly, limiting it to those circumstances in which a
miscarriage of justice would otherwise result. Id. To find plain error: (1) there
must be error; (2) the error must be plain; (3) the error must affect substantial
rights; and (4) the error must seriously affect the fairness, integrity or public
reputation of judicial proceedings. Id. Generally, to satisfy the burden of
demonstrating that an error affected substantial rights under the third prong,
3