THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0042, James G. Boyle, Trustee of the
150 Greenleaf Avenue Realty Trust v. City of Portsmouth, the
court on December 14, 2023, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The
plaintiff, James Boyle, acting as Trustee of the 150 Greenleaf Avenue Realty
Trust, appeals an order of the Superior Court (Honigberg, J.) affirming a ruling
by the Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) for the defendant, City of Portsmouth
(City), that he is required to obtain a variance. We affirm.
The following facts appear in the trial court’s orders or are otherwise
supported by the record. The plaintiff owns and operates an auto dealership
on an approximately 14-acre parcel located in Portsmouth (the Property). The
Property has been the subject of considerable prior litigation.
At issue in this appeal is the plaintiff’s site plan application to develop a
second auto dealership on the Property, which the plaintiff originally submitted
to the City in 2009. The site plan proposes parking and display of vehicles
within 200 feet of a residential zoning district. The City’s consideration of the
application was suspended due to other litigation between the parties regarding
the Property. After the conclusion of that litigation, the plaintiff in 2020
“reviv[ed]” his 2009 site plan application. The City’s planning director
determined that this revived application would be subject to a version of the
ordinance enacted in 2006 (the 2006 ordinance) that was in effect when the
site plan application was originally filed in 2009.1 The 2006 ordinance
identified motor vehicle sales as a permitted use provided that “areas for
parking, display, and/or storage of vehicles, equipment, goods or materials are
located at least” 200 feet from any residential or mixed residential district.
After reviewing the plaintiff’s revived application, the planning director
concluded that the plaintiff would need to obtain a variance from the 200-foot
buffer requirement.
1 To provide a clear timeline of events and analysis, we have chosen to refer to the two versions of
the zoning ordinance at issue in this appeal by different shorthand (2004 ordinance and 2006
ordinance) than did the trial court and the parties (2006 ordinance and 2009 ordinance).
The plaintiff unsuccessfully appealed that decision to the ZBA. He then
appealed the ZBA’s decision to the superior court. The superior court upheld
the ZBA’s decision that the plaintiff would need a variance from the 200-foot
buffer requirement. It determined that the ZBA did not err when it applied the
2006 ordinance to the plaintiff’s application and concluded that the ordinance
was not enacted in retaliation for a prior lawsuit brought by the plaintiff
against the City. The court also rejected the plaintiff’s argument that a 2007
superior court order, issued in response to his motion to enforce or for
contempt in the context of a prior litigation (the 2007 order), had “definitively
resolve[d] the question of whether Plaintiff needed a variance from the
requirements of the [2006] ordinance.” The court construed the 2007 order as
limited to the interpretation and application of a previous version of the
ordinance — not the 2006 ordinance applicable to the pending application —
and therefore found the 2007 order inapposite. Finally, the trial court
concluded that the record supports the ZBA’s implicit finding that the
plaintiff’s proposed use is not a preexisting nonconforming use. The plaintiff
filed a motion to reconsider, which the trial court denied. This appeal followed.
Judicial review in zoning cases is limited. Accurate Transp., Inc. v. Town
of Derry, 168 N.H. 108, 112 (2015). Factual findings by the ZBA are
deemed prima facie lawful and reasonable, and the ZBA’s decision will not be
set aside by the superior court absent errors of law unless it is persuaded by
the balance of probabilities, on the evidence before it, that the ZBA’s decision is
unlawful or unreasonable. Id.; see RSA 677:6 (2016). Our review of the
superior court’s decision, in turn, is also limited: we will uphold the superior
court’s decision unless the evidence does not support it or it is legally
erroneous. Accurate Transp. Inc., 168 N.H. at 112.
The plaintiff clarified at oral argument that the primary issue on appeal
is the interpretation of the 2007 superior court order. The plaintiff argues that
this order establishes that he does not need a variance from the 200-foot buffer
requirement for the current project. We disagree.
The interpretation of a court order is a question of law, which we review
de novo. In the Matter of Salesky & Salesky, 157 N.H. 698, 702 (2008). In
construing a court order, we look to the plain meaning of the words used in the
document. Id. at 703. We read subsidiary clauses so as not to conflict with
the primary purpose of the trial court’s decree. Id. We also construe a court
order “with reference to the issues it was meant to decide.” Id.
Before turning to the language of the 2007 order itself, we provide the
context in which the 2007 order was issued. In 2004, the City reviewed a prior
site plan application submitted by the plaintiff concerning the Property and
determined that, under the zoning ordinance in effect at that time, the plaintiff
had to obtain a variance in order to park vehicles within 200 feet of a
residential district. The ordinance in effect at that time (the 2004 ordinance)
2
identified motor vehicle sales as a permitted use provided that “outdoor storage
areas” not be located within 200 feet of residential or mixed residential
districts. The plaintiff challenged the City’s decision and that dispute reached
this court in Boyle v. City of Portsmouth, 154 N.H. 390 (2006). On appeal, we
interpreted the “outdoor storage” language of the 2004 ordinance as not
encompassing parked vehicles, and we therefore held that the plaintiff did not
need a variance to store vehicles within the 200-foot buffer zone. Boyle, 154
N.H. at 391-92.
Meanwhile, in 2006 during the pendency of the Boyle appeal, the City
amended the relevant provision of the zoning ordinance. The amendment
removed the “outdoor storage” language and replaced it with the language of
the 2006 ordinance: motor vehicle sales are a permitted use provided that
“areas for parking, display, and/or storage of vehicles, equipment, goods or
materials are located at least” 200 feet from any residential or mixed residential
district.
In 2007, on remand from Boyle, the superior court issued an order
stating that, based on the Boyle decision, the 2004 ordinance did not prohibit
the plaintiff from parking vehicles within the 200-foot buffer zone. That same
year, the plaintiff submitted a new site plan application that also proposed
parking vehicles within the 200-foot buffer zone. The City attempted to block
that project, asserting that Boyle applied only to already paved portions of the
Property and that any other areas included in the new application were subject
to the recently amended 2006 version of the ordinance. In response, the
plaintiff filed a motion to enforce and motion for contempt, arguing that the
Boyle decision applied to the entire Property.
The superior court ruled upon the plaintiff’s motion to enforce or for
contempt in the 2007 order upon which the plaintiff relies in this appeal. The
order provides in relevant part:
[T]he Supreme Court’s decision [in Boyle] is broad enough to
include the parking of vehicles in an area where the plaintiff is
desirous of parking them. Thus the plaintiff does not need
permission from the Zoning Board in order to park vehicles in an
area designated on a plan submitted to the [City] back in 2004. . . .
The City of Portsmouth is ordered to accept the plaintiff’s site
plan review application and act thereon. The so-called “outdoor
storage” ordinance is not a bar to the plaintiff parking vehicles in
an area set forth on his plan. However the within Order is strictly
limited to the application of the language in the ordinance
concerning “outdoor storage.”
3