THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0424, John Doe v. New Hampshire
Division of State Police & a., the court on December 10, 2024,
issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The plaintiff, John Doe, appeals an order from the Superior
Court (Schulman, J.) dismissing his complaint against the New Hampshire
Division of State Police (the Division) and the New Hampshire Attorney
General’s Office (collectively, the State). The plaintiff argued in his complaint
that he was improperly placed on the Exculpatory Evidence Schedule (EES)
pursuant to RSA 105:13-d (2023) because the conduct described in his
personnel file was not potentially exculpatory. On appeal, the plaintiff argues
that the trial court erred when it failed to consider the arguments advanced in
his motion to reconsider regarding the impact of his disability on his memory.
We affirm.
We accept the following factual allegations set forth in the plaintiff’s
pleadings as true for the purposes of this appeal. See Barufaldi v. City of
Dover, 175 N.H. 424, 425 (2022). In 2018, while working as a trooper for the
Division, the plaintiff arrested a woman whom he later contacted — by text
message using his personal cellphone — regarding personal property that she
had left in his police cruiser. The text communication was reported to the
Division.
In June 2018, the plaintiff’s supervising lieutenant met with the plaintiff
and told him that he should not use his personal cellphone to contact members
of the public. The lieutenant asked if the plaintiff had previously contacted
other members of the public using his personal cellphone. The plaintiff
answered in the negative.
In July 2018, the lieutenant became aware of a lengthy text exchange
between the plaintiff and a different arrestee using the plaintiff’s personal
cellphone that began in May 2018 (the May 2018 text messages). When the
lieutenant confronted the plaintiff about the newly discovered text messages,
the plaintiff apologized for not being “truthful” during the June 2018 meeting.
The Division opened an internal investigation, during which the plaintiff again
apologized for not being “truthful” with the lieutenant in June 2018 when he
denied previously using his personal cellphone to communicate with members
of the public.
The plaintiff subsequently met with three Division officers to discuss the
contents of the text messages and his admissions that he had been untruthful
with the lieutenant. He failed to rebut the allegations and he was terminated
from his position. Shortly thereafter, the plaintiff’s name was added to the
EES.
In 2021, the plaintiff filed a complaint in which he argued that he is
entitled to removal from the EES because his conduct is not potentially
exculpatory under RSA 105:13-d. He argued that his conduct is not potentially
exculpatory because he “was not thinking about” the May 2018 text messages
when he answered the lieutenant and, rather, was truthfully representing that
he was not at that time contacting other arrestees. Further, the plaintiff
argued that his July 2018 apologies for being untruthful with the lieutenant do
not warrant his inclusion on the EES because he was merely adhering to his
military training when he accepted responsibility for his actions after he was
confronted by superiors.
The State filed a motion to dismiss. The trial court granted the State’s
motion, ruling that the plaintiff had “lied in the course of an official
investigation into his alleged misconduct,” which is “grounds for inclusion on
the EES” regardless of whether he lied to the lieutenant initially or lied about
lying to the lieutenant during the subsequent investigation.
The plaintiff then moved for reconsideration. He argued, for the first
time, that his placement on the EES is improper because he suffers from a
disability that caused him to forget the prior text messages. He further argued
that the symptoms of his disability, including “anxiety” and “impaired
judgment,” resulted in him admitting to lying despite not having done so, and
that he did not intentionally misstate the truth. The trial court denied the
motion on the grounds that the plaintiff had lied during the investigation into
his alleged misconduct.
On appeal, the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred when it declined
to consider his arguments — raised for the first time in his motion to
reconsider — regarding the impact of his disability on his memory when
determining that his admissions to being untruthful warranted placement on
the EES. Whether to receive further evidence on a motion for reconsideration
rests in the sound discretion of the trial court. Lillie-Putz Trust v. Downeast
Energy Corp., 160 N.H. 716, 726 (2010). We review the trial court’s ruling for
an unsustainable exercise of discretion and will not overturn it unless the
plaintiff can show the court’s ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to
the prejudice of his case. See id. Assuming, without deciding, that the trial
court should have considered the plaintiff’s new facts and arguments, we
conclude that the trial court did not err because the plaintiff’s disability does
not negate the potentially exculpatory nature of his conduct.
2
When reviewing a trial court’s ruling on a motion to dismiss, we consider
whether the allegations in the pleadings are reasonably susceptible of a
construction that would permit recovery. Doe v. N.H. Attorney Gen. (Activity
Logs), 176 N.H. 806, 812 (2024), 2024 N.H. 50, ¶13. We assume the pleadings
to be true and construe all reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to
the plaintiff. Id. We then engage in a threshold inquiry that tests the facts in
the complaint against the applicable law. Id. We will uphold the granting of a
motion to dismiss if the facts pled do not constitute a basis for legal relief. Id.
RSA 105:13-d, I, provides that “[t]he department of justice may
voluntarily maintain an [EES]” which “shall consist of a list of all current or
former law enforcement officers whose personnel information contain
potentially exculpatory evidence.” The statute further provides that an officer
may challenge his or her placement on the EES in the superior court, and “the
individual’s name and corresponding information will become public” unless “a
court issues an order finding that the underlying misconduct is not potentially
exculpatory” or “[a] court issues an order finding that the law enforcement
agency erred in recommending that the officer be placed on the [EES].” RSA
105:13-d, II(a)-(d).
At issue in this case is whether the plaintiff’s conduct constitutes
“potentially exculpatory evidence” as contemplated by RSA 105:13-d, I.
Recently, in Doe v. New Hampshire Attorney General (Activity Logs), we held
that “potentially exculpatory evidence” under RSA 105:13-d, I, “is evidence,
including impeachment evidence, that is reasonably capable of being material
to guilt or to punishment.” Doe (Activity Logs), 176 N.H. at 814, 2024 N.H. 50,
¶18. In reaching our conclusion, we explained that the considerations bearing
upon the admissibility of evidence are relevant to the determination of whether
information is “potentially exculpatory” such that an officer’s inclusion on the
EES is warranted. Id. at 815, 2024 N.H. 50, ¶20. “If there is no reasonably
foreseeable case in which ‘potentially exculpatory evidence’ relating to an
officer’s conduct would be admissible,” then an officer’s inclusion on the EES is
not warranted. Id.
Here, the plaintiff claims that he forgot the May 2018 text messages due
to his disability and, therefore, that he was not lying when he told the
lieutenant in June 2018 that he had not texted other members of the public.
He further claims that he falsely admitted to being untruthful with the
lieutenant after he was confronted by the lieutenant in July 2018 with the
additional text messages and during the July 2018 internal investigation. The
plaintiff argues that his false admissions were caused by a combination of his
disability impairing his ability to process the information and respond correctly
and his adherence to his military training to accept responsibility when
confronted by superiors.
3