THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0251, In the Matter of Robert Pizani, Jr.
and Dayana Pizani, the court on February 21, 2024, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The
respondent, Dayana Pizani (Wife), appeals a final divorce decree and alimony
order entered by the Circuit Court (Lemire, J.) dividing the marital property
and awarding her alimony in her divorce from the petitioner, Robert Pizani, Jr.
(Husband). See RSA 458:16-a (2018 & Supp. 2023); RSA 458:19-a (2018 &
Supp. 2023). Wife argues that the trial court erred by: (1) improperly allowing
Husband to offset his alimony obligation against the property division award;
(2) allowing Husband’s appraisal reports to be admitted at trial under New
Hampshire Rule of Evidence 804(b)(6); (3) choosing a value for certain property
in Panama that was the average of the appraisals offered by the parties when
there was no evidence to support the value; (4) ignoring the children’s interest
in the Panama property and assigning one hundred percent of the property’s
value to Wife; and (5) finding that Wife intentionally dissipated or diminished
the marital estate when she transferred her ownership in the Panama property
to a business entity. We affirm.
I. Background
The following facts were found by the trial court or are supported by the
record. The parties were married in 1995 and have two adult children. Wife is
from Panama. The parties purchased a home in Londonderry and lived there
for more than seventeen years. In 2006, Wife’s mother deeded three parcels of
land in Panama to her. In 2015, Wife’s father deeded three additional parcels
of land in Panama to her.
In January 2019, Husband began an affair. In July 2019, Husband
announced he was leaving the marriage and moved out of the marital home. In
August 2019, Wife created En Dios Confio, S.A. (EDC), a business entity in
Panama. In January 2020, Wife owned a fifty-two percent interest in the
company, while the parties’ children each owned a twenty-four percent
interest. In January 2020, Wife deeded the Panama land held in her name to
EDC.
Husband filed for divorce on February 24, 2020, alleging irreconcilable
differences. On February 28, Wife transferred her EDC shares equally to her
children. On May 28, Wife filed a cross-petition for divorce alleging the fault
ground of adultery. In September, the children transferred shares back to Wife
such that she regained her prior fifty-two percent interest in the company.
Following a final divorce hearing, the trial court issued a narrative order.
The court dismissed Husband’s ground for divorce and granted Wife the
divorce on the ground of adultery. Citing RSA 458:16-a, II(l) and RSA 458:19-
a, IV(g), the court considered Husband’s adultery, among other things, in
determining the division of marital assets and alimony.
The court awarded alimony to Wife in the amount of $5,000 per month
for a period of 148.5 months. In determining the property division, the court
identified and valued a variety of marital assets. Relevant to this appeal, the
court constructively awarded the full value of the Panama land, $2,428,047, to
Wife in the parties’ overall property division. The court awarded Wife
approximately sixty-five percent of the marital estate and Husband
approximately thirty-five percent.
Because the Panama land was the largest asset, and was awarded
entirely to Wife, the court found that a cash payment was required to make the
division equitable. The court ordered Wife to pay Husband $719,632 at a rate
of $5,000 per month. Further, the court ordered that so long as Husband had
an alimony obligation to Wife, instead of making the alimony payment, “he
shall retain the $5,000 per month and it shall be credited against the property
settlement payment she owes him.” The court stated that in the event Wife
paid the balance of the settlement payment in full, Husband “shall thereafter
immediately begin paying her alimony of $5,000 per month until the end of
148.5 months, or [Wife’s] remarriage, whichever sooner occurs.” This appeal
followed.
II. Analysis
A trial court has broad discretion in fashioning a final decree of divorce,
and in managing the proceedings before it. In the Matter of Spenard &
Spenard, 167 N.H. 1, 3 (2014). Its discretion necessarily encompasses
decisions concerning child support, alimony, and property distribution. Id. We
will not overturn a trial court’s rulings absent an unsustainable exercise of
discretion. Id. This standard of review requires that we review the record only
to determine whether it contains an objective basis to sustain the trial court’s
discretionary judgments. Id. If the court’s findings can reasonably be made on
the evidence presented, they will stand. Id.
We first address Wife’s argument that the trial court erred in allowing
Husband’s appraisal reports to be admitted at trial under New Hampshire Rule
2
of Evidence 804(b)(6).1 In February 2021, Husband’s appraisal company
issued appraisal reports regarding the Panama land. In May, Husband
provided copies of the appraisals to Wife. On June 10, Wife moved to strike the
appraisals. On June 14, the trial court denied the motion. On June 18, Wife
granted power of attorney to her cousin, a Panamanian attorney. On August 9,
the attorney filed a criminal complaint and civil action on Wife’s behalf against
the appraisal company alleging that the company completed the appraisals
without authorization or permission and established “false values . . . with the
sole purpose of benefitting [Husband] in the . . . divorce proceedings.” The civil
action alleged economic damages equivalent to $1,000,000.
On December 17, Husband’s appraisal company informed him that, in
light of the lawsuit, it would not act as an expert witness in his divorce hearing.
On January 10, 2022, Husband moved to admit the appraisal reports without
expert testimony, arguing that they were admissible, in part, under Rule
804(b)(6) because Wife “wrongfully and intentionally” caused the appraisal
company to be unavailable “by filing a frivolous lawsuit to intimidate” the
company from testifying at the divorce hearing. See N.H. R. Ev. 804(b)(6). The
trial court granted the motion. In its order, the court observed that “[t]he Rules
of Evidence do not apply to divorce proceedings in the Family Division.”
Nevertheless, the court found that the appraisal reports were admissible under
Rule 804(b)(6).
The trial court has broad discretion over the admission of evidence in
divorce cases and is not bound by the rules of evidence. Gosselin v.
Gosselin, 136 N.H. 350, 353 (1992); N.H. R. Ev. 1101(d)(3). We review a trial
court’s decision on the management of discovery and the admissibility of
evidence under an unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. In the Matter
of Hampers & Hampers, 154 N.H. 275, 280 (2006). To meet this standard, Wife
must demonstrate that the trial court’s ruling was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of her case. Id.
Although the trial court conducted an analysis under Rule 804(b)(6) in
finding the appraisal reports admissible, we need not review the court’s
analysis under that rule because we conclude that the court’s decision to admit
the evidence was a sustainable exercise of discretion. The court inferred from
the timing of the Panamanian lawsuit that it “was intended to accomplish what
[Wife] was unable to do in this Court, namely preclude the admission of
[Husband’s] appraisals.” On this record, we determine that it was reasonable
for the trial court to admit Husband’s appraisal reports and Wife has failed to
1 New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 804(b)(6) provides that the following is not excluded by the rule
against hearsay if the declarant is unavailable as a witness: “A statement offered against a party
that wrongfully caused — or acquiesced in wrongfully causing — the declarant's unavailability as
a witness, and did so intending that result.”
3