THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0082, State of New Hampshire v. Cody
Gunseth, the court on June 29, 2023, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments, oral arguments, and the
record submitted on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of
this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The defendant, Cody Gunseth, appeals his
conviction following a jury trial in Superior Court (Delker, J.) on one felony
count of possession of cocaine. See RSA 318-B:2, I (Supp. 2022). He argues
that the trial court erred by denying his motion to dismiss because: (1) the
evidence was insufficient to prove that he possessed any substance that was
found to be cocaine; and (2) the State did not charge him with possessing any
cocaine found outside a safe located inside a bedroom closet where the
defendant was discovered hiding. We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. In March 2019, police
officers executed a search warrant at the rented residence of the defendant’s
girlfriend, Megan. Although the property owner rented the residence only to
Megan, the search warrant targeted both Megan and the defendant, seeking
“[e]vidence of drugs and sales of drugs.” When executing the search warrant,
the police announced their presence and Megan answered the door. After
initial questioning, she informed the police that the defendant was not in the
home. The officers proceeded to clear the home and in a bedroom on the
second floor an officer found the defendant hiding in a closet wearing only a
pair of boxers. The officer ordered the defendant out of the closet and asked for
his identification. The defendant responded that his wallet with his
identification was in a wooden box beside the bed.
The officers observed clothing and shoes scattered throughout the
bedroom. Inside the closet where the defendant had been hiding, officers
discovered a SentrySafe. The officers forcibly opened the safe and inside
discovered a significant amount of controlled drugs. Specifically, the State
later alleged that the safe contained, among other things, 75 grams of a
substance containing fentanyl and heroin, four orange pills of buprenorphine,
and four packages, each weighing approximately three grams, of crack cocaine.
The contents of the safe also included, among other things, baggies, scales,
multiple cell phones, multiple knives, a plethora of drug paraphernalia, and a
piece of paper with an IOU issued to Megan.
In the bedroom, but outside the safe, officers found, among other things,
drug paraphernalia, smaller quantities of alleged controlled drugs and drug
residue, marijuana flowers, and $800 in cash hidden behind a picture on the
wall. Additionally, in the wooden box containing the defendant’s identification,
officers found a Narcan device, a suspected marijuana lollipop, a pink envelope
with the defendant’s name containing $296 in cash, and a black earbuds case
that contained a suspected drug consisting of a chunk of a small white
substance.
In January 2020, a grand jury indicted the defendant on one felony
count of possession of five grams or more of fentanyl with the intent to
dispense, one felony count of possession of five grams or more of heroin with
the intent to dispense, one felony count of possession of cocaine with the intent
to dispense, and one felony count of possession of buprenorphine. Specifically,
the indictment charging the defendant with possession of cocaine alleged that
“on or about the [30th] day of March 2019, at Antrim in the County of
Hillsborough,” the defendant committed the crime of “possession of a controlled
drug with intent to dispense.” (Emphasis omitted.) The State charged Megan
as a co-defendant, but she later absconded and remained at large when the
defendant’s case was tried.
At trial, the State elicited testimony from two of the officers who executed
the search warrant and discovered the controlled drugs in the bedroom.
During its direct examination of the officers, the State introduced photographs
of, among other things, numerous small white chunky substances found in a
baggie inside the safe (19-216-PR), as well as “a bag of off-white chunky
material” (19-115-PR) found in the bedroom.1 Further, the State introduced
some of the contents of the wooden box, including the small white chunky
substance in the black earbuds case alleged to be a controlled substance (19-
117-PR), as well as photographs of the wooden box and its contents.
The State then presented the testimony of a State Laboratory analyst,
qualified “as an expert in the analysis of controlled drugs,” who tested some of
the evidence seized in this case. As relevant here, the expert testified that 19-
216-PR contained four packages “that all appeared the same.” The expert then
randomly selected one substance to test, which documented the presence of
crack cocaine. The expert explained that she did not test all four packages
pursuant to a State Laboratory policy that directed analysts not to test every
suspected drug when numerous items appear similar and a test of one of the
items documents the presence of a controlled substance. The expert also
applied this policy to three other evidence bags in this case. Specifically, she
testified that, because 19-112-PR contained a white chunky substance and
testing of it documented the presence of cocaine, she did not test either 19-
1 We agree with the defendant that, based upon the record submitted on appeal, we are unable to
determine where in the bedroom the officers found 19-115-PR.
2
113-PR or 19-115-PR because they also contained a similar white chunky
substance. The expert also testified that she could not comment on whether
19-117-PR contained any controlled drugs because it “didn’t come into the
laboratory” and was not tested.
After the State concluded its case-in-chief, the defendant moved to
dismiss all of the charges. The defendant argued that the State had not met its
burden of proving that he had control or authority sufficient to establish his
possession over the evidence found in the safe and some of the evidence found
in the bedroom. The defendant acknowledged that he likely had control over
the contents of the wooden box containing his identification, but argued that
the State Laboratory did not test 19-117-PR containing the white chunky
substance located inside the wooden box. Therefore, he argued, the State had
not met its burden of proving that the wooden box contained a controlled
substance. Additionally, the defendant asserted that because the evidence was
circumstantial, the State had not excluded all rational conclusions other than
guilt. The State countered that the circumstantial evidence supported the
defendant’s constructive possession of all the items found in the bedroom.
Alternatively, the State argued that, even if there was insufficient evidence to
prove that the defendant had control or possession of the items in the safe,
evidence concerning the other alleged contraband found in the bedroom was
sufficient to support the State’s charges.
The trial court denied the defendant’s motion. The court found that
“viewing the evidence and all reasonable inferences in the light more favorable
to the State, a rational jury can conclude that the [d]efendant exercised control
over the drugs, including the drugs in the safe.” The court relied upon
evidence supporting the defendant’s cohabitation in the bedroom, his
consciousness of guilt in hiding from the police, and much of the evidence in
plain sight, as supporting its decision that the defendant “generally had access
to drugs in the house.” The court further found that this evidence included the
contents of the wooden box, which although not tested, appeared “very similar
to other drugs that were tested and found to be controlled substances.”
Thereafter, the defendant called one witness at trial, the owner of the
property, who testified that he leased the property only to Megan and he did
not know the defendant. After the defendant rested his case, he renewed his
motion to dismiss, which the trial court denied. At the conclusion of the two-
day trial, the jury found the defendant guilty on one lesser-included offense of
possession of cocaine. This appeal followed.
On appeal, the defendant first argues that the trial court erred by
denying his motion to dismiss because the evidence was insufficient to convict
him. He “concedes that the evidence was sufficient to prove that he possessed
the contents of the wooden box containing his identification,” but asserts that
the evidence was insufficient to establish, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the
3