THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0545, Appeal of Town of Derry, the court
on August 17, 2023, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments, oral arguments, and the
record submitted on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of
this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The Town of Derry (Town) appeals an order
of the Housing Appeals Board (HAB) reversing the Town’s Zoning Board of
Adjustment’s (ZBA) decision denying the request of the respondents, John
Cooper and the Estate of Cooper, for a frontage variance. The Town argues
that: (1) the HAB failed to apply the correct standard of review; (2) the HAB
erred when it supplanted its judgment for the ZBA’s judgment; (3) the HAB
improperly conducted a de novo review of the three other variance factors set
forth in RSA 674:33, I(a)(2) (Supp. 2022) not addressed by the ZBA; and (4) the
HAB erred in its analysis of RSA 674:33, III (Supp. 2022). We conclude that:
(1) the HAB reasonably reversed the ZBA’s decision on the diminution of
property value factor; and (2) the Town failed to establish reversible error with
respect to the HAB’s analysis of RSA 674:33, III. We decline to address the
HAB’s analysis of the spirit of the ordinance factor and whether the HAB
conducted an improper de novo review of the remaining three variance factors
because these issues were not preserved. Accordingly, we affirm.
The record supports the following facts. The respondents own a lot in
the town that lies in a low-medium density residential (LMDR) area. The town’s
Zoning Ordinance states that properties in LMDR areas must have 150 feet of
road frontage to construct a home. The respondents’ lot is 2.6 acres and has
108 feet of frontage along Ballard Road. A strip of land, roughly thirty feet
wide, connects the main section of the property to Ballard Road. The strip of
land was intended to be an access road for the lot’s original purpose —
supplying water to the neighboring lots by way of a community well. The
majority of the lot’s acreage lies behind three other homes and sits upon a hill.
The respondents first applied for a frontage variance in 2003 and were
denied. In November 2021, the respondents again sought a frontage variance
from the ZBA so that they could build a single-family home on their lot.1
During two public hearings in November, only abutting property owners
expressed disapproval. Collectively, the abutters claimed that the respondents
1 The ZBA determined that due to a change in the statute between applications, the respondents’
application was not barred pursuant to Fisher v. City of Dover, 120 N.H. 187 (1980), and neither
party challenges this decision.
had promised not to build on the lot, and that development of the lot would
affect their privacy and cause water runoff concerns.2 During the deliberative
portion of one of the hearings, one ZBA member, appearing to rely on the 2003
denial, commented that changes to the lot could diminish the values of other
properties.
The motion to approve the variance failed on a 2-3 vote. Two members
voted against the motion because they believed that granting the variance
would be contrary to the spirit of the ordinance; the third member voted
against the motion because he believed that other property values would be
diminished. The notice of the ZBA’s decision denying the respondents’ request
for a variance merely indicated the result of the vote and listed those two
factors as the reason for denial. The record does not show that the ZBA
considered the three other factors listed in RSA 674:33, I(a)(2) when making its
decision. The ZBA denied the respondents’ request for rehearing, and they
appealed to the HAB.
The HAB reversed the ZBA’s decision and granted the respondents’
variance application subject to conditions not relevant to this appeal. The HAB
found that the ZBA’s decision on the two factors — that granting the variance
would be contrary to the spirit of the ordinance and would result in the
diminishment of the values of surrounding properties — was unreasonable
based on the evidence in the record. The HAB then evaluated the three other
variance factors set forth in RSA 674:33, I(a)(2) and found in favor of the
respondents. To support its decision, the HAB analyzed RSA 674:33, III and
explained that the statute was not clear as to “whether a failed vote to approve
a variance is equivalent to a successful motion to deny.” Without addressing
that issue, the HAB noted that the posture of the ZBA’s vote was relevant
because it demonstrated that two members “felt that the [respondents] satisfied
all five prongs of the variance test, including the three that were not cited in
the ZBA’s written notice of decision.”
The Town moved for a rehearing and raised only two arguments: (1) that
the HAB substituted its judgment for the ZBA’s on the issue of diminution in
property value; and (2) that the HAB incorrectly analyzed RSA 674:33, III,
which led to a mistaken “emphasis on the number of votes in favor and
opposed to the denial of the variance.” The HAB denied the motion and
clarified that its “intent was simply to recognize the vote posture while
discussing the variance elements that were not cited by the Town as grounds
2 Comments by the abutters that raised concerns about diminished property values appear only
in the unofficial transcripts of the ZBA hearings. The respondents commissioned a company to
transcribe the ZBA hearings and then submitted the transcriptions to the HAB for consideration.
At the request of the Town, the HAB disregarded the unofficial transcripts. Therefore, we limit our
review to the record reviewed by the HAB.
2
for denial. The specific vote tally was not relied upon by the [HAB] as a basis
for finding the ZBA’s findings unreasonable or unlawful.” This appeal followed.
When reviewing a zoning board’s decision, the HAB must uphold the
decision unless there is an error of law or the HAB is persuaded by the balance
of probabilities, on the evidence before it, that the decision was unreasonable.
RSA 679:9, II (Supp. 2022); see RSA 677:6 (2016); see also RSA 679:9, I (Supp.
2022) (appeals shall be consistent with those to the superior court pursuant to
RSA 677:4 (2016) through RSA 677:16 (2016)). The appealing party bears the
burden of proving the ZBA’s decision was unlawful or unreasonable. RSA
677:6; see also RSA 679:9, I. The HAB must treat the ZBA’s factual findings as
prima facie lawful and reasonable. RSA 677:6; see also RSA 679:9, I. The
HAB’s review is not whether it agrees with the ZBA’s findings, but, rather,
whether there is evidence in the record upon which the ZBA could have
reasonably based its findings. See Appeal of Chichester Commons, LLC, 175
N.H. 412, 415-16 (2022).
Our review of the HAB’s decision is governed by RSA chapter 541 (2021).
See RSA 679:15 (Supp. 2022). Accordingly, the HAB’s order will not be set
aside unless we are satisfied, by a clear preponderance of the evidence, that
such order is unjust or unreasonable. See RSA 541:13. The HAB’s factual
findings are “deemed to be prima facie lawful and reasonable.” Id. “When
reviewing the HAB’s findings, our task is not to determine whether we would
have found differently or to reweigh the evidence, but, rather, to determine
whether the HAB’s findings are supported by competent evidence in the
record.” Appeal of Chichester Commons, 175 N.H. at 416.
The Town begins by arguing that the HAB applied the incorrect standard
of review. We disagree. In its order, the HAB correctly articulated the standard
of review by stating that, when reviewing the board’s decision, it would
consider the ZBA’s factual findings to be prima facie lawful and reasonable.
The HAB also indicated that those findings would not be set aside unless, by a
balance of the probabilities upon the evidence before it, the HAB found that the
ZBA’s decision was unlawful or unreasonable. The HAB’s review, which
focused upon whether the ZBA’s findings were reasonable in light of the
evidence before it, was consistent with this standard. Cf. Garrison v. Town of
Henniker, 154 N.H. 26, 35 (2006). Accordingly, the HAB applied the correct
standard of review.
The Town nonetheless argues that “the HAB erred when it determined
the ZBA lacked a reasonable, lawful basis to deny [respondents’] variance
based on [respondents’] failure to satisfy the diminution of property values.”3
3 The Town also argued that “the HAB erred when it determined the ZBA lacked a reasonable,
lawful basis to deny [respondents’] variance based on [respondents’] failure to satisfy the . . .
spirit of the ordinance” factor. We note, however, that the Town did not argue in their motion
3