THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0457, Chase Cutts Brigham Neighborhood
Association, Inc. & a. v. City of Portsmouth, the court on May
21, 2024, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The
plaintiffs, Chase Cutts Brigham Neighborhood Association, Inc., Marilee Clark,
Hal Clark, Eldon Collymore, Carolyn O’Connor Collymore, Mary Anne Gauthier,
Natasha Karlin, Jason Karlin, Bernice Kowalski-Richards, Edward W.
Richards, and Diane Chalifour, appeal a decision of the Superior Court
(Honigberg, J.) dismissing their complaint requesting declaratory and
injunctive relief against the defendant, the City of Portsmouth (City), on the
ground that the suit is barred by res judicata. We affirm.
I. Background
The record supports the following facts. In 2016, the City proposed a
citywide rezoning initiative to establish three zoning “Gateway Districts.” The
three proposed zoning districts would range from allowing greater density and
larger and taller buildings to allowing less density, lower building heights, and
smaller mixed uses. In August 2017, the City identified several properties on
Chase Drive and Cutts Avenue to be rezoned as part of this initiative. Those
properties included 200 Chase Drive, which is owned by the intervenor, Bethel
Assembly of God, Inc. (the Church), and three residential properties abutting
200 Chase Drive. The City Council approved the Gateway Districts rezoning
initiative in December 2017.
Subsequently, the Church sought approval from the City’s planning
board to subdivide its property and construct a 22-unit apartment building,
which the planning board granted in 2020. All the plaintiffs in the instant
action — except Chalifour — timely appealed that decision to the superior
court (the planning board appeal). In January 2021, the superior court
affirmed the planning board’s decision, and all the present plaintiffs, save
Chalifour, appealed that decision to this court. See Chase Cutts Brigham
Neighborhood Association, Inc. & a. v. City of Portsmouth, No. 2021-0196
(non-precedential order at 1), 2022 WL 1416502 (N.H. Apr. 25, 2022). We
affirmed — our decision became final in June 2022.
On July 7, 2021, while that appeal was pending before this court, the
plaintiffs filed in superior court the instant action seeking declaratory and
injunctive relief against the City. In their complaint, the plaintiffs allege that
the zoning initiative approved in 2017 was void because they were not given
proper notice of the public hearings leading to its approval, and that the
rezoning of 200 Chase Drive and abutting properties constituted illegal spot
zoning. The plaintiffs sought an injunction preventing the City from issuing a
final construction permit to the Church for its proposed apartment building.
The trial court ultimately dismissed the action, concluding that under the
doctrine of res judicata, the plaintiffs’ claims were barred by the January 2021
decision of the superior court that affirmed the 2020 planning board decision
approving the Church’s application to subdivide its property and construct the
apartment building. This appeal followed.
II. Analysis
Generally, when reviewing a trial court’s ruling on a motion to dismiss,
we consider whether the plaintiffs’ allegations are reasonably susceptible of a
construction that would permit recovery. Graham v. Eurosim Constr., 175
N.H. 633, 636 (2023). However, when a litigant moves to dismiss based
exclusively upon res judicata, which is an affirmative defense, the movant —
here, the City — bears the burden of proving its application. See id. at 636-37.
Because the trial court determined that res judicata applied as a matter of law,
our review is de novo. Id. at 637.
Res judicata is a judicial doctrine that prevents a losing party from
obtaining a second review of a claim after having failed to obtain relief in its
first attempt. It is rooted in a policy that those who have litigated a dispute are
bound by the results of the first litigation and that issues that were or could
have been resolved in the first case are settled as between the parties. See
Christian Camps & Conferences v. Town of Alton, 118 N.H. 351, 353-54 (1978);
Baldwin v. Traveling Men’s Assn., 283 U.S. 522, 525 (1931). The doctrine
applies when three elements are met: (1) the parties must be the same or in
privity with one another; (2) the same cause of action must be before the court
in both instances; and (3) a final judgment on the merits must have been
rendered in the first action. Kalil v. Town of Dummer Zoning Bd. of
Adjustment, 159 N.H. 725, 730 (2010). The plaintiffs challenge the trial court’s
rulings on elements one and two.
We begin by considering whether the parties were the same or in privity
with one another. It is undisputed that all of the parties in the instant action,
other than plaintiff Chalifour, are the same parties as in the previous action.
The issue is whether Chalifour is in privity with the plaintiffs from the first
action.
2
Here, the trial court stated that Chalifour is similarly situated to the
plaintiffs in the previous action “in every imaginable way: she resides in the
same neighborhood, has the same quarrels with the City’s actions, and like
many of the other Plaintiffs, took part in the planning board process.” Her
claims, as the trial court noted, “are not unique as compared to the other
plaintiffs.”
While the term “privity” includes a variety of pre-existing substantive
legal relationships such as that between a property owner and the property
owner’s successor in interest, Sleeper v. Hoban Family P’ship, 157 N.H. 530,
534 (2008), “we have used the term more broadly to refer to a functional
relationship, in which, at a minimum, the interests of the non-party were in
fact represented and protected in the prior litigation,” id. (quotation omitted).
Having reviewed the record before us, we agree with the trial court’s conclusion
that, in this case, “a ‘functional relationship’ exists between Plaintiff Chalifour
and the plaintiffs in the [previous litigation], because her interests were in fact
represented and protected in the prior litigation.” (Quotation omitted.) Thus,
the trial court did not err by concluding that Chalifour was in privity with the
plaintiffs in the previous litigation.
We next address whether the instant suit advances the “same cause of
action” as the prior litigation. A “cause of action” is “the underlying right that
is preserved by bringing a suit or action.” Finn v. Ballentine Partners, LLC,
169 N.H. 128, 147 (2016) (quotation omitted). It encompasses “all theories on
which relief could be claimed on the basis of the factual transaction in
question.” Sleeper, 157 N.H. at 534 (quotation omitted). Our primary inquiry
“in determining whether two actions are the same cause of action for the
purpose of applying res judicata” is to “consider whether the alleged causes of
action arise out of the same transaction or occurrence.” Id. (quotation and
brackets omitted). We have relied on the factors identified in the Restatement
(Second) of Judgments § 24 to guide our determination as to whether the facts
constitute a single transaction or occurrence. See Finn, 169 N.H. at 147-48.
The Restatement provides that such a determination should be made
“pragmatically” by “giving weight to such considerations as whether the facts
are related in time, space, origin, or motivation, whether they form a
convenient trial unit, and whether their treatment as a unit conforms to the
parties’ expectations or business understanding or usage.” Restatement
(Second) of Judgments § 24(2), at 196 (1982).
As we have long recognized, res judicata rests, inter alia, “upon
considerations of . . . public policy favoring the establishment of certainty in
legal relations.” Christian Camps & Conferences, 118 N.H. at 354. “Whether a
claim is barred by res judicata is determined on a case by case basis.” Hallisey
v. DECA Corp., 140 N.H. 443, 445 (1995).
3