THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0433, State of New Hampshire v. Richard
Ellison, the court on January 14, 2026, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The
defendant, Richard Ellison, appeals his conviction of reckless second degree
murder for causing the death of the victim in a December 2005 house fire in
Concord, see RSA 630:1-b, I(b) (2016). On appeal, the defendant argues that
the Superior Court (Kissinger, J.) erred in: (1) restricting cross-examination of a
witness; and (2) admitting certain expert opinion testimony of a forensic video
analyst. The defendant also asserts that the trial court may have erred in not
disclosing records the trial court reviewed in camera. We conclude that the
trial court did not err in restricting cross-examination, and that any purported
error in admitting the expert opinion testimony was harmless beyond a
reasonable doubt. Having reviewed the records examined in camera by the
trial court, we find no error in its decision not to disclose additional records.
Accordingly, we affirm.
I. Factual and Procedural Background
The jury could have found the following facts. In the early morning
hours of December 9, 2005, Concord police and firefighters responded to a fire
at a duplex on North State Street, across from the New Hampshire State Prison
for men. Firefighters extracted the owner of the duplex, an elderly disabled
man, from one side of the duplex. He later died from burns suffered in the fire.
On the date of the fire, Stephen Carter resided on the other side of the
duplex. The victim had an agreement with Carter that, in lieu of rent, Carter
would take care of the victim and the house. Carter purchased a cell phone for
the victim into which Carter entered his phone number and the phone
numbers of the victim’s children, friends, doctors, and other contacts. The
victim kept his phone at his bedside. After the victim suffered a stroke in
November 2005, he lost his ability to speak, was bedridden, and required care
around the clock.
For a few months in the summer of 2005, Carter let the defendant live in
the finished basement on Carter’s side of the duplex in exchange for helping
Carter with maintenance and repair projects. After the defendant’s girlfriend,
Robin Theriault, moved in with the defendant, Carter told them they needed to
leave because the victim had not agreed to let two people live in the basement.
Thereafter, the defendant and Theriault moved between hotels and the homes
of friends, and slept in Theriault’s car. Eventually, they moved in with
Theriault’s sister, who had an apartment on Loudon Road in Concord.
On the evening of December 8, the victim was running a low-grade fever
and Carter was not at home. Shortly after midnight on December 9, while
patrolling the perimeter of the prison, two corrections officers saw a fire at the
duplex. Upon arriving at the scene, both smelled gasoline and observed that
there was a clear linear fire in a hallway on Carter’s side of the duplex. Other
first responders who arrived at the scene smelled gasoline coming from the
building. Based upon these observations and other evidence, experts called by
the State at trial opined that the fire had been intentionally set in Carter’s
kitchen by a person using a gasoline jug and that the fire spread through the
hallway and then throughout the victim’s side of the duplex.
On December 26, 2005, the victim’s cell phone was found in a puddle of
water by a path near the apartment building in which the defendant and
Theriault were living at the time of the fire.
Sometime after the fire, the defendant and Theriault moved out of her
sister’s apartment. In January 2006, Theriault and the defendant committed
robberies in Concord, and sometime thereafter, Theriault and the defendant
moved to Berlin, New Hampshire. In December 2006, the defendant told the
police that he and Theriault had committed the Concord robberies, and the
police then arrested Theriault. While she was being interviewed by the police
about the robberies, Theriault mentioned the fire, and suggested that the
defendant might have been involved. Following a lengthy investigation, the
State charged the defendant in 2018 with first and second degree murder for
causing the death of the victim in a house fire. The defendant stood trial in
2021, but during jury deliberations the court declared a mistrial.
The defendant was tried again in April and May 2022. Over the course of
the twenty-nine day trial, the State presented testimony from a number of
firefighters, police officers, lay witnesses, and experts. The jury found the
defendant not guilty of first degree murder, but guilty of second degree murder
for recklessly causing the death of the victim by starting a fire at the victim’s
residence that resulted in his death. This appeal followed.
II. Analysis
According to the defendant, at the 2022 trial, the defendant disputed
that the fire was arson, suggesting, through cross-examination of the State’s
witnesses, that the fire could have resulted from an interaction between the
oven’s pilot light and gas vapors from a fuel jug Carter stored in his kitchen.
2
He also disputed the State’s claim that he started the fire. On appeal, the
defendant argues that the trial court erred when it limited defense counsel’s
live cross-examination of Matthew York and admitted certain opinion testimony
from a forensic video analyst, and that the trial court may have erred in not
disclosing information contained in records the trial court reviewed in camera.
A. Cross-Examination of Matthew York
The State called a number of witnesses to testify about statements the
defendant had made to them. One of those witnesses, York, had traveled from
Florida to testify and was called on the tenth day of the twenty-nine day trial.
York had been housed at the same dormitory as the defendant at the Coos
County House of Corrections in 2006, and had testified at the defendant’s 2021
trial. When called at the 2022 trial, York testified that due to a traumatic brain
injury he suffered in 2013, he was unable to recall much about the time he
spent incarcerated with the defendant, and was unable to identify the
defendant in the courtroom.
The State sought to refresh York’s memory by asking him to review,
among other things, a transcript of his testimony from the 2021 trial. When
that proved unsuccessful, the State moved to introduce York’s testimony from
the 2021 trial. Over the defendant’s objection, the trial court ruled that York’s
testimony from the prior trial was admissible under an exception to the rule
against hearsay because York was unavailable. See N.H. R. Ev. 804(a), (b)(1).
Following that ruling, defense counsel argued that the defendant was entitled
to present his cross-examination as he wished, and
that would be to cross Mr. York in front of this jury, who has the
opportunity to see him answer the questions under oath, to be able
to judge his demeanor, his candidness, his pauses, and I think
that this jury has the right and the ability to do so. And to limit
us, when Mr. York is physically here, to being able to present that,
and to be able to present it perhaps in a more cohesive, coherent
way so that it is understandable and digestible by this jury that
has to cast this decision -- if the State gets to choose how it’s going
to present Mr. York’s testimony, I think it’s only fair that the
Defense had the opportunity to present its case and be able to ask
Mr. York questions as well.
Thereafter, the trial court ruled that the defendant would be allowed to ask
York some questions, but that his “request to do a full-on sweeping cross-
examination of Mr. York in front of this jury is denied.”
Following this ruling, defense counsel asked to delay cross-examining
York until after the presentation of York’s prior testimony. In response, the
State noted that it did not know whether that would be “feasible . . . in the
3