THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0252, K.M. v. R.M., the court on
September 1, 2022, issued the following order:
Having considered the briefs filed by the parties and the record
submitted on appeal, we conclude that oral argument is unnecessary in this
case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1). The defendant, R.M., appeals a domestic violence
order of protection entered by the Circuit Court (Pendleton, J.) upon the
petition of the plaintiff, K.M. We affirm.
Before addressing the defendant’s appellate arguments, we first consider
the motion he filed with his reply brief seeking permission to supplement the
record with exhibits from the evidentiary hearing. We interpret his motion,
titled “Notice to pick up Exhibits,” as a request that this court order the trial
court to transfer those exhibits. The defendant’s motion is denied.
Supreme Court Rule 13(3) advises that this court “will not ordinarily
review any part of the record that has not been provided to it in an appendix by
a party or transmitted to it by the trial court or administrative agency.” Sup.
Ct. R. 13(3). The rule further advises that “[u]nless a party believes that
providing a copy in an appendix of a paper or exhibit filed below would be
impracticable or inadequate for appellate review, a party seeking to provide a
paper or exhibit” to the court shall include the paper or exhibit in an appendix,
“which shall be filed on or before the date established for filing the party’s
brief.” Id. Supreme Court Rule 13(4) provides that if a party believes that
providing a copy of papers or exhibits filed below in an appendix “would be
impracticable or inadequate for appellate review,” the party “shall file a motion
. . . on or before the date established for filing the party’s brief, requesting” this
court to order the trial court to transmit the papers or exhibits in question.
Sup. Ct. R. 13(4).
The defendant’s motion does not comply with Rule 13(3), (4). See Town
of Nottingham v. Newman, 147 N.H. 131, 137 (2001) (explaining that we do not
relax our rules for self-represented parties). Rule 13(3), (4) required the
defendant to file a motion asking this court to order the trial court to transmit
the exhibits in question before filing his opening brief. Allowing the defendant
to supplement the record with the exhibits after the parties have already filed
their briefs would effectively deprive the plaintiff of an opportunity to address
the content of the exhibits in her brief. Moreover, to comply with Rule 13(3),
(4), the defendant had to establish that providing the exhibits in an appendix
“would be impracticable or inadequate for appellate review.” He failed to make
this showing as to the exhibits he entered at the evidentiary hearing.
We now turn to the defendant’s appellate arguments. To obtain relief
under RSA chapter 173-B, the plaintiff must show “abuse” by a preponderance
of the evidence. L.C. v. W.C., 174 N.H. 355, 358 (2021). RSA 173-B:1, I,
defines “[a]buse” as “the commission or attempted commission” by “a family or
household member or by a current or former sexual or intimate partner” of one
or more specified criminal acts “where such conduct is determined to
constitute a credible present threat to the [plaintiff’s] safety.” RSA 173-B:1, I
(Supp. 2021). Such abuse may include the crimes of stalking and harassment.
See RSA 173-B:1, I(d); RSA 633:3-a (Supp. 2021) (defining the crime of
stalking); RSA 644:4 (Supp. 2021) (defining the crime of harassment). Thus,
before issuing a domestic violence final order of protection under RSA chapter
173-B, a trial court must find by a preponderance of the evidence that: (1) the
defendant, “a family or household member or . . . a current or former sexual or
intimate partner” of the plaintiff, committed or attempted to commit one or
more of the enumerated criminal acts; and (2) the defendant’s conduct
constituted “a credible present threat” to the plaintiff’s safety. RSA 173-B:1, I;
see L.C., 174 N.H. at 358-59.
On appeal, the defendant first argues that the record fails to support the
trial court finding that his conduct constituted a credible threat to the
plaintiff’s safety because her testimony establishes that “she is not in fear of
her safety.” In an appeal from an order on a domestic violence petition, the
trial court’s “findings of fact shall be final,” and we review its rulings on
“questions of law” de novo. RSA 173-B:3, VI (2014). We review sufficiency of
the evidence claims as a matter of law, upholding the trial court’s findings and
rulings unless they lack evidentiary support or are tainted by error of law.
Achille v. Achille, 167 N.H. 706, 715 (2015). When performing this review, we
accord considerable weight to the trial court’s judgments on the credibility of
witnesses and the weight to be given testimony. Id. at 715-16. We view the
evidence in the light most favorable to the prevailing party — here, the plaintiff.
See id.
In making this argument, the defendant quotes only one sentence of the
plaintiff’s answer to the trial court’s question, “Can you tell me specifically
what makes you in fear for your physical safety.” Her entire answer is as
follows:
I never have been – and that’s why I was hesitant to ever
move forward with this. I – he’s never been violent with me. I am
not saying that I am in fear of my safety 100 percent. I just – that
was the first time, September – I mean, excuse me, March 26th
was the first time though that it – he was being quite aggressive in
2
nature, and I just – I don’t – again, I don’t know that I don’t feel
safe, I just did not feel comfortable at my house.
When the court invited the plaintiff to elaborate, she testified:
Just the incessant contact that – that, you know, for three-
and-a-half hours in the middle of the night, he was trying to call
me with no response, and he just kept trying. And then I felt on 7
p.m. on a Saturday he’s of sound mind and still trying to get in
touch with me when I’ve made it abundantly clear that I don't want
that.
And again, I just felt like if he was really trying to contact me
this hard, then the only next step would be him showing up at my
house, because I wasn’t responding to anything else. I wasn’t sure
if that was going to happen, but I didn’t want to take that risk, and
I decided not to sleep at my house.
Thus, contrary to the defendant’s assertions, the plaintiff testified that
although she is not “in fear of [her] safety 100 percent,” his “quite aggressive”
conduct made her feel so concerned that he would “show[] up at [her house]”
that she “decided not to sleep” there. Viewing this testimony in the light most
favorable to the plaintiff, we conclude that it supports the trial court’s finding
that the defendant’s conduct constituted a credible present threat to the
plaintiff’s safety.
The defendant next asserts that the evidence does not support the trial
court’s finding that he committed the crime of harassment. See RSA 644:4, I.
We need not address the merits of this argument because the trial court also
found that the defendant committed the crime of stalking, see RSA 633:3-a,
and the defendant does not challenge that finding on appeal.
The defendant couches his remaining arguments in constitutional terms,
asserting that the trial court violated his federal due process rights by denying
his requests for a continuance and to call witnesses. However, the defendant
has not demonstrated that he raised these constitutional claims in the trial
court. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004). Moreover,
the constitutional aspects of his arguments are insufficiently developed for our
review. See State v. Chick, 141 N.H. 503, 504 (1996) (passing reference to
constitutional claim renders argument waived); Keenan v. Fearon, 130 N.H.
494, 499 (1988) (“off-hand invocations” of constitutional rights supported by
neither argument nor authority warrant no extended consideration). Under
these circumstances, we address the defendant’s remaining arguments without
reference to the Federal Constitution.
3