THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2022-0268
DAVID LOIK
v.
GLORIA LOIK
Argued: February 9, 2023
Opinion Issued: May 3, 2023
Gallant & Ervin, LLC, of Chelmsford, Massachusetts (John F. Gallant
and Nancy A. Morency on the brief, and John F. Gallant orally), for the
plaintiff.
Law Office of Pamela J. Khoury, of Salem (Pamela J. Khoury on the
memorandum of law and orally), for the defendant.
MACDONALD, C.J. The plaintiff, David Loik, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Ruoff, J.) dismissing his petition for the partition and sale of
real estate. At issue in this appeal is whether the superior court or the circuit
court had subject matter jurisdiction over this matter. Because we conclude
that, under the applicable statute, the circuit court and not the superior court
had subject matter jurisdiction, we vacate and direct the superior court to
transfer the petition to the circuit court.
I. Background
The record supports the following facts. The plaintiff and the defendant,
Gloria Loik, were divorced by final decree in 2018. The final decree was drafted
by both parties and adopted by the circuit court. Regarding the marital home,
the parties stipulated as follows:
The parties shall continue to own the property until such time as they
agree to sell it as joint tenants with rights of survivorship. If the parties
agree to sell the home, they shall equally divide any net proceeds from
the sale of the house.
Gloria shall remain in the home. David shall be responsible for the
mortgage, taxes and insurance however Gloria shall be responsible for
any maintenance and upkeep.
In 2021, the plaintiff moved for the circuit court to modify the divorce decree to
force the sale of the former marital home. His motion came after the court had
modified the parties’ parenting plan to transfer primary residential
responsibility to the plaintiff and vacated his obligation to pay child support.
The circuit court denied the motion to sell on the basis that it would
constitute an impermissible modification of a property division, but directed
the plaintiff to file a petition to partition the property in “Probate or Superior
Court.” Accordingly, the plaintiff filed the present petition to partition. The
petition alleged that the defendant was engaging in waste of the property, and
it sought both preliminary injunctive relief and partition. The defendant moved
to dismiss the petition asserting, among other things, that, because the claims
in the petition “relate to the property settlement of the parties’ divorce
proceeding” over which the circuit court has exclusive jurisdiction, the superior
court did not have jurisdiction to hear the merits. Following a hearing, the
superior court granted the motion. The superior court did not address the
merits of the defendant’s subject matter jurisdiction argument but, rather,
found that, by agreeing to joint ownership of the property unless the parties
agreed to sell it, the plaintiff waived his right to seek partition.
II. Analysis
On appeal, the plaintiff argues that the superior court erred in
concluding that he had waived his right to seek partition. We must begin,
however, with the defendant’s argument that the superior court lacked
jurisdiction to hear this case. “The issue of subject matter jurisdiction may be
raised at any time in the proceedings because it cannot be conferred where it
does not already exist.” Maldini v. Maldini, 168 N.H. 191, 194 (2015)
(quotation omitted). “The ultimate determination as to whether the [superior]
2
court has jurisdiction in this case is a question of law subject to de novo
review.” Id. (quotation omitted).
We look to the relevant statutes to answer the question whether the
superior court lacked subject matter jurisdiction. When undertaking statutory
interpretation, we first examine the language found in the statute and, where
possible, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to words used. Id. at
194-95. When a statute’s language is plain and unambiguous, we need not
look beyond it for further indications of legislative intent. Id. at 195. Courts
can neither ignore the plain language of the legislation nor add words which
the lawmakers did not see fit to include. Id. We interpret statutes not in
isolation, but in the context of the overall statutory scheme. Id.
As we have previously explained, “[t]he legislature established the circuit
court in 2011 by merging the former probate and district courts and the former
judicial branch family division.” Colburn v. Saykaly, 173 N.H. 162, 165 (2020)
(quotation omitted). It conferred the jurisdiction, powers and duties of these
former courts upon the circuit court, and divided the circuit court into three
divisions: a probate division, a district division, and a family division. Id.
“Although there remain statutory references ‘to the probate or district courts or
to the judicial branch family division,’ those references ‘shall be deemed to be
to the New Hampshire circuit court where it has exclusive jurisdiction of a
subject matter and to the superior court and circuit court where the circuit
court has concurrent jurisdiction with the superior court.’” Id. at 166 (quoting
RSA 490-F:18 (Supp. 2019)). Thus, the reference to the “probate court” in RSA
547-C:2, as set forth below, refers to the circuit court.
The superior and circuit courts share concurrent jurisdiction over
petitions for partition of real estate pursuant to RSA chapter 547-C. See RSA
547:3, II(e) (Supp. 2022). RSA 547-C:2 (2019) allocates that jurisdiction as
follows:
A petition may be filed by such person in the superior or probate court in
the county in which the property or any part of the property lies or is
then located . . . provided, however, where there is a related pending
matter in either court, jurisdiction for the related partition action shall lie
with the court having jurisdiction over the underlying matter . . . .
(Emphasis added.)
Here, both at the time of the circuit court’s order on the motion to sell,
and at the time the plaintiff filed his partition action, there were a number of
post-divorce disputes between the parties then pending in the circuit court.
These disputes, including the change of primary residential responsibility as to
the parties’ minor children, form at least part of the basis for the plaintiff’s
petition for partition. We conclude that these post-divorce disputes constitute
3
“related pending matter[s]” within the meaning of RSA 547-C:2. See Daine v.
Daine, 157 N.H. 426, 427-28 (2008) (explaining that “[t]he law is well settled
that jurisdiction in divorce proceedings is a continuing one with respect to all
subsequent proceedings which arise out of the original cause of action” and
that “[a]fter granting a divorce, the court retains jurisdiction to revise and
modify any order made by it, make such new orders as may be necessary, and
award costs as justice may require” (quotation and ellipses omitted)).
Therefore, the circuit court — rather than the superior court — had subject
matter jurisdiction over the petition for partition. Consequently, because the
superior court lacked subject matter jurisdiction to hear and decide this case,
we vacate its decision.
We note, however, that in its order declining to require the sale of the
home, the circuit court instructed the plaintiff that his “remedy [wa]s to file a
Petition for Partition with the Probate or Superior Court, which is the
appropriate forum [in which] to bring an equitable action.” Reliance on those
instructions was reasonable. Therefore, pursuant to our “general
superintendence of all courts of inferior jurisdiction,” RSA 490:4 (2010), we
direct that, on remand, the petition be transferred to the circuit court, and we
instruct that it consider the matter in the first instance.
Vacated and remanded.
HICKS, BASSETT, HANTZ MARCONI, and DONOVAN, JJ., concurred.
4