THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0238, Appeal of Town of Roxbury, the
court on November 14, 2023, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The
Town of Roxbury (Town) appeals an order of the Housing Appeals Board (HAB)
reversing the Town’s Planning Board’s (Board) denial of a subdivision
application submitted by Greatwoods Unity Forests, LLC (Greatwoods). On
appeal, the Town argues that the HAB erred by: (1) substituting its judgment
for that of the Board; (2) determining that the Board did not properly address
the test for scattered or premature development; and (3) concluding that the
Board’s decision to deny the subdivision application was based on a concern
about future development. We reverse.
I
The following facts are supported by the record. In April 2021,
Greatwoods submitted an application to the Board seeking approval for a
three-lot subdivision with frontage on Middletown Road in Roxbury.
Greatwoods proposed to subdivide its current 159.3 acre lot into one lot of 6.5
acres and one lot of 5.18 acres, leaving “a large remainder lot of 147.6+/-
acres.” Although “[n]o dwellings [were] specifically proposed in conjunction
with the subdivision,” Greatwoods indicated in its application that “the lots are
intended for residential use.”
In July 2021, the Board held a public hearing on Greatwoods’
application. Scott Sanborn, property surveyor and Road Agent for the Town of
Orange, reported on behalf of Greatwoods that the proposed subdivision met
“all zoning requirements.” He stated that, “with reference to the total acreage
of the existing single property, zoning regulations in Roxbury could allow for up
to 31 lots,” but “the subdivision proposal before the Board would result in only
three lots, the two smaller of which [were] targeted for home development.”
Regarding the proposal’s potential impact, an abutter expressed concern
about additional development because Middletown Road “is difficult to
negotiate particularly in mud season.” Board Chair Kline emphasized the
problems that added traffic on Middletown Road would pose. He pointed out
that “the applicable zoning allows for two-family residences,” and calculated
that if two-family residences were built on each of the proposed lots, that would
amount to six additional households. He noted that “the road becomes
virtually impassable during mud season, requiring residents to very often pull
out and tow stuck cars.” Sanborn observed that “if Middletown Road is already
considered to be substandard, the Town should address that matter on its own
initiative.” In addition, the Fire Chief testified about the lack of access to
certain fire protection measures on Middletown Road.
At its subsequent meeting in August 2021, Kline explained that “the
town’s attention, effort and expense [were] barely able to maintain Middletown
and other town roads in useable conditions, and at times even those efforts
and expenses [could not] keep the roads safe.” He posited that “the condition
of Middletown Road already pose[d] a hazard to current residents whose
properties front on the road,” and that “in his view the effect of added traffic on
the road from” potentially six new households “on the welfare of current
residents is ‘a hurdle that can’t be cleared.’” Accordingly, “due to the
inadequacy of Middletown Road,” the Board voted to deny Greatwoods’
subdivision application “on property fronting Middletown Road.”
In its Memorandum of Decision, the Board found that “hazardous
conditions” exist on Middletown Road. Those hazardous conditions include
that the road: (1) “is comprised of sand and gravel that regularly washes out
despite diligent efforts to prevent” that from happening; (2) “has grades
exceeding 15%”; (3) “dead ends at the top of a long hill” and there “is no
passable outlet”; (4) “narrows to less than 20 feet in width along multiple
sections”; (5) “has no less than six blind curves”; (6) “has multiple culvert
crossings critical to the road’s structural integrity and increasingly requiring
replacement and repair”; (7) has no sidewalks or guardrails; and (8) has
sections that “are so narrow and curved as to endanger vehicular traffic and at
times have required cars traveling in opposite directions to drive off road.”
In addition, the Board found that “Winter and mud season render
portions of the road impassable,” and that “[r]esidents testified to vehicles
going off the road and vehicles sinking in the mud every Winter and Spring.”
The Board also emphasized the Fire Chief’s testimony, including that: (1) “the
latter two-thirds of the road (approximately two miles) has no water service and
the nearest hydrant to the subject subdivision is two miles away, at the bottom
of the mostly sand and gravel road that is at times impassable”; (2) “Roxbury
heavily relies on the mutual aid of nearby municipalities and that response
times are slowed by distance”; and (3) “water tankers are the primary means of
fighting fires at this end of Middletown Road, that the road is an impediment to
the tankers even in the best conditions, and that during Winter and mud
season the road is hazardous for them.”
Emphasizing the poor condition of Middletown Road — a road that was
“established centuries ago” — and the lack of access to fire protection, the
Board determined that “Middletown Road is at its capacity to safely support the
2
present density of residences.” The Board relied on Zukis v. Town of
Fitzwilliam and Garipay v. Town of Hanover, which recognize that the pre-
existing inadequacy of access roads is a valid basis for a planning board’s
finding of prematurity. See Zukis v. Town of Fitzwilliam, 135 N.H. 384, 389
(1992); Garipay v. Town of Hanover, 116 N.H. 34, 36 (1976); see also RSA
674:36, II(a) (2016). Therefore, the Board determined that “[t]he subdivision
would increase danger to public health and safety, life and property, and is
therefore denied.”
In September 2021, Greatwoods appealed the Board’s decision to the
HAB, arguing that the decision should be reversed because (1) the decision was
unreasonable, illegal, and not based on facts in the record and (2) the Board
exceeded its authority and engaged in ad hoc growth control. On November 30,
2021, the HAB conducted a “Property View,” “which included walking the entire
frontage of the area where the new lots would be created, as well as driving the
full length of Middletown Road and back.” The HAB held a hearing on the
appeal in December 2021 at which counsel for the Town and Greatwoods
presented argument. Counsel for the Town pointed out that three of the four
voting members on the Board live on Middletown Road. He explained that the
Board relied, in part, on its members’ “firsthand, personal knowledge” of
Middletown Road, which he distinguished from mere personal opinion. He
further emphasized that the Fire Chief provided expert testimony before the
Board.
In February 2022, the HAB found, “on a balance of the probabilities,”
that the Board’s denial of the application was “unreasonable.” Based on its
observations from its view, the HAB disagreed with the Board’s assessment of
the condition of Middletown Road. For instance, the HAB noted that “new
drainage structures had been installed along sections of the Road, that the
Road was of sufficient width to allow safe approaching vehicular passage, and
that the surface was in good condition even though a portion of the Road was
unpaved.” The HAB also observed that “[t]he crowns of the road allow for
reasonable drainage in order to prevent excessive pooling of water.” The HAB
rejected the Board’s finding that the road contains six blind curves, asserting
that “[t]he unanimous view” of the HAB was that “there are no ‘hairpins,’ and
all curves can be safely driven at the Town’s posted speed limit.”
In addition, the HAB determined that the Board failed to identify, in
relation to the proposed three-lot subdivision, the point at which a present
hazard existed and further development became premature. See Garipay, 116
N.H. at 36. The HAB also noted that “[w]hile the Planning Board was not
bound by Mr. Sanborn’s opinion, it was given little-or-no weight by the
Planning Board, which relied upon its own conclusions regarding the condition
of Middletown Road.” Moreover, the HAB stated, “[t]he focus of the ‘fire
protection’ issue was the Fire Chief’s concerns about mud-season access,” yet
“[t]here was no report submitted to the Board of any emergencies on
3