THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0525, Appeal of David Strauss & a., the
court on February 22, 2024, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The
petitioners, David Strauss and Judith Strauss (taxpayers), appeal a decision by
the Board of Tax and Land Appeals (BTLA) that the Town of Effingham Select
Board (Board) was without authority to grant an abatement on their property
in Effingham. We reverse.
I
The following facts are supported by the record or are undisputed. The
Town of Effingham (Town) contracts with Avitar Associates of New England,
Inc. (Avitar) to assess real property in the Town. In 2015, in assessing the
value of the taxpayers’ property, Avitar designated the property’s view as
“panoramic” and “extreme distant.” (Capitalization omitted.) The taxpayers
filed an abatement application under RSA 76:16, I(b) with the Board,
challenging the designation of their view as “overstating what is actually there
based on the definition given in [Avitar’s] [assessing] manual.” Avitar agreed
that a change in the view designations from “panoramic” to “wide” and
“extreme” to “distant” was warranted and recommended granting an abatement
on the value difference of $26,300. (Quotations and capitalization omitted.)
The Board accepted Avitar’s recommendation and granted the abatement.
In 2020, after conducting a town-wide revaluation, Avitar again
designated the taxpayers’ property’s view as “panoramic” and “extreme
distant.” The taxpayers again filed an abatement application under RSA 76:16,
I(b), challenging the designations of their view. In February 2021, Avitar
recommended that the Board deny the abatement request because “[r]egardless
of the engineering measurement, the property, if not panoramic, is closer to
panoramic than wide, and if not extreme distant, is closer to extreme distant
than distant.” The Board accepted Avitar’s recommendation and denied the
abatement.
The taxpayers appealed to the BTLA pursuant to RSA 76:16-a, asserting
that, based on the view distance codes and the view width codes used by
Avitar, the view assessment should be abated by $42,000. At a hearing on
March 22, 2022, attended by the taxpayers and, on behalf of the Town, an
assessor from Avitar, Avitar moved to dismiss on grounds that the taxpayers
failed to meet their burden of proof because they provided no evidence of the
property’s market value. The BTLA granted the motion, finding that the
taxpayers “did not present any credible evidence of the Property’s market
value” and therefore failed to meet their “burden of proving by a preponderance
of the evidence that they are paying more than their proportional share of
taxes.”
The taxpayers timely moved for rehearing. In their motion, the taxpayers
asserted that the ground for their appeal from the 2020 assessment was a
physical description error that resulted in the contributory value of the
property’s view being disproportionately assessed. They argued that, because
their appeal was based upon a physical description error, not a valuation
opinion difference, evidence of fair market value was not required because their
“burden of proof of establishing disproportionality . . . was met by proving that
the Town made a measurement error, i.e. a physical description error, upon
which its assessment was made.” The BTLA issued an order suspending its
March 30 order pending a decision on the taxpayers’ motion. See RSA 541:5
(2021).
While their motion for reconsideration was pending with the BTLA, David
Strauss attended the Board’s April 12, 2022 public meeting. The Board had
before it the BTLA’s March 30 order. Strauss explained to the Board that the
BTLA had dismissed the taxpayers’ appeal for failure to present evidence of
market value without addressing whether a physical description error had
occurred. He further explained that the property’s view had not changed since
2015 when the Board had accepted an abatement recommendation from Avitar
based on a correction of the view measurements from panoramic to wide and
from extreme distant to distant. After noting that the taxpayers’ motion for
rehearing was pending before the BTLA, members of the Board agreed that the
taxpayers had “a legitimate argument” that Avitar’s rationale that the
measurement was “close enough” was not sufficient. (Quotation omitted.)
Accordingly, based on good cause shown under RSA 76:16, I(a), the Board
Chair moved “to direct the Assessor’s Office to adjust the overall assessment of
the property . . . , from the year 2020 to present, by adjusting the view factors
of Panoramic to Wide and Extreme Distance to Distant,” thereby resulting in
“an overall reduction of assessed value of $42,000.” The motion passed
unanimously.
Shortly after the Board’s April 12 meeting, the Town Administrator
informed the taxpayers that she had spoken with the BTLA and was told the
Board “cannot override the BTLA, only the Supreme Court has that authority,”
and that she would be providing the BTLA with a copy of the minutes from the
April 12 meeting. On April 15, the taxpayers notified the BTLA that they had
reached an “informal settlement” with the Board at its April 12 meeting and
moved that the BTLA “either approve the same as [an] informal settlement, or
2
dismiss the . . . matter in its entirety as being moot.” That same day, the BTLA
denied the taxpayers’ motion for rehearing, and, by letter dated April 19,
returned the taxpayers’ “Motion to Allow Informal Settlement,” explaining that
it could not “be accepted as filed” because “the record is closed in this matter
pursuant to Tax 201.27(j).” See N.H. Admin. R., Tax 201.27(j) (“The record
shall be closed at the conclusion of the hearing unless the board leaves the
record open to receive additional evidence or documents requested by the
board at the hearing.”).
On May 16, 2022, the BTLA received documents from an anonymous
source suggesting that at the Board’s April 12 meeting Strauss had asked the
Board “to overrule the BTLA decision and change the value on his property.” In
response, the BTLA issued an “Order to Show Cause,” opened a docket
“pursuant to RSA 71-B:16, II,” and ordered each member of the Board, Town
counsel, and representatives of Avitar to attend a hearing to “explain why and
under what authority [the Board] granted the Taxpayers an abatement for tax
year 2020” after the BTLA had issued its March 30 decision dismissing the
taxpayers’ appeal. (Capitalization, underlining, and bolding omitted.) See RSA
71-B:16, II (2012) (providing that the BTLA “may order a reassessment of taxes
previously assessed . . . [w]hen it comes to the attention of the board from any
source, . . . that a particular parcel of real estate . . . has been fraudulently,
improperly, unequally, or illegally assessed”). Following the hearing, the BTLA
issued a written decision finding that “the Town was without authority to grant
the abatement and therefore it should not be processed.” The BTLA
subsequently denied the taxpayers’ motion for rehearing. This appeal followed.
II
At the outset, we reject the BTLA’s assertion that the taxpayers lack
standing. In evaluating whether a party has standing to sue, we focus on
whether the party suffered a legal injury against which the law was designed to
protect. Teeboom v. City of Nashua, 172 N.H. 301, 307 (2019). The party must
show that its own rights have been or will be directly affected. Id. Here, the
effect of the BTLA’s decision following the show cause hearing was to overturn
the Board’s decision to settle its dispute with the taxpayers by granting an
abatement on their property. Thus, the taxpayers’ own rights were directly
affected sufficient to establish standing. See id.
The taxpayers argue that the BTLA erred as a matter of law in
conducting an inquiry under RSA 71-B:16, II because “what actually occurred
at the . . . [Board] meeting on April 12, 2022, was not a vote to overrule the
BTLA, but to grant an abatement of the 2020 taxes for good cause pursuant to”
RSA 76:16, I(a). (Capitalization, underlining, and bolding omitted.) They assert
that “[a]fter [receiving] notice of the informal settlement” with the Board, “the
BTLA could have conducted . . . a proper hearing pursuant to [New Hampshire
Administrative Rule] Tax 201.23(c) as to whether or not the
3