THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0502, D.D. v. D.C., the court on March 23,
2023, issued the following order:
The defendant, D.C., appeals an order of the Circuit Court (Alfano, J.),
following a hearing, denying his motion for the return of a firearm. See RSA 173-
B:5, X (2022) (providing for return of firearms relinquished pursuant to a
protective order); RSA 633:3-a, III-a (2016) (providing that RSA chapter 173-B
governs procedure in stalking cases). On appeal, the defendant argues, among
other things, that the trial court erred by failing to make sufficient factual
findings to support its decision.
In December 2021, the Circuit Court (LeFrancois, J.) issued a stalking
temporary order of protection in favor of the plaintiff, D.D., which required the
defendant to relinquish any firearms owned or possessed by him to law
enforcement. See RSA 173-B:4, I (2022). In January 2022, the trial court held a
final hearing in the matter, and, as a result of the plaintiff’s failure to appear,
dismissed the case. Thereafter, in February 2022, the defendant filed a motion
for the return of his firearm, and, in June 2022, the trial court held a hearing on
the motion at which only the defendant and his counsel appeared.
At the hearing, the only evidence adduced was a “Gun Line” report
submitted to the court by the New Hampshire State Police. A complete copy of
the report is not in the record, and, according to the defendant, was never
provided to him. On the cover page, the report states that “[b]ased on a
background check performed by this office, it appears that there are NO firearms
disqualifiers on [the defendant’s] criminal record.” However, on a subsequent
page of the report, a box is checked next to the following statement: “Found
FEDERAL Disqualifiers for the request of return of firearm(s) that has been
deemed a non-disqualifier by the NH Supreme Court. See Dupont v. Nashua
Police Department et al., 167 N.H. 429 (2015).” The report does not identify what
the purported federal disqualifier(s) are, and, at the hearing, the trial court
informed the defendant that “[t]here’s no way of knowing without more
information,” and that “[t]hat’s the only information they’ve given us.”
Following the hearing, the trial court denied the defendant’s motion,
finding that “[s]ince there is a federal disqualifier, as reported by the Gun Line,
the motion to return firearms must therefore be respectfully DENIED.” The
defendant unsuccessfully moved for reconsideration, and this appeal followed.
RSA chapter 173-B provides that, at the expiration of a protective order, a
defendant may request the return of any firearms relinquished to law
enforcement while the protective order was in effect. RSA 173-B:5, X(a). Upon
receipt of such a motion, the trial court must schedule a hearing to, among other
things, “establish[] whether the defendant is subject to any state or federal law or
court order that precludes the defendant from owning or possessing a firearm.”
RSA 173-B:5, X(a)(1). “If the court finds that the defendant is not subject to any
state or federal law or court order precluding the ownership or possession of
firearms, or if the court denies the plaintiff’s request to extend the protective
order, the court shall issue a written order directing the law enforcement agency
to return the requested firearms, ammunition, or deadly weapon to the
defendant.” RSA 173-B:5, X(b).
Here, the temporary protective order pursuant to which the defendant
relinquished his firearm had expired, and the case against the defendant had
been dismissed. The trial court’s order failed to specify on what grounds the
defendant was purportedly disqualified from having his firearm returned, and the
“Gun Line” report, upon which the court solely relied, was both incomplete and
internally inconsistent as to whether the defendant was subject to any
disqualifiers. Further, to the extent that the report identified one or more federal
disqualifier(s) — apparently deemed non-disqualifying by this court, see DuPont
v. Nashua Police Dep’t, 167 N.H. 429, 434-43 (2015) — it did not disclose what
those purported disqualifier(s) were. Thus, on this record, we are unable to
determine “whether the defendant is subject to any state or federal law or court
order that precludes the defendant from owning or possessing a firearm.” RSA
173-B:5, X(a)(1).
Accordingly, we remand for the trial court to clarify the basis for its
determination that the defendant is disqualified from having his firearm
returned, and to enter specific factual findings as to the particular statutory
ground(s) upon which the court found him to be so disqualified. If necessary, the
trial court shall obtain a complete copy of the “Gun Line” report, and shall allow
the defendant an opportunity to respond. Additionally, the trial court may take
such steps as it deems necessary to protect any confidential information
contained therein. The trial court shall issue its order on remand no later than
April 24, 2023. We shall retain jurisdiction over the appeal while the case is on
remand.
MacDonald, C.J., and Hicks, Bassett, Hantz Marconi, and Donovan, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2