THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0456, E.G. v. A.G., the court on February
24, 2023, issued the following order:
The defendant, A.G., appeals a stalking final order of protection issued
by the Circuit Court (Cross, J.), following a hearing, in favor of the plaintiff,
E.G. See RSA 633:3-a (Supp. 2022). He argues, in part, that the trial court
erred by finding that he engaged in a “course of conduct,” and in so finding, by
relying upon allegations in the civil stalking petition for which there was no
testimony or other evidence submitted at the final hearing.
The offense of stalking is defined to include “[p]urposely, knowingly, or
recklessly engag[ing] in a course of conduct targeted at a specific person which
would cause a reasonable person to fear for his or her personal safety or the
safety of a member of that person’s immediate family, and the person is
actually placed in such fear.” RSA 633:3-a, I(a). A “course of conduct” “means
2 or more acts over a period of time, however short, which evidences a
continuity of purpose.” RSA 633:3-a, II(a). It does not include, however,
“conduct that was necessary to accomplish a legitimate purpose independent of
making contact with the targeted person.” Id. In a civil stalking case, upon
proof of stalking by a preponderance of the evidence, the trial court is required
to “grant such relief as is necessary to bring about a cessation of stalking,” RSA
633:3-a, III-a, and to make specific findings of fact as to precisely which acts
constituted the course of conduct, South v. McCabe, 156 N.H. 797, 798-99
(2008); Fisher v. Minichiello, 155 N.H. 188, 193 (2007). The purpose of the
requirement to render specific findings of fact is to avoid “speculat[ion] as to
the precise nature of the trial court’s findings, and whether sufficient evidence
was in fact introduced to support them.” South, 156 N.H. at 798-99.
In granting the plaintiff’s petition in this case, the trial court made the
following findings of fact as to the course of conduct:
One of Plaintiff’s minor children disclosed that Defendant
sexually assaulted her several times between April and June 2020.
And Defendant, who is Plaintiff’s landlord, was inside Plaintiff’s
property in June 2022, without notice, to fix some electrical issues.
Defendant’s conduct was such as to cause a reasonable person to
fear for her personal safety and that of her children, and Plaintiff is
actually in fear.
The defendant moved to reconsider because the trial court had “relied on
evidence that was not proffered at the hearing.” The defendant noted that,
although the plaintiff had alleged in her petition that he had entered her
property without notice in June 2022, she had introduced no evidence or
testimony to that effect. The defendant made an offer of proof that, had the
plaintiff testified concerning the entry, he would have introduced evidence
establishing that: (1) the parties’ lease allowed him to enter the property with
prior notice; (2) he provided the plaintiff more than 24 hours prior written
notice regarding two entries onto the property in June 2022 when he would be
present to make necessary repairs; (3) the plaintiff expressly acknowledged the
notice regarding the first entry and stated that neither she nor her children
would be present at the time identified in the notice; and (4) neither the
plaintiff nor her children were present on either noticed occasion when the
defendant entered the property to make the necessary repairs. The defendant
represented that he was submitting with the motion copies of emails, including
an email chain between his wife and the plaintiff, corroborating his claim to
have provided the prior written notices. In denying the motion, the trial court
stated: “Accepting that Defendant was inside Plaintiff’s property with notice,
the Court still finds that he committed stalking.”
By “[a]ccepting that Defendant was inside Plaintiff’s property with notice,”
but “still find[ing] that he committed stalking,” the trial court effectively modified
its findings of fact as to the course of conduct, without specifying which predicate
acts constituted the course of conduct. As a result, we are “left to speculate as to
the precise nature of the trial court’s findings, and whether sufficient evidence
was in fact introduced to support them.” South, 156 N.H. at 798-99.
Accordingly, we remand to the trial court for the limited purpose of
clarifying which specific predicate acts it determined constituted the “course of
conduct” in finding, on reconsideration, that the defendant “still . . . committed
stalking.” In addition to clarifying the predicate acts that constituted the course
of conduct, the trial court shall state whether it relied upon allegations in the
petition for which there was no testimony introduced at trial to support any such
findings. The trial court shall issue its order on remand no later than March 27,
2023. We shall retain jurisdiction over the appeal while the case is on remand.
MacDonald, C.J., and Hicks, Bassett, Hantz Marconi, and Donovan, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2