THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0583, Patricia Morris & a. v. Town of
Barnstead, the court on February 14, 2024, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The
plaintiffs, Patricia Morris and Jerad Davis, appeal orders of the Superior Court
(Houran and Leonard, JJ.) in their appeal from decisions of the planning board
and zoning board (ZBA) of the defendant, the Town of Barnstead (Town).
Industrial Tower and Wireless, LLC (ITW), an intervenor in the superior court
action, cross-appeals other orders by the Superior Court (O’Neill, J.) in this
case. The Town joins in ITW’s brief. We affirm.
The following facts and relevant procedural history are taken from the
trial court orders in this case. In early 2020, ITW filed an application for site
plan review with the planning board, seeking to build a 175-foot open lattice
communications tower and associated equipment storage sheds on a 39.6 acre
wooded parcel owned by a third party. The proposed tower would be located
329 feet from the plaintiffs’ property line.
The planning board held two public hearings on ITW’s application in May
2020. In a letter dated May 7, 2020, Morris argued to the planning board that
ITW is a business subject to Section 8-1 of the Barnstead Zoning Ordinance
(BZO). The planning board approved the application without mentioning
Section 8-1 during any of its meetings.
The plaintiffs1 appealed the planning board’s decision to the ZBA,
arguing, among other things, that the planning board misapplied Section 8-1.
ITW filed a motion to dismiss, which the ZBA granted, concluding that it “found
no connection between the arguments raised by the plaintiffs and the
applicable sections of the [BZO].” In other words, and as the trial court
interpreted the ZBA’s ruling, the ZBA concluded that it lacked jurisdiction over
the plaintiffs’ administrative appeal. The plaintiffs filed a motion for rehearing,
seeking, among other things, review of the planning board’s alleged
1 The record is unclear as to whether both plaintiffs participated at each step of the proceedings
leading up to this appeal. Because the parties treat them as having done so, we do the same.
misapplication of Section 8-1. The ZBA denied the motion, reiterating its prior
ruling, but also adding the following additional reason:
While it was not explicit in the Planning Board decision, it seems
likely that the Planning Board determined that under the [BZO],
the proposed Communications tower is a commercial tower owned
and operated by a business outside of Barnstead and not a
business located in Barnstead. This is a reasonable position and
consistent with the treatment of land-line telephone property as
property owned by a business located elsewhere.
The plaintiffs filed an appeal in superior court challenging the planning
board’s approval of ITW’s site plan application and the ZBA’s denial of their
administrative appeal. On June 4, 2021, the Trial Court (O’Neill, J.) ruled that
the ZBA erred in finding that it lacked jurisdiction and remanded to the ZBA to
consider the plaintiffs’ appeal.
ITW filed a motion for reconsideration and, in the alternative,
clarification to, among other things, “ensure that the ZBA determines only the
question which the Court is remanding.” The court denied reconsideration but
directed the ZBA to answer the following question on remand: “Did the
Barnstead Planning Board err in interpreting Section 8-1 of the Barnstead
Zoning Ordinance to be inapplicable to ITW’s proposed Commercial Tower?”
The court further clarified that in its June 4 order, it did not “consider . . . [or
rule upon] any matters/arguments relating to the Planning Board approval of
the site plan,” and stayed the appeal pending the ZBA’s determination of the
matter on remand.
Following a public hearing, the ZBA answered “no” to the remanded
question. After the ZBA denied their request for a rehearing, the plaintiffs
amended their superior court appeal to challenge that determination by the
ZBA.
In an order dated June 3, 2022, the Trial Court (Houran, J.) denied the
plaintiffs’ ZBA appeal, ruling that “the ZBA had a sufficient basis to conclude
the Planning Board did not err in interpreting Section 8-1 of the [BZO] to be
inapplicable to ITW’s proposed Commercial Tower.”
The plaintiffs filed a motion for reconsideration and clarification of the
June 3 order. The Trial Court (Houran, J.) issued an order denying the request
for reconsideration and clarifying that the June 3 order did not resolve all
issues in the case, but only the issue remanded to the ZBA in the June 4, 2021
order. Accordingly, in an order issued on August 16, 2022, the Trial Court
(Leonard, J.) ruled on the plaintiffs’ remaining challenges to the planning
board’s decision. The court granted the appeal in part — ruling that the
planning board acted unreasonably or unlawfully in finding that ITW had fully
2
satisfied the requirement contained in Section 3.2(J) of the Town’s non-
residential site plan review regulation — but denied it in all other respects, and
remanded to the planning board to receive evidence of ITW’s compliance with
Section 3.2(J) and, thereafter, to confirm the same. The plaintiffs filed a
motion for reconsideration and clarification, which the trial court denied.
In September 2022, ITW filed a motion for entry of final judgment in its
favor, informing the court that the planning board had confirmed ITW’s
compliance with Section 3.2(J). The Trial Court (Leonard, J.) granted the
motion, thereby affirming the planning board’s site plan approval. The
plaintiffs then filed the instant appeal, challenging the trial court’s affirmance
of the ZBA’s decision on the remanded question and of the planning board’s
approval of ITW’s site plan. ITW cross-appealed, challenging the trial court’s
ruling that the ZBA had jurisdiction over the administrative appeal and, in
turn, the trial court’s own assertion of subject matter jurisdiction over the
plaintiffs’ appeal of the planning board’s site plan approval decision.
This appeal and cross-appeal require us to review superior court orders
in appeals from decisions of the planning board and the ZBA. “The superior
court was obligated to treat the factual findings of both boards as prima facie
lawful and reasonable and could not set aside their decisions absent
unreasonableness or an identified error of law.” Hannigan v. City of Concord,
144 N.H. 68, 70 (1999). “We will uphold the superior court’s decision unless it
is unsupported by the evidence or is legally erroneous.” Id.
We first consider ITW’s cross-appeal, as it challenges the trial court’s
subject matter jurisdiction. See DHB v. Town of Pembroke, 152 N.H. 314, 317
(2005). Specifically, ITW contends that the superior court lacked jurisdiction
because the plaintiffs’ appeal to the superior court, filed 130 days after the
planning board’s decision approving ITW’s site plan, was untimely. The
plaintiffs counter that their appeal was timely filed under the “dual track for
appeals” set forth in RSA 676:5, III and RSA 677:15, I-a because the trial court
correctly found that the planning board “made an implied decision under the
terms of the BZO.” See RSA 676:5, III (2016) (governing appeals to the ZBA);
RSA 677:15, I-a (2016) (detailing procedures for appealing planning board
decisions where some issues are appealable to the ZBA); see also Anthony v.
Town of Plaistow, 175 N.H. 762, 767 (2023) (explaining statutory scheme). The
issue before us, then, is whether the trial court erred in concluding that the
planning board “is assumed to have considered said ordinance after [Morris]
raised it during the public hearing, and made a determination on same.”
The trial court noted:
In a letter sent to the Planning Board dated May 7, 2020, Morris
argued that ITW is a business [that] is subject to Section 8 of the
[BZO], among other things. She also submitted an additional letter
3