THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0008, State of New Hampshire v. William
Argie, the court on February 11, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The
defendant, William Argie, appeals his conviction for first-degree murder. See
RSA 630:1-a, I(a) (2016). The defendant argues that the Superior Court
(Wageling, J.) improperly admitted prior bad act evidence under New
Hampshire Rule of Evidence 404(b), and deprived him of due process in
violation of the State and Federal Constitutions when it denied his request for
an evidentiary hearing on the admissibility of the Rule 404(b) evidence. We
conclude that the defendant failed to preserve his due process argument for
our review and that the trial court’s admission of the prior bad act evidence did
not violate Rule 404(b). Accordingly, we affirm.1
The following facts are supported by the record or are undisputed. At the
time of the victim’s death, the defendant and the victim were married and had
two minor children together. The defendant had a gambling habit and was
unable to maintain stable employment, which put a significant financial strain
on the family. The defendant had gambling debts, had exhausted his personal
bank account, and had stated to family and friends that he was considering
filing for bankruptcy. The defendant was the sole beneficiary of the victim’s
$400,000 life insurance policy. The defendant knew that the victim was
planning to divorce him, take custody of their children, sell the family home,
and move in with his mother. On or about April 4, 2019, the victim was
murdered. The police apprehended the defendant on April 5, 2019 while he
was gambling at a casino in Connecticut.
After the victim’s death, one of the defendant’s gambling associates (the
associate) contacted the police. The associate told the police that the
defendant and the associate had known each other socially for several years
prior to the victim’s death and would occasionally travel to casinos together.
The associate informed the police that in February 2019 — less than two
1 Although the defendant appended the sentencing decisions for both his first-degree murder and
falsification of physical evidence convictions to his notice of appeal, the defendant does not raise
any arguments related to his conviction for falsification of physical evidence in his brief and,
therefore, we deem this issue waived. See State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 49 (2003).
months before the victim’s death — he met the defendant at a restaurant where
the defendant told the associate of the victim’s life insurance policy and offered
the associate a portion of the life insurance proceeds if he helped the defendant
kill the victim or found a hitman to kill her.
In December 2019, a grand jury indicted the defendant for first-degree
murder and falsifying physical evidence. See RSA 630:1-a, I(a) (purposeful
first-degree murder); RSA 641:6, I (2016) (falsifying physical evidence).
Because the defendant’s solicitation of the associate occurred in a different
county than the victim’s murder, the State did not file charges related to the
defendant’s murder solicitation.
Prior to trial, the State filed a motion in limine to admit evidence
regarding the defendant’s solicitation of the associate for the victim’s murder.
The trial court held a non-evidentiary pretrial hearing on the motion during
which the State argued that the evidence of solicitation was admissible under
Rule 404(b). It sought to introduce the testimony to show the defendant’s
“motive and intent to harm the victim, and . . . his identity as the person who
murdered her.” The defense argued that the evidence was inadmissible
because it did not satisfy the requirements of Rule 404(b). The trial court
granted the State’s motion, and the associate testified about the solicitation at
trial without further objection.
Following trial, the jury found the defendant guilty of purposeful first-
degree murder and falsifying physical evidence. See RSA 630:1-a, I(a); RSA
641:6, I. This appeal followed.
The defendant raises two issues on appeal: first, whether the trial court
erred when it granted the State’s pretrial motion to admit evidence of the
uncharged murder solicitation, see N.H. R. Ev. 404(b); and second, whether the
trial court deprived him of due process under the State and Federal
Constitutions when it denied his request for an evidentiary hearing on the
admissibility of the Rule 404(b) evidence. We begin by addressing the trial
court’s decision to grant the State’s motion in limine.
We review the trial court’s ruling for an unsustainable exercise of
discretion and will reverse only if it was clearly untenable or unreasonable to
the prejudice of the defendant’s case. State v. Nightingale, 160 N.H. 569, 573
(2010). Because the trial court ruled before trial regarding the admissibility of
the challenged evidence, we consider only the arguments and evidence
presented at the pretrial hearing. See id. We so limit our review to avoid the
pitfall of justifying the court’s pretrial ruling upon the defendant’s response at
trial to the evidence. Id.
2
Rule 404(b)(1) states that:
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove
the character of a person in order to show that the person acted in
conformity therewith. It may, however, be admissible for other
purposes, such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent,
preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, or absence of mistake or
accident.
To ensure that this rule is followed, we have held that before a trial court
admits “other crimes, wrongs, or acts” evidence pursuant to Rule 404(b), it
generally must first determine: (1) that the evidence is relevant for a purpose
other than character or disposition; (2) that there is clear proof that the
defendant committed the prior act; and (3) that the probative value of the
evidence is not substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to
the defendant. State v. Roy, 167 N.H. 276, 287 (2015). The State bore the
burden of demonstrating the admissibility of the prior bad act evidence. See
State v. Ericson, 159 N.H. 379, 388 (2009).
On appeal, the defendant does not challenge the relevancy of the prior
bad act evidence. Rather, he asserts that there was not clear proof that he
committed the prior bad act and that the probative value of the evidence was
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice.
We begin with the defendant’s clear proof argument. Rule 404(b)
requires “clear proof, meaning that there is sufficient evidence to support a
finding by the fact-finder that the other crimes, wrongs or acts occurred and
that the person committed them.” N.H. R. Ev. 404(b)(2)(B) (emphases
added). Whether there was clear proof of the solicitation for purposes of Rule
404(b) is a preliminary determination concerning the admissibility of evidence,
and the trial court is not bound by the rules of evidence in making this
determination. See Ericson, 159 N.H. at 388; see also N.H. R. Ev. 104(a).
The defendant raises two overarching arguments as to why the clear
proof standard was not met: first, that our prior “decisions indicate that ‘clear
proof’ requires more than uncorroborated and unsworn statements from a
single witness with a motive to lie”; and second, that the trial court failed to
adequately assess the reliability of the proffered evidence.2 We disagree.
2 The defendant relies on State v. Michaud, 135 N.H. 723 (1992), to support his clear proof
argument. The defendant’s reliance on Michaud, however, is misplaced. In Michaud we
concluded that there was not clear proof that the defendant, rather than another person, had
committed the prior bad act. See Michaud, 135 N.H. at 728. By contrast, here, the defendant has
not claimed that the State insufficiently established his identity as the person who solicited the
associate. Rather, he argues that there was insufficient evidence that the solicitation occurred.
Additionally, in Michaud all of the evidence that the defendant committed the prior bad act was
circumstantial, id. at 726, whereas here the associate’s “eyewitness” statement was before the trial
3