THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2022-0071, E.D. v. J.N., the court on September
6, 2022, issued the following order:
Having considered the brief and record submitted on appeal, we conclude
that oral argument is unnecessary in this case. See Sup. Ct. R. 18(1). The
defendant, J.N., appeals the decision of the Circuit Court (Mace, J.), following a
hearing, granting a domestic violence final order of protection to the plaintiff,
E.D. See RSA 173-B:5 (2022). The defendant argues that the evidence was
insufficient to support the order or the trial court’s findings on reconsideration.
We affirm.
We review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a matter of law, and
uphold the findings and rulings of the trial court unless they are lacking in
evidentiary support or erroneous as a matter of law. Achille v. Achille, 167
N.H. 706, 715 (2015). We view the evidence in the light most favorable to the
prevailing party. Smith v. Pesa, 168 N.H. 541, 544 (2016).
To be entitled to a domestic violence final order of protection, the plaintiff
must establish, by a preponderance of evidence, that the defendant engaged in
“abuse.” RSA 173-B:5, I. “Abuse” means the commission or attempted
commission of one or more enumerated crimes by a family or household
member or a current or former sexual or intimate partner when such conduct
“constitute[s] a credible present threat” to the plaintiff’s safety. RSA 173-B:1, I
(2022); see S.C. v. G.C., 175 N.H. ___, ___ (May 11, 2022) (slip op. at 4). The
enumerated crimes that may constitute abuse include “[d]estruction of
property as defined in . . . RSA 634:2” (criminal mischief), and “[h]arassment as
defined in RSA 644:4.” See RSA 173-B:1, I.
The trial court found that the defendant committed criminal mischief and
harassment when he “intentionally damaged the former marital homestead
after the court awarded the property to [the] plaintiff, intentionally left his feces
in toilets in the house mixed with [a] cut-up photograph of [the] plaintiff, [and]
allowed the children to draw a crude image of the plaintiff on a wall of her
house and then drew or permitted other adults to draw violent images thereon
such as a noose and blood near ‘her’ throat.” In moving for reconsideration,
the defendant argued that, because the plaintiff had not entered the marital
home between “Christmas, 2019,” and October 3, 2021, she was unable to offer
any evidence that he committed such acts after July 26, 2021, the date of the
court’s final divorce decree awarding the marital residence to the plaintiff. In
its order denying the defendant’s motion, the court noted that it was “beyond
dispute” that the defendant engaged in the conduct at issue, or permitted
others to do so, after the court issued its anti-hypothecation order at the start
of the parties’ divorce case.
On appeal, the defendant argues that he received an anti-hypothecation
“notice,” not an order, and that he did not violate any orders contained in the