THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0521, In the Matter of David Campbell
and Robin Partello, the court on April 4, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The
petitioner, David Campbell (Father), appeals an order from the Circuit Court
(Curran, J.) that established a parenting plan between himself and the
respondent, Robin Partello (Mother). Mother cross-appeals. We affirm in part,
reverse in part, and remand.
The trial court found the following facts, or they are supported by the
record. Mother and Father have one son together. In 2018, Father initiated
this action and asked the trial court to implement a temporary parenting
schedule. The trial court issued a temporary parenting plan to govern the
parties’ parenting responsibilities during the pendency of the action. After the
final hearing, the trial court issued a final parenting plan governing Father’s
and Mother’s parenting responsibilities.
In its final order, the trial court explained that it had reviewed the
proposed findings of facts and rulings of law and the proposed parenting plans
of both of the parties. The court concluded that a parenting plan more similar
to Mother’s proposed plan was in the best interests of the child because it
involved less change from the temporary parenting plan than Father’s proposal,
and because it would cause less confusion and contact between Mother and
Father. The final parenting plan allocated approximately eight days out of
every two-week period to Mother and the remaining time to Father. The trial
court further ordered that nonemergency medical decisions be delegated to the
child’s pediatrician “in the first instance.” Each party filed a motion to
reconsider. The trial court granted the motions in part and denied them in
part. This appeal followed.
The trial court has broad discretion in matters involving parental rights
and responsibilities, and we will not overturn its determination except when
there has been an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See In the Matter of
Morris & Morris, 174 N.H. 562, 565 (2021). We consider only whether the
record establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the discretionary
judgment made, and we will not disturb the trial court’s determination if it
could reasonably have been made. In the Matter of Routhier & Routhier, 175
N.H. 6, 18 (2022). The trial court’s discretion necessarily extends to matters
such as assigning weight to evidence and assessing the credibility and
demeanor of witnesses. Id. We apply a de novo standard of review to the trial
court’s application of the law to the facts. Morris, 174 N.H. at 565.
Father argues, citing In the Matter of Miller & Todd, 161 N.H. 630
(2011), that the trial court erred when it issued its parenting plan because it
failed to cite or discuss the factors set forth in RSA 461-A:6, I (Supp. 2024) in
its order. Mother contends that this argument is not preserved for appellate
review. Father counters that his submission of proposed findings and rulings
to the trial court preserved this argument for appeal. We agree with Mother.
The mere submission of proposed findings and rulings that reference some of
the RSA 461-A:6, I, factors, but which never raised this argument, is
insufficient to preserve this argument for appeal. In addition, after the trial
court issued its order and the parenting plan, Father failed to raise this
argument in his motion to reconsider. See McDonough v. McDonough, 169
N.H. 537, 545 (2016) (“The trial court must have had the opportunity to
consider any issues asserted by the appellant on appeal; thus, to satisfy [the]
preservation requirement, any issues which could not have been presented to
the trial court prior to its decision must be presented to it in a motion for
reconsideration.”). Accordingly, we conclude that Father’s argument is not
preserved.
Father next argues that the court erred because it failed to include
sufficient detail in its parenting plan, and because it failed to impose deadlines
and consequences should either party fail to comply with the terms of the
parenting plan. We are not persuaded that the trial court erred. RSA 461-A:4
and :6 specify provisions, information, and findings that the parenting plan
“may” and “shall” include depending on the circumstances. See RSA 461-A:4,
:6 (2018 & Supp. 2024). The parenting plan here specifies the periods when
each parent has residential responsibility for the child, schedules non-
residential parenting times, and specifies the legal residences of the parents.
These terms satisfy the statutory requirements. See RSA 461-A:4, :6 (requiring
parenting plan to include legal residences of parents when there is joint
decision-making authority and a detailed parenting schedule which specifies
when each parent has residential responsibility and non-residential parenting
times). Father has failed to identify any detail, deadline, or consequence that
the trial court omitted which is mandated by the statute.
Finally, Father argues that the trial court erred when it awarded greater
than equal parenting time to Mother. He argues that there is not an objective
basis in the record to support that award as being in the child’s best interests.
We first observe that the court is not required to award equal parenting time.
See RSA 461-A:6, I-a (Supp. 2024) (amended 2024) (“If the court concludes
that frequent and continuing contact between each child and both parents is
not in the best interest of the child, the court shall make findings supporting
2
its order.”). Instead, when fashioning a parenting plan, the court must
“consider only the best interests of the child as provided under RSA 461-A:6
and the safety of the parties.” RSA 461-A:4, I. When determining the best
interests of the child, the court may consider any factor that it deems relevant.
See RSA 461-A:6, I(m).
Here, the court concluded that less change for the child and parties was
in the child’s best interests. Accordingly, the court adopted a plan similar to
Mother’s proposed plan because it involved minimal change from the
temporary order. The court also found that Mother’s plan reduced the risk of
confusion, involved fewer exchanges between the parties, and required less
interaction between the parties than Father’s proposed plan. These findings
are consistent with the best interests of the child.
Father further argues that there is insufficient evidence that Mother can
communicate and cooperate with Father for the child’s best interests, and that
the trial court erred when it failed to apply the factors set forth in RSA 461-A:6,
I(e)-(g), (i) (requiring court to consider ability of each parent to foster a positive
relationship and communicate with the other parent, and to support the child’s
relationship and contact with the other parent). Father asserts that the effect
of the trial court’s order is to reward Mother for her past misconduct. We
disagree.
Although the trial court found that “neither party has purely clean hands
relative to the conduct and communications,” and that both parties had shown
an “inability to cooperate and tolerate one another for their son’s best
interests,” the court noted that the parties’ recent communications had been
“more placid.” These findings align with the factors set forth in RSA 461-A:6,
I(e)-(g), (i). Nor are we persuaded that the trial court failed to consider the
parties’ acrimonious history, or that Mother benefitted from her prior
misbehavior. Specifically, the order states that: “[H]ad [Mother] continued
down the path she trod in 2018-2020, the result of today’s orders may likely
have been very different.” Accordingly, based upon our review of the trial
court’s order and the record, we conclude that the trial court considered the
factors set forth in RSA 461-A:6, I, and that there is an objective basis in the
record sufficient to support its ruling. See Routhier, 175 N.H. at 18.
Accordingly, Father has failed to demonstrate legal error or an unsustainable
exercise of discretion.
Turning to Mother’s cross-appeal, Mother argues that the trial court
erred in delegating decision-making authority for nonemergency medical
decisions, in the first instance, to their son’s pediatrician. Father counters that
the order does not delegate decision-making authority to the child’s
pediatrician but, rather, orders the parties to “consult” with the pediatrician
“for a recommendation,” after which the parties may go to the court for
3