THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0467, State of New Hampshire v. Brandon
Gomez, the court on March 13, 2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Brandon Gomez, appeals his convictions
following a jury trial in Superior Court (Donovan, J.) of manslaughter, negligent
homicide, and first degree assault. See RSA 630:2 (Supp. 2025); RSA 630:3
(2016); RSA 631:1 (Supp. 2025). On appeal, the defendant asserts that the
trial court erred by overruling a defense objection to the prosecutor’s closing
argument. The defendant also argues that the trial court may have erred by
failing to disclose additional records after in camera review. We affirm.
I. Background
The jury could have found the following facts. On September 30, 2021,
volunteers were providing food and supplies to people at Victory Park (the park)
in Manchester. After hearing yelling, two of the volunteers saw the victim being
punched or kicked, and when they approached they found him unconscious
and bleeding from the mouth. The victim died of his injuries. The victim’s
death was classified as a homicide.
Following an investigation, the defendant and another individual, B.M.,
were charged with his death. B.M. agreed to plead guilty and to testify against
the defendant. Prior to trial, the court granted the defendant’s motion for in
camera review and discovery of B.M.’s “complete mental health records.” After
conducting an in camera review, the trial court released, under seal, materials
to the parties that it found relevant and material to the case. The defendant
was found guilty of manslaughter, negligent homicide, and first degree assault.
The State sought sentencing only for manslaughter. This appeal followed.
II. Analysis
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred in overruling a
defense objection to a point made at the end of the prosecutor’s closing
argument. At issue is the prosecutor’s statement:
. . . There is a reason that Brandon Gomez thinks that he can get
away with this. There’s no press in the room, nobody -- because
this was a killing that happened in the center of Manchester, and
you know, there’s nobody here who wants to hear that. There’s
nobody at the park who wants to talk about it. That’s why
Brandon Gomez thinks he can get away with it.
What I ask of you to do is hold him accountable.
In a sidebar, defense counsel objected to the prosecutor’s argument that “there
is a reason that Brandon Gomez can get away with this and then cited that
there were people who weren’t talking at the park.” Defense counsel suggested
that argument was “prejudicial without any evidence to support it.” The trial
court disagreed, responding that “there’s plenty of evidence that people aren’t
willing to talk at the park.”
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in overruling
defense counsel’s objection. We review a trial court’s ruling on the propriety of
closing argument for an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See State v.
Collins, 168 N.H. 1, 6 (2015). To show that the trial court’s decision is not
sustainable, the defendant must demonstrate that it was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Id.
The basis for defense counsel’s objection was that in the absence of
evidence that people in the park were not talking, it was prejudicial to suggest
that the defendant thought he could get away with the crime. See State v.
Lake, 125 N.H. 820, 824 (1984) (explaining that “a prosecutor should not argue
facts not introduced into evidence”). The trial court determined, however, that
there was “plenty of evidence” of the unwillingness of people at the park to talk
about the incident of September 30, 2021. Our review of the record supports
the trial court’s ruling.
One witness testified that he was lying when he initially told police that
he saw two males arguing on that date but that he could not describe them.
B.M. testified that he initially falsely told police he could not remember
anything from the night of the incident because he did not want to be a
“snitch.” A Manchester police officer testified that he talked to five to six people
at the scene “to get a general idea of what they had seen, if they’d witnessed
anything at all” and that some people were cooperative but others were not.
Another police officer testified that he went through the park after the incident
trying to obtain witness statements and spoke to four individuals who “gave
[him] no information or refused to give [him] any information.” Accordingly,
because the record establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the trial
court’s decision, we conclude that the defendant has failed to demonstrate that
the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion by overruling defense
counsel’s objection based on lack of evidence. See State v. Lambert, 147 N.H.
295, 296 (2001).
2
The defendant further asserts that the prosecutor’s closing argument
“proposed that [he] believed he could escape responsibility because nobody
would care about [the victim’s] life,” and thereby “implied that the jury should
respond to that attitude by convicting [him] as a way of demonstrating that the
lives of homeless people matter.” The defendant argues that the prosecutor’s
“appeal[] to return a verdict based on societal values rather than on the facts of
the case” was improper, and by overruling the defense objection the trial court
erred. We agree with the State that these arguments were never raised before
the trial court and, therefore, we review them for plain error. See Sup. Ct. R.
16-A.
Under the plain error rule, we may consider errors not raised before the
trial court. State v. Hodges, 176 N.H. 751, 754 (2024), 2024 N.H. 44, ¶9.
However, the rule should be used sparingly, its use limited to those
circumstances in which a miscarriage of justice would otherwise result. Id. To
find plain error: (1) there must be an error; (2) the error must be plain; (3) the
error must affect substantial rights; and (4) the error must seriously affect the
fairness, integrity or public reputation of judicial proceedings. Id.
When instructing the jury, the trial court stated multiple times that the
jury was required to decide the case solely on the evidence presented at trial.
The court also instructed the jury that it must “reach a fair and just verdict
without prejudice, without fear, and without sympathy,” and that the lawyers’
“arguments are not evidence.” See State v. Cooper, 168 N.H. 161, 171 (2015)
(explaining that juries are presumed to follow instructions). Even if the
prosecutor’s remark could be construed as improperly urging the jury to
convict the defendant out of concern “for the humanity of homeless people,” we
conclude that the trial court’s instructions were sufficient to protect the
defendant’s substantial rights and, accordingly, we find no plain error. See
State v. Cummings, 177 N.H. 291, 295 (2025), 2025 N.H. 15, ¶11 (explaining
that “[g]enerally, to prove that an error affected substantial rights, the
defendant must show that the error was prejudicial”).
The defendant next argues that the trial court may have erred in failing
to disclose information that it reviewed in camera. He asks that we review the
information to determine whether the court failed to disclose records that “may
have helped show [B.M.’s] incapacity to distinguish fact from fantasy, or to
perceive or remember the events to which he would testify at trial.”
We review a trial court’s ruling on the management of discovery to
determine whether its decision is sustainable. Hodges, 176 N.H. at 757, 2024
N.H. 44, ¶18. When a defendant argues on appeal that a trial court’s ruling
regarding the disclosure of privileged records is unsustainable, we “must review
the same records and determine whether the ruling was clearly unreasonable
or untenable to the prejudice of his case.” Id. After reviewing the records that
were examined by the trial court, we conclude that the court’s decisions
3