THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0477, State of New Hampshire v. Steven
O’Brien, the court on January 28, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(2). The defendant, Steven O’Brien, appeals his convictions in the Superior
Court (Will, J.), following a jury trial, on one count of aggravated felonious sexual
assault, see RSA 632-A:2, II (2016), and two counts of felonious sexual assault,
see RSA 632-A:3 (Supp. 2023), against a minor under the age of thirteen. The
defendant argues that the trial court erred in allowing a witness, other than the
victim, to testify that the defendant sexually contacted her. We affirm.
The victim was 31 years old at the time of trial. The defendant argues that
the testimony of the other witness, who was close in age to the victim, likely led
the jury to infer that the defendant also sexually assaulted her when she was a
minor, and that the probative value of the evidence was substantially outweighed
by the risk of unfair prejudice. See State v. Thomas, 168 N.H. 589, 599-603
(2016); N.H. R. Ev. 404(b). The State counters that the court acted within its
discretion by limiting the context of the testimony to minimize the prejudicial
effect, but that if the evidence was admitted in error, the error was harmless. We
assume that the trial court erred and conclude that the error was harmless.
To establish harmless error, the State must prove beyond a reasonable
doubt that the error did not affect the verdict. State v. Boudreau, 176 N.H. 1, 11
(2023). This standard applies to both the erroneous admission and exclusion of
evidence. Id. “We consider the alternative evidence presented at trial as well as
the character of the erroneously admitted evidence itself.” Id. (brackets and
quotation omitted). To determine whether the State has proven beyond a
reasonable doubt that an error did not affect the verdict, we evaluate the totality
of the circumstances at trial. Id. at 11-12.
The victim testified that her parents separated before she started
elementary school. When she visited the defendant on weekends, she slept in his
bed. She testified that the defendant first sexually assaulted her on the couch in
the living room of her grandparents’ house, where the defendant was living. She
testified that the defendant touched her vagina under her clothing with his hand
and with his penis. She testified that the defendant slid his erect penis between
her legs, moving back and forth, touching her vagina. She testified that this
occurred when she was in first and second grade. She testified that this type of
touching occurred more than once in her grandparents’ house, and that it
happened in the living room, on a bed in the basement, and in the defendant’s
bedroom. She testified that the defendant made her promise not to tell anyone.
The victim testified that when she was in the fourth and fifth grade, the
same type of touching continued at the defendant’s apartment. She testified that
when she was between the ages of nine and eleven, the defendant inserted
something into her vagina, and that it hurt. The victim testified that before she
was in middle school she decided to stop visiting the defendant.
The testimony of the other witness was brief and limited. She testified that
she also had sexual contact with the defendant, that he touched her vaginal area
with his hand, and that he told her that the victim liked being touched in that
way. However, that witness, who was close in age to the victim, did not testify
that she was a minor when this contact occurred, or that the contact was not
consensual.
As set forth above, the victim testified in detail regarding the defendant’s
repeated sexual assaults over a period of years. See State v. Lemieux, 136 N.H.
329, 331-32, 615 A.2d 635 (1992) (explaining that “the evidence most damaging
to the defendant was the victim’s description, in vivid detail, of the various sexual
acts that the defendant forced her to perform on a regular basis”); see also RSA
632-A:6, I (2016) (“The testimony of the victim shall not be required to be
corroborated in prosecutions under this chapter.”). In addition, the defendant
admitted to a police officer that he shared a bed with the victim at her
grandparents’ house, and that the last time he spoke with the victim was when
she was approximately thirteen years old.
Based upon the totality of the circumstances, we conclude that, assuming
the trial court erred in admitting the other witness’s testimony, the evidence did
not affect the verdict and was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. See
Boudreau, 176 N.H. at 11.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2