THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
Case No. 2023-0357
Citation: Robinson v. 1 Bouchard Street Realty, 2024 N.H. 59
D’KWON ROBINSON
v.
1 BOUCHARD STREET REALTY, LLC
Argued: June 6, 2024
Opinion Issued: October 22, 2024
Ward Law Group, PLLC, of Manchester (John L. Ward and Dana K.
Smith on the brief, and John L. Ward orally), for the plaintiff.
The Hanover Law Group, of Plymouth, Massachusetts (Daniella
Massimilla and Michael R. Morancy on the brief, and Daniella Massimilla
orally), for the defendant.
Douglas, Leonard & Garvey, P.C., of Concord (Benjamin T. King on the
brief) for New Hampshire Association for Justice, as amicus curiae.
MACDONALD, C.J.
[¶1] This appeal involves whether the defendant landlord, 1 Bouchard
Street Realty, LLC, is liable in negligence for injuries suffered by the plaintiff,
D’Kwon Robinson, when he slipped and fell on ice on the defendant’s property.
The defendant leased the premises to the plaintiff’s employer, New Hampshire
Plastics, LLC (NHP). The lease provided that NHP was responsible for snow
and ice removal on the property. The Superior Court (Anderson, J.) entered
summary judgment for the defendant, primarily concluding that, pursuant to
the lease, the defendant did not owe the plaintiff a duty of care to keep the
premises safe. We conclude that the lease did not relieve the defendant of its
duty of care to the plaintiff, and, therefore, we reverse and remand.
I. Background
[¶2] The following facts are undisputed. In April 2018, the defendant
leased the subject property to NHP. The terms of the lease ran through
February 2023. The lease required NHP to keep the premises “free of dirt,
snow and ice.”
[¶3] In February 2020, the plaintiff worked for NHP. While the plaintiff
was working outdoors on the premises, he slipped and fell on ice. The plaintiff
sued the defendant in negligence for failing to properly maintain its facilities in
a safe condition.
[¶4] The defendant moved for summary judgment, arguing that because
the terms of the lease required NHP to assume the responsibility for ice
removal, the defendant had no duty to maintain the subject property. The trial
court agreed and granted the motion. The plaintiff unsuccessfully moved for
reconsideration. This appeal followed.
II. Analysis
[¶5] On appeal, the plaintiff principally argues that the trial court erred
in finding that the defendant did not owe a duty of care to him. The defendant
contends that because there was no evidence that it maintained control of the
premises, the terms of the lease relieved the defendant from its duty to
maintain its premises in a safe condition. We agree with the plaintiff.
[¶6] A moving party is entitled to summary judgment “if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with
the affidavits filed, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact
and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.” RSA
491:8-a, III (2010). When reviewing a trial court’s grant of summary judgment,
we consider the parties’ affidavits, other evidence, and all inferences properly
2
drawn from them in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Chartier
v. Apple Therapy of Londonderry, 175 N.H. 603, 607 (2023). If there is no
genuine issue of material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to judgment
as a matter of law, the grant of summary judgment is proper. Id. We review
the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de novo. Id.
[¶7] We begin by determining what effect the lease has on the defendant’s
common law duty to keep its premises in a safe condition. To recover for
negligence, the plaintiff must demonstrate that the defendant owes a duty to
him, that the defendant breached that duty, and that the breach proximately
caused injury to him. See Bloom v. Casella Constr., 172 N.H. 625, 627 (2019).
Absent a duty, there is no negligence. Id. Whether a duty exists in a particular
case is a question of law. Id. Under New Hampshire law, premises owners are
governed by the test of reasonable care under all the circumstances in the
maintenance and operation of their premises. Rallis v. Demoulas Super
Markets, 159 N.H. 95, 99 (2009). A premises owner owes a duty to entrants to
use ordinary care to keep the premises in a reasonably safe condition, to warn
entrants of dangerous conditions, and to take reasonable precautions to
protect them against foreseeable dangers arising out of the arrangements or
use of the premises. Id.
[¶8] However, “[w]here the parties to a contract are free to make their
own bargain, and no special relationship (such as landlord-tenant or common
carrier-passenger) exists between them, a clause fully exculpating one party for
property damage due to its negligence in the performance of a contract is valid
and will be enforced.” Tanguay v. Marston, 127 N.H. 572, 577 (1986). In
particular, “a lessor and lessee in a lease of commercial real estate may agree
on which party will maintain the leased premises and which party will be liable
for injuries caused by improper failure to maintain.” Id. at 578. “While
exculpatory clauses in leases of commercial real estate are binding on the
parties to the lease, they have no effect on non-signers.” Id.
[¶9] In Tanguay, the plaintiff was injured on his employer’s business
premises when he slipped and fell on a patch of grease in the parking lot. Id.
at 574. The plaintiff sued the defendant landowner. Id. The plaintiff’s
employer had leased the property from the defendant. Id. The lease contained
a provision assigning the employer responsibility for the maintenance of the
premises. Id. at 577. We held that the provision did not bar the suit by the
plaintiff, a non-party to the lease. Id. at 578.
[¶10] Here, the plaintiff is likewise not a party to the lease between the
defendant and NHP. Accordingly, we hold that the lease’s requirement that
NHP keep the premises free from ice has no effect on the defendant’s duty to
the plaintiff to maintain its property in a reasonably safe condition. See id.; see
also Valenti v. NET Properties Management, 142 N.H. 633, 636 (1998)
3
(“Although a possessor of business premises is free to delegate the duty of
performance to another . . . he cannot thereby avoid or delegate the risk of non-
performance of the duty.” (quotation omitted)). Therefore, the defendant was
not entitled to judgment as a matter of law. By ruling to the contrary, the trial
court erred.
[¶11] The defendant relies on Kuchynski v. Ukryn, 89 N.H. 400 (1938), in
arguing that it owed no duty to the plaintiff. The trial court likewise relied on
Kuchynski when it granted the defendant summary judgment. We conclude
that Kuchynski is inapposite. Kuchynski was decided at a time when New
Hampshire law granted landlords limited tort immunity. See Tanguay, 127
N.H. at 578 (“Prior to [Sargent v. Ross, 113 N.H. 388 (1973)], a landlord was
not liable, except in certain limited situations, for injuries caused by defective
or dangerous conditions in the leased premises.”).
[¶12] In Kuchynski, a plaintiff, the spouse of the tenant, was injured due
to the insecurity of a staircase post that the defendant landlord had repaired.
Kuchynski, 89 N.H. at 400 (preface to opinion). We observed that the
defendant landlord had “no duty to act at all.” Id. at 401. We held, in part,
that the plaintiffs could not recover from the defendant landlord because the
plaintiffs did not know until after the incident that the defendant repaired the
post and, therefore, they could not assert that they relied on the defendant’s
repairs under an assumed duty of care for the security of the post. Id. Our
holding, in effect, examined whether an exception applied to the general rule at
the time that landlords had no duty to act in these circumstances.
[¶13] In Sargent, we “relegated to the history books” landlords’ limited
tort immunity in favor of the modern rule that “landlords as other persons
must exercise reasonable care not to subject others to an unreasonable risk of
harm.” Sargent, 113 N.H. at 396-97. In light of Sargent, Kuchynski’s analysis
flows from the now invalid premise that landlords generally had “no duty to act
at all.” Kuchynski, 89 N.H. at 401. Accordingly, the trial court erred in relying
on Kuchynski in granting the defendant summary judgment.
[¶14] In sum, because the trial court erred in granting summary
judgment to the defendant, we reverse and remand for proceedings consistent
with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.
BASSETT, DONOVAN, and COUNTWAY, JJ., concurred; HANTZ
MARCONI, J., sat for oral argument but did not participate in the final vote.
4