THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0247, Lois Stearns & a. v. Town of
Gorham & a., the court on March 12, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The
plaintiffs, Diane Holmes, Michael Pelchat, Sandra Lemire, Audrey and Rene
Albert, and Nancy and Bruce Neil, who are homeowners in Gorham, brought
this suit against the defendants, the New Hampshire Department of
Transportation and the New Hampshire Department of Natural and Cultural
Resources (collectively, the State), and the Town of Gorham (Town), requesting
relief for alleged injuries arising from the placement of off-highway recreational
vehicle (OHRV) trails near their properties. The plaintiffs appeal various
rulings of the Superior Court (MacLeod, J.) made during the course of this
litigation.1 We affirm.
The following facts are drawn from the trial court’s orders or are
supported by the record. The plaintiffs lived in Gorham at the relevant time
and their respective properties are located next to or near either United States
Route 2 or the Presidential Rail Trail (PRT), which are part of a network of
recreational trails owned and operated by the State. In 2011, the State
designated the PRT as open for public OHRV use on a seasonal basis and
permitted OHRV trailer parking in the Route 2 parking lot. The Town approved
the State’s proposal. In 2013, the State, with the Town’s support, expanded
the permitted use of OHRV in Gorham to include a portion of Route 2,
beginning at the Route 2 parking lot.
In 2018, the plaintiffs brought this suit alleging that the defendants’
approval of OHRV use on Route 2 and the PRT substantially and unreasonably
interfered with their use and enjoyment of their homes due to the noise, fumes,
and dust created by OHRV use. The plaintiffs asserted: (1) a mandamus action
against the Town; (2) nuisance claims against the Town and the State; and (3)
inverse condemnation claims against the Town and the State. They requested
a preliminary and permanent injunction enjoining the nuisance created by the
defendants’ approval of OHRV use on trails near the plaintiffs’ homes. They
also requested an award of attorney’s fees and costs.
1 Other plaintiffs, including Lois Stearns, have not joined in the appeal. We refer to the appellants
as the plaintiffs.
The trial court denied the plaintiffs’ request for a preliminary injunction,
dismissed the mandamus claim against the Town, and ruled that the nuisance
claim against the State is barred by sovereign immunity. The court
subsequently granted summary judgment to the Town on the nuisance claim
on the basis of discretionary function immunity. During pretrial litigation, the
plaintiffs served a deposition subpoena and a trial subpoena on Sarah Stewart,
Commissioner of the Department of Natural and Cultural Resources. The trial
court granted the State’s motions to quash both subpoenas.
The parties ultimately proceeded to trial on the only remaining claims —
inverse condemnation. Following a view of the plaintiffs’ properties and a
three-day bench trial, the trial court ruled that the defendants’ conduct in
permitting OHRV use in Gorham resulted in noise, dust, and fumes that
substantially and frequently interfered with the plaintiffs’ use and enjoyment of
their properties, thereby effecting a taking of the plaintiffs’ property. The court
then held a two-day bench trial on the issue of damages. It concluded that,
although the plaintiffs had proven a taking of their property, they failed to
demonstrate that they suffered any damages as a result, and they therefore
were not owed “just compensation” for the taking. The court also denied the
plaintiffs’ requests for attorney’s fees and costs. The plaintiffs unsuccessfully
moved for reconsideration, and this appeal followed.
I. Denial of Preliminary Injunctive Relief
We first address the plaintiffs’ argument that the trial court erred when it
denied their request for a preliminary injunction halting OHRV operation on
the trails in the plaintiffs’ neighborhood. We agree with the defendants that
this issue is moot. See Capriole v. Uber Technologies, Inc., 991 F.3d 339, 343
(1st Cir. 2021) (“It has long been the law that an appeal from the denial of a
preliminary injunction motion becomes moot when final judgment issues
because the [trial] court’s denial of the motion merges with the final
judgment.”).
II. Quash of Deposition and Trial Subpoenas
The plaintiffs next challenge the trial court’s orders quashing deposition
and trial subpoenas of Sarah Stewart, Commissioner of the Department of
Natural and Cultural Resources. In granting the State’s motion to quash the
deposition subpoena duces tecum, the trial court relied upon Bogan v. City of
Boston, 489 F.3d 417, 423-24 (1st Cir. 2007), for the proposition that a party’s
access to high-ranking government officials through the discovery process
should be limited. Under this rule, high-ranking government officials may be
deposed if the party seeking the deposition shows that “the official has first-
hand knowledge related to the claim being litigated” and that “other persons
cannot provide the necessary information.” Bogan, 489 F.3d at 423. The trial
court concluded that the plaintiffs failed to meet this standard, in part because
2
they had already deposed another government official with relevant first-hand
knowledge. The trial court granted the State’s motion to quash the trial
subpoena for similar reasons.
We review a trial court’s decisions on the management of discovery and
the admissibility of evidence under an unsustainable exercise of discretion
standard. Kukesh v. Mutrie, 168 N.H. 76, 80 (2015). Accordingly, to show
reversible error, the plaintiffs must demonstrate that the trial court’s rulings
were clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of their case. See id.
We conclude that the plaintiffs have failed to meet this burden. They do not
contest the trial court’s application of the Bogan standard under these
circumstances, nor do they directly challenge the court’s determination that
they failed to meet that standard. They identify several subjects they wished to
explore with the Commissioner, but fail to explain why other persons — such
as the former chief supervisor of the New Hampshire Bureau of Trails whom
they deposed and who testified at trial — could not provide the same
information. See Bogan, 489 F.3d at 423-24 (concluding trial court did not
abuse discretion by preventing deposition of mayor when plaintiffs had not
exhausted other available avenues of discovery).
III. Dismissal of Nuisance Claims on Immunity Grounds
A. Sovereign immunity
We next address the plaintiffs’ argument that the trial court erred when
it granted the State’s motion to dismiss the nuisance claim against the State,
concluding that it was barred by sovereign immunity. The issue of sovereign
immunity presents a question of subject matter jurisdiction and, accordingly, a
question of law subject to our de novo review. See Avery v. Comm’r, N.H. Dep’t
of Corr., 173 N.H. 726, 732 (2020). As State agencies, the Department of
Transportation and the Department of Natural and Cultural Resources are
cloaked with the State’s sovereign immunity. See Chase Home for Children v.
N.H. Div. for Children, Youth & Families, 162 N.H. 720, 730 (2011). The
agencies therefore enjoy immunity from suit in New Hampshire courts. See
RSA 99-D:1 (2023); Chase, 162 N.H. at 730. This means that New Hampshire
courts do not have subject matter jurisdiction to hear cases against these
agencies unless there is an applicable statute waiving immunity. Chase, 162
N.H. at 730. A statute can waive immunity either “expressly or by reasonable
implication.” Id. (quotation omitted). Waivers of sovereign immunity are
“strictly construed.” Id.
The plaintiffs clarified at oral argument that they are not relying on an
express waiver of sovereign immunity, but instead argue that the enactment of
RSA chapter 215-A (2019 & Supp. 2024) — specifically RSA 215-A:41 (Supp.
3