THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0495, State of New Hampshire v.
Raymond Cournoyer, the court on July 18, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). The defendant, Raymond Cournoyer, appeals his conviction, following a
jury trial in Superior Court (Kissinger, J.), on one count of aggravated felonious
sexual assault, see RSA 632-A:2, I(l) (2016). He argues that the trial court erred
by admitting as evidence certain photographs that he contends were unfairly
prejudicial. See N.H. R. Ev. 403. We affirm.
Because the defendant did not challenge this evidence at trial, our review
is for plain error. See Sup. Ct. R. 16-A. “We use the plain error rule sparingly,
limiting its application to those circumstances in which a miscarriage of justice
would otherwise result.” State v. Labrie, 171 N.H. 475, 488-89 (2018). “For us to
find plain error: (1) there must be an error; (2) the error must be plain; (3) the
error must affect substantial rights; and (4) the error must seriously affect the
fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial proceedings.” Id. at 489.
However, “[w]hat is often overlooked in the rote application of the plain error
standard is that, without objection, it is almost impossible to conclude that the
trial court committed error at all.” State v. Thomas, 168 N.H. 589, 604 (2016)
(quotation omitted). “Defense counsel can waive evidentiary restrictions, and
often has legitimate strategic reasons for doing so.” Id. (quotation and brackets
omitted). Thus, “[a] decision not to object may be a trial strategy that should not
be intruded upon by the trial court in the absence of patently egregious
circumstances.” Labrie, 171 N.H. at 489. Accordingly, given that we discourage
trial courts from acting sua sponte in such circumstances, the pertinent question
is whether the admission of the challenged evidence was so patently egregious
that the trial court erred in failing to exclude it sua sponte. See id.; Thomas, 168
N.H. at 604.
The defendant first argues that the trial court plainly erred by admitting
certain school yearbook photographs of the victim from the time of the assault.
His argument primarily relies upon our decision in State v. Cook, in which we
held that the trial court erred by admitting certain childhood photographs of the
victim for the purpose of assessing her credibility and helping the jury visually
understand that she had been a young child at the time of the assaults. See
State v. Cook, 148 N.H. 735, 738, 740-41 (2002). Given that there was no
dispute as to the victim’s age, and given the risk that the admission of the
photographs would elicit sympathy from the jury, we concluded that their limited
probative value in assessing the victim’s testimony was substantially outweighed
by the danger of unfair prejudice. See id.; N.H. R. Ev. 403.
In this case, however, the photographs at issue did more than simply show
that the victim was a child. Here, the yearbook photographs corroborated the
testimony of the victim, and that of another depicted witness, in which both
testified that the two had been childhood friends, and that the victim had
previously disclosed the assault to the witness many years before reporting it to
police. Accordingly, the yearbook photographs at issue have substantially more
probative value, as compared to their minimal risk of prejudice, than those that
were at issue in Cook. Cf. State v. Kennedy, No. 2003-0453, 2005 WL 8142382
(N.H. June 1, 2005) (non-precedential order) (finding no error in admission of
childhood photograph where probative value in corroborating victim’s testimony
was greater than in Cook).
In any event, here, unlike in Cook where the defendant had objected, our
review is only for plain error. Thus, even if we assume that the trial court would
have erred by admitting the yearbook photographs over an objection, we cannot
conclude that their admission under these circumstances was so patently
egregious that the trial court erred in failing to exclude them sua sponte. See
Labrie, 171 N.H. at 489; Thomas, 168 N.H. at 604. In other words, this case
does not present a situation where “there could be no dispute that [the
challenged evidence] impaired the defendant’s substantial rights and adversely
affected the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial proceedings.”
Thomas, 168 N.H. at 604 (quotation omitted).
The defendant next argues that the trial court plainly erred by admitting
certain photographs of him incarcerated in another state. Although these
photographs were more prejudicial than the yearbook photographs because they
clearly depict the fact of the defendant’s prior incarceration, cf., e.g., N.H. R. Ev.
404(b); Estelle v. Williams, 425 U.S. 501, 504-06, 512-13 (1976), they were also
more probative in helping identify the defendant as the person who committed
the assault — a material issue in the case. In any event, however, we need not
decide whether the trial court would have erred by admitting the prison
photographs over an objection, because, here again, our review is only for plain
error. Not only did the defendant fail to object to the admission of the prison
photographs, but, in this instance, he specifically waived any such objection and
expressly agreed to their admission. See State v. Goodale, 144 N.H. 224, 227
(1999) (explaining “invited error” doctrine which holds that “a party may not avail
himself of error into which he has led the trial court, intentionally or
unintentionally” (quotation and brackets omitted)). Accordingly, a fortiori, even if
we were to assume that the prison photographs were erroneously admitted, we
2
cannot conclude that their admission under these circumstances was so patently
egregious that the trial court erred in failing to exclude them sua sponte. See id.;
Williams, 425 U.S. at 512-13; Labrie, 171 N.H. at 489; Thomas, 168 N.H. at 604.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3