THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0109, Kathleen Sylvester v. Woodward’s
White Mountain Resort, LLC, the court on December 20, 2023,
issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The
plaintiff, Kathleen Sylvester, appeals a decision of the Superior Court (St.
Hilaire, J.) granting summary judgment in favor of the defendant, Woodward’s
White Mountain Resort, LLC, and ruling that, as a result of the plaintiff’s
release and settlement agreement with the defendant’s workers’ compensation
insurance carrier (Carrier), RSA 281-A:8 (2023) precludes the plaintiff’s
negligence action. The plaintiff argues that the trial court erred because the
Carrier’s settlement payment to the plaintiff does not constitute receipt of
workers’ compensation benefits, and, consequently, RSA 281-A:8, I, is not
implicated. The plaintiff also argues that, in reaching its decision, the trial
court impermissibly rewrote the release. We disagree and conclude that the
trial court did not err in its determination that RSA 281-A:8, I, bars the
plaintiff’s claim. Accordingly, we affirm.
The following facts are either undisputed or taken from documents in the
record. The defendant leases a motel located in Lincoln. In February 2018, the
plaintiff, who at the time was employed by the defendant, slipped and fell on a
walkway at the motel. The plaintiff sought workers’ compensation benefits,
which both the New Hampshire Department of Labor (DOL) and the New
Hampshire Compensation Appeals Board (CAB) denied. In January 2019, the
plaintiff appealed the CAB’s decision to this court. The defendant and the
Carrier filed a motion for summary affirmance, which this court denied. In
July 2019, the plaintiff withdrew her appeal with prejudice.
In connection with the withdrawal of her appeal, the plaintiff executed a
release with the Carrier. The release provided that, in exchange for a $120,000
settlement, the plaintiff would “withdraw with prejudice all claims for workers’
compensation benefits arising from” the alleged February 2018 injury, and that
the “release pertains only to claims under New Hampshire’s Workers’
Compensation Law RSA Chapter 281-A; and does not preclude any personal
injury action(s).”1 The Carrier paid the plaintiff’s settlement with funds it uses
1 In pertinent part, the release also provides the following language:
Kathleen Sylvester’s net settlement is $60,849.62, based on a total settlement of
$120,000, reduced by $15,000 for attorney’s fees and costs, and $44,150.38 for
medical bills. This settlement represents compensation at the rate of $188.44 per
month for the remainder of her [expected] life.
to pay workers’ compensation benefits.
In February 2021, the plaintiff filed a negligence suit against the
defendant in connection with her February 2018 injury. The defendant moved
for summary judgment, arguing that the exclusivity provision of New
Hampshire’s Workers’ Compensation Law bars the plaintiff’s negligence claim
because the plaintiff had “sought and received workers’ compensation in
connection with the same injury that forms the basis of the instant action.”
See RSA 281-A:8, I.
The trial court granted summary judgment in favor of the defendant.
The court found that the $120,000 settlement constituted distribution of
workers’ compensation funds because the “settlement payout was drawn from
the same pool of money used by [the Carrier] for distribution of benefits, which
is contributed to by companies like Defendant as part of the workers’
compensation scheme.” Relying on our decision in Tothill v. Estate of Center,
152 N.H. 389 (2005), the court ruled that “allowing Plaintiff to recover from
Defendant’s insurance provider and then go on to sue Defendant under a
theory of negligence would be contrary to the intended exclusivity of the
workers’ compensation scheme.” See RSA 281-A:8, I. The plaintiff moved for
reconsideration, which the court denied. This appeal followed.
On appeal, the plaintiff argues that, in ruling that RSA 281-A:8, I, bars
her negligence claim, the trial court impermissibly rewrote the terms of the
release. Specifically, the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in ruling that
the settlement constituted receipt of workers’ compensation benefits and,
therefore, “erred when it disregarded the language in the Release to support its
opinion that the exclusivity provisions of RSA 281-A:8 applied.” We disagree.
We review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts in its
summary judgment ruling de novo. Tothill, 152 N.H. at 393. We consider the
evidence in the record, as well as any inferences drawn therefrom, in the light
most favorable to the party opposing summary judgment. Id. If our review of
that evidence discloses no genuine issue of material fact and if the moving
party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, then we will affirm the grant of
summary judgment. Id.
We begin by considering the language of the release. Parties to a
contract are generally bound by the terms of an agreement freely and openly
entered into. Mentis Sciences v. Pittsburgh Networks, 173 N.H. 584, 591
(2020). Courts cannot improve the terms or conditions of an agreement that
the parties themselves have executed or rewrite contracts merely because they
might operate harshly or inequitably. Id. However, we will not enforce a
contract or contract term that contravenes public policy. Id. We have
explained that an agreement is against public policy:
[I]f it is injurious to the interests of the public, contravenes some
established interest of society, violates some public statute, is against
2
good morals, tends to interfere with the public welfare or safety, or, . . . is
at war with the interests of society and is in conflict with the morals of
the time.
Id. at 591-92 (quotation omitted) (emphasis added).
RSA 281-A:8, I, provides, as relevant to the case at hand:
I. An employee of an employer subject to [RSA chapter 281-A] shall be
conclusively presumed to have accepted the provisions of [RSA
chapter 281-A] and, on behalf of the employee or the employee’s
personal or legal representatives, to have waived all rights of action
whether at common law or by statute or provided under the laws of
any other state or otherwise:
(a) Against the employer or the employer’s insurance carrier or an
association or group providing self-insurance to a number of
employers . . . .
This exclusivity provision is based upon a “quid pro quo: tort immunity for the
employer in exchange for no-fault workers’ compensation benefits.” Tothill,
152 N.H. at 395. Thus, “[a]n employee who seeks workers’ compensation, and
is granted workers’ compensation, has no right to then question whether the
employee is entitled to that grant.” Id. “Such a result would nullify the
exclusiveness of the remedy and unravel the workers’ compensation scheme.”
Id.
Here, to the extent that the release applied to the defendant, the
agreement attempts to circumvent RSA 281-A:8, I, by providing that it
“pertains only to claims under New Hampshire’s Workers’ Compensation Law
RSA Chapter 281-A; and does not preclude any personal injury action(s).”
(Emphasis added.) If given effect, this language would allow the plaintiff to
both receive workers’ compensation and to bring a personal injury claim
against the employer, which directly contradicts RSA 281-A:8, I. See Tothill,
152 N.H. at 394-95. Accordingly, we conclude that, to the extent that it
applied to the defendant, the release language permitting personal injury
claims was void ab initio because it violates the exclusivity provision of the
workers’ compensation scheme. See RSA 281-A:8, I.
The plaintiff next argues that RSA 281-A:8, I, does not apply because the
settlement she received is not workers’ compensation, and, therefore, the
exclusivity provision is not invoked. We are unpersuaded, as the release
clearly contemplates the settlement to resolve the plaintiff’s workers’
compensation claim. The release states that “[t]his settlement represents
compensation for an injury,” — i.e., the alleged February 2018 injury — and
that the “release pertains only to claims under New Hampshire’s Workers’
Compensation Law RSA Chapter 281-A.” In addition to providing payment in
exchange for the plaintiff’s withdrawal of her workers’ compensation appeal,
3