THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0254, In the Matter of Charles Smith, Jr.,
and Shaun Smith, the court on May 3, 2024, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The respondent, Shaun Smith, appeals a final decree
entered by the Circuit Court (Countway, J.) in her divorce from the petitioner,
Charles Smith, Jr., and several orders resolving post-decree motions for
reconsideration and clarification. On appeal, she argues that the trial court
erred by allegedly not distributing the marital property in an equitable manner,
by requiring that she refinance the marital home before certain other properties
in the marital estate are sold, and by not awarding her alimony. We affirm.
The trial court has broad discretion in fashioning a final divorce decree.
In the Matter of Spenard & Spenard, 167 N.H. 1, 3 (2014). Its discretion
includes decisions concerning alimony and property distribution. Id. The trial
court likewise has broad discretion to manage the proceedings before it, In the
Matter of Conner & Conner, 156 N.H. 250, 252 (2007), including whether to
allow evidence over an objection that the evidence was not properly disclosed in
discovery, see Murray v. Developmental Servs. of Servs. of Sullivan County,
149 N.H. 264, 266-68 (2003). We will not overturn the trial court’s rulings on
such matters absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion, reviewing the
record only to determine whether it contains an objective basis to sustain the
court’s discretionary judgments. Spenard, 167 N.H. at 3; Murray, 149 N.H. at
267; State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001) (explaining unsustainable
exercise of discretion standard). If the trial court could reasonably have
reached its findings on the evidence before it, they will stand. Spenard, 167
N.H. at 3. We defer to the trial court’s judgment in resolving conflicts in
testimony, evaluating witness credibility, and determining the weight of
evidence, mindful that the trial court may accept or reject, in whole or in part,
the testimony of any witness, and is not required to believe even uncontested
testimony. In the Matter of Aube & Aube, 158 N.H. 459, 465-66 (2009).
We first address the respondent’s arguments concerning property
distribution. RSA 458:16-a, II (Supp. 2023) requires the trial court to divide
marital property, including marital debt, see Maldini v. Maldini, 168 N.H. 191,
195 (2015) (stating that “marital property” includes “marital debt”), in a
manner that is equitable, see In the Matter of Sarvela & Sarvela, 154 N.H. 426,
431 (2006). The trial court is required to presume that an equal division of
marital property is equitable unless it determines, after considering one or
more statutory factors, that an equal division would not be equitable or
appropriate. RSA 458:16-a, II; Sarvela, 154 N.H. at 430-31. Such factors
include the “duration of the marriage,” the “age, health, social or economic
status, occupation, vocational skills, employability, separate property, amount
and sources of income, needs and liabilities of each party,” the “opportunity of
each party for future acquisition of capital assets and income,” the “actions of
either party during the marriage which contributed to the growth or diminution
in value of property owned by either or both of the parties,” and the “value of
property that is allocated by a valid prenuptial contract made in good faith by
the parties.” RSA 458:16-a, II(a), (b), (c), (f), & (k). The trial court is not
required to divide the property by some mechanical formula, but in a manner
that it deems just based upon the evidence presented and the equities of the
case. Sarvela, 154 N.H. at 431. Nor is the trial court required to consider all
statutory factors in RSA 458:16-a, II, or to give such factors equal weight. Id.
The trial court found that the marriage in this case was long-term. At
the time of the divorce, the respondent was employed as a flight attendant with
a pension and a retirement account that the court valued at $118,020.82, and
the petitioner was self-employed as a carpenter with an IRA that the court
valued at $4,520.75. The trial court found that, while the divorce was pending,
the respondent had withdrawn $70,000 from her retirement account,
$27,405.56 of which the trial court determined should be credited back to the
marital estate. The most recent financial affidavits filed by the parties at the
time of the final hearing showed that the respondent had monthly income
exceeding her expenses by approximately $1,000, and that the petitioner had
monthly self-employment income approximately equaling his expenses.
The parties’ primary marital asset was the marital home, which the trial
court determined to be worth $455,000 at the time of the final hearing, and to
be encumbered by a mortgage in the amount of $56,719.02. Prior to the
marriage, the parties entered into a prenuptial agreement entitling the
respondent to the first $50,000 of equity in the marital home. The parties
agreed that the respondent should be awarded the marital home. Additionally,
the parties owned two undeveloped parcels of land.
In dividing the marital property, the trial court awarded the first $50,000
of equity in the marital home to the respondent in accordance with the
prenuptial agreement. The trial court otherwise awarded the marital home to
the respondent and determined that the remaining equity in the marital home
and the parties’ retirement accounts should be equally divided between them.
The trial court calculated the respondent’s equalization payment to the
petitioner to be $222,950.31 in a spreadsheet, which it incorporated in its
narrative order. With respect to the undeveloped parcels, the trial court
2
ordered that they “shall be . . . sold and the proceeds shall be divided equally”
between the parties. With respect to the respondent’s payment of the
$222,950.31, the trial court stated that “[t]his shall be achieved first through
the proceeds . . . of the [sale of the] two lots. Thereafter, the remaining balance
shall be paid through a refinance of the marital home which shall occur within
120 days of the Clerk’s Notice of Decision on this Order.”
The petitioner moved for reconsideration, observing that, in calculating
the respondent’s equalization payment of $222,950.31, the trial court had
improperly added the total equity in the marital home to the total value of the
retirement assets, divided that amount in half, and then subtracted the
$50,000 of equity to which the respondent was entitled under the prenuptial
agreement from half the value of the marital assets as a whole. The petitioner
argued, correctly, that the trial court should have instead subtracted the
$50,000 from the value of the marital home first, then added the value of the
retirement assets to the remaining equity in the marital home, and finally
divided the resulting figure in half. Properly calculated, the petitioner argued
that the respondent’s equalization payment was $247,950.30, or approximately
$25,000 more than $222,950.31. The trial court granted the motion, agreeing
that it had erred by not deducting the $50,000 first.
Additionally, the petitioner moved to clarify the trial court’s language
concerning how the respondent would make the equalization payment, noting
that the respondent had taken the position that the trial court’s statement that
the equalization payment “shall be achieved first through the proceeds . . . of
the [sale of the] two lots” meant that the petitioner was not entitled to any
proceeds from the sale of the lots, but was only entitled to the equalization
payment, satisfied first by the total sale proceeds, and then by refinancing the
marital home. The trial court granted this motion as well, clarifying that it had
intended that the petitioner receive all of the proceeds from the sale of the lots,
and that half of those proceeds would constitute a dollar-for-dollar credit
against the respondent’s equalization payment obligation. The trial court
additionally stated that the respondent “shall begin the refinance process
forthwith if she has not already done so.”
Thereafter, the respondent moved for reconsideration, seeking, among
other relief, that the court stay her obligation to refinance the marital home
until after the undeveloped lots were sold. At a subsequent hearing on the
motion, held after the 120-day deadline to refinance the marital home had
passed, the respondent represented that the parties had been unable to sell the
lots, and that without selling the lots, she could not refinance the marital
home. In ruling on the motion, the trial court observed that it had “believed
(incorrectly) that the lots would sell quickly and that the Respondent would
benefit from having to pull a lesser amount of equity out of the marital home to
achieve the property equalization.” Although the trial court granted the
3