THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0644, In re Estate of Anna M. Hafey, the
court on January 23, 2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). In this interlocutory appeal, the petitioner, Carolyn F. Foley
as the executrix of the Estate of Anna M. Hafey, challenges a decision of the
Circuit Court (Weaver, J.) ruling that the will of Anna M. Hafey is not valid
under RSA 551:2 and ordering that the estate proceed intestate. See RSA
551:2 (Supp. 2024); Sup. Ct. R. 8. The dispositive interlocutory questions
presented are whether the trial court erred as a matter of law when it ruled: (1)
“that the will was not signed by two witnesses as required by RSA 551:2”; and
(2) “that the will is not allowed.” (Quotations and brackets omitted.) We
answer both questions in the negative and, therefore, affirm and remand.
We accept the statement of the case and the facts as presented in the
interlocutory appeal statement and rely upon the record for additional facts as
necessary. See In the Matter of Liquidation of Home Ins. Co., 175 N.H. 363,
364 (2022). The decedent died in October 2022, leaving a 2005 will that
named her niece, Carolyn F. Foley, as the executrix. The decedent signed the
will before a notary. The notary’s acknowledgment and affidavit for self-proving
will, see RSA 551:2-a (2019), identified two witnesses by name who were also
present at the will signing.
The will consists of three pages: pages one and two contain the
substantive provisions of the will and pages two and three contain the notary’s
acknowledgment and affidavit for self-proving will. The decedent signed her
name on the second page of the will on a line designated for her following the
end of the substantive provisions of the will. The notary signed her name on
the third page of the will on a line designated for the notary following the
acknowledgement and affidavit for self-proving will. The will contains no
signature lines designated for the witnesses and neither witness wrote her
name anywhere on the will; however, both witnesses initialed all three pages of
the will.
In January 2023, the petitioner filed a petition for estate administration
in the circuit court and represented that the decedent had a will. The circuit
court stayed the petition pending proof of the will. In response, the two
witnesses each filed a “deposition in proof of will.” (Bolding and capitalization
omitted.) The witnesses testified in their depositions that “[t]he signature line
for witnesses was inadvertently omitted in the drafting of the document” and
that neither witness signed her name on the will.
Based on the depositions in proof of will, the circuit court determined
that “[t]he witnesses did not sign the Will as required by RSA 551:2” and
directed that the estate proceed intestate. The petitioner moved to reconsider
and requested a hearing. At the hearing, counsel for the petitioner presented
an offer of proof on behalf of one of the witnesses to the will and the court
questioned that same witness.
The trial court subsequently denied the motion to reconsider. It found
“that the witnesses did not intend their initials to be their signatures” and that
“the initials appear to be [on the will] solely to show that there were three pages
seen by the witnesses.” Accordingly, the court concluded that “the will was not
‘signed’ by two witnesses as required by RSA 551:2,” and, therefore, the will
was “not allowed” and the estate must proceed intestate. This interlocutory
appeal followed. See Sup. Ct. R. 8. There is no evidence in the record that
another party or interested individual challenged the validity of the will in the
circuit court, and the petitioner is unopposed on appeal.
Our standard of review of a circuit court probate division decision is
established by statute: “The findings of fact of the judge of probate are final
unless they are so plainly erroneous that such findings could not be reasonably
made.” RSA 567-A:4 (2019). Consequently, we will not disturb the probate
division’s decree unless it is unsupported by the evidence or plainly erroneous
as a matter of law. In re Estate of Fischer, 152 N.H. 669, 670 (2005).
RSA 551:2, I, provides:
I. To be valid, a will or codicil to a will shall:
(a) Be made by a testator qualifying under RSA 551:1; and
(b) Be in writing; and
(c) Be signed by the testator, or by some person at his or her
express direction in his or her presence; and
(d) Be signed by 2 or more credible witnesses, who shall, at the
request of the testator and in the testator’s presence, attest to
the testator’s signature.
2
(Emphasis added.) “A will that is not duly executed pursuant to the
requirements of RSA 551:2 is invalid.” Fischer, 152 N.H. at 671.
The petitioner argues that the trial court erred when it determined that
the witnesses’ initials on the will did not satisfy RSA 551:2, I(d). She asserts
that, under the plain language of the statute, a witness is not required to write
her full name on the will and, instead, can “sign” by affixing a mark such as
her initials. For the purposes of this appeal, we assume without deciding that
this interpretation of RSA 551:2, I(d) is correct — that is, that the writing of
initials on the will by two witnesses can satisfy the requirement that the will be
“signed by” two or more credible witnesses. RSA 551:2, I(d). The trial court
appears to have agreed with the petitioner’s interpretation of the statute in this
respect as it did not invalidate the will based solely upon the witnesses’ writing
of initials rather than names.
Nevertheless, the trial court concluded that the will was not “signed” by
two witnesses as required by the statute because it found that “the witnesses
did not intend their initials to be their signatures.” The petitioner argues that
the trial court erred by “prioritizing whether the witnesses intended to sign
their initials as their ‘signature[s]’” rather than focusing on their “purpose for
signing,” which she asserts was “to affirm and attest to the testator signing the
will.” (Bolding and capitalization omitted.) She contends that the trial court’s
analysis “added an additional element” — proof of the witnesses’ intent when
writing their initials — “to the statute.” We are unpersuaded.
When determining the validity of a purported signature, we have, under
some circumstances, examined evidence beyond the four corners of the
document at issue. See Willoughby v. Moulton, 47 N.H. 205, 206-07 (1866)
(explaining that proof that note was properly executed by mark can be shown
by testimony of signor that the mark was “his true signature,” testimony of an
attesting witness to the mark, or testimony of a person who observed the signor
execute documents by mark on other occasions). In the context of witness
attestation, this proof includes extrinsic evidence bearing upon the witness’s
intent when signing. See Lord v. Lord, 58 N.H. 7, 9-10 (1876); Tilton v.
Daniels, 79 N.H. 368, 369-70 (1920). For instance, in Lord, decided under a
prior but similar version of the statutory witness attestation requirement, we
rejected a claim that a will was not validly attested because one of the
witnesses, who was unable to write, directed her husband to write her name on
the will as a witness. Lord, 58 N.H. at 9-10. In upholding the will as validly
attested, we considered the circumstances under which the witness directed
her husband to sign for her and emphasized that her intention in directing him
to do so was “material.” Id. at 9. Accordingly, we are not convinced that the
trial court erred by considering the witnesses’ intent when writing their initials
on the will.
3