THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0448, In the Matter of Mark Foley and
Kasey Woodman, the court on July 15, 2024, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The respondent, Kasey Woodman (mother) appeals the final
decree entered by the Circuit Court (Countway, J.) in her divorce from the
petitioner, Mark Foley (father), arguing that the trial court erred in: (1) its order
on the parties’ holiday parenting schedule; and (2) ordering the parties to
contribute equally to the child’s uninsured medical expenses. We affirm.
The mother first argues that the trial court erred in its order on the
parties’ holiday parenting schedule. When reviewing a trial court’s decision on
parenting rights and responsibilities, our role is limited to determining whether
it clearly appears that the trial court engaged in an unsustainable exercise of
discretion. In the Matter of Kurowski & Kurowski, 161 N.H. 578, 585 (2011).
We consider only whether the record establishes an objective basis sufficient to
sustain the discretionary judgment made, and we will not disturb the trial
court’s determination if it could reasonably have been made. Id.
The trial court’s order provides the mother with parenting time on
Thanksgiving in even years, Christmas Eve in odd years, Christmas Day in
even years, and Easter in odd years. The court’s order also provides the father
with parenting time every year on the “Foley Family Christmas” weekend. The
mother argues that the trial court erred by failing to make factual findings to
support its modifications to the parties’ partial stipulation regarding the
holiday schedule. We assume the trial court made all findings necessary to
support its decision, even if it did so implicitly. In the Matter of Kosek &
Kosek, 151 N.H. 722, 725 (2005). In this case, we assume the trial court found
that its parenting schedule was in the child’s best interest. See id. Moreover,
we note that the trial court explained its decision to modify the parties’ partial
stipulation, stating that it “altered Thanksgiving [and] Easter for a better
balance in conjunction with its Christmas Eve/Day Order.” We conclude that
the trial court sustainably exercised its discretion in its order on the parties’
holiday parenting schedule. See id.
The mother next argues that the trial court erred in ordering the parties
to contribute equally to the child’s uninsured medical expenses. We will
uphold the trial court’s decision with respect to child support unless it is
unsupported by the evidence or erroneous as a matter of law. In the Matter of
Hampers & Hampers, 154 N.H. 275, 283 (2006). The mother has not identified
any current or anticipated uninsured medical expenses for the child. She
asserts, however, that the order “has the potential to create financial strain” on
her, such that she “may need to seek child support in the future.” We note
that the mother did not argue in her motion for reconsideration, as she does on
appeal, that RSA 458-C:4, II (2018) governed the allocation of uninsured
medical expenses. See Sup. Ct. R. 16(3)(b) (requiring appealing party to
specifically identify where in the trial court record that the appealing party
raised each of the questions presented for review). We conclude that the
mother has failed to show that the trial court erred in ordering the parties to
contribute equally to the child’s uninsured medical expenses. See Gallo v.
Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014) (appellant bears burden to demonstrate
reversible error).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Hantz Marconi, and Donovan, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2