THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case Nos. 2023-0100 and 2023-0178, In the Matter of
Matthew Routhier and Kelly Routhier, the court on May 1, 2024,
issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(2). The petitioner, Matthew Routhier (husband), appeals an order of the
Circuit Court (Quigley, J.), issued on remand following a new hearing, see In the
Matter of Routhier & Routhier, 175 N.H. 6 (2022), dividing certain real property
in his divorce from the respondent, Kelly Routhier (wife). The husband argues
that the trial court erred by: (1) failing to vacate and redistribute the entire
marital estate; (2) failing to consider and issue express written findings with
respect to the factors set forth in RSA 458:16-a, II (2018); (3) not deducting
certain settlement costs and other improvements paid for by his parents before
dividing his interest in the real property; and (4) ignoring the doctrine of
promissory estoppel.
The wife cross-appeals the trial court’s other order, issued on remand
following a new hearing, with respect to child support. She argues, among other
things, that the trial court erred by: (1) failing to consider the parties’ updated
financial affidavits; (2) not ordering retroactive child support back to the date of
the initial final decree; (3) deviating from the child support guidelines based on a
miscalculation of the expenses incurred by the husband in exercising his
parenting time; (4) considering the husband’s legal fees in its child support
analysis; and (5) denying her motion to change venue.
Based upon our review of the parties’ written arguments, the relevant law,
the record on appeal, and the trial court’s thorough and well-reasoned narrative
orders, we conclude that neither party has demonstrated reversible error, and
affirm the trial court’s decisions.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Hantz Marconi, Donovan, and Countway,
JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk