THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0589, Jason A. Czekalski v. Global
Tel*Link Corporation, the court on December 19, 2024, issued
the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(2). The plaintiff, Jason A. Czekalski, appeals the order of the Circuit Court
(Spath, J.), following a hearing on the merits, entering judgment for the
defendant, Global Tel*Link Corporation, in a small claims case. The plaintiff
argues that the trial court erred in: (1) striking the default entered against the
defendant; (2) denying his request for discovery; (3) denying his request to allow
three witnesses to testify; and (4) denying his consumer protection act claim.
We affirm.
The plaintiff first argues that the trial court erred in striking the default
entered against the defendant. We will not disturb the trial court’s decision to
vacate the default unless it erred as a matter of law or engaged in an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. Brito v. Ryan, 151 N.H. 635, 637 (2005).
To show that the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion, the plaintiff
must demonstrate that the court’s ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable
to the prejudice of his case. Blagbrough Family Realty Trust v. A & T Forest
Prods., 155 N.H. 29, 40 (2007).
The record shows that within ten days of receiving the default notice, the
defendant moved to strike the default, with a supporting memorandum of law,
and an affidavit of defenses. See Dist. Div. R. 3.42(a) (“The court shall strike the
default only upon motion and affidavit of defense.”). The defendant represented
that its employee or agent incorrectly understood that the complaint did not
require the filing of an answer. In striking the default, the court noted that its
“preference is to resolve matters on their merits rather than by default.” See
Keeton v. Hustler Magazine, 131 N.H. 6, 20 (1988) (noting the general preference
in this State in favor of reaching decisions on the merits). We conclude that the
plaintiff has failed to show that the trial court unsustainably exercised its
discretion in striking the default. See Brito, 151 N.H. at 637.
The plaintiff next argues that the trial court erred in denying his request
for discovery. We review the trial court’s management of discovery under our
unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. N.H. Ball Bearings v. Jackson,
158 N.H. 421, 429 (2009). Formal discovery is not permitted in small claims
cases “unless ordered at the pre-trial hearing.” Dist. Div. R. 4.5. The plaintiff did
not request discovery until approximately one month after the pre-trial hearing.
The trial court found his request to be untimely under District Court Rule 4.5.
We conclude that the plaintiff has failed to show that the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion in denying his request for discovery.
See N.H. Ball Bearings, 158 N.H. at 429.
The plaintiff next argues that the trial court erred in denying his request to
allow three witnesses to testify. We review a trial court’s decision on the
admissibility of evidence under our unsustainable exercise of discretion
standard. Figlioli v. R.J. Moreau Cos., 151 N.H. 618, 626 (2005). The plaintiff
sought to have the witnesses testify regarding their experiences seeking warranty
service from the defendant. The trial court denied the request on the grounds
that their testimony would not be relevant to the plaintiff’s claim. The court
noted, however, that “[t]heir testimony would conceivably be relevant on the issue
of whether the Defendant’s conduct was a willful or knowing violation of the
Consumer Protection Act,” and therefore ruled that the witnesses could testify at
a later damages hearing if the plaintiff first proved his liability claim. We
conclude that the plaintiff has failed to show that the trial court unsustainably
exercised its discretion in denying his request to allow the witnesses to testify at
the liability hearing. See Figlioli, 151 N.H at 626.
The plaintiff next argues that the trial court erred by denying his consumer
protection act (CPA) claim on the grounds that he did not follow the defendant’s
warranty procedure. “The CPA proscribes unfair or deceptive trade practices in
general, and sets forth a list of specific types of conduct that qualify as unfair or
deceptive trade practices.” Fat Bullies Farm, LLC v. Devenport, 170 N.H. 17, 24
(2017). Although the CPA is broadly worded, “not all conduct in the course of
trade or commerce falls within its scope.” Id.
At the hearing on the merits, the plaintiff admitted that he was aware of
the warranty procedure and that he had followed it in the past. The trial court
ruled that “because the Plaintiff did not first follow the well-known required steps
under the media players Warranty and End User’s Agreement, he is not entitled
to the relief requested.” The plaintiff asserts that complying with the warranty
procedure would be futile. However, he provides no authority for his position
that noncompliance with the warranty procedure can be excused based upon his
own determination that following the procedure would be futile. Accordingly, we
2
conclude that the trial court did not err in finding that the plaintiff failed to prove
that the defendant violated the CPA. See id.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3