THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0749, Kenneth Morrison v. The Barking
Dog, Ltd., the court on November 12, 2024, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(2). The plaintiff, Kenneth Morrison, appeals an order of the Circuit Court
(Zaino, J.) entering judgment in favor of the defendant, The Barking Dog, Ltd., in
a small claims action to recover certain veterinary costs allegedly incurred as a
result of the defendant’s negligence in briefly caring for the plaintiff’s dog. We
affirm.
In entering judgment for the defendant, the trial court determined that the
plaintiff failed to meet his burden to prove that the injury to the dog — heat
stroke — had been caused by negligence on the part of the defendant. Among
other things, the court found that the plaintiff had failed to prove that the dog
was in good health and not already hyperthermic prior to being placed in the
defendant’s care, noting that the available medical records indicated that the dog
had recently experienced medical issues and was recently on prescription
medication. Further, the court found that the dog was only outside in a shaded
area for approximately 30 minutes on an 80-degree day, and the record
demonstrates that, soon thereafter, the plaintiff retrieved the dog and took it
home for a period of time “before determining [the] dog was distressed enough to
require vet[erinary] care.” Accordingly, the court concluded that “[t]he dog’s
temperature alone does not establish that [the injury] happened while at the
Barking Dog or that their actions played any role in same.”
Although the plaintiff argues otherwise, these findings are supported by
evidence in the record, and we defer to the trial court’s judgment on such issues
as resolving conflicts in testimony, measuring the credibility of witnesses, and
determining the weight assigned to evidence. See McCabe v. Arcidy, 138 N.H. 20,
24 (1993). To the extent the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred with
respect to certain evidentiary matters, we note that the technical rules of
evidence do not apply in small claim proceedings, see RSA 503:7 (2010)
(providing that the court may admit any evidence deemed material and proper).
We review a trial court’s decision on the management of discovery and the
admissibility of evidence under an unsustainable exercise of discretion standard.
In the Matter of Hampers & Hampers, 154 N.H. 275, 280 (2006). Based upon
our review of the record, the plaintiff has failed to demonstrate that the trial
court’s evidentiary rulings were clearly untenable or unreasonable to the
prejudice of his case. See id. Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court did
not err by entering judgment in favor of the defendant. Lastly, we note that any
issues raised in the plaintiff’s notice of appeal that were not briefed are waived.
See In re Estate of King, 149 N.H. 226, 230 (2003).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2