THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0658, Hope Doerr v. Joseph King & a., the
court on November 22, 2024, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The defendants, Nicky Frost and Joseph King, appeal a
decision of the Circuit Court (Manchester, J.), following a hearing on the
merits, awarding judgment in the amount of $2,582.61 to the plaintiff, Hope
Doerr, on her claim seeking reimbursement of veterinary expenses that she
incurred as a result of an attack by the defendants’ dog upon her dog. In
awarding the plaintiff judgment, the trial court observed, and the defendants
do not dispute, “that they believe they are accountable to Plaintiff for at least
some of the costs” that the plaintiff incurred, but that they challenged the
plaintiff’s failure to seek veterinary care sooner, and questioned the veterinary
costs that the plaintiff incurred. We construe the defendants’ briefs to be
arguing that the trial court erred by not finding that the plaintiff failed to
mitigate her damages by seeking veterinary care sooner, and by crediting a
certain document relied upon by the plaintiff to support her decision not to
seek veterinary care sooner. We affirm.
We will uphold the trial court’s findings and rulings unless they lack
evidentiary support or are legally erroneous. Vincent v. MacLean, 166 N.H.
132, 134 (2014). We defer to the trial court’s judgment in resolving conflicts in
testimony, evaluating the credibility of witnesses, and determining the weight
of the evidence presented at trial. Id. It is the defendants’ burden, as the
appealing parties, to provide this court with those portions of the trial court
record, including relevant trial exhibits and pleadings, that are necessary to
decide the issues they are raising, and to establish that they raised those
issues in the trial court. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250
(2004); In the Matter of Rokowski & Rokowski, 168 N.H. 57, 62 (2015)
(applying Bean to appealing party’s failure to provide exhibits admitted into
evidence at evidentiary hearing); Estate of Day v. Hanover Ins. Co., 162 N.H.
415, 422 (2011) (applying Bean to failure to provide relevant pleadings in the
trial court). We assume that relevant portions of the evidentiary record not
provided on appeal support the result reached by the trial court. See Bean,
151 N.H. at 250. These rules are not relaxed for self-represented parties. See
In the Matter of Birmingham & Birmingham, 154 N.H. 51, 56-57 (2006).
“[A] party seeking damages occasioned by the fault of another must take
all reasonable steps to lessen the resultant loss.” Carbone v. Tierney, 151 N.H.
521, 529 (2004). Whether a plaintiff has failed to mitigate damages is a
question on which the defendant bears the burden of proof at trial. See id. In
a small claim proceeding, the technical rules of evidence do not apply, and the
trial court may admit any evidence that it deems material and proper. See RSA
503:7 (2010).
In this case, both parties introduced a number of exhibits at trial. The
plaintiff characterized one of her exhibits as a statement from a “canine
specialist” at a veterinary facility whom she testified she had consulted on the
day that the dog bite incident occurred. The defendants did not object to the
statement. According to the plaintiff’s testimony, the incident occurred on a
Sunday, her dog’s wounds were not bleeding at that time, she described the
wounds to the “canine specialist” by phone, and he instructed her to clean the
wounds with peroxide and “[k]eep an eye on them,” and if they “started to bleed
or show[ed] any kind of infection,” to bring the dog in for care. The plaintiff
further testified that she followed these instructions, and when the wounds
began to bleed two days later, she immediately sought veterinary care.
In their briefs, the defendants assert that, a couple days after trial had
concluded, they went to the veterinary facility that the plaintiff consulted and
learned that the “canine specialist” was allegedly not qualified to provide
veterinary advice, is a friend of the plaintiff, and allegedly did not provide the
advice the plaintiff described. Defendant Frost further claims that she brought
this information to the trial court’s attention in a motion “to inform,” and that
the trial court denied the motion. However, the defendants have not provided
the motion to inform as part of the record on appeal. Nor have they provided
any of the exhibits introduced at trial, including the statement of the “canine
specialist.”
Under the circumstances, the defendants have not preserved their
argument that the trial court erred by crediting the statement of the “canine
specialist,” or any argument that the trial court erred by denying the “motion to
inform.” See Bean, 151 N.H. at 250. Moreover, in the absence of the trial
exhibits, we must assume that the evidence supports the trial court’s
determinations that the plaintiff acted reasonably in not taking the dog in for
immediate veterinary care, and that the dog bite incident caused her
reasonably to incur $2,582.61 in veterinary expenses. See id. Upon this
2
record, the trial court’s award of $2,582.61 was neither unsupported by the
evidence nor legally erroneous. Vincent, 166 N.H. at 134.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3