THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0607, State of New Hampshire v. Stephen
Droney, the court on November 26, 2024, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The defendant, Stephen Droney, appeals his convictions in
the Circuit Court (Burns, J.) for: (1) driving after revocation or suspension of
his driver’s license, subsequent offense, pursuant to RSA 263:64, VI (2024);
and (2) driving after revocation or suspension of his driver’s license following a
Driving Under Influence of Drugs or Liquor (DUI) conviction pursuant to RSA
263:64, IV (2024). On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred
by permitting the State to amend its complaint after resting its case and that
his convictions on both charges violated his right against double jeopardy
under the State Constitution. We affirm.
I. Facts
The following facts are supported by the record or otherwise undisputed
by the parties. On May 5, 2022, a law enforcement officer initiated a traffic
stop of the defendant’s vehicle. During the stop, the officer discovered multiple
active suspensions of the defendant’s license, including one related to the
defendant’s failure to reinstate his license following a 2013 DUI conviction that
resulted in an 18-month suspension. The defendant was arrested and
charged, as relevant to this appeal, with: (1) driving after his license was
suspended in 2013, after having been previously convicted of operating after
suspension in December 2019, see RSA 263:64, VI; and (2) driving after his
license was revoked in December 2013 for a violation of RSA 265-A:2, which
prohibits driving under the influence of drugs or liquor. See RSA 263:64, IV;
RSA 265-A:2 (2024).
At trial, after the State rested its case, the defendant moved to dismiss
the second charge for driving after license revocation following a DUI
conviction. The defendant claimed that the Director of Motor Vehicles initially
suspended the defendant’s license in September 2013, but that the State’s
complaint erroneously alleged that his license was initially suspended in
December 2013. Therefore, he contended, the charge should be dismissed
because: (1) the date of suspension is an element of the offense that the State
was required to prove beyond a reasonable doubt; and (2) the State failed to
meet its burden of proof because the complaint cited the December 2013 date
rather than the correct September 2013 date of suspension. In response, the
State moved to amend its complaint to correct the date to September 17, 2013.
Over the defendant’s objection, the court granted the State’s motion to amend
the complaint and denied the motion to dismiss. Subsequently, the court
issued a written order finding the defendant guilty on both charges, held a
sentencing hearing, and imposed sentences for both convictions. This appeal
followed.
II. Analysis
On appeal, the defendant contends that the trial court erred by
permitting the State to amend the complaint. Specifically, he argues that he
“could not prepare his defense to address a complaint that was amended after
the State rested and in response to a Motion to Dismiss” because: (1) the date
the Director of Motor Vehicles initially suspended the defendant’s license is an
element under RSA 263:64, IV that the State was required to prove at trial; and
(2) the defendant relied on the date originally specified in the complaint when
preparing his defense.
We review the trial court’s decision to permit the State to amend a
criminal complaint under the unsustainable exercise of discretion standard.
See State v. Crockett, 116 N.H. 324, 324-25 (1976) (reviewing the trial court’s
decision to allow the State to amend a complaint for “an abuse of discretion”);
cf. State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001) (explaining the “unsustainable
exercise of discretion” standard). Under the unsustainable exercise of
discretion standard, the defendant must demonstrate that the court’s ruling
was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Lambert,
147 N.H. at 296.
To determine whether the trial court properly permitted the State to
amend its complaint, the critical issue is whether the ruling deprived the
defendant of a fair opportunity to prepare his defense and meet the case
against him. Crockett, 116 N.H. at 325. In Crockett, we held that an
amendment to a criminal complaint made after trial had commenced did not
prejudice the defendant’s case because the State amended its complaint before
the defense began, the defendant did not request a continuance, and the
defendant did not demonstrate that “the additional evidence or the amendment
of the complaint was prejudicial.” Id.
RSA 263:64, IV provides: “Any person who violates this section by driving
or attempting to drive a motor vehicle . . . during the period of suspension or
revocation of his or her license or driving privilege for a violation of,” inter alia,
RSA 265-A:2, I, “shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.” RSA 263:64, IV. We have
previously held that in order to be convicted of misdemeanor driving after
suspension or revocation, the State must prove: (1) the defendant’s license to
2
drive had been suspended or revoked; (2) the defendant drove a motor vehicle
after such suspension; and (3) the defendant did so with knowledge of the
revocation or suspension of his license to drive. State v. Mercon, 174 N.H. 261,
265 (2021). Additionally, the State must prove that the suspension was for a
violation of 265-A:2, Driving or Operating under Influence of Drugs or Liquor,
to convict a defendant for the variant of RSA 263:64, IV charged here. See RSA
263:64, IV; RSA 265-A:2. The statutory language and the case law interpreting
the language make clear that the date upon which the State initiated the
suspension is not an element of the offense.
Here, the State amended the complaint to correct the date that the
Director of Motor Vehicles initially suspended the defendant’s license from
December 2013 to September 2013. It is undisputed that the defendant’s
license was suspended or revoked following his aggravated DUI conviction and
that he never reinstated his license thereafter. Consequently, whether the
“period of suspension or revocation” of the defendant’s license began in
September or December 2013 is immaterial to the allegation that the defendant
drove during a period of suspension when law enforcement stopped him in May
2022. Therefore, we are not persuaded by the defendant’s argument that the
amendment prejudiced his rights.
Additionally, the record indicates that the defendant received the
requisite discovery materials. The prosecution provided the defense with
copies of the certified motor vehicle record and the certified copy of the DUI
conviction prior to trial. Although the prosecution provided the DUI conviction
just one day before the trial, nothing in the record suggests that the one-day
notice prejudiced the defendant’s ability to prepare his defense and meet the
case against him, given that the date upon which the suspension began is not
an element of the charge. See Crockett, 116 N.H. at 325. Lastly, the State
moved to amend the complaint before the defense began its case, and the
defense did not request a continuance. Therefore, we conclude that the trial
court sustainably exercised its discretion in allowing the State to amend its
complaint. See Lambert, 147 N.H. at 296.
The defendant next argues that the trial court violated his right to be free
from double jeopardy under the State Constitution by sentencing him for two
separate offenses that arose from a single act of driving during a period of
suspension. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 16. Specifically, he contends: (1) RSA
263:64, VI constitutes a sentence enhancement provision; and (2) the
defendant’s sentence for his conviction under RSA 263:64, IV already included
the sentence enhancement triggered by this provision. Therefore, he argues,
the trial “court should not have convicted him of a separate offense for the
same conduct as it had already applied the sentencing enhancements under
the statute.”
3