THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0301, William Ryan & a. v. Dawn Ryan,
the court on October 25, 2024, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The
issue on appeal is whether the Superior Court (Temple, J.) erred in determining
that the defendant, Dawn Ryan, is prohibited from using an easement to
access after-acquired property. We affirm.
I. Background
The following facts were found by the trial court or are otherwise
supported by the record. The parties own abutting parcels in Wilton with
frontage on Stage Coach Road. In 1996, the parties’ lots were part of an
approximately seventy-one acre undivided parcel known as Lot A-47, then
owned by Rosemary Duggan and William Ladd (RDWL). In 1996, RDWL
received approval from the Wilton Planning Board to subdivide an
approximately eleven acre lot — Lot A-47-1 — from Lot A-47. The subdivision
map shows a “farm road” beginning at Stage Coach Road on Lot A-47-1
running east/west along the newly created property line between Lot A-47-1
and Lot A-47. The road continues onto Lot A-47 where it traverses a stream
over a bridge and then returns to Lot A-47-1 where it connects with a “cart
road” running north/south across Lot A-47-1. The farm road allows access to
the easternmost area of Lot A-47-1.
In August 1996, RDWL conveyed the newly-created Lot A-47-1 to David
and Elizabeth Deysher by warranty deed. The deed created an appurtenant
easement pertaining to the farm road that benefitted Lot A-47-1. The deed
provides that RDWL’s conveyance of Lot A-47-1, “[c]ontaining 11.291 acres,” is
made:
Together with an access easement (such being an
encumbrance running with the land constituting Lot A-47 on said
plan of land) over a .386-acre area located on Lot A-47 (including a
portion of the 8’ farm road and bridge), as shown on said plan of
land, for the limited purpose of allowing grantees, their heirs,
successors and assigns access to and from that portion of the
premises lying west of the stream spanned by said bridge and that
portion of the premises lying east of said stream.
Thereafter, RDWL subdivided the remaining portion of Lot A-47 into two lots,
Lot A-47-2 and Lot A-47-3. In 1997, RDWL conveyed Lot A-47-2 and Lot A-47-
3, respectively, to new owners. Both conveyances were made subject to the
easement RDWL had granted in 1996 to the Deyshers to use the farm road.
The plaintiffs, William Ryan and Corinne Ryan, purchased Lot A-47-2 in 2018
by warranty deed.
In 1999, the then-owners of Lot A-47-3 and the Deyshers, who still
owned Lot A-47-1, obtained approval from the Wilton Planning Board to
reallocate the amount of land in their respective parcels by making a lot line
adjustment, the effect of which was to remove from Lot A-47-3 approximately
fourteen acres (Parcel A) and three acres (Parcel B) and add them to Lot A-47-1.
Parcels A and B were then conveyed to the Deyshers by warranty deed. In
2018, the Deyshers transferred Parcel A back to the owners of Lot A-47-3
pursuant to another lot line adjustment. In 2019, the Deyshers conveyed Lot
A-47-1 — consisting of the original tract and Parcel B — to the defendant.
After disputes arose between the plaintiffs and the defendant over the
cutting of vegetation in the easement by the defendant’s landscapers and the
defendant’s replacement of the bridge component of the farm road, the
plaintiffs brought suit seeking, among other things, declaratory relief that “use
of the access easement to provide access to Parcel B . . . is prohibited.” The
parties thereafter stipulated that the access easement issue was solely a legal
argument to be decided on trial memoranda. After considering the parties’
arguments and the applicable law, the trial court ruled in favor of the plaintiffs
on this issue. The court found that the intent of the parties when the
easement was created “was to allow the owners of Lot A-47-1 to use the farm
road for the limited purpose of accessing other areas of Lot A-47-1 as that lot
existed at the time of the conveyance.” “As such,” the court concluded, “the
general rule—that an appurtenant easement cannot be used to serve a
nondominant estate—applies” and, thus, the use of the access easement to
provide access to Parcel B is prohibited. (Quotation omitted.) The trial court
subsequently denied the defendant’s motion to reconsider. This appeal
followed.
II. Analysis
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred: (1) when it
ruled that the plaintiffs were entitled to an order declaring that the use of the
easement to provide access to Parcel B is prohibited; and (2) when it failed to
rule that Parcel B became part of the dominant estate as a matter of law. The
defendant also asserts that the trial court’s order was unreasonable or unjust
because it denies her “reasonable access” to 3.2 acres of her property.
We first address whether the trial court erred in ruling that use of the
easement to access Parcel B is prohibited. Resolution of this issue requires
2
that we interpret the language of the original deed establishing the easement at
issue. The interpretation of a deed is a question of law, which we review de
novo. Arell v. Palmer, 173 N.H. 641, 644-45 (2020). When interpreting a deed,
we give it the meaning intended by the parties at the time they wrote it, taking
into account the surrounding circumstances at that time. Id. at 645. If the
language of the deed is clear and unambiguous, we interpret the intended
meaning from the deed itself, without resorting to extrinsic evidence. See
Appletree Mall Assocs. v. Ravenna Inv. Assocs., 162 N.H. 344, 347 (2011).
In 1996 when the easement was created, Lot A-47-1 consisted of
approximately eleven acres as described in detail in the deed. The deed
expressly states that the easement is “for the limited purpose of allowing
grantees” access “to and from that portion of” the eleven-acre parcel “lying west
of the stream spanned by said bridge” and that portion of the eleven-acre
parcel “lying east of said stream.” (Emphasis added.) Under the plain
language of the deed, the trial court determined that “the intent of the parties
when the easement was created was to allow the owners of Lot A-47-1 to use
the farm road for the limited purpose of accessing other areas of Lot A-47-1 as
that lot existed at the time of the conveyance.” (Quotation omitted.) The trial
court reasoned that, “[h]ad the parties intended to allow the grantees to use the
easement to access areas beyond the conveyed premises, i.e. newly-acquired
tracts in the future, they could have used words to that effect.” See Arcidi v.
Town of Rye, 150 N.H. 694, 701 (2004) (deed provided that the scope of the
easement was “for the benefit of any and all property presently or hereinafter
owned, occupied or used by Grantee”). The trial court further found that the
land now referred to as Parcel B was owned in 1996 by RDWL as part of Lot A-
47. Therefore, the court reasoned, “[a]bsent language to the contrary, it seems
illogical that RDWL, as the then-owners of Parcel B, intended to grant the
Deyshers the right to use the farm road to access other areas of RDWL’s lot
that were not being conveyed at the time.”
The defendant asserts that the trial court “mistakenly overlooked
exceptions to the general rule that an appurtenant easement cannot be used to
serve a non-dominant estate,” including when the addition of other land to the
dominant estate does not overburden or change the easement. (Bolding
omitted.) In addition, she argues that the “rule of reason” should be applied.
We disagree.
As noted above, “[t]he general modern rule regarding the interplay
between an easement appurtenant and a nondominant estate is that an
appurtenant easement cannot be used to serve a nondominant estate.”
Ettinger v. Pomeroy Ltd. P’ship, 166 N.H. 447, 451 (2014) (quotation omitted);
see Restatement (Third) of Property, Servitudes § 4.11 (2000) (“Unless the
terms of the servitude . . . provide otherwise, an appurtenant easement . . .
may not be used for the benefit of property other than the dominant estate.”
(bolding omitted)). “The purpose undergirding the rule is that the owner of the
3