THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0417, State of New Hampshire v. S.B., the
court on April 14, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, S.B., appeals an order of the Superior Court
(Colburn, J.), following a hearing, finding him not competent to stand trial on
certain criminal charges, and dismissing the charges. See RSA 135:17-a
(2021). On appeal, the defendant argues that the evidence was insufficient to
establish that he is not competent, and that the trial court deprived him of due
process by relying upon competency examinations performed in an unrelated
criminal case. We affirm.
“The mental competence of a criminal defendant is an absolute basic
condition of a fair trial.” State v. Smith, 177 N.H. ___, ___ (2025), 2025 N.H. 1,
¶10 (quotation omitted). To be competent, the defendant must have both “a
sufficient present ability to consult with and assist his lawyer with a
reasonable degree of rational understanding,” and “a factual as well as rational
understanding of the proceedings against him.” Id. (quotations omitted). We
defer to the trial court’s determination of competence unless no reasonable fact
finder could have found as the trial court did. Id.
The trial court granted the defendant’s motion for a competency
evaluation, ordering an examination of him by the Office of the Forensic
Examiner (OFE). In response, an examiner from the OFE submitted a letter on
May 31, 2022, requesting the court to “reconsider its current order requiring a
new competency evaluation,” explaining that she had examined the defendant
in an unrelated criminal case in February 2022 and had found him competent,
that an additional evaluation so soon thereafter was unlikely to yield a different
result, and that if the defendant’s counsel believed that his “presentation has
deteriorated,” it would be appropriate to seek a second opinion. With the letter,
the examiner submitted the report from the evaluation she had performed in
the unrelated case, and requested that the court “accept this letter and the
recent report for use in [the] pending case.”
The report submitted by the OFE examiner revealed that the same
examiner had evaluated the defendant twice prior to February 2022, once in
2016 and once in 2017. In the prior evaluations, the OFE examiner had
determined that he was not competent. In determining that he was competent
in February 2022, the examiner contrasted his presentation during her recent
examination from his presentations in 2016 and 2017.
The trial court held a competency hearing on August 26, 2022. At that
hearing, the parties revealed that the defendant was in the process of
obtaining, but had not yet received, a second competency opinion in the
unrelated case, and they requested the court to continue the hearing until the
defendant had received the second opinion. Although the court expressed
concern that the OFE’s evaluation would become stale and that the defendant
had only been evaluated within the context of the unrelated case, the court
ultimately agreed to continue the matter until after the defendant had obtained
the second opinion. The court suggested that defense counsel consult with
counsel in the unrelated case and have the examiner providing the second
opinion conduct the examination “with all charges pending in mind.”
On October 18, 2022, a second forensic examiner issued a competency
report based upon an examination conducted on July 29, 2022, prior to the
August hearing, and concluded that the defendant was not competent. In the
report, the examiner discussed at length the evaluations conducted by the OFE
examiner in 2016, 2017, and February 2022, and opined that during the July
2022 examination, the defendant “presented nearly identically to when he was
interviewed by [the OFE examiner] in 2016 and 2017.” The second forensic
examiner concluded that the defendant “lacks a rational understanding of the
proceedings against him, and is unable to consult with his attorney with a
reasonable degree of rational understanding.” Nothing in the report indicates
whether the examiner considered the charges in the present case.
On February 16, 2023, the OFE examiner issued an addendum to her
earlier report and letter that she had filed in the present case, explaining that
she had reviewed the report issued by the second forensic examiner, and that
the second examiner’s description of the defendant’s presentation was
“identical to [her] previous evaluations” of the defendant, and “demonstrated
that his mental health had deteriorated since [her] evaluation in February,
2022.” Accordingly, the OFE examiner reported that she “would not be able to
opine that [the defendant] was currently competent.”
The trial court held a competency hearing on April 28, 2023, at which
the OFE examiner testified, and the trial court, without objection, took judicial
notice of the report by the second forensic examiner. The State conceded that,
in light of the OFE examiner’s addendum, it could not meet its burden to prove
competency, but asserted that it would introduce evidence on whether the
defendant could be restored to competence, and whether he was dangerous.
See RSA 135:17-a, I, V. The OFE examiner testified that she had amended her
opinion because the second forensic examiner’s description of the defendant’s
presentation “was very reminiscent of his previous evaluations . . . [from] 2016
and 2017, and [she] . . . could no longer say that . . . [the defendant’s]
2
presentation was the same as it had been in February of 2022.” However, the
OFE examiner opined that, with treatment, the defendant’s “symptoms would
be reduced and he could be competent.”
In finding that the defendant was not competent, the trial court observed
that (1) the OFE examiner had “opine[d] that the defendant is not competent,”
and (2) the State had conceded that it cannot meet its burden regarding
competency. The trial court concluded that the defendant “does not have a
sufficient ability to consult with and assist his lawyer, and while he may have a
factual understanding of the proceedings against him, he does not have a
rational one.” The trial court further found that there was no reasonable
likelihood that the defendant could be restored to competence within twelve
months, see RSA 135:17-a, I, and that he was not a danger to himself or
others, see RSA 135:17-a, V. Accordingly, the court dismissed the charges,
and the defendant, while self-represented, appealed the determination that he
is not competent. See State v. Veale, 158 N.H. 632, 637-39 (2009) (holding
that incompetency finding implicates reputational interests sufficient to
warrant due process protection under State Constitution).
On appeal, the defendant first argues that the evidence was insufficient
to support the finding that he is not competent because, he claims, the OFE
examiner did not “opine[] that he is not competent,” but only “expressed a lack
of comfort with her previous opinion,” and because her report concluded that
he was competent. We disagree.
Although the OFE examiner stated in her addendum that she was “no
longer confident in her previous opinion” and testified that she was “no longer
comfortable finding [that the defendant] was competent,” she also stated that
she could not opine that he “was currently competent,” and testified that she
“could no longer say that . . . his presentation was the same as it had been in
February of 2022.” Moreover, she specifically testified that with appropriate
treatment, the defendant “could be competent,” necessarily implying that, in
her opinion, the defendant was not competent. In context, we construe the
OFE examiner’s addendum and testimony to be expressing her opinion that,
based upon the defendant’s presentation as reported by the second forensic
examiner in his October 2022 report, and upon all of the OFE examiner’s prior
examinations of the defendant, the defendant’s mental health had deteriorated
since February 2022 to the point that he was not competent. The October
2022 report, expressly considered by the OFE examiner and the trial court,
supports the OFE examiner’s opinion and the trial court’s finding. Based on
this record, we conclude that the trial court reasonably determined that the
defendant was not competent. See Smith, 177 N.H. at ___, 2025 N.H. 1, ¶10.
The defendant next argues that, because his competency was only
examined with reference to the unrelated case, he was deprived of an
opportunity for rebuttal in violation of his right to due process. See Veale, 158
3