THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0724, State of New Hampshire v. Richard
S. Theriault, Jr., the court on January 27, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(2). The defendant, Richard S. Theriault, Jr., appeals his convictions in the
Superior Court (Temple, J.), following a jury trial, on three counts of aggravated
felonious sexual assault, see RSA 632-A:2, I (Supp. 2023), one count of second
degree assault, see RSA 631:2, I(f) (2016), two counts of simple assault, see RSA
631:2-a, I(a) (2016), and one count of misdemeanor sexual assault, see RSA 632-
A:4, I(a) (Supp. 2023). The defendant argues that the trial court erred in denying
his motions to dismiss the aggravated felonious sexual assault, simple assault,
and misdemeanor sexual assault charges, asserting that the evidence was
insufficient to support the convictions. We affirm.
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred in denying his motion
to dismiss the three aggravated felonious sexual assault charges, asserting that
the State failed to prove that the victim did not consent to the sexual acts. To
prevail in his challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, “the defendant must
prove that no rational trier of fact, viewing all of the evidence and all reasonable
inferences drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to the State, could have
found the essential elements of the offense beyond a reasonable doubt.” State v.
Cullen, 175 N.H. 628, 630 (2023). “[W]here the proof involves both direct and
circumstantial evidence, a sufficiency challenge must fail if the evidence,
including the jury’s credibility determinations, is such that a rational trier of fact
could find guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, even if the evidence would support a
rational conclusion other than guilt if the jury had resolved credibility issues
differently.” State v. Saunders, 164 N.H. 342, 351 (2012).
To convict the defendant of aggravated felonious sexual assault, the State
was required to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant knowingly
digitally penetrated the victim’s anal opening, either by overcoming the victim
through “the actual application of physical force, physical violence, or superior
physical strength,” that the victim submitted to the digital penetration “under
circumstances involving false imprisonment [or] kidnapping,” or that the victim
“indicate[d] by speech or conduct” that she did not consent to the sexual act.
RSA 632-A:2, I(a), (e), (m).
The defendant argues that the evidence was insufficient to prove that the
victim did not consent to the sexual acts. “Once a defendant in an aggravated
felonious sexual assault case raises the defense of consent, the State must prove
beyond a reasonable doubt that the victim did not consent.” State v. Jackson,
141 N.H. 152, 154 (1996). “The issue of consent involves the victim’s objective
manifestations of her unwillingness to engage in the charged conduct . . . [and]
thus concerns the victim’s demonstrative and verbal conduct.” Id. (quotation
omitted). “Although physical resistance is relevant to a determination of the
absence of consent, the absence of physical resistance is not dispositive of the
issue.” Id. “The question, rather, is whether a reasonable person in the
circumstances would have understood that the victim did not consent.” Id.
(quotation omitted). “Lack of consent may be proved in a variety of ways,
including but not limited to an attempt to escape, outcry, or offer of resistance,
except where the complaining witness is restrained by fear of violence.” State v.
Hunter, 132 N.H. 556, 560 (1989) (quotation omitted).
When the victim agreed to visit the defendant “at his place,” a camper by a
river, there was no discussion that the visit would involve sexual activity.
However, once inside the camper, the defendant told the victim to take her pants
off. He then slapped her hard on the cheek with his hand, so that her glasses
“went flying.” When the victim started to cry, the defendant slapped her again.
He then lifted his shirt, placed the victim’s middle fingers on his nipples, and told
her, “I want you to go up and down, left and right, round and right . . . and don’t
stop.” The victim testified that if she stopped, the defendant slapped her in the
face with his hand.
While the victim was rubbing the defendant’s nipples, he “took [her] boobs,
and he yanked on [her] nipples so hard and pulled them, then slapped [her]
because [she] let go of doing this nipple thing with him.” When the victim could
no longer “take the pain,” she would tell the defendant that she had to go to the
bathroom. During the assaults, the victim continued to scream and cry, and the
defendant “kept covering [her] mouth and [her] nose,” so that “[she] could not
breathe.”
After the victim removed her pants, the defendant “bent [her] over” at the
edge of the bed and “said something about fisting [her].” She testified that the
defendant bent her over the bed because “he wanted to stick something in [her]
butt.” The defendant was wearing yellow gloves and he “stuck one of his fingers
on the yellow glove into [her] anus.” She tried to get up to stop the defendant
from digitally penetrating her, but the defendant was holding her down with his
body weight so that she could not move. The victim’s head was facing down, and
the defendant was behind her, “almost on top of her.” When she screamed in
pain, he “slapp[ed] [her] hard on [ ] [her] ass.”
2
During their investigation, police officers spoke with the defendant, who
asked them “why his name came up in a sex assault investigation.” The
defendant told the officers, “unprompted,” that “you’re not going to find my
semen or any evidence anywhere.”
Based on this testimony, the jury could have concluded that the victim
indicated by speech or conduct that she did not consent to the sexual acts. RSA
632-A:2, I(m); State v. Jackson, 141 N.H. at 154.
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred in denying his motion
to dismiss the simple assault charges, asserting that the State failed to prove that
his conduct was unprivileged. The State was required to prove that the
defendant knowingly caused unprivileged physical contact to the victim by
slapping her face with his hand and by striking her buttocks with his hand. RSA
631:2-a, I(a) (2016). Unprivileged physical contact “includes all physical contact
not justified by law.” State v. Burke, 153 N.H. 361, 364 (2006).
As previously noted, the defendant, after telling the victim to take her
pants off, “whacked [her] so hard [her] glasses went flying.” When the victim
started crying, the defendant slapped her again. The victim testified that she was
“not expecting this,” and that she felt “like [she] walked into a booby trap.” When
the defendant struck the victim’s buttocks, he was also forcibly digitally
penetrating her anus with his finger. The victim was “screaming in pain,” and
she thought that the defendant had struck her because she was screaming too
loudly. After he struck her buttocks, the victim kept screaming as loudly as she
could. We conclude that the evidence was sufficient to prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that the defendant’s slapping the victim in her face and striking
her buttocks constituted unprivileged physical contact. See id.
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred in denying his motion
to dismiss the misdemeanor sexual assault charge, asserting that the evidence
was insufficient to prove that he pulled and grabbed the victim’s breasts for his
sexual arousal or gratification. The defendant concedes that he did not make
this argument to the trial court and raises the issue under our plain error rule.
See State v. Racette, 175 N.H. 132, 139 (2022). “To find plain error: (1) there
must be error; (2) the error must be plain; (3) the error must affect substantial
rights; and (4) the error must seriously affect the fairness, integrity, or public
reputation of judicial proceedings.” Id. at 139-40 (citation omitted).
The State was required to prove that the defendant purposely subjected the
victim to sexual contact by pulling or grabbing her breasts when she “indicated
by speech or conduct that there was not freely given consent to the performance
of the sexual act.” RSA 632-A:4, I(a) (Supp. 2023); RSA 632-A:2, I(m). “‘Sexual
contact’ means the intentional touching whether directly, through clothing, or
otherwise, of the victim’s . . . sexual or intimate parts, including . . . breasts.”
3