THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0352, State of New Hampshire v. Adam
Hersom, the court on January 24, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The
State of New Hampshire (the State) appeals a decision of the Superior Court
(Attorri, J.) granting the defendant’s, Adam Hersom, motion to exclude an
audio recording made by the complainant in violation of the Wiretapping and
Eavesdropping Law, RSA chapter 570-A. We affirm and remand.
I. Background
The following facts are supported by the record. In January 2021, the
complainant reported to the police that the defendant, her husband at the
time, had physically and sexually assaulted her in New Hampshire in the fall of
2018. The complainant reported that the day after the alleged assault, she
went to Maine to confront the defendant and surreptitiously recorded a part of
her conversation with him on her phone. The defendant made inculpatory
statements to the complainant on the recording. The complainant emailed a
copy of the recording to the police. In February 2021, a grand jury indicted the
defendant on one count of aggravated felonious sexual assault–domestic
violence, see RSA 632-A:2, I(b) (2016); RSA 632-A:2, V (Supp. 2024), and one
count of second degree assault–domestic violence, see RSA 631:2, I(a) (2016);
RSA 631:2, III (Supp. 2024).
Subsequently, the defendant moved to exclude the recording pursuant to
RSA chapter 570-A. He argued that there was reason to believe the recording
was made in New Hampshire, not in Maine. The State objected, arguing that
the defendant had put forward no evidence that contradicted the complainant’s
version of events. In February 2022, following a hearing at which the parties
presented offers of proof, the Trial Court (Ignatius, J.) denied the motion to
exclude, reasoning that there was “no credible basis to conclude the [recording]
took place anywhere other than in Maine.”
In September 2022, the defendant renewed his motion to exclude the
recording. Defense counsel explained that he had been able to inspect the
recording’s file properties, which revealed that the file was created on
“9/28/2019 [at] 11:55 pm.” The defendant argued that this information “casts
serious doubts as to when the recording was actually made and [it] should
therefore be excluded.” He asserted that if the recording was made in 2019, it
would be irrelevant to the charges. Further, the defendant argued that
because he was not living in Maine in 2019, it called into question whether the
recording was made in Maine.
After a hearing, the trial court granted the renewed motion. The court
stated that “there are strong indications that the recording was not made in
Sanford, Maine in November 2018 . . . but instead on September 28, 2019 near
midnight.” The court concluded that there was a “strong possibility that the
recording at issue was in fact made” in New Hampshire.
In October 2022, the State moved for reconsideration of the trial court’s
ruling on the renewed motion to exclude. The court granted the motion in part.
The court suggested that an evidentiary hearing on the motion ought to be
conducted and that “[b]oth parties now appear to seek [the complainant’s]
sworn testimony on this issue, which would be appropriate.”
In December 2022, the Trial Court (Attorri, J.) issued an order explaining
that it would hold an evidentiary hearing at which the State would bear the
burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the recording was
not subject to the exclusionary rule of RSA 570-A:6. The court observed that
the recording might fall under the felony provision of RSA chapter 570-A. The
court stated that exclusion would be required if the recording was made in New
Hampshire and if the complainant acted “willfully.” Therefore, the court stated
that the hearing would be held “on those two factual issues.”
In February 2023, the trial court held the evidentiary hearing. At the
outset, the court observed that “hearsay testimony is admissible at
suppression hearings.” However, the court noted that “the State does have the
burden here” and it would “consider the fact that it’s hearsay testimony when
deciding how much weight to give the testimony.”
The State called a former Ossipee Police Department detective to testify.
The detective testified that he interviewed the complainant in January 2021.
The complainant told him about the alleged sexual assault and the recording
she had made in Maine. He testified that the complainant did not say that she
knew it was illegal to record the conversation in New Hampshire. He also
stated that the complainant never gave any indication that she knew about
New Hampshire’s wiretap statute.
On cross-examination, the detective testified that the complainant asked
him “if [the recording] could be used by the way she . . . obtained it.” He stated
that he asked to look at the file of the recording on her phone to see if it had a
date and timestamp on it, but the complainant told him she did not have the
2
file on her phone and that she would email it. She indicated that the
defendant had deleted the file from her phone but that she had kept it in other
electronic locations. The detective testified that he never saw the file properties
of the recording he reviewed. Defense counsel showed the detective the file
properties of the recording that was in the parties’ possession, which indicated
that it was created on “September 28th, 2019, at 11:55 p.m.”
The State also called a Carroll County Attorney’s Office investigator to
testify. The investigator testified that she spoke with the complainant in
January 2023. The complainant described the alleged sexual assault to the
investigator and said that she had driven to Maine to confront the defendant.
The complainant explained the circumstances of the recording, and told the
investigator that when the defendant learned the recording existed he
destroyed her phones. The complainant told the investigator that she had
saved the recording through “multiple methods.” When the investigator asked
the complainant about the wiretapping statute in New Hampshire, she replied
that she was aware that Maine and New Hampshire law differed. The
investigator testified that the complainant stated that she “did not have
knowledge of the law itself” and that she did not “look the RSA up.” The
investigator testified that any knowledge the complainant had about the
wiretapping law came after she made the recording, and that the complainant
maintained that the recording was made in Maine.
In April 2023, the trial court issued an order granting the defendant’s
motion to exclude the recording. The court observed that the State chose not
to present the testimony of the complainant and instead presented “the
hearsay testimony of two investigators who had interviewed her about the
recording.” The court stated that “[t]his was obviously a strategic decision by
the State, as it was aware it bore the burden of proof . . . and apparently
sought to sustain that burden while also shielding [the complainant] from
cross-examination before trial.” The court found “that the State has failed to
carry its burden of showing that the recording was made in Maine as it
contends.” Further, the court found “that the State has also failed to sustain
its burden of proving that, if [the complainant] made the recording in New
Hampshire, she did so without knowledge of the legal prohibition against such
covert recordings.”
The State unsuccessfully moved for reconsideration. This appeal
followed.
II. Analysis
In general, the trial court has broad discretion to determine the
admissibility of evidence, and we will not upset its ruling absent an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. State v. Jette, 174 N.H. 669, 673 (2021).
3