THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0710, Estate of Edward C. Gaspar, the
court on March 11, 2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The appellant, Stephanie Gaspar, appeals an order from the
Circuit Court (Patten, R., approved by Keating, J.) on several pending matters,
as well as an order on the appellant’s motion to depose and remove the
executor, Robert Richardson, II. At the outset, we note that the executor has
not filed a brief in this matter and has not argued that this is an improper
interlocutory appeal. The appellant argues that the trial court erred in:
(1) denying her motion to depose the executor and extend her term as co-
executor; (2) relying on testimony concerning the decedent’s state of mind prior
to his illness to evaluate his susceptibility to undue influence during his period
of decline; and (3) denying her motion to remove the executor. We affirm.
The appellant first argues that the trial court erred in denying her motion
to depose the executor and extend her term as co-executor. The trial court has
broad discretion in managing the proceedings before it. In the Matter of
Conner & Conner, 156 N.H. 250, 252 (2007). We review a trial court’s rulings
in this area under an unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. Id. Under
this standard, the appellant must demonstrate that the trial court’s ruling was
clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of her case. Id.
While this appeal was pending, the parties reached an agreement to stay
the appeal, allow the appellant to serve as co-executor of the estate for a period
of 100 days, and allow her to investigate the management of her father’s affairs
before his death. Approximately two weeks before the end of the 100-day
period, her attorney contacted the executor’s attorney requesting the executor’s
deposition prior to the expiration of the 100-day period. Citing scheduling
conflicts, the executor’s attorney did not agree to the request. The appellant
then moved for permission to depose the executor and to extend her period as
co-executor.
In denying the motion, the trial court noted that the appellant had
several months in which to request the executor’s deposition but “chose, for
whatever reason not to do so until just a few days prior to the end of her
authority by agreement to do so.” The court also noted that, in the absence of
an agreement, the appellant did not subpoena the executor to appear for his
deposition or serve a notice of deposition “as required by court rule.” The
appellant notes that the court did not cite the applicable court rule and asserts
that it is unclear under these circumstances whether a formal deposition notice
would have been necessary. Regardless of the specific notice requirements, the
trial court’s point was essentially that the appellant took no further steps to
obtain the executor’s deposition. We conclude that the appellant has failed to
show that the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion in denying her
motion to depose the executor and extend her term as co-executor. See id.
The appellant next argues that the trial court erred in relying on
testimony concerning the decedent’s state of mind prior to his illness to
evaluate his susceptibility to undue influence during his period of decline.
Whether undue influence exists is a question of fact to be determined based
upon the surrounding facts and circumstances. In re Estate of Cass, 143 N.H.
57, 61 (1998). “The findings of fact of the judge of probate are final unless they
are so plainly erroneous that such findings could not be reasonably made.”
RSA 567–A:4 (2019). We will not disturb the court’s findings unless they are
unsupported by the evidence or erroneous as a matter of law. In re Estate of
Dow, 174 N.H. 37, 41 (2021).
The trial court noted that the executor and two of his witnesses “all
testified to the effect that [the decedent] always had a strong personality, was a
very self-confident man, with a strong will, and not about to allow anyone to
influence him one way or another or change his mind, once he had decided
what he wanted to do.” The court noted that the witnesses testified that the
decedent “remained a self-confident and strong willed person, not about to be
influenced or dissuaded from his chosen path and decisions he made along the
way, to the very end of his life.” We defer to the trial court to resolve conflicts
in testimony, measure the credibility of witnesses, and determine the weight to
be given to the evidence. In re Guardianship of E.L., 154 N.H. 292, 296
(2006). In this case, it was for the trial court to determine, based on the
evidence presented, the extent to which the decedent remained insusceptible to
the influence of others during his period of decline. Based upon this record, we
cannot conclude that the court’s findings are unsupported by the evidence or
erroneous as a matter of law. See Estate of Dow, 174 N.H. at 41.
Finally, the appellant argues that the trial court erred in denying her
motion to remove the executor, noting in particular that the executor failed to
name her as an heir. The trial court noted that there was no specific evidence
“as to whether the omission occurred by simple oversight or otherwise.”
Moreover, the court noted that there was no dispute that the appellant “would
be a pretermitted heir and the sole surviving heir of [the decedent] for the
purposes of this estate administration.” As previously noted, the trial court
also rejected the appellant’s position that the executor unduly influenced the
decedent in the management of his affairs and the disposition of his assets.
Based on this record, we conclude that the appellant has failed to show that
2
the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion in denying her motion to
remove the executor. See In the Matter of Conner, 156 N.H. at 252.
Affirmed.
Donovan, Countway, and Gould, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3