THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0754, State of New Hampshire v. Casely
Schandorf, the court on May 29, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The
defendant, Casely Schandorf, appeals his convictions, following a jury trial in
Superior Court (Temple, J.), on one count of attempted endangering the welfare
of a child (“attempted endangering”), see RSA 629:1 (2016); RSA 639:3 (2016),
and one count of attempted felonious sexual assault (“FSA”), see RSA 629:1
(2016); RSA 632-A:3 (Supp. 2024). The defendant argues that the trial court
erred by denying his motion to dismiss and motion to set aside the verdict
because the State failed to produce sufficient evidence as to his intent and
because the evidence established entrapment as a matter of law. He also
argues that the trial court erred by denying his motion to set aside the verdict
based on the State’s repeated Brady violations. We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. In May 2019, the Nashua
Police Department (NPD) was leading a multijurisdictional operation to combat
and deter the exploitation of children on the internet. On May 21, 2019, the
detective assigned to this operation created a persona, set up a profile, and
posted an ad on an adults-only dating website called “SkiptheGames.” The ad
listed the persona’s age as 99 years old and said the persona was “visiting,”
and was “willing to provide services in exchange for compensation.” The ad
used a photograph of a female NPD officer from when she was 17 years old.
On May 21, 2019, the defendant, who was traveling for work, was at his
hotel in Nashua when he visited the SkiptheGames website to meet a woman,
something which he had done previously. The defendant saw the ad and
initiated contact with the persona through an anonymous texting app, asking
her what the “donation” was for an hour of her time. The persona asked what
the defendant was looking for, to which he responded that he was not seeking
anything “weird,” “[j]ust BJ and full service.” They arranged to meet the next
night. The persona then said “just so you know I’m 15 but I’ve hosted before,”
and “sorry i thought i mentioned that earlier.” The defendant represented both
in his post-arrest interview and at trial that he did not see these two messages.
The following evening, the defendant texted the persona, asking her if
they were “still on for today.” The defendant and the persona had the following
text exchange:
Persona: yes of course! im not old enough to drive so your still
comin over right???
[. . .]
Defendant: WAit are you underage?
Persona: lol yes silly u knew that
Defendant: That’s illegal and I can’t if you are
Persona: alright im sorry
Persona: if u change your mind im here
Defendant: No I didn’t
Defendant: How old are you? Don’t want to end up getting arrested
and
Persona: im 15 but everyone says i act old 4 my age! lol i can’t get
in trouble either. i wont say shit
Persona: but its your call
The defendant then said it was “[h]ard to say,” and that he “[m]ay stop by to
drop off 20 without any service just to see.” When the persona said she needed
to make a date to make more money if he wasn’t coming, the defendant told
her the 20 dollars would be “just free” and that “[i]f you’re legit we may do more
but not committing to anything.” The persona responded “lol well im legit but i
don’t play games and i only like sure things,” and “thanks anyways tho.” The
defendant confirmed that the persona was not law enforcement and then said
“10pm then.” The persona asked if he was coming and asked if he “still
want[ed] the full service and BJ” for 75 dollars. The defendant said yes, and
that he “[m]ay do more time and donate more.” He told the persona that he
would have to drive her to his hotel and back, but “only if [she was] interested.”
The persona confirmed that she was interested.
They arranged for the defendant to pick up the persona at 10 p.m. and
the defendant asked that she “[d]ress normal if [they were] going back to [his]
place.” The defendant testified that he requested this because he did not want
to walk in to his hotel with somebody dressed in anything “suggestive.” At
2
trial, the defendant testified that he was going to meet the persona to
determine whether she was legitimate and verify her age.
When the defendant arrived at the persona’s apartment, he was arrested.
He testified that he cried and felt embarrassed because he knew that his wife
would find out that he had been arrested and also knew that adultery and
paying money for sex were bad. The defendant consented to a search of his
vehicle, bag, and electronic devices. In that search, police found Viagra.
The defendant also consented to an interview with the detective and a
Homeland Security agent. The defendant said in the interview that he had a
“lapse in judgment” and made a mistake. However, he testified that he meant
that he should have just “cut the conversation” as soon as he became aware
that the persona was a minor. After a manual review of the defendant’s
electronic devices, the detective wrote in his report that “[b]ased on all this
information, there’s no evidence to suggest that [the defendant] is involved in
any other incidence related to the sexual exploitation of minors.”
After the State rested, the trial court denied the defendant’s motion to
dismiss the charges based on lack of sufficient evidence of his purposeful mens
rea. The jury rendered a guilty verdict on both charges. The defendant then
made a motion to set aside the verdict based upon the State’s “repeated Brady
violations” and the detective’s entrapment conduct, which the trial court
denied.
A. Sufficiency of the Evidence
We first address the defendant’s challenges to the sufficiency of the
evidence. A challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence raises a claim of legal
error; therefore, our standard of review is de novo. State v. Zuzelo, 176 N.H.
499, 504 (2024), 2024 N.H. 14, ¶13. When considering such a challenge, we
objectively review the entire record, including the evidence presented by the
defendant, to determine whether any rational trier of fact could have found the
essential elements of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt, considering all the
evidence and all reasonable inferences drawn therefrom in the light most
favorable to the State. Id.; Id. We examine each evidentiary item in the context
of all the evidence, and not in isolation. Id.; Id.
The defendant has the burden of demonstrating that the evidence was
insufficient to prove guilt. State v. Pierce, 176 N.H. 487, 492 (2024), 2024 N.H.
12, ¶19. When, as in this case, the evidence as to one or more elements of a
charged offense is solely circumstantial, a defendant challenging sufficiency
must establish that the evidence does not exclude all reasonable conclusions
except guilt. Id. at 492-93; Id. The proper analysis is not whether every
possible conclusion consistent with innocence has been excluded, but, rather,
whether all reasonable conclusions based upon the evidence have been
3