THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0599, State of New Hampshire v. Donald
Gilbert, the court on December 6, 2024, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(2). The defendant, Donald Gilbert, appeals his conviction, following a jury
trial in Superior Court (Leonard, J.), on one felony count of assault by a prisoner
– simple assault, see RSA 642:9, I, IV (2016). We affirm.
On appeal, the defendant challenges the trial court’s decision to permit a
corrections officer to testify that, shortly after the alleged assault, the victim
informed the officer that “he had water thrown on him.” The defendant argues
that the victim’s statement describing the assault was hearsay, and that the trial
court erred by admitting it under the “present sense impression” exception to the
rule against hearsay. See N.H. R. Ev. 803(1). The defendant also argues that,
because the victim did not testify and was not subject to cross-examination, the
trial court’s decision to permit this testimony violated his right to confrontation
under the Sixth Amendment to the Federal Constitution. See U.S. CONST.
amend. VI. The State disputes both arguments.
We need not address these arguments, however, because we agree with the
State that, even if the trial court erred by permitting the testimony at issue, any
such error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. See State v. Boudreau, 176
N.H. 1, 11-13 (2023) (explaining harmless error doctrine). Here, among other
things, the jury viewed surveillance video of the assault which clearly depicted
the defendant removing a cup of water from a microwave and throwing it at the
victim. This alternative evidence of the defendant’s guilt was overwhelming, and
the out-of-court statement that the victim “had water thrown on him” was merely
cumulative and plainly inconsequential in relation to the strength of the State’s
case. Accordingly, based upon the totality of the circumstances at trial, we
conclude that any purported error in permitting the officer’s testimony at issue
did not affect the verdict, and thus was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
See id.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk