THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0518, State of New Hampshire v. Adam
Montgomery, the court on August 27, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Adam Montgomery, was convicted, following
a jury trial in Superior Court (Messer, J.), on charges of being an armed career
criminal, theft by unauthorized taking, and receiving stolen property, arising
from his taking and possession of certain firearms. See RSA 159:3-a, I (2023);
RSA 637:3, I, :7, I (2016). On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court
erred by admitting testimony from the victim’s wife, over his hearsay objection,
that she had heard rumors that he had taken the firearms. We affirm.
The trial court has broad discretion to determine the admissibility of
evidence, and we will not disturb its evidentiary rulings unless the defendant
establishes an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See State v. Reinholz, 169
N.H. 22, 28 (2016). To prevail under this standard, the defendant must
demonstrate that the evidentiary ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable
to the prejudice of his case. See id.
Evidence in the record establishes that the victim’s wife was friends with
both the defendant and the defendant’s wife at the time that the victim’s
firearms went missing. At the time the firearms disappeared, the victim was
away from home, and the defendant had spent time at the victim’s residence.
Following the disappearance of the firearms, the victim’s wife fabricated a story
that there was footage from a neighbor’s security cameras that would reveal
who had taken the firearms, a fabrication that the defendant discussed during
his opening statement.
The victim’s wife testified that at some point after the firearms
disappeared, she became suspicious of the defendant because she “started
hearing rumors from friends that [the defendant] had taken them.” When the
defendant objected to this testimony as inadmissible hearsay, the State
asserted that it was offering the testimony not to prove the truth of the rumors,
but to establish the effect that the rumors had on the victim’s wife. See id. at
29; N.H. R. Ev. 801(c) (defining hearsay). Specifically, the State represented
that the victim’s wife fabricated the existence of security camera footage in
order to gauge the defendant’s and his wife’s reactions to the story. The trial
court allowed the testimony into evidence for this purpose, and the victim’s
wife then testified that, based on the rumors, she in fact fabricated the story
about the security cameras to the defendant’s wife, and the defendant’s wife
responded by asking the victim’s wife which direction the security cameras
pointed. On cross-examination, the victim’s wife explained that by “rumors
from friends,” she meant rumors from one specific friend who also testified at
trial.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court “failed to recognize
that the rumor evidence would only ‘explain’ [the victim’s wife’s] subsequent
conduct if she believed the rumors were true.” The defendant further argues
that the State did not need to admit the rumor evidence to establish why the
victim’s wife fabricated the story, and that, because the State’s witnesses had
credibility issues, and because the testimony “suggested . . . that people who
did not testify at trial had good reason to believe [the defendant was] guilty,”
admission of the testimony was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the
prejudice of his case. See Reinholz, 169 N.H. at 28. The State counters, in
part, that even if the trial court erred by admitting the rumor evidence, the
error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. We agree with the State.
“[T]o establish harmless error, “the State must prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that the error did not affect the verdicts.” State v. Boudreau,
176 N.H. 1, 11 (2023) (quotation omitted). This standard applies to the
erroneous admission of evidence. Id. In assessing whether the erroneous
admission of evidence constitutes harmless error, we consider “the alternative
evidence presented at trial as well as the character of the erroneously admitted
evidence itself,” evaluating the totality of the circumstances at trial. Id. at 11-
12 (quotation omitted).
The factors that we have considered in assessing whether an
error did not affect the verdict include, but are not limited to: (1)
the strength of the State’s case; (2) whether the admitted or
excluded evidence is cumulative or inconsequential in relation to
the strength of the State’s case; (3) the frequency of the error; (4)
the presence or absence of evidence corroborating or contradicting
the erroneously admitted or excluded evidence; (5) the nature of
the defense; (6) the circumstances in which the evidence was
introduced at trial; (7) whether the court took any curative steps;
(8) whether the evidence is of an inflammatory nature; and (9)
whether the other evidence of the defendant’s guilt is of an
overwhelming nature. No one factor is dispositive. This court may
consider factors not listed above, and not all factors may be
implicated in a given case.
Id. at 12 (citations omitted).
2
Even if we assume, without deciding, that the trial court erred by
admitting testimony concerning rumors that the defendant had taken the
firearms, evidence that the defendant had in fact taken the firearms was
overwhelming. As noted above, when the victim’s wife told the defendant’s wife
that her neighbors had security camera footage that might reveal who had
taken the firearms, the defendant’s wife responded by asking which direction
the cameras were pointed. The defendant’s wife testified that not only had the
defendant admitted to her that he had taken the firearms, but that she had in
fact witnessed the defendant in possession of the stolen firearms in their home
and offering to sell or trade them for drugs. After the victim’s wife suggested
that security cameras may have captured relevant footage of the theft, both the
defendant and the defendant’s wife became concerned.
Testimony from multiple other witnesses established that (1) the
defendant took, possessed, and hid the firearms; (2) the defendant admitted
that the firearms were stolen; (3) the defendant showed the firearms to others;
(4) the defendant offered to sell the firearms to others; and (5) the defendant
sold the firearms. One of the witnesses to whom the victim’s wife had told the
fabricated story about the video footage testified that the defendant told him
the that the story was a lie because if there were security camera footage of the
theft, the defendant would “be in jail already.” With respect to the challenged
testimony, the victim’s wife clarified that by “rumors from friends,” she meant
rumors from a single person who testified and was subject to cross-
examination. That friend, in turn, testified that he knew the defendant had
stolen the firearms. Viewed in the totality of the circumstances, we conclude,
beyond a reasonable doubt, that the challenged testimony did not affect the
verdict. See id. at 11-12.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3