THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0108, State of New Hampshire v. Cleve
Wilmot, the court on December 24, 2024, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The
defendant, Cleve Wilmot, was sentenced, after a jury trial in Superior Court
(Temple, J.), for, inter alia, pattern aggravated felonious sexual assault (pattern
AFSA). See RSA 632-A:2, III (2016). On appeal, he argues that the trial court
erred by denying his motion to enter a conviction for misdemeanor sexual
assault rather than pattern AFSA. We affirm.
The pattern AFSA indictment at issue in this case states, in relevant
part, that the defendant:
between or about the 1st day of January 2013 and the 1st day of
December 2018, at Nashua in the County of Hillsborough, aforesaid, did
commit the crime of PATTERN AGGRAVATED FELONIOUS SEXUAL
ASSAULT in that he knowingly engaged in a pattern of sexual assault
against [the victim] (DOB: . . . 2004), not his legal spouse who was under
16 years of age at the time by putting his penis in her mouth, on more
than one occasion over a period of 2 months or more and within a period
of 5 years.1
(Bolding omitted.) In addition, at the top of the page, in the caption to the
indictment, appear the following: “D.O.B. 03/28/1970,” “RSA Ch. 632-A:2, III,”
and “AFSA - Pattern Sexual Assault.” With respect to this charge, the jury was
instructed that the State was required to prove that: (1) the defendant engaged
in a pattern of sexual assault with the victim as described; (2) the victim was
not his legal spouse; (3) the victim was under 16 years of age; and (4) the
defendant acted knowingly. The trial court defined “pattern of sexual assault”
as “committing more than one act of sexual penetration upon the same person
over a period of two months or more, and within a period of five years.” The
jury returned a verdict of guilty on this charge.
1 The indictment sets forth the victim’s date of birth, which was in 2004. We have omitted the
month and day, as they are unnecessary to our analysis.
The defendant did not object to either the indictment or the jury
instructions. Instead, he filed a motion asking the trial court to enter his
conviction as misdemeanor sexual assault and to sentence him accordingly.
See RSA 632-A:4 (Supp. 2023). The trial court ruled that the defendant’s post-
trial motion challenging the sufficiency of the indictment and the jury
instructions was untimely, and denied it. The defendant thereafter appealed.
The defendant contends that, although the State had intended to charge
the felony offense of pattern AFSA, the indictment alleges only misdemeanor
sexual assault. Similarly, the defendant argues that the jury was instructed to
find elements that establish only misdemeanor sexual assault.
The crime of pattern AFSA is defined in RSA 632-A:2, III, which provides:
A person is guilty of aggravated felonious sexual assault when such
person engages in a pattern of sexual assault against another person,
not the actor’s legal spouse, who is less than 16 years of age. The mental
state applicable to the underlying acts of sexual assault need not be
shown with respect to the element of engaging in a pattern of sexual
assault.
(emphasis added). The term “pattern of sexual assault” is defined in RSA 632-
A:1, I-c (2016) as meaning: “committing more than one act under RSA 632-A:2
or RSA 632-A:3, or both, upon the same victim over a period of 2 months or
more and within a period of 5 years.” With respect to the acts alleged in the
indictment, the defendant argues, inter alia, that to have violated RSA 632-A:2,
the alleged acts of penetration had to have occurred when the victim was under
the age of thirteen. See RSA 632-A:2, I(l )(2016). Alternatively, to have violated
RSA 632-A:3, if the acts occurred when the victim was between thirteen and
sixteen years of age, the age difference between the victim and the defendant
had to have been four years or more. See RSA 632-A:3, II (Supp. 2023).
Because the indictment did not allege either that the acts occurred when the
victim was under the age of thirteen or that the age difference between the
victim and the defendant was four years or more, the defendant contends that
the indictment alleges misdemeanor sexual assault pursuant to RSA 632-A:4,
I(c), which provides that a person is guilty of a class A misdemeanor:
In the absence of any of the circumstances set forth in RSA 632-A:2,
when the actor engages in sexual penetration with a person who is 13
years of age or older and under 16 years of age where the age difference
between the actor and the other person is 4 years or less.
Accordingly, the defendant contends that he was convicted of misdemeanor
sexual assault, not felony pattern AFSA.
2
A defendant must bring challenges to the sufficiency of a charging
document before trial. See State v. Pinault, 168 N.H. 28, 33 (2015). The trial
court, relying upon our decision in State v. Leroux, 175 N.H. 204 (2022),
concluded that the defendant’s challenge to the sufficiency of the indictment
was untimely. On appeal, the defendant contends that because, in his view,
the indictment sufficiently charged the misdemeanor offense of sexual assault,2
and because he never moved to dismiss or challenge the sufficiency of the
indictment, he was not required to object to the indictment. We disagree.
As the trial court noted, we recently rejected a similar argument in State
v. Leroux. There, the defendant was charged with one count of class A
misdemeanor driving after his license was suspended. Leroux, 175 N.H. at
206. The complaint alleged that the defendant’s privilege to drive had been
suspended “by the director of motor vehicles for DWI-second offense.” Id. After
the State rested, the defendant unsuccessfully moved to dismiss the complaint,
arguing, for the first time, that the complaint failed to allege that his license
was suspended by a court of competent jurisdiction, and therefore
insufficiently alleged a class A misdemeanor. Id. On appeal, in response to the
argument that his challenge to the sufficiency of the complaint was untimely,
the defendant argued that the complaint adequately alleged a violation-level
offense, and therefore he could properly raise the issue when he did. Id. at
207. We disagreed, stating that, “notwithstanding his contention that the
complaint adequately alleged a violation-level offense, the defendant was
required to bring his challenges to the sufficiency of the complaint before trial.”
Id. at 208 (quotation and brackets omitted). Similarly, in the instant case, we
conclude that, notwithstanding his contention that the indictment adequately
alleged a misdemeanor-level offense, the defendant was required to challenge
the sufficiency of the indictment before trial.3
The defendant relies upon our decisions in State v. Allegra, 129 N.H. 720
(1987), and State v. Perry, 166 N.H. 716 (2014). Neither case controls. In
Allegra, the indictment alleged all of the elements of the crime of forgery, but
mistakenly included the notation “Class B Felony.” Allegra, 129 N.H. at 724.
The error was not that the indictment mistakenly failed to allege an element of
the offense — rather, the State erroneously took the position that the writing
that the defendant was alleged to have altered was of a type that made the
2 For the purposes of this appeal, we will assume without deciding that, as the defendant
contends, the indictment sufficiently charges the misdemeanor offense of sexual assault.
3 Although the defendant maintains that his motion to enter misdemeanor convictions was not
a challenge to the sufficiency of the indictment, we disagree. The substance of the motion
challenged the sufficiency of the indictment — the motion argued that the indictment did not
contain the facts needed to allege the elements of pattern AFSA. Accordingly, we conclude that
the defendant’s motion was in essence a challenge to the sufficiency of the indictment that, as
we held in State v. Leroux, 175 N.H. 204 (2022), the defendant needed to raise before trial.
3