THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0205, State of New Hampshire v. Cody
M. Frye, the court on September 26, 2023, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The
defendant, Cody M. Frye, appeals a decision from the Superior Court (Attorri,
J.) ordering him preventively detained without bail pursuant to RSA 597:1-c
(Supp. 2022) or, in the alternative, RSA 597:2, III(a) (Supp. 2022). The
defendant argues that the court erred in finding that the State proved, by clear
and convincing evidence, that: (1) pursuant to RSA 597:1-c, the “proof is
evident” or the “presumption great” that the defendant violated RSA 318-B:26,
IX (Supp. 2022); and (2) pursuant to RSA 597:2, III(a), the defendant’s release
would endanger the safety of the public. Based upon the record before us, we
conclude that the State failed to meet its burden of proof required by RSA
597:1-c and accordingly reverse the trial court’s ruling on that issue. Because
we cannot determine the extent to which the trial court’s RSA 597:1-c
determination factored into its RSA 597:2, III(a) dangerousness ruling, we
vacate and remand.
The following facts are agreed upon by the parties or are otherwise
supported by the record. On July 31, 2022, the body of the decedent, Joshua
Smith, was discovered. It was later determined that the decedent died from
fentanyl toxicity. Police found the decedent’s body surrounded by drug
paraphernalia, including two baggies, one filled with a white powdery
substance and the other filled with a tan powdery substance. Officers also
found the decedent’s cell phone in a bathroom. Testing at the state laboratory
determined that the white substance was cocaine and the tan substance was
fentanyl.
After reviewing the decedent’s text messaging history, Detective
Gaudreau learned that, within days of his passing, the decedent had been
communicating with a man named Walter Peek-Antolin. Gaudreau testified
that he believed that the defendant ordered “four different types of drugs” from
Peek-Antolin: “pretty,” which is cocaine, two grams of “dirty,” which is fentanyl,
a “zip,” which is a baggie of marijuana, and marijuana edibles.
Text messages between the defendant and Peek-Antolin and between
Peek-Antolin and the decedent, as well as other evidence, established that on
July 29, the defendant delivered drugs to the decedent’s residence. Although
the decedent ordered four different drugs from Peek-Antolin, Gaudreau
believed that the defendant only delivered fentanyl, cocaine, and possibly the
edibles. Gaudreau testified regarding a text message conversation between
Peek-Antolin and the decedent in which Peek-Antolin “says that basically he
forgot the zip and he would deliver it himself the following day.” The evening of
July 29, following the delivery, the decedent suffered a non-fatal overdose.
When the decedent’s mother found her son overdosing that night, she
destroyed some of his drug paraphernalia and drugs, which Gaudreau believed
to be most likely the cocaine.
The following day, on July 30, another text message conversation and
phone calls between the decedent and Peek-Antolin took place. The decedent
told Peek-Antolin that he had “leaned on” what he had and needed more of the
“pretty,” leading Gaudreau to believe that the decedent was “asking for more of
the cocaine.” Although these text messages demonstrate that Peek-Antolin and
the decedent discussed another drug delivery, Gaudreau testified that he
“cannot confirm that th[e] transaction did actually happen” and the
investigation uncovered no evidence that the defendant was involved in any
sort of delivery on July 30. That same day, from approximately 1 p.m. until
9:30 or 10 p.m., the decedent covered a shift at the restaurant where he
worked. After work, the decedent met up with his co-worker and a friend
outside of the restaurant. The decedent’s friend was a former drug user who
had previously acquired drugs from the decedent to give to other people. The
decedent, who according to his friend had been struggling with an opiate
addiction for years, left the restaurant in the early morning hours of July 31.
That morning, the decedent’s body was found in his residence.
The defendant was charged with sale of a controlled drug resulting in
death in violation of RSA 318-B:26, IX. In March 2023, the defendant had a
bail hearing in superior court. At the close of the hearing, the court found that
the State met its burden of proof and ordered the defendant detained without
bail pursuant to RSA 597:1-c, or, in the alternative, that the defendant’s
release would pose a danger to the community. See RSA 597:2, III(a). The
court noted, however, that it would continue to consider the issue. The
defendant filed a subsequent motion for clarification as to whether the order
made from the bench was final.
The court subsequently issued a written order affirming the decision
delivered from the bench. The court found that the State clearly and
convincingly proved that the defendant delivered drugs, including fentanyl and
cocaine, to the decedent on the evening of July 29. The court further found
that, although the State “may not have proven . . . to a mathematical certainty”
that the drugs the defendant delivered to the decedent on July 29 were the
same drugs that caused the decedent’s death on July 31, “the presumption is
great.” The court reasoned that the “temporal proximity of the delivery,
coupled with the fact that drugs of the same kind were found near the
2
decedent’s body, raises a strong presumption.” The court also found that “[t]he
defense’s speculation notwithstanding, there is no evidence that the decedent
received fentanyl from any other source in the interval between his receipt from
the defendant and his death.”
In the alternative, the court found that the defendant’s release would
endanger the safety of the public pursuant to RSA 597:2, III(a). The court
reasoned that the “influx of fentanyl into New Hampshire poses a serious
danger to the citizens and communities of this state,” that the defendant
traveled from Maine to New Hampshire to deliver the drugs, that the
defendant’s “role in the transaction was impersonal and businesslike,” and that
“this was not an isolated instance.” The court denied the defendant’s motion to
reconsider, and this appeal followed.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the State failed to satisfy its
burden pursuant to RSA 597:1-c. The State argues that we should review the
trial court’s decision under our unsustainable exercise of discretion standard.
See State v. Spaulding, 172 N.H. 205, 207 (2019). We disagree. We recognize
that we review a trial court’s decision to order preventive detention pursuant to
RSA 597:2, III(a) under an unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. See
id. (stating that the court has “broad discretion to order a defendant to be held
without bail”). However, RSA 597:1-c does not grant the trial court discretion
but, rather, mandates that “[a]ny person arrested for an offense punishable by
up to life in prison . . . shall not be allowed bail” if the “proof is evident or the
presumption great.” RSA 597:1-c (emphasis added); see also State v. Furgal,
161 N.H. 206, 209-10 (2010) (“RSA 597:1-c leaves the court with no discretion
where the proof is evident or the presumption great. In such cases, a person
‘shall not be allowed bail.’”). In other words, RSA 597:1-c precludes the
exercise of discretion by requiring the court to deny bail if the State proves by
clear and convincing evidence that the defendant committed the charged
offense. See Furgal, 161 N.H. at 209-10, 216. Thus, unlike a bail decision
pursuant to RSA 597:2, III(a), the trial court has not made a discretionary
decision when it orders a defendant preventively detained under RSA 597:1-c.
Accordingly, we will review the trial court’s decision to detain the defendant
pursuant to RSA 597:1-c under our sufficiency of the evidence standard.
To prevail upon this challenge, the defendant must demonstrate that no
rational trier of fact, viewing all of the evidence and all reasonable inferences
drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to the State, could have found the
essential elements of the offense by clear and convincing evidence. See State v.
Butler, 175 N.H. 444, 447 (2022); see also RSA 597:1-c; Furgal, 161 N.H. at
216 (holding that the State bears the burden of proof under RSA 597:1-c by
clear and convincing evidence). In such a challenge, we objectively review the
record to determine whether any rational trier of fact could have found the
essential elements of the crime by clear and convincing evidence. See Butler,
175 N.H. at 447; Furgal, 161 N.H. at 216. Because a challenge to the
3