THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0708, In the Matter of Gerri Bernstein and
Philip Sadler, the court on November 25, 2024, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(2). The respondent, Philip Sadler (husband), appeals a final decree of the
Circuit Court (Gorman, J.), issued following a hearing, in his divorce from the
petitioner, Gerri Bernstein (wife). He challenges the trial court’s alimony award
and its decision not to adjust the distribution of marital assets to offset a
monetary gift the parties gave to the wife’s daughter during the marriage. We
affirm.
The trial court is afforded broad discretion in determining matters of
property distribution and alimony when fashioning a final divorce decree. In the
Matter of Letendre & Letendre, 149 N.H. 31, 34 (2002). We will not overturn a
trial court’s decision on these matters absent an unsustainable exercise of
discretion or an error of law. Id.; In the Matter of Silva & Silva, 171 N.H. 1, 9
(2018). “This standard of review means that we review only whether the record
establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the discretionary judgment
made, and we will not disturb the trial court’s determination if it could
reasonably have been made.” In the Matter of Braunstein & Braunstein, 173
N.H. 38, 47 (2020). We will not substitute our judgment for that of the trial
court; nor will we reweigh the equities. Id.
We first address the husband’s challenge to the alimony award. He argues
that the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion in awarding alimony to
the wife because the evidence did not provide an objective basis for the award.
He contends, among other things, that the court erred by not imputing income to
the wife on the basis that she is voluntarily underemployed, and by otherwise
failing to consider certain circumstances relative to the wife’s income and need
for alimony, and the husband’s financial ability to pay. We disagree.
The trial court’s narrative order demonstrates that the court carefully
considered the parties’ financial circumstances. For example, although the
husband contends that the trial court failed to consider the substantial value of
the marital assets awarded to the wife, the court expressly considered those
assets in entering an alimony award that was lower than she had requested, and
lower than the amount which would have resulted from the statutory formula.
See RSA 458:19-a, II(a) (Supp. 2023). Further, the court also considered the
husband’s assertion that he would need to obtain a mortgage in order to afford
alimony, but concluded that, even if he did obtain a mortgage, he would be able
to accommodate the additional expense without adversely affecting his standard
of living. In sum, the court’s narrative order demonstrates that it carefully
weighed the evidence relative to both parties’ financial circumstances, ultimately
crediting the opinion of the wife’s expert and awarding alimony to the wife. See
Cook v. Sullivan, 149 N.H. 774, 780 (2003) (observing that “[i]t is within the
province of the trial court to accept or reject, in whole or in part, whatever
evidence was presented,” and that “we defer to the trial court’s judgment on such
issues as resolving conflicts in the testimony, measuring the credibility of
witnesses, and determining the weight to be given evidence”).
With respect to the husband’s argument that the trial court erred by not
imputing income to the wife on the basis that she is voluntarily underemployed,
we disagree. Although the court found that the wife is capable of earning
additional income by expanding her real estate practice, the court concluded that
“she is not required to change her employment into another area of real estate
just because it is possible to do so.” Ultimately, this is a discretionary decision
for the trial court; even if the court finds that a party is voluntarily
underemployed, the court is not required to impute income to the party on that
basis. See RSA 458:19-a, IV(d) (providing that, in awarding alimony, the court
“may adjust the formula amounts, duration limitations, or both, if . . . the court
finds that justice requires an adjustment” based upon special circumstances,
such as the voluntary underemployment of either party (emphasis added));
Appeal of Rowan, 142 N.H. 67, 71 (1997) (explaining the general rule that the
word “may” is permissive and indicates a discretionary matter). Accordingly,
given that, among other things, both parties are past retirement age, and both
are capable of earning additional income, we cannot conclude, based upon our
review of the record, that the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion by
declining to impute income to the wife in awarding alimony. See Braunstein, 173
N.H. at 47 (observing that we will neither substitute our judgment for that of the
trial court, nor reweigh the equities).1
1 Although the husband also contends that the trial court erred by not taking judicial notice of
certain new evidence relative to the wife’s underemployment that he presented for the first time
in his motion for reconsideration, we disagree. The trial court has the discretion not to
consider new issues or accept new evidence in a motion for reconsideration. Smith v. Shepard,
144 N.H. 262, 265 (1999). Some of the new evidence was plainly inappropriate for judicial
notice-taking. See N.H. R. Ev. 201(a). Moreover, the evidence could have, and should have,
been proffered earlier in the proceeding, and none of it is dispositive of the discretionary issue
for which it was offered. Accordingly, we cannot conclude that the trial court unsustainably
exercised its discretion by denying the husband’s motion. See Walker v. Walker, 158 N.H. 602,
607 (2009) (explaining that we will sustain a trial court’s decision on a motion for
reconsideration absent a showing that the ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the
prejudice of the appellant’s case).
2
Lastly, the husband argues that the trial court erred by not adjusting the
distribution of marital assets to offset a monetary gift the parties gave to the
wife’s daughter during the marriage. Although he contends that the parties had
agreed to give comparable gifts to the husband’s children, the trial court found
otherwise, and there is evidence in the record supporting that finding. See
Sullivan, 149 N.H. at 780 (observing that we defer to the trial court’s judgment
on such issues as resolving conflicts in testimony, measuring the credibility of
witnesses, and determining the weight to be given evidence). Accordingly, we
conclude that the trial court did not err by declining to adjust the distribution of
marital assets to offset the parties’ gift to the wife’s daughter.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3