THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0401, State of New Hampshire v. Wesley
D. Locke, the court on November 8, 2024, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The defendant, Wesley D. Locke, appeals his convictions,
following a jury trial, on four counts of aggravated felonious sexual assault.
See RSA 632-A:2 (2016). He argues that the Superior Court (Wageling, J.)
erred by precluding evidence of a custody dispute between the victim’s mother
and the defendant over their child, S.L. He also argues that the trial court may
have erred by failing to disclose records submitted for in camera review. We
affirm.
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred in precluding
evidence of a custody dispute between the victim’s mother and the defendant
over their child, S.L. We review the trial court’s evidentiary rulings for an
unsustainable exercise of discretion and reverse only if the court’s decision was
clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of the defendant’s case.
State v. Racette, 175 N.H. 132, 135 (2022). We consider whether the record
establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the discretionary decision
made. Id. The defendant bears the burden of demonstrating that the trial
court’s ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his
case. Id.
The defendant sought to introduce evidence of the custody dispute to
support his theory that the victim fabricated her allegations against him to
assist the mother in the dispute. The evidence showed, however, that the
custody dispute arose after the victim’s disclosures. Accordingly, we conclude
that the defendant has failed to show that the trial court’s ruling was clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. See id.
The defendant next argues that the trial court may have erred by failing
to disclose records submitted for in camera review. The trial court, after
granting the defendant’s motions for in camera review of the victim’s
confidential counseling records, disclosed certain records and not others. The
defendant argues that if we conclude, based upon our review of the counseling
records, that the trial court failed to disclose any relevant and material records,
then we should release them for his review, so that he may consider whether to
move for a new trial based upon them.
We review a trial court’s ruling on whether to disclose confidential
records after an in camera review for an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
State v. Guay, 162 N.H. 375, 385 (2011). Having reviewed the undisclosed
documents, we conclude that they are cumulative of the documents that the
trial court disclosed. Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court sustainably
exercised its discretion in declining to disclose additional records. See id.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2