THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0702, N.E. v. J.Y., the court on September
10, 2024, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The
plaintiff, N.E., appeals a decision from the Circuit Court (Carroll, R., approved
by Guptill, J.) dismissing his stalking petition against the defendant, J.Y. The
plaintiff argues that the court erred in concluding there was insufficient
evidence of a “course of conduct” under RSA 633:3-a, II(a) (2016) based upon
the court’s erroneous interpretation of RSA 633:3-a, II(a) and prior caselaw.
We conclude that the court did not err in determining that the plaintiff failed to
prove a “course of conduct” as defined in RSA 633:3-a, II(a). Accordingly, we
affirm.
I. Facts
The following facts are supported by the record or are otherwise
undisputed by the parties. The plaintiff is married to the former wife of the
defendant. The defendant and his former wife have eight-year-old twins. On
the morning of September 20, 2023, the plaintiff was responsible for driving
the twins to school. That morning, according to the plaintiff, the twins “weren’t
being very cooperative,” and they were running late. At one point, the plaintiff
lifted one of the twins under the arms and, using several expletives, yelled at
the child to hurry up. Later that day, the defendant picked up the twins from
school, and the defendant learned about what happened that morning.
That evening, over the course of thirteen minutes, between 5:59 p.m. and
6:12 p.m., the defendant and the plaintiff exchanged a series of ten text
messages. Their conversation went as follows:
Defendant (5:59 p.m.): “If you ever put your hands on MY daughter
again I will break your arms off!!!”
Defendant (6:01 p.m.): “That’s not a threat it’s a promise!!”
Plaintiff (6:02 p.m.): “I lifted her up. I didn’t hit her.”
Defendant (6:02 p.m.): “If you f***ing touch her again, I’m gonna
f***ing pound you”
Plaintiff (6:04 p.m.): “Call Dcyf if you have a problem.. I’ll wait.”
Defendant (6:04 p.m.): “There’s no do you need for DC why F I’m
telling you if you f***ing touch her again, I’m gonna break your
face”
Plaintiff (6:05 p.m.): “So I didn’t do anything wrong enough to call
the authorities, but you are threatening to assault me?”
Defendant (6:06 p.m.): “Yes, I’m promising you if you put my [sic]
hands on my daughter again, I’m going to f***ing break your face”
Plaintiff (6:11 p.m.): “First I lifted her up because she wouldn’t stop
what she was doing. Then I yelled at her to move her ass. There,
you have my full confession. I didn’t lift her up any harder than I
did to help her into the hay wagon.”
Defendant (6:12 p.m.): “Great!”
On September 22, two days after the parties exchanged these text
messages, the plaintiff filed a stalking petition in circuit court and was granted
a temporary order of protection. A final hearing on the petition took place on
October 16, and the court denied the petition the following day, explaining that
it did “not find evidence of a course of conduct.” The plaintiff filed a motion for
reconsideration. In its order denying the plaintiff’s motion, the court explained
that it “continues to find that this is a text ‘thread,’ a singular event and not a
course of conduct.” This appeal followed.
II. Analysis
RSA 633:3-a (Supp. 2023) creates a civil cause of action for victims of the
offense of stalking. See RSA 633:3-a, III-a (2016). As relevant to this appeal,
stalking occurs when a person:
(a) Purposely, knowingly, or recklessly engages in a course of
conduct targeted at a specific person which would cause a
reasonable person to fear for his or her personal safety or the
safety of a member of that person’s immediate family, and the
person is actually placed in such fear;
(b) Purposely or knowingly engages in a course of conduct targeted
at a specific individual, which the actor knows will place that
individual in fear for his or her personal safety or the safety of a
member of that individual’s immediate family; . . . .
2
RSA 633:3-a, I(a), (b) (2016) (emphases added). Whether the defendant
engaged in a course of conduct is a question of fact. See State v. Gubitosi, 152
N.H. 673, 681 (2005).
The statute defines “‘[c]ourse of conduct’” to mean “2 or more acts over a
period of time, however short, which evidences a continuity of purpose.” RSA
633:3-a, II(a). As relevant to the current appeal, “a course of conduct may
include, but not be limited to . . . [a]ny act of communication, as defined in
RSA 644:4, II.” Id. In turn, RSA 644:4, II (2016) provides that:
“[C]ommunicates” means to impart a message by any method of
transmission, including but not limited to telephoning or personally
delivering or sending or having delivered any information or material by
written or printed note or letter, package, mail, courier service or
electronic transmission, including electronic transmissions generated or
communicated via a computer.
(Emphases added.)
On appeal, the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in denying his
petition because the “five distinctly worded and separately sent threatening text
messages are sufficient evidence of a ‘course of conduct’ under RSA 633:3-a,
II(a).” The plaintiff maintains that the trial court’s finding that the defendant
did not engage in a “course of conduct” “conflicts with the plain and ordinary
meaning of the words used to define ‘course of conduct’ under the Stalking
statute” and is inconsistent with New Hampshire caselaw. We disagree.
“We review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a matter of law and
uphold the findings and rulings of the trial court unless they are lacking in
evidentia[ry] support or tainted by error of law.” Comer v. Tracey, 156 N.H.
241, 246 (2007). Resolution of this case requires that we consider the meaning
of “course of conduct” under RSA 633:3-a, II(a). This is a question of statutory
interpretation, which we review de novo. In re D.J., 176 N.H. 78, 81 (2023).
We interpret the statute as written and will not consider what the legislature
might have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit to include.
Id. at 81-82.
RSA 633:3-a, II(a) defines a “‘[c]ourse of conduct’” to mean “2 or more acts
over a period of time, however short, which evidences a continuity of purpose.”
A course of conduct may include “[a]ny act of communication, as defined in
RSA 644:4, II.” RSA 633:3-a, II(a)(7). As relevant to this appeal, a
“communication” for purposes of RSA 633:3-a, II(a)(7) means “to impart a
3