THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0623, Rajani Singh v. Donald Ricker & a.,
the court on January 27, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(2). The plaintiff, Rajani Singh, appeals an order of the Superior Court
(Attorri, J.), issued following a hearing, denying her request for equitable
discovery from the defendants, Donald Ricker and Donald Ricker as Trustee of
the Jonathan V. Guloyan Family Trust. She argues that the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion because, absent the requested discovery,
she has no adequate remedy available at law. We reverse and remand.
RSA 498:1 provides that the superior court shall have the powers of a
court of equity in certain cases, including, among other things, matters of
discovery, and cases in which there is not a plain, adequate and complete remedy
at law. See RSA 498:1 (2010). “The propriety of affording equitable relief rests in
the sound discretion of the trial court to be exercised according to the
circumstances and exigencies of the case.” B&C Mgmt. v. N.H. Div. of
Emergency Services, 175 N.H. 20, 26 (2022). “We review the trial court’s decision
whether to grant equitable relief for an unsustainable exercise of discretion.” Id.
“In doing so, we determine whether the record establishes an objective basis
sufficient to sustain the discretionary judgment made.” Id. The party asserting
that the trial court ruling is unsustainable, here the plaintiff, must demonstrate
that the ruling was unreasonable or untenable to the prejudice of her case. Id.
In this case, the plaintiff sought discovery relative to whether the decedent,
Jonathan Guloyan, had named her as a beneficiary on one or more life insurance
policies held by him. According to the plaintiff, the two had been in a romantic
relationship, and the decedent had told her that she was a named beneficiary on
at least one of the policies. Although the plaintiff sought only the information
necessary to determine her rights, such as the name(s) of the insurer(s), the trial
court nevertheless denied the plaintiff’s request. In so ruling, the trial court
noted certain factors which it weighed against the plaintiff’s request; however, the
crux of its reasoning was that such personal financial information was
“presumptively private,” and that the plaintiff had failed to establish “that she
had any relationship with Mr. Guloyan that was sufficiently close to justify
invading that privacy” — finding that the evidence demonstrated that the two
were, “at most, friends.” Accordingly, the court concluded that “[t]he lack of
evidence supporting [the plaintiff’s] claimed relationship with Mr. Guloyan weighs
heavily against her request” for equitable discovery.
We agree with the plaintiff that the trial court erred. Regardless of whether
the plaintiff and the decedent were romantic partners, or simply friends, there is
no dispute that the two had a relationship of some kind. In any event, the
question of whether the plaintiff is entitled to equitable discovery is not
dependent on the closeness of their relationship, but on whether the plaintiff has
an adequate remedy available at law, and whether the relief sought is appropriate
under the circumstances. See RSA 498:1; B&C Mgmt., 175 N.H. at 26.
In this case, the relief sought by the plaintiff is appropriate under the
circumstances. Here, the decedent’s estate has only a minimal privacy interest
in the name(s) of the relevant insurer(s), especially given that the defendant had
already provided the plaintiff with information about the decedent’s will, and had
expressly confirmed, by text message, that the decedent “had 3 life insurance[]
policies,” that “we do not know who the beneficiaries are,” and that “we have let
the insurance company know that [the decedent] has passed away.” Although
the parties and their attorneys corresponded regarding this issue over the
ensuing years, the record reflects that even though the defendant at one point
provided the plaintiff with some of the decedent’s ashes, he did not provide her
with the name of the referenced insurance company so that she could inquire as
to whether she was listed as a beneficiary. In fact, contrary to his earlier text
message — the authenticity of which is undisputed — the defendant later denied
knowledge of any such life insurance policies.
As a result, the plaintiff lacks an adequate remedy at law because she is
unable to pursue a potential cause of action against the decedent’s insurer(s)
without knowing who they are. Although the defendant argues otherwise, this
case is analogous to Robbins v. Kalwall Corp., 120 N.H. 451 (1980). In Robbins,
the plaintiff suffered a job-related injury for which she received worker’s
compensation. Id. at 452. Because the employer was immune from suit, she
sought to pursue a potential third-party claim against the unknown
manufacturer of the oven which she asserted had caused her injuries. Id. The
employer, however, refused to permit her to examine the oven in order for her to
determine the manufacturer’s name and possible liability. Id. With no other
remedy available at law, the plaintiff filed a petition for equitable discovery
against her employer. See id. Although the trial court dismissed her petition, we
reversed, observing, among other things, that “[i]n some instances discovery will
lie against one not himself liable in the main action, to discover facts peculiarly
within his knowledge as a result of his dealings with the real or prospective
defendants,” and that the “reasons for discovery apply with equal force and some
greater reason to a nonparty.” Id. at 452-53 (quotations and emphases omitted).
Therefore, given that the plaintiff lacked an adequate remedy at law, we held that
RSA 498:1 permitted equitable discovery against a third-party, even when no
litigation was pending. See id.
2
Accordingly, here, because the plaintiff lacks an adequate remedy at law,
and because the limited relief sought is appropriate under the circumstances, we
conclude that RSA 498:1 entitles the plaintiff to obtain the requested information
from the defendant, and that the trial court, therefore, unsustainably exercised
its discretion in denying the plaintiff’s request for equitable discovery. See RSA
498:1; B&C Mgmt., 175 N.H. at 26; Robbins, 120 N.H. at 452-53. Just as in
Robbins, however, “open-ended ‘fishing expeditions’ are not permitted”; the trial
court remains free to cabin the scope of the requested discovery, and may set
appropriate time, place, and manner restrictions thereon. Robbins, 120 N.H. at
453.
Reversed and remanded.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3