THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0150, In the Matter of William Cloutier
and Ashley Nachampassak, the court on May 1, 2024, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The mother, Ashley Nachampassak, appeals orders of the
Circuit Court (Hall, J.), following a final hearing on the parenting petition filed
by the father, William Cloutier, arguing that the trial court erred in:
(1) awarding “retroactive” child support; (2) unreasonably restricting her
parenting time; and (3) prohibiting contact between her boyfriend and the
children. We affirm.
The mother first argues that the trial court erred in awarding
“retroactive” child support starting from the date she was served with the
parenting petition because, she alleges, the petition “lacked specificity.” The
father counters that the mother failed to preserve this issue for appellate review
because she did not raise it in the trial court. It is a long-standing rule that
parties may not have judicial review of matters not raised in the trial court.
Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004). It is the burden of
the appellant, here the mother, to demonstrate that she raised her issues in
the trial court. Id. Based upon our review of the record, we conclude that the
mother has failed to demonstrate that she raised this issue in the trial court.
Accordingly, we decline to review it. See id. at 250-51.
The mother next argues that the trial court’s parenting plan
unreasonably restricts her parenting time, contrary to the principles set forth
in RSA 461-A:2 (2018), and that it is not in the children’s best interests,
contrary to the principles set forth in RSA 461-A:6 (Supp. 2023). At the outset,
we note that the mother has failed to provide this court with the trial court’s
decree, parenting plan, or uniform support order. See Sup. Ct. R. 13(2) (“The
moving party shall be responsible for ensuring that all or such portions of the
record relevant and necessary for the court to decide the questions of law
presented by the case are in fact provided to the supreme court.”). We will
assume, however, for purposes of this argument, that under the court’s
parenting plan, the children spend 18 hours per week with the mother, and no
overnight stays, as she states in her brief.
The trial court has wide discretion in matters involving parenting rights
and responsibilities, and our review is limited to determining whether it clearly
appears that the trial court engaged in an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
In the Matter of Miller & Todd, 161 N.H. 630, 640 (2011). If the court’s
findings can reasonably be made on the evidence presented, they will stand.
In the Matter of Peirano & Larsen, 155 N.H. 738, 749 (2007). RSA 461-A:2
provides that, “[b]ecause children do best when both parents have a stable and
meaningful involvement in their lives, it is the policy of this state, unless it is
clearly shown that in a particular case it is detrimental to a child, to . . .
[s]upport frequent and continuing contact between each child and both
parents.” RSA 461-A:6, in turn, provides that, “[i]n determining parental rights
and responsibilities, the court shall be guided by the best interests of the
child.” RSA 461-A:6 identifies the factors relevant to the best interest analysis,
including “[t]he ability and disposition of each parent to foster a positive
relationship and frequent and continuing . . . contact with the other parent,”
and “[t]he support of each parent for the child’s contact with the other parent.”
RSA 461-A:6, I(e), (f).
In this case, the trial court found that the mother “has no ability to foster
a positive relationship with [the father] or to support the children’s relationship
with their father.” The court also found that the mother’s “hostile attitude and
refusal to meaningful[ly] co-parent or communicate with [the father] is directly
contrary to the children’s best interests.” The court found that “[s]ince August
of 2021, [the mother] has seen the children on average of one time per week.”
We conclude that the court’s findings can reasonably be made on the evidence
presented. See Peirano, 155 N.H. at 749. Based upon this record, we cannot
conclude that trial court’s parenting plan constitutes an unsustainable exercise
of discretion. See Miller, 161 N.H. at 640.
The mother next argues that the trial court unsustainably exercised its
discretion in prohibiting contact between her boyfriend and the children. In
prior orders, the court found that the boyfriend has a history of causing
domestic disturbances, and that he was belligerent and confrontational with
the father at an exchange of the children. At the final parenting hearing, the
court found the boyfriend’s testimony to be “very troubling,” and his demeanor
to be “explosive and angry.” The mother argues that the boyfriend is not a
physical threat to the children. The trial court acknowledged that the
boyfriend “may not be a physical threat to [the children],” but found that “his
anger and animosity towards [their father] are emotionally harmful and
damaging to the children.” Based upon this record, we cannot conclude that
the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion in prohibiting contact
between the mother’s boyfriend and the children. See Miller, 161 N.H. at 640.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Hantz Marconi, Donovan, and Countway,
JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2