THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0302, State of New Hampshire v. Kenneth
Brunelle, the court on April 8, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup.
Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Kenneth Brunelle, was convicted by a jury on one
count of second degree assault-domestic violence, see RSA 631:2, III(a) (Supp.
2024), two counts of domestic violence-simple assault, see RSA 631:2-b, I(a)
(2016), and three counts of criminal threatening, see RSA 631:4, I(c), (d) (2016).
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred by: (1) admitting text
messages sent from the victim to her sister; and (2) applying an incorrect
standard when conducting an in camera review of the victim’s counseling
records. We affirm.
I. Background
The jury could have found the following facts. The victim and the
defendant were married and lived together at the time of the charged conduct.
On the evening of December 12, 2019, the victim was at home alone. When the
defendant returned home, he began yelling at the victim. The victim attempted
to leave the house to avoid the defendant. As she tried to leave, the defendant
grabbed the victim’s hair, dragged her into the kitchen, and threw her onto the
floor. The defendant threatened to harm the victim, her family, and her dogs.
The defendant put his hands around the victim’s throat and repeated the
threats. After the defendant stopped strangling the victim, she crawled into her
bedroom where she retrieved her phone. The victim testified that she
“immediately” began texting her sister and stated she “was afraid for [her] life.”
She stayed in her bedroom or bathroom while texting her sister. The defendant
periodically entered the bedroom and bathroom briefly while the victim was
there.
The victim (V) recounted these events to her sister (S) in the following
text messages:
S: Want me to say no lights or sirens
V: He will know because it is quiet now
V: No
V: Because I will get hurt
V: Please I want my teeth
V: It is quiet now
S: Ok
V: I will go on [sic] morning he will not know
S: [redacted]
V: No
V: If you call he said he will put me on a breathing tube
V: They take too long
V: He will hurt me and dog
V: He will not be here on Saturday
V: Don’t call him or cops he will hurt me
V: He is yelling and screaming still I am on toilet pretending I am going to
bathroom
V: He don’t know I have phone
V: He is going to dover Saturday maybe you and josh can come up
S: Call 911
V: If I start process and paperwork comes here idk
V: If I call he said he will beet [sic]
S: [redacted]
S: [redacted]
V: I know
V: I will
V: [redacted]
V: You know I am serious
S: [redacted]
V: That is why I told you and talked with you
S: [redacted]
V: I am weak and under stress and duress
V: I just need to loe [sic] here now
V: I will call you if anything else happens
V: I cant get out because my keys for truck are hidden
S: Why
V: I’m stuck all I have is my phone he don’t know I have it
S: [redacted]
S: [redacted]
V: I said I left it in car
S: I ll tell them no light and no siren
V: I will call or text you when he gets up
S: [redacted]
The next morning, the police spoke with the defendant and the victim.
The police were subsequently provided with screenshots of the text messages
the victim had sent to her sister.
Before trial, the defendant moved in limine to exclude the text messages,
arguing that all but four were inadmissible hearsay. The defendant conceded
that four messages would be admissible under New Hampshire Rule of
Evidence 803(1): “[h]e will know because it is quiet now,” “it is quiet now,” “I
2
am weak and under stress and duress,” and “[h]e is yelling and screaming still
I am on toilet pretending I am going to bathroom.” The State objected,
asserting that all of the text messages were admissible under the “present-
sense impression” and “then-existing mental, emotional, or physical condition”
exceptions to the hearsay rule. The Superior Court (Ignatius, J.) determined
that, “[a]ssuming a proper foundation” was laid at trial, most of the text
messages would be admissible under the two hearsay exceptions. In addition,
the trial court ruled that “limited” texts sent from the victim’s sister to the
victim were admissible “for continuity and context.”
The defendant also moved for an in camera review of the victim’s
counseling records. In support, the defendant asserted that the victim’s
“mental health status” may have led the victim to “say something happened
when it did not.” The State objected, arguing that the defendant had not met
his burden to demonstrate a “reasonable probability that the records contain
information that is material and relevant to his defense.” (Quotation and
emphasis omitted.) The Superior Court (Schulman, J.) granted the defendant’s
motion, reviewed the records, and decided “in an overabundance of caution” to
release some, but not all, of the victim’s counseling records.
At trial, the State introduced the text messages as a single exhibit. The
victim testified that she sent the text messages to her sister after the defendant
had strangled and threatened her. After a four-day jury trial, the jury
convicted the defendant on one count of second degree assault-domestic
violence, two counts of domestic violence-simple assault, and three counts of
criminal threatening. This appeal followed.
II. Analysis
A. Evidentiary Ruling
We first address the defendant’s argument that the trial court erred in
admitting the victim’s text messages to her sister as either “present-sense
impressions” or “then-existing mental, emotional, or physical conditions.” See
N.H. R. Ev. 803(1), (3). He asserts that the statements “do not ‘describe’ or
‘explain’ a ‘condition’ or ‘event’ that [the victim] was contemporaneously
perceiving or had just perceived.” Rather, the defendant argues, the victim’s
messages state “what she might do at some later time, what she wanted her
sister to do or not do, what she speculated [the defendant] might do, and what
she claimed [the defendant] had at some unknown time threatened to do.”
We review the trial court’s ruling on the admissibility of evidence for an
unsustainable exercise of discretion, and will reverse only if it was clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of the defendant’s case. State v.
Rouleau, 176 N.H. 400, 405 (2024), 2024 N.H. 2, ¶13. In applying our
unsustainable exercise of discretion standard of review, we determine only
3