THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0313, State of New Hampshire v.
Christopher Nash, the court on November 13, 2024, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). Following a jury trial in the Superior Court (Will, J.), the
defendant, Christopher Nash, was convicted on one count of aggravated
felonious sexual assault and one count of felonious sexual assault. He argues
that the trial court erred in allowing the State to introduce certain text
messages and witness testimony about his “whereabouts and activities” on the
night of the charged assaults. We affirm.
The jury heard the following evidence. On the night of January 11-12,
2020, the nine-year-old victim spent the night at the home of her friend, who
was the daughter of the defendant’s girlfriend. The defendant visited his
girlfriend’s apartment every day, sometimes spending nights there. The victim
alleged that at 4 a.m. the defendant came into the room where she was
sleeping with her friend and asked whether she could “do him a favor.” She
acquiesced and followed him out of the room. At the defendant’s request, she
found something to cover her eyes and ears and followed him into another
room where the assaults took place. She disclosed the assaults to her friend
the next morning and to others in the neighborhood. The police were
contacted; the responding officer took the victim to the hospital.
Two detectives returned to the apartment where the assaults took place
to speak to the defendant. When asked where he had been during the previous
night, the defendant said that he had left his girlfriend’s home at approximately
10:30 p.m., had given a friend a ride, and then went to the home of another
friend, Nicole. He stated that he stayed there until approximately 2 a.m., then
returned to his girlfriend’s apartment to return her car, and then walked to his
mother’s house where he stayed until 7 a.m. when he returned to his
girlfriend’s apartment. He denied that he had engaged in any inappropriate
touching with the victim.
Prior to trial, the State filed a motion in limine seeking to introduce text
messages between: (1) the defendant and Nicole; and (2) Nicole and the
defendant’s girlfriend. The State also sought to introduce Nicole’s testimony
“about what she and the defendant were doing on the night of January 11th.”
The messages between the defendant and Nicole addressed drug transactions
and drug use. Although the defendant left Nicole’s home at 10:39 p.m. on
January 11, 2020, Nicole told the police that the defendant and his girlfriend
had asked her to say that he had been with Nicole until 2 a.m. on January 12,
2020, thereby corroborating his statement to the police. Text messages
between Nicole and the defendant’s girlfriend confirmed this request. The State
contended that the text messages and Nicole’s prospective testimony were
“probative of consciousness of guilt and prove[d] that the defendant had a clear
opportunity to commit the sexual assault.”
The trial court found that the messages provided evidence both that the
defendant had the opportunity to commit the assault and of consciousness of
guilt. The court conditionally granted the State’s motion, ruling that the time
and the location of the text and Facebook messages could be admitted, as well
as Nicole’s testimony about the timing of the defendant’s presence at her
house. The court barred evidence that addressed the sale and use of drugs,
ruling that it was irrelevant and prejudicial to the defendant. The court further
stated that this ruling “does not preclude the defendant from objecting
contemporaneously at trial should events during trial give rise to further
objection(s).”
At trial, after the text messages were admitted as a full exhibit, the trial
court instructed the jury that because the content of the messages was not
relevant, portions had been redacted. The defendant was subsequently
convicted and this appeal followed.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in allowing the
State to introduce the text messages and Nicole’s testimony to show the
defendant’s consciousness of guilt. He contends that, because the State had
other available evidence, the challenged evidence had little probative value. He
also contends that its admission “unfairly prejudiced the defense, by inviting
an inference of [his] consciousness of guilt to which he could respond only by
introducing other highly prejudicial evidence tending to show his guilt of drug
crimes.” He asserts that, to the extent that he displayed a consciousness of
guilt in either his statements or other actions, it was caused by his other
uncharged criminal activity.
We review the trial court’s evidentiary rulings to determine whether its
exercise of discretion is sustainable and will reverse only if the court’s decision
was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of the defendant’s case.
State v. Clark, 174 N.H. 586, 589 (2021). Evidence is relevant if it has “any
tendency to make a fact [of consequence in determining the action] more or
less probable than it would be without the evidence.” N.H. R. Ev. 401. Under
the balancing test of Rule 403, we must determine whether the probative value
2
of relevant evidence is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair
prejudice to the defendant. Clark, 174 N.H. at 590; see N.H. R. Ev. 403. When
reviewing the evidence, we consider: (1) whether it would have a great
emotional impact upon a jury; (2) its potential for appealing to a juror’s sense
of resentment or outrage; and (3) the extent to which the issue upon which it is
offered is established by other evidence, stipulation, or inference. Clark, 174
N.H. at 590. Because the trial court is in the best position to gauge the impact
of potentially prejudicial testimony and to determine what steps to take to
remedy that prejudice, we give the court broad latitude in ruling on the
admissibility of potentially unfairly prejudicial evidence. Id.
We have explained that unfair prejudice is not the tendency of the
evidence to prove guilt but rather “an undue tendency to induce a decision
against the defendant on some improper basis, commonly one that is
emotionally charged.” State v. Roy, 167 N.H. 276, 285 (2015). In this case, the
trial court, cognizant of potential prejudice to the defendant, allowed the text
messages to be admitted to establish a timeline of the defendant’s location but
required that the contents be redacted and, further, instructed the jury that
the redacted content was not relevant to the issues in the case. The court
imposed similar limitations on Nicole’s testimony.
Although the defendant argues that the State could have proved his
location during the hours in question through the GPS data from his cellphone,
the text messages and Nicole’s testimony established that the defendant was
actually in possession of the phone during that time. His argument that, to the
extent that he displayed consciousness of guilt in either his statements or
other actions, it was caused by his other uncharged criminal activity is also
unpersuasive. When asked by the police about his whereabouts, he said that
he had left the apartment at 10:30 p.m. on January 11, returned at 2 a.m. on
January 12 to drop off a car, and then spent the night at his mother’s house,
returning to the apartment at 7 a.m. As the defendant observes, his statement,
by itself, that he was at Nicole’s house until 2:00 a.m. did not provide an alibi
for the 4:00 a.m. sexual assault. However, it was part of his entire narrative of
his whereabouts on that night which, considered as a whole, did provide an
alibi. See State v. Evans, 150 N.H. 416, 420 (2003) (reasonable to infer
consciousness of guilt from defendant’s false exculpatory statement).
The defendant’s location during the time of the charged assaults was
highly probative; with the limitations imposed by the trial court, the probative
value of the challenged evidence was not substantially outweighed by the risk
3