THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0439, In the Matter of Karen Loux and
Brandon Loux, the court on December 20, 2024, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The petitioner, Karen Loux (wife), appeals the final decree of
the Circuit Court (Subers, J.), following a hearing, in her divorce from
respondent, Brandon Loux. She argues that the trial court erred in:
(1) denying her request for a fault-based divorce without considering all the
statutory grounds for granting a fault-based divorce; (2) awarding the marital
home to the husband; and (3) entering a final default against her. We affirm.
The wife first argues that the trial court erred in denying her request for
a fault-based divorce without considering all the statutory grounds for granting
a fault-based divorce. At the outset, we note that it is the wife’s burden as the
appealing party to demonstrate that she raised her issues in the trial court.
Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004). The statement of
questions presented in the wife’s brief does not include specific references to
any portion of the record where the issues on appeal were raised and
preserved. See Sup. Ct. R. 16(3)(b) (“After each statement of a question
presented, counsel shall make specific reference to the volume and page of the
transcript where the issue was raised and where an objection was made, or to
the pleading which raised the issue.”). We may decline to review issues raised
on appeal for failure to comply with this rule. Bean, 151 N.H. at 250-51.
In her petition, the wife sought a divorce based upon “[f]elony spousal
abuse” and “abandonment.” The wife does not challenge the trial court’s
finding that, at the final hearing, she failed to prove grounds for a divorce
based upon abandonment. The trial court construed her request for a divorce
based upon “felony spousal abuse” to mean a divorce based upon the
husband’s conviction of a felony, see RSA 458:7, IV (2018), and found that the
wife did not prove grounds for divorce based upon such grounds. On appeal,
the wife argues that the trial court erred in failing to construe her petition more
broadly to assert additional grounds for a fault-based divorce, including
“[e]xtreme cruelty” and treatment that seriously “injure[s] health or endanger[s]
reason.” See RSA 458:7, III, V (2018). However, the record fails to show that
she made this argument to the trial court. In her motion for reconsideration,
the wife argues that ‘[t]he court overlooked facts pre[s]ented” on grounds of
extreme cruelty or treatment that injured health or endangered reason,” but
she does not argue that the court erred in construing her petition not to allege
these grounds. Even if the wife had preserved this issue, we cannot conclude
that the trial court erred in construing the wife’s petition as it did.
The wife next argues that the trial court erred in its property distribution.
We afford the trial court broad discretion in determining matters of property
distribution when fashioning a final divorce decree. In the Matter of Sanborn &
Bart, 174 N.H. 343, 353 (2021). The trial court in its discretion may award a
particular asset in its entirety to one party. In the Matter of Letendre &
Letendre, 149 N.H. 31, 36 (2002). We will not overturn the trial court’s
decision absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion or an error of law. In
the Matter of Sanborn, 174 N.H. at 353. If the court’s findings can reasonably
be made on the evidence, they will stand. Id.
The wife argues that the court erred in awarding the marital home
entirely to the husband. The court noted that the husband purchased the
residence in 2006, approximately nine years prior to the marriage. The
husband presented a letter from a real estate agent estimating the fair market
value of the home to be $215,000. He testified that he used an inheritance
from his mother to replace the roof, remodel the kitchen, and purchase a wood-
fired boiler in the garage. The court found the total cost of these renovations to
be approximately $70,000 to $75,000. The court also found that, from
February 9, 2022, when the wife started living in the home without the
husband, until the final hearing on May 19, 2023, she had not made any
mortgage payments, and that by the time of the final hearing, the mortgage
was delinquent by 636 days. Based upon this record, we cannot conclude that
the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion in awarding the marital
home entirely to the husband. See In the Matter of Sanborn, 174 N.H. at 353.
The wife next argues that the trial court erred in entering a final default
against her. The trial court has broad discretion in managing the proceedings
before it. In the Matter of Conner & Conner, 156 N.H. 250, 252 (2007). We
review a trial court’s rulings in this area under an unsustainable exercise of
discretion standard. Id. To establish that the court erred under this standard,
the respondent must demonstrate that the court’s rulings were clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of her case. Id.
The court found that the wife did not provide her answers to the
husband’s interrogatories until the day before the final hearing, more than
thirty days after they were served. In sanctioning the wife, the court advised
her that if she sought to present evidence that was requested in the
interrogatories, the husband would have the opportunity to object, and that the
wife “may or may not be able to present that information” at the hearing. The
wife argues that the court’s order was inequitable and confusing. Based upon
2
this record, we cannot conclude that the trial court unsustainably exercised its
discretion. See id.
Affirmed.
Donovan and Countway, JJ., concurred; Nadeau, J., retired superior court
chief justice, specially assigned under RSA 490:3, concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3