THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0649, State of New Hampshire v. Edward
Farley, the court on April 11, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Edward Farley, appeals a finding of guilt by
the Circuit Court (Pendleton, J.), following a bench trial, on a charge alleging a
violation of a local dog ordinance based upon an incident in which two of the
defendant’s dogs escaped his property, and one of the dogs bit a third dog that
was being walked by a member of the public on the road abutting the
defendant’s property. On appeal, the defendant raises a number of arguments,
including a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence to support the trial
court’s finding that his dog bit the third dog. We affirm.
A challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence raises a question of law that
we review de novo. State v. Seibel, 174 N.H. 440, 445 (2021). When
considering a challenge to the sufficiency of evidence to support a conviction,
we objectively review the entire record, construing the evidence, and all
reasonable inferences from it, in the light most favorable to the State, and
determine whether any rational trier of fact could have found guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt, recognizing that the trier of fact has the benefit of observing
the demeanor of the witnesses first-hand. Id.; see State v. Giles, 140 N.H. 714,
718-19 (1996) (“We defer to the jury’s findings on credibility in part because a
trial transcript provides no indication of a witness’s tone of voice or demeanor,
two useful tools in the assessment of credibility.”). We examine each item of
evidence in the context of the entire case, not in isolation. Seibel, 174 N.H. at
445. The trier of fact is entitled to draw reasonable inferences from the facts
proved as well as from facts found as the result of other inferences so long as
they can reasonably be drawn therefrom. Id. The defendant bears the burden
of demonstrating that the evidence was insufficient to prove guilt. Id.
As the appealing party, the defendant has the burden of demonstrating
reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014). Based upon our
review of the record submitted on appeal, including the transcript of the two-
and-a-half-hour trial, the defendant’s arguments, and the relevant law, we
conclude that the evidence supports the trial court’s finding, beyond a
reasonable doubt, that the defendant’s dog bit the dog of the passerby on the
road abutting the defendant’s property, and that the defendant has not
demonstrated reversible error with respect to any of the arguments he is
raising. See id.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2