THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0012, In the Matter of Ulrike Newsted
and Gary Newsted, the court on February 13, 2024, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). In
this appeal from a final order of the Circuit Court-Family Division (Burns, J.),
the petitioner, Ulrike Newsted (Wife), appeals the trial court’s ruling that she
improperly redirected payments pursuant to a loan agreement from the
respondent, Gary Newsted (Husband), to herself. The Wife argues that the
family division: (1) lacked subject matter jurisdiction to divide the loan after
ruling that the loan was not marital property; (2) impermissibly rewrote the
loan agreement; (3) erred when it failed to find that the Husband waived his
rights under the loan agreement; and (4) erred when it found that the Wife was
the author of a contested email. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. The parties were married in
April 2016, and they divorced in May 2019. In November 2016, the parties
executed a loan agreement with the Wife’s adult son. The agreement lists the
Husband as “lender,” the Wife as “co-lender,” and the Wife’s son as “borrower.”
The purpose of the loan was “to pay off five student loans that [the son] was
responsible for.” A portion of the loan was used to pay off three student loans
that the Wife had taken out to finance her son’s college education, and the
balance of the loan was used to pay off two loans that the son had taken out to
pay for college. The Husband provided the funding for the loan, which he
derived from an inheritance from his parents. Pursuant to the loan
agreement’s payment terms, the son was required to make ninety-six monthly
payments from December 2016 through December 2024 directly to the
Husband’s bank account.
From December 2016 until April 2019, the son issued monthly payments
to the Husband’s account. In April 2019, the Wife instructed her son to
redirect the monthly loan payments to her rather than to the Husband. The
son thereafter issued the monthly loan payments to the Wife. The final divorce
decree, dated May 27, 2019, did not address the loan, even though both parties
listed the loan as an asset on their financial affidavits.
In January 2022, the Husband filed a motion for contempt, alleging that
the Wife “wrongfully, and without right, redirect[ed] payments owed from a
personal loan” to herself in violation of the terms of the loan agreement. The
family division held a two-day hearing on the motion in June and July 2022.
Much of the hearing testimony centered around a May 15, 2019 email entitled
“Fini,” in which the Husband allegedly told the son: “Our divorce is final. You
are absolved of any debt to me and there will be no civil action against you.
Have a good life.” Both the Husband and the Wife denied authoring the “Fini”
email.
In its October 2022 order, the trial court ruled that the Wife had no legal
basis or authority to redirect the loan payments from the Husband to herself,
explaining that “[t]here was no writing that allowed it, and no writing that
altered the terms of the loan agreement in any way.” Although the court
acknowledged that the Husband and the Wife are both identified in the loan
agreement as lenders, it concluded that “this does not defeat [the Husband’s]
claim that he is entitled to repayment of the loan, and that [the Wife] is not so
entitled.” The court reasoned that “while [the Wife] may argue that the
inherited funds were a marital asset,” the fact that the loan benefitted the Wife
and her son by allowing them to consolidate their loans “militate[s] against
such a finding.” The court determined that allowing the Wife to “use her
husband’s inheritance to achieve the elimination of her own debt – the direct
benefit of the loan – and also achieve the direct benefit of getting repaid by her
son after divorcing her husband” would unjustly enrich the Wife.
The family division also found that “[b]ased on the weight of credible
testimony, and taking into consideration the demeanors of the witnesses,” the
Wife, not the Husband, wrote the “Fini” email, and that “[t]his email was a
false, deceitful attempt on the part of [the Wife] to alter the repayment
arrangements of the loan due to [the Husband].” The court ordered the Wife to
disgorge the loan payments she had received since April 2019 and to pay the
Husband any future loan payments she receives from her son. The court
denied the Wife’s motion for reconsideration, and this appeal followed.
We first address the Wife’s argument that the trial court acted outside of
its subject matter jurisdiction because it “adjudicated the husband’s ownership
interest in the loan proceeds after ruling that the loan was not a marital asset
and without analyzing the property division factors called for in RSA 458:16-a.”
This argument requires that we analyze the family division’s jurisdiction to
effectively determine which party is entitled to the loan payments. “A court
does not have power to hear a case concerning subject matters over which it
lacks jurisdiction, and subject matter jurisdiction cannot be conferred where it
does not already exist.” Colburn v. Saykaly, 173 N.H. 162, 164 (2020). The
ultimate determination as to whether the trial court has jurisdiction in this
case is a question of law subject to de novo review. Id.
As we have previously explained, “[t]he legislature established the circuit
court in 2011 by merging the former probate and district courts and the former
2
judicial branch family division.” Id. at 165 (quotation omitted). It conferred the
jurisdiction, powers and duties of these former courts upon the circuit court
and divided the circuit court into three divisions: a probate division, a district
division, and a family division. Id. Although there remain statutory references
“to the probate or district courts or to the judicial branch family division,”
those references “shall be deemed to be to the New Hampshire circuit court
where it has exclusive jurisdiction of a subject matter and to the superior court
and circuit court where the circuit court has concurrent jurisdiction with the
superior court.” RSA 490-F:18 (Supp. 2023). Thus, when we refer in this
order to the family division, we necessarily refer to the circuit court.
“Because the powers and jurisdiction of the family division are limited to
those conferred by statute, we look to the relevant statutes to determine
whether the family division had subject matter jurisdiction.” In the Matter of
Muller & Muller, 164 N.H. 512, 517 (2013) (citation omitted). RSA 490-D:2
(Supp. 2023) provides, in pertinent part, that “the judicial branch family
division” has exclusive jurisdiction over “[p]etitions for divorce, nullity of
marriage, alimony, custody of children, support, and to establish paternity.”
RSA 490-D:2 (Supp. 2023). “The law is well settled that jurisdiction in divorce
proceedings is a continuing one with respect to all subsequent proceedings
which arise out of the original cause of action.” Daine v. Daine, 157 N.H. 426,
427-28 (2008) (quotation omitted). RSA 458:16-a (Supp. 2023) authorizes the
family division to distribute property that belongs to divorcing parties. See RSA
458:16-a, I (“Property shall include all tangible and intangible property and
assets, real or personal, belonging to either or both parties, whether title to the
property is held in the name of either or both parties.”). When doing so, the
court employs a two-step analysis. In the Matter of Chamberlin & Chamberlin,
155 N.H. 13, 16 (2007). First, the family division determines, as a matter of
law, which assets constitute marital property under RSA 458:16-a, I. Id.
Then, the court exercises its discretion to equitably distribute those assets
pursuant to RSA 458:16-a, II. Id. The family division’s determination as to
whether certain assets constitute marital property presents a question of law,
which we review de novo, while the equitable division of property is reviewed for
an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Id.
Here, the Wife argues that the family division was deprived of its
jurisdiction to resolve the parties’ loan dispute because the court concluded
either that the loan was not marital property or that a determination of
whether the loan was marital property was unnecessary. The Wife claims that
the trial court ruled that the loan was not marital property when it stated that
“while [the Wife] may argue that the inherited funds were a marital asset, the
following additional considerations militate against such a finding.” However,
the Wife misreads the trial court’s order. The court’s order distributed the loan
payments, not the Husband’s inheritance.
3