THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0559, Michelle Boucher, individually and
as executrix of Estate of Alan C. Gilman v. Estate of Alan C.
Gilman & a., the court on April 16, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The
petitioner, Michelle Boucher, both individually and as the executrix of the
Estate of Alan C. Gilman, brought multiple actions against the respondents,
Lynne R. Gilman and the Estate of Alan C. Gilman. Lynne appeals an order of
the Circuit Court (Patten, R., approved by Keating, J.) granting relief sought by
Michelle, as executrix, for declaratory judgment and restitution. We reverse.
The following facts are drawn from the trial court’s orders or are
undisputed by the parties. Denise Gilman and Alan C. Gilman were married in
1980. Michelle is Denise’s daughter and is not the biological or adopted
daughter of Alan.
In 1986 and 1987, Denise and Alan acquired interests in real property in
Madison (the “Madison property”) as joint tenants with rights of survivorship.
In 1994, Alan and Denise signed identical, mutual wills. The mutual wills
made a specific devise of the Madison property to Michelle as the contingent
beneficiary if she survived both Denise and Alan. Denise died in 1995.
Lynne began to reside with Alan on the Madison property in 1996, and
they married in 1998. Alan and Lynne had an arrangement for the payment of
their bills: Alan paid the mortgage, while Lynne paid for household bills
including real estate taxes, household repairs, and insurance. On several
occasions, Alan, and on one occasion Alan and Lynne, borrowed money from a
bank, each time securing the loan with a mortgage on the Madison property.
In 2018, Alan conveyed the Madison property by quitclaim deed to himself and
Lynne as joint tenants with rights of survivorship.
Alan died in 2020. Michelle filed Alan’s will and a petition for probate
administration and was appointed as the estate fiduciary. At the time of Alan’s
death, Lynne did not know that Alan and Denise had executed the mutual
wills.
Michelle brought claims in both her individual capacity and as the
executrix of Alan’s estate. As executrix, Michelle brought actions against
Lynne for declaratory judgment and restitution. Individually, Michelle brought
an action against Lynne for avoidance of fraudulent transfer. The trial court
granted Lynne’s motion to dismiss as to the fraudulent transfer count, but
otherwise denied Lynne’s motion to dismiss and granted Michelle declaratory
judgment and equitable relief. In so ruling, it found that Alan and Denise, by
express agreement, “contracted to make mutual wills, which became
irrevocable after the death of Denise, in order to carry out their common plan
as to the manner their property which existed as [of] the date of their
agreement was to be disposed of upon the later death of Alan.” The trial court
further found that the mutual wills were silent as to whether Alan “could or
could not make a deed transfer of the property, before or after Denise’s death.”
In answering “whether or not the inter vivos quitclaim deed from Alan to
himself and Lynne as joint tenants constitute[d] a breach of the mutual will
contract between Alan and Denise,” the trial court ruled that “Alan’s quitclaim
deed was contrary to the duties he had under the implied covenant to act in
good faith and to fairly deal with the property subject to the [contract].”
The trial court imposed “a constructive trust on Lynne’s possession, use
and title claim to the property in favor of Michelle”; “void[ed] the quitclaim deed
from Alan to himself and Lynne”; and “rul[ed] that the Madison property is
subject to the terms of Alan’s 1994 will as an estate asset for probate
administration procedures and law.” Lynne’s motions for clarification and for
reconsideration were denied. On appeal, Lynne challenges, among other
things, Michelle’s standing to sue and the trial court’s finding that Alan
breached his contract contained in the mutual will with Denise.
We first address Lynne’s argument that Michelle lacks standing to sue
for breach of contract as the executrix of the estate. We conclude that Michelle
has a sufficient interest in these proceedings to have standing. See Conduent
State & Local Solutions v. N.H. Dep’t of Transp., 171 N.H. 414, 418 (2018).
Although Lynne raises a number of issues on appeal, we need only
address whether the trial court erred in finding that Alan’s conveyance of the
Madison property breached the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing.
Lynne argues that the factual record is insufficient to show that Alan breached
the mutual wills or violated the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing.
We agree. Our standard for reviewing probate division decisions is set forth by
statute. See RSA 567-A:4 (2019). “The findings of fact of the judge of probate
are final unless they are so plainly erroneous that such findings could not be
reasonably made.” Id. Consequently, we will not disturb the probate division’s
decree unless it is unsupported by the evidence or plainly erroneous as a
matter of law. In re Estate of Couture, 166 N.H. 101, 105 (2014).
2
In every agreement, there is an implied covenant that the parties will act
in good faith and fairly with one another. Short v. LaPlante Trs., 174 N.H. 384,
391 (2021). This case addresses the implied covenant that imposes limits on
the exercise of discretion in contractual performance. See id. This covenant
prohibits behavior inconsistent with the parties’ agreed-upon common purpose
and justified expectations, as well as with common standards of decency,
fairness and reasonableness. Id. at 391-92. We will uphold a trial court’s
determination regarding the breach of the implied covenant of good faith and
fair dealing unless it is not supported by the evidence or is legally erroneous.
Birch Broad. v. Capitol Broad. Corp., 161 N.H. 192, 198 (2010).
In Centronics Corp. v. Genicom Corp., 132 N.H. 133, 143-44 (1989), we
set forth four questions to address when determining whether a party breached
the covenant of good faith and fair dealing:
First, does the agreement “allow . . . or confer upon the defendant a
degree of discretion in performance tantamount to a power to deprive the
plaintiff of a substantial proportion of the agreement’s value?” Second,
did the parties intend “to make a legally enforceable contract?” Third,
“has the defendant’s exercise of discretion exceeded the limits of
reasonableness?” Finally, did the defendant’s abuse of discretion cause
the damage complained of or does the damage “result from events
beyond the control of either party, against which the defendant has no
obligation to protect the plaintiff?”
Short, 174 N.H. at 392 (quoting Centronics Corp., 132 N.H. at 143-44)
(citations omitted).
Resolution of this matter turns on the reasonableness of Alan’s transfer
of the property to himself and Lynne as joint tenants with rights of
survivorship. Because the mutual wills are silent regarding the surviving
spouse’s authority to transfer the property, we conclude that Alan had some
discretion to dispose of the Madison property. See Annotation, Right Of Party
To Joint Or Mutual Will, Made Pursuant To Agreement As To Disposition Of
Property At Death, To Dispose Of Such Property During Life, 85 A.L.R.3d § 19
(1978) (“It is generally held that regardless of the interest given to the survivor
in a joint or mutual will, as long as there is no express provision to the
contrary, the survivor has power to dispose of the property for necessities,
support, and maintenance.”); see also Schwartz v. Horn, 290 N.E.2d 816, 819
(N.Y. 1972) (“In no instance . . . would a transfer—whether or not it defeats the
purpose of the agreement—be prohibited when the property or its proceeds are
used to meet the daily needs of the surviving testator.”). We accordingly
disagree with Michelle’s argument that Alan lacked discretion to convey the
property to himself and Lynne.
3