THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0641, State of New Hampshire v. Brandon
Brymer, the court on May 19, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Brandon Brymer, appeals his conviction in
Superior Court (MacLeod, J.), following a jury trial, of possessing controlled
drugs. See RSA 318-B:2, I (Supp. 2023). He argues that the trial court erred
in: (1) denying his motion to dismiss based upon his claim of immunity; and
(2) denying his request for a jury instruction on immunity. We affirm.
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred in denying his
motion to dismiss based upon his claim of immunity. “To succeed on a motion
to dismiss, the defendant bears the burden of establishing that the evidence,
viewed in its entirety and with all reasonable inferences drawn in the State’s
favor, was insufficient to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that he was guilty of
the crime charged.” State v. Farrington, 161 N.H. 440, 445 (2011) (quotation
omitted). “We view the evidence and reasonable inferences arising therefrom in
the manner most favorable to the State.” Id. (brackets and quotation omitted).
Additionally, “we review the evidence in context, and not in isolation.” Id.
(quotation omitted).
After the State rested, the defense moved to dismiss, arguing that the
State failed to prove that the defendant was not entitled to immunity under
RSA 318-B:28-b (Supp. 2023). The statute provides, in relevant part, that
“[a] person who . . . is the subject of a good faith request for medical
assistance . . . shall not be arrested, prosecuted, or convicted for
possessing . . . a controlled drug in violation of RSA 318-B:2, if the evidence for
the charge was gained as a proximate result of the request for medical
assistance.” RSA 318-B:28-b, III; State v. Eldridge, 173 N.H. 61, 67-68 (2020).
The statute defines “medical assistance” to mean “professional services
provided to a person experiencing a drug overdose by a health care professional
licensed, registered, or certified under state law who, acting within his or her
lawful scope of practice, may provide diagnosis, treatment, or emergency
services for a person experiencing a drug overdose.” RSA 318-B:28-b, I(b).
Officer Bullock testified that he received a call at approximately
7:25 p.m. on December 22, 2022, and was dispatched to Walmart. He testified
that he “was essentially there for a welfare check on a blue sedan that was in
the parking lot, multiple occupants.” Bullock “tried to talk to
the . . . passenger in the back seat, but she wasn’t able to speak to [him].”
Bullock testified that the woman appeared to be impaired. Bullock spoke to
the person in the driver’s seat, who identified himself as the defendant, and
who said that they were “waiting on a licensed driver” and “were just kind of
hanging out.” Bullock “proceeded talking to [the defendant] for a little bit.”
When the defendant asked Bullock why he was there, Bullock told him, “We
got a call that you guys might be using drugs and that somebody looked like
they were nodding off and might need medical attention.”
Assuming, without deciding, that the State had the burden to prove
beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant was not “the subject of a good
faith request for medical assistance,” we conclude that the State met its
burden. The person who appeared to be impaired and might need medical
attention was the woman in the back seat, not the defendant. Moreover, there
was no evidence of a request for “medical assistance,” which is defined in the
statute as a request for “professional services provided to a person experiencing
a drug overdose by a health care professional.” There was no evidence that
anyone had called for an ambulance or that Bullock, a law enforcement officer,
was trained to provide “medical assistance.” On the contrary, Bullock testified
that if someone needed more than basic first aid, he is trained to “call the
EMTs.” Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court did not err in denying the
defendant’s motion to dismiss.
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred in denying his
request for a jury instruction on the elements of immunity under RSA 318-
B:28-b. We review the trial court’s decision not to give a jury instruction for an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. State v. Cavanaugh, 174 N.H. 1, 7 (2020).
A trial court must grant a defendant’s requested jury instruction on a specific
defense if there is “some evidence” to support a rational finding in favor of it.
Id. “Some evidence” requires more than a minutia or scintilla of evidence. Id.
For the reasons discussed above, we conclude that there was insufficient
evidence to support a rational finding that the defendant was entitled to
immunity under RSA 318-B:28-b. Accordingly, we cannot conclude that the
trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion in denying the defendant’s
requested jury instruction.
2
In light of our decision, we need not address the parties’ remaining
arguments. See Antosz v. Allain, 163 N.H. 298, 302 (2012) (declining to
address parties’ other arguments where holding on one issue is dispositive).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3