THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0714, Yuma Haidara v. Joni Plante, the
court on November 25, 2024, issued the following order:
Yuma Haidara’s motion to seal appellant’s objection to the appellee’s
motion to strike is granted to the extent that Joni Plante’s August 15, 2024
objection shall remain confidential.
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The defendant, Joni Plante, appeals the order of the Circuit
Court (Chabot, J.), following a hearing, finding that she violated RSA 540-A:3, I
(2021) and RSA 540-A:3, IV (2021), and awarding damages to the plaintiff,
Yuma Haidara. The defendant argues that the trial court erred in its findings
because, she alleges: (1) she is not the “landlord”; (2) she believed that she had
permission to enter the plaintiff’s apartment; (3) the plaintiff’s air conditioner
was not a utility; and (4) she was acting in an emergency. We affirm.
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred in finding that she,
as an individual, violated RSA 540-A:3, I, and RSA 540-A:3, IV, when the
landlord named in the plaintiff’s lease is a limited liability company. RSA 540-
A:1, I (2021) defines “landlord” as “an owner, lessor or agent thereof who rents
or leases residential premises . . . to another person.” The defendant admits
that she is the agent of the owner of the premises. We conclude that the
defendant meets the definition of “landlord” under RSA 540-A:1, I.
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred in finding that she
violated RSA 540-A:3, IV, which prohibits a landlord from “willfully enter[ing]
into the premises of the tenant without prior consent, other than to make
emergency repairs.” The trial court found that the defendant violated this
provision when she entered the plaintiff’s apartment without prior consent and
disconnected her air conditioner, where there was no need for emergency
repairs. The defendant argued that the evidence supported her position that
she had permission to enter the apartment.
The trial court credited the plaintiff’s testimony that the defendant
entered the apartment without permission. Conflicts in testimony, questions
about the credibility of witnesses, and the weight assigned to testimony are
matters for the trial court to resolve. In the Matter of Kurowski & Kurowski,
161 N.H. 578, 585 (2011). Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court did not
err in finding that the defendant violated RSA 540-A:3, IV.
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred in finding that the
plaintiff’s air conditioner constituted a utility under RSA 540-A:3, I. RSA 540-
A:3, I, provides:
No landlord shall willfully cause, directly or indirectly, the
interruption or termination of any utility service being supplied to
the tenant including, but not limited to water, heat, light,
electricity, gas, telephone, sewerage, elevator or refrigeration,
whether or not the utility service is under the control of the
landlord, except for such temporary interruption as may be
necessary while actual repairs are in process or during temporary
emergencies.
The trial court found that the plaintiff operated her air conditioner “to
maintain a constant temperature in her apartment.” The plaintiff testified that
when she returned home on July 14, 2023, the day after the defendant
disconnected the air conditioner, the temperature in her apartment was ninety
degrees. We conclude that the trial court did not err in finding that the
plaintiff’s air conditioner constituted a utility for purposes of RSA 540-A:3, I.
See Lally v. Flieder, 159 N.H. 350, 252 (2009) (“The specified utility services in
RSA 540-A:3, I, all pertain to the habitability of a dwelling or a person’s well-
being.”).
Alternatively, the defendant argues that disconnecting the plaintiff’s air
conditioner, after noticing that the plug was hot, constituted an emergency.
The trial court found that the defendant entered the plaintiff’s apartment with
the intent to disconnect the air conditioner regardless of whether the plug was
hot. The trial court did not find credible the defendant’s testimony that she
disconnected the unit because of an emergency. We defer to the trial court’s
credibility findings. See Kurowski, 161 N.H. at 585. Accordingly, we conclude
that the trial court did not err in finding that the defendant violated RSA 540-
A:3, I.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2