THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0056, In re Estate of Anthony Martini, the
court on July 15, 2024, issued the following order:
Anthony Colantonio’s motion for leave to reply to the executor’s objection
to his motion for sanctions is denied. His motion for sanctions against
Executor Pittocco and Attorney Bielagus is denied. To the extent that the
appellants’ appendix contains documents not provided to the trial court, we
have not considered them. See Flaherty v. Dixey, 158 N.H. 385, 387 (2009).
Accordingly, Louis Pittocco’s motion to strike is moot.
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The appellants, Anthony Colantonio and Elizabeth
Colantonio, creditors of the Estate of Anthony Martini, appeal the order of the
Circuit Court (Quigley, J.), denying their motion to vacate all probate action in
New Hampshire. The creditors argue that the trial court erred in ruling that
the probate proceeding in New Hampshire is the primary estate administration
because, they assert, the decedent, Anthony Martini, was a resident of
Connecticut, not New Hampshire. We affirm.
“The findings of fact of the judge of probate are final unless they are so
plainly erroneous that such findings could not be reasonably made.” RSA 567-
A:4 (2019). Accordingly, we will not disturb the trial court’s order unless it is
unsupported by the evidence or plainly erroneous as a matter of law. In re
Estate of Dow, 174 N.H. 37, 41 (2021).
RSA 21:6 (2020), defining “resident” and “inhabitant,” provides:
“A resident or inhabitant or both of this state . . . shall be a person who is
domiciled or has a place of abode or both in this state . . . , and who has,
through all of his or her actions, demonstrated a current intent to designate
that place of abode as his or her principal place of physical presence to the
exclusion of all others.”
RSA 21:6-a (2020), defining “residence” or “residency,” provides:
“Residence or residency shall mean a person’s place of abode or domicile. The
place of abode or domicile is that designated by a person as his or her principal
place of physical presence to the exclusion of all others. Such residence or
residency shall not be interrupted or lost by a temporary absence from it, if
there is an intent to return to such residence or residency as the principal
place of physical presence.”
“[A] person is a New Hampshire ‘resident’ under RSA 21:6 and has a New
Hampshire ‘residence’ under RSA 21:6-a if they live in New Hampshire and
have indicated through all of their actions that New Hampshire is their ‘most
important’ place of physical presence, to the exclusion of all other places in
which they may live.” Casey v. N.H. Sec’y of State, 173 N.H. 266, 273 (2020).
This does not “mean that, to have a New Hampshire ‘residence’ under RSA
21:6-a, the person cannot also live elsewhere.” Id. “Rather, it means only that
there is no other place that the person, through all of their actions, has
demonstrated is their ‘most important’ place of physical presence.” Id.
On August 16, 2022, the trial court held an evidentiary hearing on
residency. The court found, “[a]fter considering the witnesses’ testimony, the
exhibits, and arguments of counsel and the parties,” that the decedent
designated Spofford, New Hampshire “as his principal place of physical
presence to the exclusion of all others.” The court found that the decedent was
domiciled in Spofford, and that he had “demonstrated an intent to designate
that as his place of abode.” The court credited the testimony that the decedent
spent a significant amount of time in New Hampshire, “usually approximately
five out of seven days a week,” and that he registered his vehicles, received his
mail, and voted in New Hampshire.
The creditors submitted evidence that, in their view, showed that the
decedent’s principal place of residence was in Connecticut. The trial court has
broad discretion to resolve conflicts in the testimony, measure the credibility of
witnesses, and determine the weight to be given evidence. In re Guardianship
of Kapitula, 153 N.H. 492, 497 (2006). The trial court may accept or reject, in
whole or in part, whatever evidence was presented. Id. at 497-98. Based upon
this record, we conclude that a reasonable person could have found, as the
trial court did, that the decedent was a resident of New Hampshire. See id.
The creditors raise numerous other issues and arguments. As the
appealing parties, they have the burden of demonstrating reversible error.
Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014). Based upon our review of the
record, we conclude that they have not demonstrated reversible error. See id.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Hantz Marconi, Donovan, and Countway,
JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2