THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0128, Deborah Dascenzo-Paul v. Brian
Paul, the court on September 4, 2024, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). We
affirm.
The petitioner, Deborah Dascenzo-Paul (Wife), appeals an order of the
Circuit Court (Swegart, J.) that dismissed her petition to change court order, in
which she had requested post-divorce alimony from the respondent, Brian Paul
(Husband). Wife argues that her petition sought to establish, rather than to
modify, alimony, but that even if the petition sought to modify alimony, the
trial court erred in dismissing it because a substantial change in
circumstances that was unforeseeable at the time of the divorce required a
change in the alimony award.
I.
For background purposes, we recite the following facts, which are
supported by the record. The parties married in 2002, and moved to New
Hampshire when Husband was accepted at Dartmouth Medical School. When
the parties’ son was born in 2003, Wife stopped working full time while
Husband pursued his medical degree.
In 2014, when Wife filed for divorce for irreconcilable differences,
Husband was a psychiatry resident. Prior to the final hearing, the parties
reached agreement on a parenting plan and a number of other disputed
matters, but did not reach agreement on other issues, including Wife’s request
for alimony. The final hearing was held over two days, on August 2, 2016 and
January 6, 2017.
At the end of the first day of the final hearing, Wife called the
superintendent of the Newport School District to testify. The superintendent
testified that Husband had provided to the school district documents that
appeared to be court orders identifying Husband’s town as the parties’ son’s
legal residence for school purposes, but which included the forged signature of
the presiding judge. The trial judge informed the parties that he would refer
the matter to the county attorney.
Husband’s counsel in the criminal matter was present on the second day
of the final hearing, and he informed the trial court that Husband was
negotiating with the county attorney’s office regarding the charges to be
brought and the proposed disposition. The parties proceeded by offers of proof
at the second day of the hearing regarding the outstanding issues. Counsel for
Wife argued that she had a substantial need for alimony given Wife’s age,
which was 58 at the time of the hearing, and her limited work history during
the marriage. Counsel for Wife also argued that Husband had a greater ability
to earn an income, given his degree, his age, which was 44 at the time of the
hearing, and his employability. Counsel for Husband argued that the standard
for making the determination about alimony is the current ability to pay based
on the standard of living enjoyed during the marriage. On March 30, 2017, the
Trial Court (Yazinski, J.) issued a final divorce decree which, in relevant part,
denied Wife’s request for alimony.
In May 2017, Husband was charged with tampering with public records
or information, see RSA 641:7 (2016), and unsworn falsification, see RSA 641:3
(Supp. 2023). He pleaded guilty to these charges, and, after completing his
psychiatry residency in June 2017, Husband began serving a 60-day sentence.
Within ten months of completing his sentence, Husband was hired as a full-
time staff psychiatrist, and in May 2018 he notified the court and Wife of his
change of employment. Thereafter, Husband was ordered to pay $700 per
week in child support.
On March 31, 2022, Wife filed a petition to change court order, in which
she requested that the court award her alimony “based upon a substantial
change in circumstances.” Following a hearing on Husband’s motion to
dismiss the petition, the trial court issued an order stating, in part, that “[a]s
no alimony order was ever issued, it appears that this request is not truly a
modification request but rather a request for establishment of alimony.” In
subsequent pleadings, Wife argued that her petition was an action to request
alimony, rather than a request for modification of a prior order.
At the beginning of the November 14, 2022 hearing, the trial court stated
that it would “to the extent that it’s necessary, amend [its] order . . . reverse
[its] decision to the extent that it was a finding that this was – is an
establishment case . . . [the court is] treating this now as a modification.”
Following discussion with counsel, the court informed the parties that it would
review the record and decide whether the evidence established that it was
foreseeable at the time of the final hearing that Husband would earn the
income he did starting in 2018.
2
Thereafter, the trial court issued an order which, in relevant part,
dismissed Wife’s petition to change court order to add a term of alimony. The
trial court acknowledged that although an investigation was ongoing at the
time of the final hearing, Husband had not been convicted and was engaged in
negotiations with the prosecutor to resolve the case. The court also noted that
the March 30, 2017 final order did not mention the criminal investigation “or
any question about [Husband’s] future earning capacity.” The court stated:
Looking at the allegations in the [Wife’s] request in the light
most favorable to her, I cannot see any construction that would
amount to “clear and convincing” evidence of an unforeseeable
change of circumstances . . . . [T]he circumstances as they stood
for the Final Decree [were] that [Husband] was on track to
becoming a doctor and that alimony was denied due not only to his
low income at the time but also because of [Wife’s] lack of interest
and effort in supporting herself. [Wife] still does not support
herself now and appears to only be making this request because
she is concerned about the impending end of child support.
Wife filed a motion to reconsider in which she argued that because the
final order did not award alimony, there is no award of alimony to modify, and,
therefore, her request was for the establishment of alimony pursuant to RSA
458:19-a, I. The trial court denied the motion, and this appeal followed.
II.
In reviewing the trial court’s grant of a motion to dismiss, our standard
of review is whether the allegations in Wife’s pleadings are reasonably
susceptible of a construction that would permit recovery. In the Matter of
Lemieux & Lemieux, 157 N.H. 370, 372 (2008). We assume Wife’s pleadings to
be true and construe all reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to
her. Id. at 372-73. We then engage in a threshold inquiry that tests the facts
in the petition against the applicable law, and if the allegations constitute a
basis for legal relief, we must conclude that it was improper to grant the motion
to dismiss. Id. at 373.
Wife first argues that the trial court erred when it ruled that her petition
was a request to modify an existing alimony order, rather than a petition for
the establishment of alimony. The distinction is significant because the
establishment of alimony is governed by RSA 458:19-a, I (Supp. 2023), but
modification is governed by RSA 458:19-aa, I(a) (Supp. 2023).1 A request for
1 Although the divorce decree was issued in 2017, such that the version of the statute in effect at
that time should arguably apply, see RSA 458:19-aa, X (Supp. 2023), the trial court order cites
the versions of the statute effective after January 1, 2019. Because neither party argues that a
decision to apply the pre-2019 versions rather than the post-2019 versions would change the
3