THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0257, State of New Hampshire v.
Anderson Pereira, the court on March 18, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the parties’ oral arguments, and has determined to
resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant,
Anderson Pereira, appeals his conviction, following a jury trial in the Superior
Court (Delker, J.), for first degree murder. See RSA 630:1-a, I(a) (Supp. 2024).
He argues that the trial court erred by: (1) denying his motion to suppress
statements made in a custodial interrogation; (2) ruling that a statement made
by an “alternative perpetrator” constituted inadmissible hearsay; and (3) failing
to strike expert testimony relevant to the alibi of the proposed “alternate
perpetrator.” We conclude that the trial court did not err in denying the
defendant’s motion to suppress statements made during a custodial
interrogation. We also conclude that any errors associated with the trial
court’s evidentiary rulings were harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
Accordingly, we affirm.
I. Facts
The jury could have found the following facts. In 2019, Flavia de Oliveira
lived with the defendant in an apartment in Methuen, Massachusetts. She and
the defendant were in a long-term relationship. Later that year, de Oliveira
began communicating with the victim via Facebook and text. In November
2019, after meeting the victim only a few times, she moved to the victim’s home
in Manchester. Soon after, she and the victim married. In January 2020, de
Oliveira’s son, Gabriel Baronto, came to the victim’s house for a long-term visit.
On March 7, an argument broke out between Baronto and the victim.1
Baronto threatened to punch the victim in the face, and the victim ultimately
ordered Baronto to leave his house. Baronto and de Oliveira left and returned
to the defendant’s apartment. Subsequently, Baronto sent the victim Facebook
messages that stated: “I’m going to give you the beating you deserve” and “I will
block you.”
1 Gabriel Baronto speaks only Portuguese. During the argument, Baronto and the victim
communicated by using Google Translate.
During the following week, de Oliveira alternated between staying at the
victim’s house and the defendant’s apartment. On the morning of March 12,
de Oliveira and the victim discussed whether the victim was willing to allow
Baronto to return to his house and the victim’s concerns that he “did not want
[de Oliveira] spending time with the [d]efendant.” Later that day, de Oliveira
returned to the defendant’s apartment.
She and Baronto remained at the defendant’s apartment throughout the
evening of March 12 and into the morning of March 13. The defendant,
however, did not spend the evening at the apartment. Instead, he worked at a
nearby restaurant from approximately 2:00 p.m. to 9:30 p.m. He did not
return to the apartment after his shift ended.
At approximately 11:00 p.m., surveillance footage captured a vehicle
entering the victim’s neighborhood. The vehicle dropped off an individual,
whom investigators believed to be the assailant. The footage showed him
walking toward the victim’s house. About two hours later, the defendant
drove a box truck, used by the victim for work, from the victim’s home to a
parking lot in Methuen. The defendant parked the box truck in a parking lot,
then walked back to his apartment. Throughout the evening, cell location
data identified the defendant’s phone traveling together with the victim’s
phone and smartwatch.
During the afternoon of March 13, the defendant returned to the parking
lot, purchased a shovel from a nearby hardware store, and then went to work.
Later that night, he went to the location in Methuen where investigators
eventually discovered the victim’s body, and then to another site where the
victim’s box truck was later discovered. There, the defendant exited the box
truck, discarded some items, and left in an Uber.
On March 14, the victim’s family became concerned after he failed to
appear for work. They tracked his smartwatch and discovered the victim’s box
truck parked next to a dumpster. Thereafter, law enforcement opened a
missing person investigation. They subsequently discovered clothing and a
smartwatch in a nearby dumpster and found blood stains on the interior of
the truck. Months later, law enforcement discovered the victim’s body at the
Methuen location that the defendant visited during the night of March 13.
The defendant was later arrested in Florida in connection with the
victim’s murder. In October 2021, New Hampshire law enforcement
interviewed the defendant. The investigators began the interview by reading
the defendant his Miranda rights. See Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436
(1966). The defendant responded that he understood the rights, discussed the
implications of waiving them, and thereafter signed the waiver form.
Subsequently, the defendant was charged with, among other things, first
degree murder. See RSA 630:1-a, I(a).
2
Prior to trial, the defendant moved to suppress “[a]ll statements” made
after he “expressly invoked [his Miranda] rights” by saying “[n]o, I don’t want
to waive” during the October 2021 interview. The defendant argued that the
detectives violated the New Hampshire and United States “Constitutions when
they did not cease all questioning as soon as [the defendant] unambiguously
invoked his rights.” (Emphasis and capitalization omitted). The State
objected, asserting that the defendant’s statements were not unambiguous
assertions of his constitutional rights. The trial court held evidentiary
hearings on November 4 and December 8, 2022. The State subsequently filed
a post-hearing memorandum in support of its objection to the defendant’s
motion. After reviewing the transcript and audio and video recording of the
interrogation, the trial court denied the defendant’s motion to suppress,
concluding that “the defendant’s purported invocation was ambiguous.”
The State and the defendant also filed pre-trial motions in limine related
to the admissibility of evidence that an alternative perpetrator murdered the
victim. In its February and March 2022 motions, the State sought, inter alia,
to “preclude . . . statements made by Gabriel Baronto through voice mail and
text messages” and “details of an argument between the victim and Baronto
that resulted in the victim removing Baronto from the victim’s home in
Manchester.” The defendant objected and moved in limine to be allowed to
introduce evidence that an alternative perpetrator committed the murder.
On January 6, 2023, the trial court issued an order ruling on all the pre-
trial motions in limine. As relevant here, the trial court denied the State’s
motion to exclude evidence of Baronto’s argument with the victim and granted,
in part, the defendant’s motion, ruling that “to the extent the defendant asserts
that Baronto is the alternative perpetrator, his threats against the victim just
days before the victim disappeared [are] relevant to establish intent and
motive.” The trial court also denied the State’s motion to exclude text message
and voicemail statements between Baronto and the victim for the same
reasons.
At the beginning of the defendant’s case, the State argued that some
portions of Baronto’s messages included in the State’s and defendant’s exhibits
were inadmissible because certain phrases constituted hearsay and did not fall
under a hearsay exception. The trial court ruled that a portion of the
messages, including Baronto’s statement to the victim that said, ‘“[y]ou stay
there saying bad things to my mother, but you are forgetting a simple fact. I
am not the same as she who forgives the other,’” constituted inadmissible
hearsay. The defendant asked the court to reconsider its ruling, contending
that the statement constituted a threat. The trial court declined, responding
that the statement was also inadmissible under New Hampshire Rule of
Evidence 403 and concluding that the unfair prejudice caused by its admission
outweighed its probative value.
3