THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0356, State of New Hampshire v.
Christopher Viveney, the court on June 13, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The
defendant, Christopher Viveney, appeals his convictions on two alternative
counts of aggravated felonious sexual assault (AFSA), see RSA 632-A:2, I(b), I(i)
(Supp. 2024). On appeal, the defendant argues that the Superior Court
(Delker, J.) erred in barring the defense from introducing certain text messages
between two witnesses who testified at trial and by sustaining a hearsay
objection to certain testimony proffered by the defendant. The defendant also
posits that the trial court may have erred in not disclosing information
contained in records the trial court reviewed in camera. We need not decide
whether either of the trial court’s evidentiary rulings was erroneous, because
we conclude that any purported error was harmless beyond a reasonable
doubt. In addition, our review of the records reviewed by the trial court in
camera supports its decision not to disclose the records it withheld.
Accordingly, we affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. In March 2020, the
defendant lived in Manchester where he had a girlfriend and a young son. He
was also a friend of Tyler Brooks, whom he had known since his childhood. At
that time, Brooks had been dating the victim, who had recently turned twenty-
one, for approximately one month.
On the evening of March 14, 2020, Brooks and his roommate, Billy
Preston, hosted a gathering at Brooks’ residence to celebrate a birthday of a
friend’s brother. The victim attended the gathering with a number of Brooks’
friends whom she had not previously met. After drinking at Brooks’ residence
for about an hour, the group of approximately ten people went to a Manchester
bar where they had reserved private VIP tables. The victim testified that she
drank three cocktails at the bar, which was “crowded” and very busy.
Later that night, the defendant, who was not part of the group, appeared
at the bar, where he ran into Brooks who introduced him to the victim. At
trial, witnesses’ descriptions of the interaction between the defendant and the
victim that night varied. Brooks testified that after introducing the defendant
to the victim, the victim walked away, and the defendant exclaimed, “dude,
she’s so hot. Like, how did you score that one?” Brooks testified that the
defendant also made a comment about having a threesome with the victim, but
Brooks testified that he laughed the comment off and said something to the
effect of “you wish.” According to the defendant, he made the threesome
comment in the victim’s presence, and he testified that the victim giggled and
appeared to be “intrigued” by his remark. In addition, the victim testified that
someone unknown to her slapped her buttocks at the bar, whereas the
defendant testified that Brooks grabbed his hand and “smacked her butt with
it.” According to the defendant, the victim responded by turning around and
giving him “the kinky eyes.” For his part, Brooks denied that he engaged in
any such act or that the victim told him any such thing had happened. The
defendant also testified that, within minutes of meeting him for the first time,
the victim gave him a “lap dance” and showed him nude and semi-nude
photographs of herself on a cell phone. At trial, the victim denied showing the
defendant any pictures of herself.
After drinking for a couple of hours, Preston left the bar with his
girlfriend and another friend who had been kicked out of the bar. They
returned to Brooks’ residence, and Preston and his girlfriend immediately went
to bed in Preston’s bedroom while their friend slept on a couch. At trial,
Preston testified that he did not hear or see anyone else return to the residence
that night. At some point after 11:00 p.m., Brooks and the victim left the bar
and returned to the residence with another friend. Brooks estimated that they
arrived at his residence “by midnight probably. He left the door to his
residence unlocked in the event another member of the group who remained at
the bar decided to spend the night there. When they arrived, the lights were off
and everyone was sleeping. After she threw up in the kitchen sink, the victim
and Brooks went to Brooks’ bedroom, shut the door and went to bed. Brooks
brought a bowl to the bedroom because the victim told him she might throw up
again. Brooks recalled that he fell asleep after observing the victim leaning
over the bowl, and the victim testified that she too fell asleep after vomiting in
the bowl a couple of times.
Security camera footage showed the defendant arriving at Brooks’
residence with a friend named Himanshu Sijapati and a bottle of Tito’s vodka
at 1:06 a.m. The defendant and Sijapati testified that Preston sent them text
messages inviting them back to the residence for an after-party. According to
the defendant and Sijapati, Preston was awake in the kitchen when they
arrived and made them a couple of drinks before going to bed. At trial, the
defendant testified that he then went to Brooks’ bedroom to wake him up,
where he found Brooks sleeping and the victim lying in bed watching the
television.
The victim testified that she woke up when the bedroom door opened,
saw the defendant enter the bedroom, and heard him say that he had nowhere
else to sleep as he walked toward the victim’s side of the bed. At the time, the
2
victim was lying on her side, face to face with Brooks. The victim then heard
the defendant spit onto his hand and felt his wet hand touching her before she
fell back asleep. At trial, the victim explained that she was “pretty . . . out of it
from drinking, so [she] had fallen back asleep again.” Later, the victim woke
up again and felt the defendant, who was positioned behind her, having vaginal
intercourse with her. The victim testified that she attempted to squeeze
Brooks’ wrist to wake him up, but she felt “[t]errified” and “stuck” and could
not move. She also testified that she was “in and out of it the whole time” and
fell back to sleep until she was awakened when the defendant pulled her
underwear up and left the room.
At trial, the defendant painted a very different picture. Essentially, he
claimed that the victim permitted him to share the bed and that they were
watching a movie when the victim initiated sexual contact by grabbing his
shorts. According to the defendant, he engaged in consensual digital
penetration with the victim until he had an “epiphany” and started “thinking
about [his] girlfriend and [his] one-year old at home. And I was like . . . I can’t
do this. Like, I can’t be here.” The defendant testified that he then helped the
victim pull her underwear back up, apologized to her and left the room. After
realizing that Sijapati had left without him, the defendant called an Uber for a
ride home. Security camera footage showed the defendant leaving the
residence at 1:39 a.m.
At approximately 6:30 a.m. on March 15, the victim woke up and texted
a friend from Brooks’ bedroom. In the text message, the victim informed her
friend that one of Brooks’ friends came into the bedroom and that when she
woke up, Brooks’ friend “was having sex with [her], and that [she] froze, and . .
. couldn’t do anything to stop it.” She also told her friend that she tried to grab
Brooks’ wrist, but he did not wake up and that she was scared. When Brooks
woke up, he noticed that the victim “was definitely [acting] very like weird” and
she “wanted to leave like as soon as we both woke up.” The victim did not
initially inform Brooks about what happened earlier that morning, but ten
minutes after her departure she called Brooks and told him that she had been
sexually assaulted. The victim also texted Brooks with more details, informing
him that one of his friends came into his bedroom and that she woke up to his
friend having sex with her. In the text message, the victim also explained that
she tried to squeeze Brooks’ wrist to wake him up, but he did not wake up and
she “couldn’t do anything about it.”
That same morning, Brooks texted the defendant: “why [did] you come
into my room last night and f***k with that girl? Do you want to die?” In a
responding text message, the defendant stated: “Yo, what? You was laughing
earlier in the night when I was joking about a threesome . . . I was hammered.
I don’t even know what I was doing.” During this text conversation, the
defendant apologized to Brooks, but Brooks informed him that the victim “was
scared for her life last night. She didn’t know what was going on,” to which the
3