THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0729, State of New Hampshire v. Ghenton
Doty, the court on March 25, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Ghenton Doty, appeals his conviction,
following a jury trial in Superior Court (Colburn, J.), on a charge of bail
jumping for knowingly failing to appear at a court hearing as required by the
conditions of his release. See RSA 642:8, I(a) (2016). He argues that the
evidence was insufficient to support the jury’s finding that he acted knowingly
when he failed to appear at the relevant hearing. We reverse.
A challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence raises a question of law that
we review de novo. State v. Seibel, 174 N.H. 440, 445 (2021). When
considering a challenge to the sufficiency of evidence to support a conviction,
we objectively review the entire record, construing the evidence, and all
reasonable inferences from it, in the light most favorable to the State, and
determine whether any rational trier of fact could have found guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt. Id. We examine each item of evidence in the context of the
entire case, not in isolation. Id. The trier of fact is entitled to draw reasonable
inferences from the facts proved as well as from facts found as the result of
other inferences so long as they can reasonably be drawn therefrom. See id.
The defendant bears the burden of demonstrating that the evidence was
insufficient to prove guilt. State v. Saintil-Brown, 172 N.H. 110, 117 (2019).
When the evidence as to one or more of the elements is solely circumstantial,
the defendant must establish that the evidence does not exclude all reasonable
conclusions except guilt. Id. The proper analysis is not whether every possible
conclusion consistent with innocence has been excluded, but whether all
reasonable conclusions based on the evidence have been excluded. Id. When
solely circumstantial evidence is at issue, “the critical question is whether, even
assuming all credibility resolutions in favor of the State, the inferential chain of
circumstances is of sufficient strength that guilt is the sole rational
conclusion.” Seibel, 174 N.H. at 445 (quotation omitted).
To convict the defendant in this case, the State was required to prove
that, following his pretrial release in a criminal matter, he “knowingly fail[ed] to
appear before a court as required by the conditions of his release.” RSA 642:8,
I(a). Specifically, the State was required to prove that the defendant knowingly
failed to appear at a show cause hearing held in the superior court on March
30, 2022, as required by bail conditions in connection with a criminal matter.
The evidence establishes that on November 22, 2019, the defendant was
accused of certain criminal conduct, following which his then-spouse told him
to leave their home. On November 27, 2019, when the defendant returned to
the home and collected personal belongings, police were dispatched to the
home on a complaint of an “[u]nwanted subject,” and the defendant told an
officer that he had returned to the home against an attorney’s advice, that the
criminal allegations were going to ruin his life, and that he was distraught. On
December 6, 2019, an attorney, who was not the defendant’s attorney at the
time of trial, entered an appearance on the defendant’s behalf in superior court
on his pending criminal charges. On January 9, 2020, the trial court issued
an order setting personal recognizance bail subject to a condition requiring
that he “appear at all court proceedings as ordered.”
On October 1, 2021, nearly two years after the criminal proceedings
commenced, the trial court issued a notice of jury trial requiring the defendant
to attend a trial management conference on March 25, 2022. The attorney who
had entered an appearance for the defendant in December 2019 was copied on
the jury trial notice. Although the State claims in its brief that the defendant
did not appear at the trial management conference, there was no testimony at
trial regarding who did or did not attend the trial management conference,
including the defendant or his attorney.
On March 25, 2022, the trial court issued a notice of show cause hearing
to occur on March 30, 2022, again copying the defendant’s then-attorney on
the notice. The clerk of court testified that a show cause hearing may be
scheduled for any number of reasons, including a party’s failure to attend a
prior hearing, and that this show cause hearing notice “was created and likely
sent on” March 25, 2022, the same day as the trial management conference.
Although the State again failed to introduce direct testimony regarding who did
or did not attend the March 30 show cause hearing, the defendant did not
object to the introduction into evidence of his arrest warrant, issued by the
superior court on March 30, 2022, as a full exhibit. The warrant stated that it
was being issued based upon the defendant’s failure to appear at a “status
hearing” on March 30, 2022. It is the failure to attend the March 30 show
cause hearing for which the defendant was charged with bail jumping.
At trial, the clerk of court testified generally that, when a hearing is
scheduled, a notice of the hearing is prepared by the clerk’s office, the clerk’s
office “check[s] off the names of the attorneys that the notice would be sent to,”
and the notice is sent electronically through the “file and serve program” to
counsel of record copied on the notice. The clerk further testified that under
the file and serve program, the clerk has the ability to “check to see if
2
something has been properly delivered and . . . who, as part of that case, has
opened that filing.” Although the clerk testified that the defendant’s attorney
who had filed an appearance in December 2019 and who was copied on the
show cause hearing notice was counsel of record, there was no testimony that
the clerk ever determined that the show cause hearing notice was in fact
“properly delivered” to, or opened by, the defendant’s then-counsel. Nor did the
State introduce any other evidence that either the defendant’s then-counsel, or
the defendant himself, received the show cause hearing notice.
Following trial, the jury acquitted the defendant of the criminal charges
underlying the bail jumping charge, but convicted him of bail jumping. On
appeal, the defendant argues that, because the evidence that he acted
“knowingly” in failing to appear at the show cause hearing was solely
circumstantial, and because it did not exclude a reasonable conclusion that he
never received notice of the show cause hearing, the evidence was insufficient
to sustain his conviction. We agree.
“A person acts knowingly with respect to conduct or to a circumstance
that is a material element of an offense when he is aware that his conduct is of
such nature or that such circumstances exist.” RSA 626:2, II(b) (2016).
“Awareness is . . . central to the concept of acting ‘knowingly.’” State v. Hall,
148 N.H. 394, 398 (2002). In this case, we agree with the defendant that the
evidence that he knowingly failed to attend the show cause hearing was solely
circumstantial — it required the jury to infer, from evidence that his then-
counsel’s name was on the hearing notice, that (1) the notice in fact was sent to
counsel by the file and serve program, (2) counsel opened the notice, and (3)
counsel notified the defendant of the hearing. Cf. State v. Kelley, 159 N.H. 449,
453-54 (2009) (distinguishing direct from circumstantial evidence).
Although the clerk of court testified that hearing notices are generally
sent electronically to counsel of record copied on the notices, and that the clerk
has the ability through the file and serve program to determine whether a
specific notice was in fact sent to, or opened by, an intended recipient, there
was no testimony that the clerk ever determined whether the show cause
hearing notice here was actually sent to or opened by the defendant’s then-
counsel. Nor was there evidence, beyond the mere presence of the defendant’s
then-counsel’s name on the show cause hearing notice and the clerk’s
testimony as to what generally happens, from which the jury reasonably could
have inferred that his counsel actually received the notice. For instance, there
was no testimony that the defendant’s then-counsel actually attended either
the show cause hearing or the earlier trial management conference. Nor was
there testimony that the email address to which the file and serve program
served the hearing notice upon defense counsel was the same address that
counsel had provided upon filing the appearance. Under these circumstances,
even after resolving all credibility issues in favor of the State, we conclude that
3