THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2023-0605, State of New Hampshire v. Jacob
Finley, the court on June 13, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The defendant, Jacob Finley, appeals his conviction,
following a jury trial in the Superior Court (Temple, J.), on one count of
reckless conduct with a deadly weapon. See RSA 631:3 (2016); RSA 625:11, V
(2016). The defendant argues that: (1) the evidence was insufficient to prove
that he did not act in self-defense; and (2) the court erred in denying his
motion to set aside the verdict as against the weight of the evidence. We affirm.
The defendant first argues that the evidence was insufficient to prove
that he did not act in self-defense. To prevail on his challenge to the
sufficiency of the evidence, “the defendant must establish that no rational trier
of fact, viewing all of the evidence and all reasonable inferences from it in the
light most favorable to the State, could have found guilt beyond a reasonable
doubt.” State v. Wilson, 169 N.H. 755, 760 (2017). When evidence of self-
defense is admitted, conduct negating self-defense becomes an element of the
charged offense that the State must prove beyond a reasonable doubt. State v.
Collins, 176 N.H. 570, 573 (2024), 2024 N.H. 22, ¶10.
The indictment alleged that the defendant, while a passenger in a motor
vehicle, committed the crime of reckless conduct with a deadly weapon when
he fired a handgun at another moving motor vehicle, placing the occupants of
that vehicle, and anyone in the immediate area, in danger of serious bodily
injury. The driver of the other vehicle, R.R., testified that, on October 17,
2021, he exited a fast food restaurant onto East Hollis Street in Nashua when
he noticed a vehicle approaching from behind at a high rate of speed. The
vehicle swerved to the right side of R.R.’s vehicle and “into the small breakdown
lane.”
The two vehicles were next to each other at a red light when R.R. noticed
that the defendant was trying to say something to him. R.R. lowered his
window and heard the defendant yelling that R.R. cut him off and “almost
killed him.” After the light turned green, the defendant continued to “yell,
scream, [and] curse” at R.R. At one point, R.R. swerved to avoid something in
the road. The defendant’s vehicle was behind him. After R.R. swerved, he
heard “a loud pop.” When R.R. arrived at his destination, he exited his vehicle
and noticed a large hole in the driver’s side of the vehicle.
The defendant’s brother, who was driving, testified that, as the two
vehicles were next to each other, R.R. yelled, “I’m going to f---ing kill you,” and
told them to pull over so they could fight. The brother testified that he tried to
drive away from R.R.’s vehicle but was unable to do so because of the traffic.
The brother testified that he saw R.R. grip his steering wheel and swerve into
the adjacent lane of traffic. He testified that, fearing a crash, he swerved to
avoid R.R. and nearly struck cars parked along the roadway. The defendant
then drew his gun and fired a shot at R.R’s vehicle.
A police officer who responded to the incident spoke to the defendant,
who told the officer that he and his brother were “cut off” by another vehicle.
The defendant told the officer that he thought that the driver of the other
vehicle was going to try to “ram them into a telephone pole on the side of the
road.” The defendant admitted that he fired one round from his pistol toward
the area of R.R.’s vehicle.
The defendant argues that the trial court erred in denying his motion for
a directed verdict because the evidence was insufficient to disprove that he
acted in self-defense based upon a reasonable belief that R.R. was likely to use
unlawful force against him. RSA 627:4, II(a) (2016) provides that a person may
use deadly force in self-defense “when he reasonably believes that such other
person . . . [i]s about to use unlawful, deadly force against the actor or a third
person.” A belief that is unreasonable, even though honest, will not support
the defense. State v. Woodburn, 175 N.H. 645, 651 (2023). When reviewing
sufficiency of the evidence claims, we view the record in the light most
favorable to the State, which involves resolving issues of credibility in the
State’s favor. State v. Woodbury, 172 N.H. 358, 364 (2019). Based upon this
record, we conclude that the State presented sufficient evidence to establish
that the defendant did not act in self-defense.
The defendant next argues that the court erred in denying his motion to
set aside the verdict as against the weight of the evidence. “Although a verdict
may be supported by sufficient evidence, a trial court may nevertheless
conclude that the judgment is against the weight of the evidence.” State v.
Spinale, 156 N.H. 456, 465 (2007) (quotation omitted). “[A] motion addressed
to the weight of the evidence primarily presents a question of fact for the trial
court” and, therefore, we “will uphold the trial court’s decision unless it was
made without evidence or constituted an unsustainable exercise of discretion.”
Id. at 465–66.
The defendant argues that R.R.’s testimony regarding the events was not
credible and was undermined by other evidence, including testimony from
B.R., the passenger in R.R.’s vehicle. The defendant argues that R.R. had a
motive to downplay his culpability, and that he did not want B.R. to cooperate
with the police. “[E]valuation of witness credibility, resolving conflicts in the
testimony, and determining the weight to be given to the evidence are matters
2
within the province of the jury.” State v. Alwardt, 164 N.H. 52, 57 (2012).
Based upon this record, we cannot conclude that the trial court unsustainably
exercised its discretion in denying the defendant’s motion to set aside the
verdict.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3