THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0319, John Doe v. New Hampshire Liquor
Commission, Bureau of Enforcement & a., the court on
December 17, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, John Doe, appeals an order of the Superior
Court (Kissinger, J.) granting summary judgment in favor of the defendants,
the New Hampshire Liquor Commission, Bureau of Enforcement (commission),
and the New Hampshire Attorney General’s Office (AGO). The plaintiff sought
an order that his name be removed from the Exculpatory Evidence Schedule
(EES). See RSA 105:13-d (2023). On appeal, he argues that the trial court
erred when it granted summary judgment to the defendants by: (1) applying
the wrong standard in determining whether the information in his personnel
file is “potentially exculpatory”; (2) adopting “stale and antiquated information”;
(3) determining that his misconduct meets the EES criteria; and (4) concluding
that he received sufficient due process. (Bolding omitted.) We affirm.
I. Background
The following facts are established by the summary judgment record.
The plaintiff was employed as an investigator with the commission. In August
2008, the commission initiated an internal investigation involving the plaintiff,
following a complaint about his performance during an arrest. Subsequently, a
second investigation was initiated involving the plaintiff due to “allegations of
misleading false information given by [the plaintiff] in both verbal and written
communications” during the first investigation. The second investigation
concerned “facts and circumstances in [the plaintiff’s] statements that were
contradictory in nature to those of the witnesses, one of [whom] is a sergeant
with the Concord Police Department.” Following the investigations, the plaintiff
was suspended with pay.
In December 2008, the Chief of the commission summarized the results
of the investigations in a letter to the plaintiff:
The final outcome of this investigation has resulted in
substantiating these claims that the information outlined in your
police report and during three separate interviews is not only
inconsistent in and of themselves, but contradicts what the
witnesses have said. The information obtained during this
investigation leads me to believe that these issues were not
inadvertent in nature, nor misinterpreted during the course of your
conduct. Rather, some of the information provided by you in your
written police report and the interviews [was] not truthful. As a
result, this has [led] to your credibility and integrity being
compromised. The County [Attorneys] throughout the State and
the Attorney General’s Office will be notified that your conduct has
placed you in a compromising position and therefore your name
will be added to the “Laurie List” as directed by then Attorney
General Peter W. Heed in his Memorandum dated February 13,
2004.
The letter states that the plaintiff, the plaintiff’s union representative, and the
Chief had met and “a mutual agreement was established” regarding
disciplinary actions. Those disciplinary actions included a two-week
suspension without pay and notification to all county attorneys and the AGO
that the plaintiff is “considered to be a potential ‘Laurie Issue.’” In addition,
the plaintiff was “required to submit in writing any request by a defendant or
defense attorney seeking information about this potential ‘Laurie’ status” with
a copy “sent to the respective District Court, thereby alerting the District Court
Judge to this issue for his/her review.”
A typewritten acknowledgement at the end of the letter was crossed
out and replaced by a handwritten statement:
Neither this agreement nor the documents referred to herein shall
be considered an admission of any facts or allegations contained
herein. I agree not to appeal this suspension; however, my
agreement not to appeal this suspension shall not act as, nor
should it be construed as, an admission of any fact or allegation
contained herein.
The plaintiff signed on the typewritten signature line and initialed next to the
handwritten acknowledgement. The letter included notice that the plaintiff had
the right to appeal to the Personnel Appeals Board. See RSA 273-D:3, III
(Supp. 2024). The plaintiff did not exercise that right.
In January 2009, in response to a prosecutor’s motion, the Concord
District Court (Boyle, J.) conducted an in camera review of the plaintiff’s
personnel file and determined that “there is a ‘Laurie’ issue” with the plaintiff
“that would cause the Court to question his credibility.” The Chief
subsequently sent a copy of the district court’s order to the AGO.
In September 2021, the legislature enacted RSA 105:13-d, authorizing
the New Hampshire Department of Justice to maintain an EES consisting of “a
list of all current or former law enforcement officers whose personnel
2
information contain potentially exculpatory evidence.” RSA 105:13-d, I; see
N.H. Ctr. for Pub. Interest Journalism v. N.H. Dep’t of Justice, 173 N.H. 648,
651 (2020) (explaining that the “Laurie List” was subsequently renamed as the
EES). Thereafter, the AGO sent the plaintiff a letter pursuant to RSA 105:13-d,
notifying him that his name has been included on the EES and informing him
of his statutory right to challenge that placement.
In March 2022, the plaintiff filed a petition for declaratory judgment
seeking, among other things, a determination that pursuant to RSA 105:13-d,
his name is not “appropriate for inclusion on the EES.” The defendants moved
for summary judgment. Following a hearing on the motion, the trial court
concluded that: (1) in light of the Chief’s determination that the plaintiff was
dishonest and the district court’s determination that his personnel file
contained “Laurie” material, the plaintiff’s dishonesty “bears on his general
credibility, potentially triggering a prosecutor’s obligation to disclose the
misconduct to a criminal defendant in a case where . . . the [plaintiff’s]
credibility is at issue”; (2) neither the staleness of the misconduct nor the
plaintiff’s subsequent retirement from law enforcement eliminated the
potentially exculpatory nature of the misconduct; and (3) given that the
plaintiff “had an opportunity during the internal investigations and afterwards”
to appeal the Chief’s conclusions, he received adequate due process. The
plaintiff unsuccessfully moved for reconsideration. This appeal followed.
II. Analysis
A moving party is entitled to summary judgment “if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with
the affidavits filed, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact
and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.” RSA
491:8-a, III (2010). We review the trial court’s application of the law to the
facts de novo. Taylor Community v. City of Laconia, 177 N.H. __, __ (2025),
2025 N.H. 38, ¶7.
The plaintiff first argues that, applying the standard set forth in Doe v.
New Hampshire Attorney General (Activity Logs), 176 N.H. 806 (2024), 2024
N.H. 50, there is “no reasonably foreseeable case in which the information” in
his personnel files “would be admissible as exculpatory evidence or could be
used to impeach [his] credibility, due to the fact that the alleged misconduct is
now over fifteen years old and [he] has not been a police officer since 2011.” He
asserts that the likelihood that he “would be required to testify as a former
police officer for a criminal case is essentially zero,” and his placement on the
EES “would serve no purpose at this point other than to publicly embarrass
him and his family.” We disagree.
As we recently explained, “the proper inquiry in this context is whether,
assuming a future case were to arise, it is reasonably foreseeable that evidence
3