THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0050, Truist Bank v. Paulette Duclair, the
court on November 26, 2024, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The defendant, Paulette Duclair, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Ruoff, J.), following a hearing, on a motion for contempt filed
by the plaintiff, Truist Bank. The defendant argues that the trial court erred in
its order because, she alleges: (1) the attorney who appeared for the plaintiff at
the hearing was not authorized to represent the plaintiff; (2) the plaintiff’s
attorney committed a “fraud upon the court”; and (3) the court unsustainably
exercised its discretion by approving the proposed order prepared by the
plaintiff’s attorney. We affirm.
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred in granting relief to
the plaintiff because, she alleges, the attorney who appeared for the plaintiff at
the hearing was not authorized to represent the plaintiff. The defendant’s
argument is based upon a letter she received from an officer of the plaintiff
stating that the defendant’s account had been assigned to an out-of-state law
firm. At the hearing, the plaintiff’s attorney explained that the out-of-state law
firm contracted with the attorney’s law firm to represent the plaintiff in New
Hampshire. The trial court advised the defendant that the plaintiff’s attorney
and law firm were authorized to represent the plaintiff in this case. On appeal,
the defendant has the burden to demonstrate error. Coyle v. Battles, 147 N.H.
98, 100 (2001). We conclude that the defendant has failed to show that the
trial court erred.
The defendant next argues that the trial court’s order should be vacated
because, she alleges, the plaintiff’s attorney, by submitting a proposed order
without verifying that he had authority to represent the plaintiff, committed a
“fraud upon the court.” At the hearing, the trial court stated that it had
already “read through everything” that the defendant submitted on this issue,
that it had “already ordered” that the attorney was authorized to represent the
plaintiff, and that it had “already decided that issue.” We conclude that the
defendant has failed to show that the trial court erred in accepting the
proposed order submitted by the plaintiff’s attorney. See id.
Finally, the defendant argues that the trial court unsustainably exercised
its discretion by approving the proposed order submitted by the plaintiff’s
attorney. To show that the trial court’s decision is unsustainable, the
defendant must demonstrate that the court’s ruling was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of her case. State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296
(2001). We review the record to determine whether it establishes an objective
basis sufficient to sustain the trial court’s discretionary judgment. Id. Other
than stating that the trial court approved the proposed order prepared by the
plaintiff’s attorney, the defendant has not explained why she believes the trial
court’s ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of her
case. Accordingly, we cannot conclude that the trial court unsustainably
exercised its discretion. See id.
To the extent that the defendant’s brief may contain other arguments, we
conclude that they are inadequately developed, see Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 49
(2003), and decline to address them, see Vogel v. Vogel, 137 N.H. 321, 322
(1993).
The plaintiff’s request for attorney’s fees on appeal is denied. See Sup.
Ct. R. 23; RSA 490:14-a (2010).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2