THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0474, Town of Newmarket v. Jeffrey T.
Clay; Jeffrey T. Clay v. Town of Newmarket, the court on August
20, 2025, issued the following order:
Jeffrey Clay’s objection to the Town of Newmarket’s brief, which we
construe as a motion to strike, is denied. Jeffrey Clay’s objection to the Town’s
appendix exhibits 7-11, which we also construe as a motion to strike, is denied.
However, given the Town’s implicit acknowledgment that certain emails
reproduced on pages 163-71 of its appendix were not presented to the trial court,
we decline to consider those emails and they form no part of our decision in this
case. See Lake v. Sullivan, 145 N.H. 713, 717 (2001) (“On appeal, we consider
only evidence and documents presented to the trial court.”).
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). Jeffrey Clay appeals an order of the Superior Court (Schulman, J.),
issued following a hearing, granting summary judgment in favor of the Town in
this dispute involving claims relative to the Right-to-Know Law, RSA chapter 91-
A (2023 & Supp. 2024). Jeffrey Clay advances several arguments on appeal,
primarily challenging the trial court’s decision to uphold and enforce the
settlement agreement that he had previously agreed to with the Town. As the
appealing party, Jeffrey Clay has the burden of demonstrating reversible error.
Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014). Based upon our review of the trial
court’s well-reasoned order, Jeffrey Clay’s challenges to it, the relevant law, and
the record submitted on appeal, we conclude that Jeffrey Clay has not
demonstrated reversible error and affirm the court’s decision. See id.; Sup. Ct. R.
25(8).
Lastly, the Town’s request in its brief for an award of reasonable costs and
attorney’s fees incurred on appeal is granted. In accordance with Supreme Court
Rule 23, the Town may file a request for taxation of costs with itemization, and
shall submit with any such request an affidavit establishing the amount and
reasonableness of any attorney’s fees incurred on appeal. Failure to comply with
the deadline in Rule 23 shall constitute a waiver of the costs and attorney’s fees
granted pursuant to this order.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2