THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0307, A.G. v. R.F., the court on December
9, 2024, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(2). The defendant appeals an order of the Circuit Court (Joseph, J.), issued
following a hearing, granting a domestic violence final order of protection in favor
of the plaintiff. See RSA 173-B:5 (2022). The defendant argues that the evidence
was insufficient to support the court’s order. We affirm.
“In an appeal from an order on a domestic violence petition, the trial
court’s ‘findings of facts shall be final,’ and we undertake de novo review of
‘questions of law.’” S.C. v. G.C., 175 N.H. 158, 162 (2022) (quoting RSA 173-B:3,
VI). “We review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a matter of law, upholding
the findings and rulings of the trial court unless they are lacking in evidentiary
support or tainted by error of law.” Id. “When performing this review, we accord
considerable weight to the trial court’s judgments on the credibility of witnesses
and the weight to be given testimony.” Id. at 162-63. We view the evidence in
the light most favorable to the prevailing party — here, the plaintiff. See id. at
163.
To be entitled to a domestic violence final order of protection, the plaintiff
must establish, by a preponderance of evidence, that the defendant engaged in
“abuse.” RSA 173-B:5, I. “Abuse” means the commission or attempted
commission of one or more enumerated crimes by a family or household member
or a current or former sexual or intimate partner when such conduct
“constitute[s] a credible present threat” to the plaintiff’s safety. RSA 173-B:1, I
(2022); see also S.C., 175 N.H. at 163. The trial court “may consider evidence of
such acts, regardless of their proximity in time to the filing of the petition, which,
in combination with recent conduct, reflects an ongoing pattern of behavior
which reasonably causes or has caused the [plaintiff] to fear for his or her safety
or well-being.” RSA 173-B:1, I; see also S.C., 175 N.H. at 163.
In this case, the trial court found that the defendant had engaged in abuse
of the plaintiff, his ex-girlfriend, by “thr[owing] a rollerblade at [her] after she
broke up with him,” and then, “a few months later, storm[ing] toward [her] at
their (then shared) place of employment while yelling and swearing at her loudly
in front of several witnesses.” The trial court noted the plaintiff’s fear of the
defendant, and further found that the defendant’s conduct constituted a credible
present threat to the plaintiff’s safety because, “[d]uring the second incident
above, [the defendant] became highly agitated very quickly and a co-employee
had to step in to stop him from coming into contact with plaintiff, with his hands
fisted.”
These findings are supported by evidence in the record. Although the
defendant argues that the trial court erred by crediting the testimony of the
plaintiff and her witness in lieu of his own version of events, we note that “[w]e
view the evidence in the light most favorable to the prevailing party,” and “accord
considerable weight to the trial court’s judgments on the credibility of witnesses
and the weight to be given testimony.” S.C., 175 N.H. at 162-63. Accordingly,
based upon our review of the record, we conclude that the evidence was sufficient
to support the trial court’s decision to grant a domestic violence final order of
protection in favor of the plaintiff.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2