THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0405, Bear Revocable Trust & a. v. Town
of Chichester, the court on July 9, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Bear Revocable Trust, appeals an order of the Superior
Court (Klass, J.), issued following a hearing, upholding a decision by the Town of
Chichester Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) which, in turn, upheld an
administrative decision of the town’s planning board requiring the plaintiff to
apply for a variance for a proposed project. See RSA 674:33, I(a)(1) (Supp. 2024);
RSA 677:4 (2016). The plaintiff advances several arguments challenging the trial
court’s order, primarily contending that the court erred in upholding the finding
that the proposed project would impermissibly expand or alter the plaintiff’s
existing non-conforming use.1 We affirm.
“The superior court’s review in zoning cases is limited.” Kalil v. Town of
Dummer Zoning Bd. of Adjustment, 155 N.H. 307, 309 (2007). “Factual findings
of the ZBA are deemed prima facie lawful and reasonable and will not be set
aside by the superior court absent errors of law, unless the court is persuaded by
a balance of probabilities on the evidence before it that the ZBA decision is
unreasonable.” Id. “The party seeking to set aside the ZBA decision in the
superior court bears the burden of proof.” Id. Mindful that we do not act as a
super zoning board, our review is similarly limited. Dietz v. Town of Tuftonboro,
171 N.H. 614, 618 (2019). “We will uphold the trial court’s decision on appeal
unless it is not supported by the evidence or is legally erroneous.” Id. (quotation
omitted).
As the appealing party, the plaintiff has the burden of demonstrating
reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014). Based upon our
review of the trial court’s well-reasoned order, the plaintiff’s challenges to it, the
1 To the extent the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred by not clarifying whether the
property could be subdivided, and the proposed project developed on a newly-created lot, we
note that the issue before the trial court was whether the ZBA erred by upholding the planning
board’s decision that developing the proposed project on the plaintiff’s existing lot required a
variance, not whether the lot could be subdivided.
relevant law, and the record submitted on appeal, we conclude that the plaintiff
has not demonstrated reversible error and affirm the court’s decision. See id.;
Sup. Ct. R. 25(8).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2