THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0303, State of New Hampshire v. Shogo
Hanamura, the court on July 28, 2026, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The
defendant, Shogo Hanamura, appeals his convictions, following a jury trial in
the Superior Court (Nicolosi, J.), on four counts of endangering the welfare of a
child, see RSA 639:3, I (2016), one count of domestic violence-simple assault
with a deadly weapon, see RSA 631:2-b, I(c) (2016), and one count of reckless
conduct, see RSA 631:3 (Supp. 2017) (amended 2021). His appeal rests solely
on the trial court’s overruling of an objection he made during the State’s
closing argument. We affirm.
The charges stemmed from allegations that the defendant scalded the
victim’s skin with hot water. The source of the child-victim’s injuries —
whether a burn or a skin disorder — comprised a central issue at trial. The
defendant called Dr. Bryan Kurtz, an emergency room physician, as his expert
on that issue. By way of qualifications, Dr. Kurtz explained that he “evaluate[s]
patients on their initial presentation . . . to the emergency department for the
purpose[s] of initial stabilization of their medical condition[] and then
determining the most likely causes or diagnoses that they present with and
their disposition based on those judgments.” Dr. Kurtz defined this latter
function (determining the most likely causes of a patient’s presentation) as
“differential diagnosis.” The defendant moved “to qualify Dr. Kurtz as an expert
witness in the field of emergency medicine and in the process of differential
diagnosis,” and the trial court instructed the jury that “the doctor may testify
in the area of emergency room medicine and the process of arriving at a
differential diagnosis, and he is an expert in those two areas.”
Dr. Kurtz then opined, to “a reasonable degree of medical certainty,”
“that [the child] presented with the manifestations of an organic dermatologic
process such as a bullous skin disorder.” During cross-examination, Dr. Kurtz
acknowledged his lack of expertise in dermatology, burn care, genetics, and
child abuse pediatrics. He admitted that he had never encountered epidermal
bullosa in his career and he agreed that the condition is “exceedingly rare.”
In his closing argument, the prosecutor began to say that “[Dr. Kurtz]
was not qualified by the court to diagnose — ” (emphasis added), but he did not
complete the sentence due to the defendant’s truncating objection. In the
short, ensuing bench conference outside the jury’s hearing, the trial court
overruled the defendant’s objection, through the following exchange:
[DEFENSE]: He’s qualified as an expert.
[STATE]: Yeah. But —
[COURT]: What were you going to say?
[STATE]: I was —
[COURT]: Not qualified as what?
[STATE]: To diagnose bullous skin disorders.
[COURT]: It’s okay. You may proceed.
[STATE]: Okay.
[COURT]: But that’s a fair argument.
Upon resuming his argument, instead of completing the prior sentence, the
prosecutor began anew with a different statement: “So he was not qualified to
diagnose bullous skin disorders.” The defendant claims prejudicial error
flowing from the prosecutor’s interrupted argument urging the jury to disregard
Dr. Kurtz’s opinion because the trial judge did not “qualify” him to give it.
We review a trial court’s ruling on the propriety of closing argument for
an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See State v. Collins, 168 N.H. 1, 6
(2015). “To show that the trial court’s decision is not sustainable, the
defendant must demonstrate that it was clearly untenable or unreasonable to
the prejudice of his case.” Id. (quotation omitted). Whether or not untenable
or unreasonable, we conclude that the defendant failed to demonstrate that the
trial court’s disposition of his objection prejudiced his defense. See id.
The prosecutor never uttered — and the jury never heard — the
statement the defendant challenges as objectionable. In its first iteration, the
defendant’s objection interrupted the sentence before the prosecutor finished
it. In its second iteration, the prosecutor did not pick up where he left off pre-
objection, but tacked away from the trial court’s qualification of Dr. Kurtz to a
more general argument concerning Dr. Kurtz’s specific qualification “to
diagnose bullous skin disorders.” Even though the trial court signaled that it
would allow the prosecutor to complete the sentence that triggered the
objection, the prosecutor chose to move his argument away from it.
2
At oral argument in this court, the defendant asserted that “the jury
would have understood the utterance before the objection and the utterance
after the objection to be part of the same sentence” and therefore would have
concluded that they must disregard Dr. Kurtz’s opinion. But the jury could
equally have assumed that the trial court sustained the objection since the
prosecutor, after the conference, did not complete his initial sentence. These
equally plausible possibilities foreclose the prejudice the defendant claims. Cf.
id. Based on the record, we cannot conclude that the defendant has
demonstrated that the combination of the two statements, bookending a bench
conference, prejudiced his case.1 See id.
Several of the trial court’s jury instructions buttress our conclusion.
First, the trial court emphasized that the jurors alone assess, weigh, and
evaluate testimony, and reminded them that they could assign to all witness
testimony — expert or lay — “the weight you think it deserves.” Second, the
trial court stressed the distinction between argument and evidence, stating
“[y]ou will hear the lawyers discuss the facts and the law in their opening
statements and closing arguments . . . . These statements and arguments are
not evidence.” The instructions grounded the jury in its role and in the
distinction between evidence and argument. We assume that juries follow the
instructions the trial court gives them, and we conclude that these particular
instructions countered any prejudice that could have arisen from the trial
court’s disposition of the objection. See State v. Cooper, 168 N.H. 161, 170-71
(2015). The absence of prejudice compels our conclusion that the trial court
did not unsustainably exercise its discretion in overruling the objection. See
Collins, 168 N.H. at 7 (concluding that due to lack of prejudice “the
defendant . . . failed to demonstrate that the trial court’s decision to overrule
the defendant’s objection . . . was an unsustainable exercise of discretion”). We
deem waived any other issues raised in the defendant’s notice of appeal but not
briefed. See State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 49 (2003).
Affirmed.
DONOVAN, COUNTWAY, GOULD, and WILL, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
1 The lack of prejudice resulting from the prosecutor’s unobjectionable, post-conference statement
moots the defendant’s argument concerning the lack of a curative instruction.
3