THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0614, William Bartoswicz & a. v. Town of
Effingham, the court on September 18, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiffs, William Bartoswicz and Tammy McPherson,
appeal an order of the Superior Court (Klass, J.) upholding a decision of the
planning board for the Town of Effingham approving a site plan application for
a gas station. On appeal, the plaintiffs argue that the trial court erred by
upholding the decision over their arguments and the assertions of their
retained expert that the application violated certain environmental and local
land use regulations. We affirm.
Judicial review of planning board decisions is limited. See Trustees of
Dartmouth Coll. v. Town of Hanover, 171 N.H. 497, 504-05 (2018). The trial
court is required to treat the board’s factual findings as prima facie lawful and
reasonable, and it may not set the board’s decision aside absent
unreasonableness or an identified error of law. Id. at 504. It is the burden of
the party challenging the board’s decision to persuade the trial court that, by
the balance of probabilities, the board’s decision was unreasonable. Id. The
trial court’s role is not to determine whether it agrees with the board’s findings,
but whether there is evidence upon which such findings reasonably could have
been based. Id. We, in turn, will reverse the trial court’s decision only if it is
unsupported by the evidence or legally erroneous. Id. We review the trial
court’s order to determine whether a reasonable person could have reached the
same decision as the trial court based on the evidence before it. Id.
It is the plaintiffs’ burden on appeal to demonstrate reversible error.
Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014). Based upon our review of the trial
court’s well-reasoned order, the plaintiffs’ arguments, the relevant law, and the
record submitted on appeal, we conclude that the plaintiffs have not
established that the trial court’s decision is unsupported by the evidence or
legally erroneous. See id.; Trustees of Dartmouth Coll., 171 N.H. at 504.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2