THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0032, State of New Hampshire v. James
Shankle, the court on March 10, 2026, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3).
Following a jury trial in the Superior Court (Schulman, J.), the defendant,
James Shankle, appeals his convictions on two counts of negligent homicide,
see RSA 630:3, I (2016), and two counts of negligent homicide — DUI, see RSA
630:3, II (2016). On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred by:
(1) denying his motion to dismiss for insufficient evidence; and (2) admitting
late-disclosed evidence that an investigating officer consulted with the state
police accident reconstruction unit. We affirm.
The following facts are supported by the record. The defendant was
charged with four counts of negligent homicide following the deaths of his wife
and friend after the utility terrain vehicle (UTV) the defendant was operating
collided with a tree. Two counts alleged that the defendant caused the deaths
by operating the UTV “in consequence of being under the influence of
intoxicating liquor,” see RSA 630:3, II, while the other two counts alleged that
the defendant caused the deaths by operating the UTV “down a hill, at an
unsafe and/or high rate of speed, with more than one passenger, while or after
drinking alcoholic beverages,” see RSA 630:3, I. After a nine-day trial, a jury
convicted the defendant on all four counts. The trial court sentenced the
defendant on the two negligent homicide — DUI counts and imposed no
sentences on the two alternative negligent homicide counts. This appeal
followed.
We first address the defendant’s sufficiency arguments. Because a
challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence raises a claim of legal error, our
standard of review is de novo. State v. Cable, 168 N.H. 673, 677 (2016). To
prevail upon a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, the defendant must
demonstrate that no rational trier of fact, viewing all of the evidence and all
reasonable inferences from it in the light most favorable to the State, could
have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Id. In such a challenge, we
objectively review the record to determine whether any rational trier of fact
could have found the essential elements of the crime beyond a reasonable
doubt. Id.
A defendant’s mental state often must be proved by circumstantial
evidence and may be inferred from the defendant’s conduct under all the
circumstances. State v. Vincelette, 172 N.H. 350, 354 (2019). When the
evidence as to an element of proof is solely circumstantial, it must exclude all
reasonable conclusions except guilt. Id. The proper analysis is not whether
the evidence excludes every possible conclusion consistent with innocence, but
whether it has excluded all reasonable conclusions other than guilt. State v.
Seibel, 174 N.H. 440, 445 (2021). The question is not whether the defendant
has suggested another possible hypothesis that could explain the events in an
exculpatory fashion. Id. Rather, we evaluate the evidence in the light most
favorable to the State and determine whether the alternative hypothesis is
sufficiently reasonable that a rational trier of fact could not have found proof of
guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Id.
As to the DUI charges, the defendant argues there was insufficient
evidence that he was impaired. To convict the defendant of negligent
homicide — DUI, the State had to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that: (1)
the defendant was under the influence of intoxicating liquor; (2) when he
operated a propelled vehicle; and (3) caused the deaths of the victims. RSA
630:3, II. To prove that the defendant was under the influence of intoxicating
liquor, the State had to prove only that the defendant was impaired to any
degree. See State v. Kelley, 159 N.H. 449, 452 (2009).
Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, we conclude
that it was sufficient for a rational jury to find that the defendant was
impaired. An EMT and a police officer responding to the scene both testified
that the defendant reported drinking 8 to 10 beers the day of the collision. The
jury heard that several beer cans were present and scattered at the scene of the
collision; some were empty while others were opened and had foam coming out
of them. Multiple first responders testified that they detected the smell of
alcohol on the defendant and observed that he exhibited slurred speech. An
EMT who examined the defendant after the collision testified that the
defendant reported experiencing dizziness, and the EMT later observed the
defendant sleeping on a stretcher before he was transported to the hospital.
The EMT also testified that dizziness and sleepiness may be consistent with
impairment. Contrary to the defendant’s claim that the evidence of impairment
was solely circumstantial, the defendant’s statement that he consumed 8 to 10
beers and the observations of the defendant made by those who responded to
the scene constitute direct evidence of impairment that the jury could consider
in its deliberations. See id. at 454 (stating that officer’s observations that the
defendant crossed the double yellow line, brought her vehicle to a sudden stop,
and displayed slow and unsteady movements, along with defendant’s
admission to officer that she had been drinking alcohol, “constitute direct
evidence of impairment”).
2
The jury also heard that the defendant refused to submit to a blood draw
as required by RSA 265-A:4 (2024), see RSA 265-A:10 (2024) (providing that
refusal to submit to blood alcohol test required under RSA 265-A:4 is
admissible evidence), and that the defendant also refused to comply with a
search warrant for officers to obtain a blood draw. Hospital staff eventually
took blood samples from the defendant approximately five hours after the
collision occurred. A state police toxicologist testified that these samples had
blood alcohol concentrations (BAC) ranging between 0.054 and 0.075 grams
per 100 milliliters at the time the samples were taken. Another forensic
toxicologist retained by the State testified that she performed a retrograde
extrapolation analysis using data from these blood samples. Based on this
analysis, she estimated that the defendant’s BAC at the time of the collision
was between 0.097 and 0.233. The jury heard that a BAC within this range
can cause slurred speech, diminished coordination, drowsiness or passing out,
and other effects. The jury also heard that the second expert performed an
additional retrograde extrapolation analysis that accounted for the possibility,
though perhaps unlikely, that as many as two alcoholic beverages were
unabsorbed in the defendant’s stomach at the time of the collision, in which
case the defendant’s BAC at the time of the collision could have been as low as
0.058. The jury heard that, even with a BAC below the legal limit of 0.08, a
person may still experience decreased reaction time, impaired critical
judgment, or increased impulsivity and risk taking.
To prove that the defendant was under the influence of intoxicating
liquor, the State needed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt only that the
defendant was impaired to any degree. See Kelley, 159 N.H. at 452. Based
upon our review of the evidence as a whole and all reasonable inferences drawn
therefrom viewed in the light most favorable to the State, we conclude that a
rational jury could find beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant was
impaired when he operated the UTV. See id. at 454-55.
Next, as to both the DUI and non-DUI charges, the defendant contends
that the evidence failed to establish that his impairment or otherwise negligent
operation of the UTV was the cause of the crash. With respect to the non-DUI
charges, he also challenges the sufficiency of the evidence that his conduct
amounted to criminal negligence. He asserts that the evidence on these issues
was solely circumstantial. We assume without deciding that the evidence on
these issues was solely circumstantial but nevertheless conclude that it was
sufficient.
Here, as to the DUI charges, there was sufficient evidence for the jury to
find that the defendant’s impairment was the cause of the collision and the
deaths of the victims. The jury heard how, relevant to the operation of a motor
vehicle, alcohol affects a person’s judgment and the ability to process what they
see and to react quickly. After the collision, the defendant told one officer that
he believed he was driving 40 to 50 miles per hour before striking the tree. The
3