THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0312, Jocelyn Laakso v. New England
Boudoir, the court on January 27, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The defendant, New England Boudoir, appeals a default
judgment in the amount of $9,468.75 plus interest and costs entered by the
Circuit Court (King, J.) in favor of the plaintiff, Jocelyn Laakso, based upon the
defendant’s failure to answer the plaintiff’s small claim complaint. See Dist.
Div. R. 4.3(c). The defendant argues, in part, that (1) it should not have been
defaulted because it never received notice of the small claim complaint; and (2)
the judgment awarded was disproportionate to the damages the plaintiff
suffered and, thus, was an improper penalty. We vacate and remand.
Under District Division Rule 4.3, if a defendant fails to timely answer a
small claim complaint, “upon the filing by the plaintiff of a Military Statement
and any other documents required by the court, a default judgment may be
issued for the plaintiff.” Dist. Div. R. 4.3(c). Upon an erroneous entry of
default, the defendant’s remedy is generally to seek to strike the default. See
generally 5 Gordon J. MacDonald, New Hampshire Practice: Wiebusch on New
Hampshire Civil Practice and Procedure § 33.15 (4th ed. 2014). We note,
however, that neither Rule 4.3 nor any other small claim rule explains that a
party may seek to strike a default improperly entered for failure to timely
answer a small claim complaint. Cf. Dist. Div. R. 3.42(a) (describing procedure
for moving to strike default entered for failure to timely answer complaint filed
under the District Division Civil Rules).
In this case, the defendant contends that the entry of default was
erroneous because it never, in fact, received “proper notice” of the small claim,
and that it only learned of the small claim when it received notice of the default
judgment. The plaintiff counters that the trial court in fact served notice of the
small claim complaint upon the defendant in accordance with RSA 503:6
(Supp. 2023). Nothing in the record reflects that the defendant sought to strike
the default in the trial court. Rather, the defendant asserts that “[u]pon
receiving the Notice of Decision [on the entry of default judgment, it]
immediately took action by filing an appeal” with this court. Accordingly, it
appears that the trial court has not yet had an opportunity to rule upon the
defendant’s claim that it did not receive notice of the small claim complaint.
With respect to the damages awarded upon the defendant’s default, a
default ordinarily results in the admission of all well-pleaded facts, requiring
the trial court then to assess damages upon proper proof thereof. See Cole v.
Hobson, 143 N.H. 14, 16 (1998); cf. Douglas v. Douglas, 143 N.H. 419, 426
(1999) (discussing decrees pro confesso in equity proceedings). In the context
of contract disputes, the goal of a damages award is to put the non-breaching
party in the position that the party would have occupied but for the breach.
See Mentis Sciences v. Pittsburgh Networks, 173 N.H. 584, 588 (2020).
Here, the parties agree that they entered into an agreement for the
provision of photography services, and that the plaintiff paid the defendant a
deposit of $2,656.25 for those services. The parties further agree that,
subsequently, a dispute arose between them regarding the location of where
the photographs were to be taken, that the plaintiff requested the return of her
deposit, that the defendant refused to return the deposit, and that the plaintiff
then filed her small claim. Although it appears from the facts agreed to by the
parties and the documents attached to their briefs that the plaintiff paid no
more than the deposit, for reasons that are unclear from the record, the trial
court awarded default judgment in the amount of $9,468.75 plus interest and
costs, an amount substantially in excess of the amount the plaintiff had paid.
In her brief, the plaintiff asserts that the amount awarded by the trial
court was the “suggested legal remedy,” and that the defendant’s failure to
respond to the small claim complaint entitled her to a “remedy in the form of
additional damages.” As noted above, however, the goal of a damages award
for breach of contract is to place the non-breaching party in the same position
that the party would have occupied but for the breach. Here, an award of more
than three-and-a-half times the amount that the plaintiff paid the defendant
appears to place the plaintiff in a significantly better position than she would
have been in but for the breach, and to result in a substantial windfall.
As a general rule, we require parties to raise issues in the trial court in
the first instance because “trial forums should have an opportunity to rule on
issues and to correct errors before they are presented for our review.” Petition
of Retired Keene Sch. Teachers, 177 N.H. ___, ___ (2024), 2024 N.H. 55, ¶16.
As noted above, the defendant did not move to strike the default in the trial
court, but immediately filed its appeal upon receiving notice of the default. Nor
did the defendant move to reconsider the default judgment on the basis that it
was disproportionate to the damages the plaintiff had suffered. However, issue
preservation is a limitation on the parties seeking review, not this court. Id. at
___, 2024 N.H. 55, ¶17. Under the unique circumstances of this case, we
vacate the judgment and remand for the trial court to determine, in the first
instance, the defendant’s claim that it never received notice of the small claim,
and thus, whether the default should be stricken. Should the trial court
2
determine that the default was properly entered, we direct the trial court to
hold a hearing on damages.
Vacated and remanded.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3