THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0026, State of New Hampshire v. Lynn
Geddes-Morin, the court on April 15, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Lynn Geddes-Morin, appeals her convictions,
following a jury trial, on one count of misdemeanor arson, see RSA 634:1
(2016), and one count of misdemeanor reckless conduct, see RSA 631:3 (2016).
She argues that the Superior Court (Anderson, J.), erred in denying her request
to cross-examine a witness regarding a diversion agreement and a dismissed
charge of issuing bad checks. We affirm.
A trial court has broad discretion to determine the scope of cross-
examination and the admissibility of evidence, and we will not upset its ruling
absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. State v. Kornbrekke, 156 N.H.
821, 823-24 (2008). “To prevail under this standard, the defendant must
demonstrate that the trial court’s decision was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of his [or her] case.” Id. at 824.
The defendant argues that the trial court erred in denying her request to
cross-examine the witness regarding his diversion agreement with the State
and a dismissed charge of issuing bad checks. She asserts that the agreement
was an admission that the witness committed a crime of dishonesty, that his
credibility was central to the trial, and that the testimony was admissible
under Rule 608.
New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 608(b) provides: “Except for a criminal
conviction under Rule 609, extrinsic evidence is not admissible to prove
specific instances of a witness’s conduct in order to attack or support the
witness’s character for truthfulness.” N.H. R. Ev. 608(b). However, “the court
may, on cross-examination, allow them to be inquired into if they are probative
of the character for truthfulness or untruthfulness of: (1) the witness; or
(2) another witness whose character the witness being cross-examined has
testified about.” Id.
New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 403 limits the discretion granted in
Rule 608(b) by excluding relevant evidence if its probative value is substantially
outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice. Kornbrekke, 156 N.H. at 824.
We accord the trial court considerable deference in determining whether
probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice.
State v. Miller, 155 N.H. 246, 252 (2007).
In this case, the trial court found that the probative value of the
diversion agreement and the witness’s underlying conduct was substantially
outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice. The court noted that the danger
of allowing inquiry into the diversion agreement was that the jury could develop
an unfair bias against the witness and place excessive weight on the
acknowledgement in the diversion agreement that he knowingly issued a bad
check. Based upon this record, we cannot conclude that the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion in its ruling. See id.
The defendant next argues that the trial court violated her right under
the State Constitution to confront the witness by precluding cross-examination
regarding the diversion agreement. Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution
provides, in pertinent part: “Every subject shall have a right to produce all
proofs that may be favorable to himself; to meet the witnesses against him face
to face, and to be fully heard in his defense, by himself, and counsel.” N.H.
CONST. pt. I, art. 15. We have held that incident to this right is the
opportunity to impeach a witness’s credibility through cross-examination.
Miller, 155 N.H. at 253. Although a trial court has broad discretion to fix the
limits of cross-examination, it may not completely deny a defendant the right to
cross-examine a witness on a proper matter of inquiry. Id. Once a defendant
has been permitted a threshold level of inquiry, however, the constitutional
standard is satisfied, and the trial court’s limiting of cross-examination is
measured against an unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. Id. at 253-
54.
In this case, the record shows that the trial court permitted a threshold
level of inquiry into the witness’s credibility. The trial court allowed defense
counsel to cross-examine the witness about whether he wanted the defendant
to move out of their residence, whether his statements to the police were
consistent with the evidence, and whether he was exaggerating the risk created
by the fire. In his closing argument, defense counsel argued that the witness’s
responses on cross-examination cast doubt upon his credibility. We conclude
that the trial court’s decision not to allow inquiry regarding the diversion
agreement did not impermissibly limit the defendant’s ability to effectively
impeach the witness in violation of Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution.
See id. at 253-55.
When the record shows that a threshold level of inquiry was allowed, we
will uphold the trial court’s decision limiting the scope of further cross-
examination unless the defendant demonstrates that the court’s ruling was
clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his or her case. Id. at
2
254. We conclude that the defendant has failed to show that the trial court’s
decision was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of her case.
See id.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3