THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0059, Ryan George Belanger v. Joseph
Wilhelmy & a., the court on November 22, 2024, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The plaintiff, Ryan George Belanger, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Delker, J.) dismissing his complaint against the defendants,
Joseph Wilhelmy and William G. Thornton, for failure to state a claim upon
which relief may be granted. We affirm.
In reviewing the trial court’s dismissal order, we consider whether the
allegations in the plaintiff’s pleadings are reasonably susceptible of a
construction that would permit recovery. See Szewczyk v. Continental Paving,
176 N.H. 148, 151 (2023). We assume the truth of any well-pleaded factual
allegations in the plaintiff’s pleadings and construe all reasonable inferences
from those facts in the light most favorable to the plaintiff. See id. We do not,
however, assume the truth of statements in the plaintiff’s pleadings that are
conclusions of law. See id.; ERG, Inc. v. Barnes, 137 N.H. 186, 190 (1993)
(“The court will not, however, assume the truth or accuracy of any allegations
which are not well-pleaded, including the statement of conclusions of fact and
principles of law.”). We will uphold the trial court’s decision if the well-pleaded
facts do not constitute a basis for relief. See Szewczyk, 176 N.H. at 151.
As the appealing party, the plaintiff has the burden of demonstrating
reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014). Based upon our
review of the trial court’s order, the plaintiff’s arguments, the relevant law, and
the record submitted on appeal, the plaintiff has not demonstrated that the
well-pleaded facts in his complaint, together with all reasonable inferences
from those facts, constitute a basis for relief. See id.; Szewczyk, 176 N.H. at
151. Accordingly, we uphold the dismissal of the plaintiff’s complaint.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett and Donovan, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk