THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0213, State of New Hampshire v. Shane
M. Beattie & a., the court on June 18, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal and has determined to resolve this case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendants, Shane and Trina Beattie, appeal an order of
the Superior Court (MacLeod, J.) granting summary judgment to the State on
its declaration of the taking of the defendants’ property. We affirm.
We described the factual and procedural history of this case in State v.
Beattie, 173 N.H. 716 (2020), and thus need not repeat it here. There, we
reversed the trial court’s order granting the State’s motion to dismiss because
we concluded that the de novo standard of review applies to the trial court’s
review of preliminary objections that challenge necessity, public uses, or net-
public benefit in eminent domain matters that involve condemnation of land for
the alteration of a state highway. See Beattie, 173 N.H. at 722; see also RSA
498-A:1, 9-b (2010). The project to alter US Route 2 and build a new bridge
replacing the Rogers’ Rangers Bridge in Lancaster that spanned the
Connecticut River (the Project) moved forward and a new bridge has been built.
The facts pertinent to this appeal are taken from the trial court’s order or are
otherwise supported by the record.
On remand, the State renewed its motion to dismiss and the defendants
objected, arguing that the Project would cause “substantial damages to their
land by altering long-established flood patterns in the Connecticut River,
causing more flooding to come closer to their property than usual; and that the
[P]roject will cause flooding to areas adjacent to their property.” In December
2021, the trial court granted the State’s motion as to the issue of necessity, a
ruling that the defendants have not appealed, but denied the motion as to the
issue of whether the taking would result in a net-public benefit. Thus, the sole
claim that remained was the defendants’ assertion that the State’s taking of
their property lacked a net-public benefit.
In May 2022, the State moved for summary judgment, arguing that the
undisputed material facts demonstrated that there was a net-public benefit to
the taking. The defendants objected, asserting that the State performed an
improper net-public benefit balancing test when it failed to avail itself of the
Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) conditional letter of map
revision (CLOMR) process.1 More specifically, the defendants alleged that the
State’s process was flawed because it was driven by the State’s pre-determined
goal of avoiding FEMA’s CLOMR process. They also argued that the Project
was not built according to the original proposed plans because it elevated,
instead of lowered, Route 2 near their home, which adversely affected the
State’s conclusions and promises it made as to the Project’s impact on the
defendants’ property. According to the defendants, this argument presented a
genuine dispute of material fact “as to whether or not the Project was
undertaken in the manner in which it was proposed and whether or not the
[defendants’] property will be adversely affected by what was actually
constructed.”
Following a hearing on the State’s motion, the trial court issued an order
granting summary judgment for the State on January 15, 2024. The order
noted that the New Hampshire Department of Transportation (DOT) contracted
with Hoyle, Tanner & Associates (Hoyle Tanner), an engineering consulting
firm, to conduct, among other things, two hydraulic analyses to evaluate and
determine the Project’s effect on the Connecticut River’s flow regimes and water
surface elevations. Hoyle Tanner’s conclusions were described in two reports,
which were submitted in the summary judgment record, documenting a
computer modeling analysis that was completed in August 2017 and a two-
dimensional hydraulic computer modeling analysis that was completed in
August 2018. Based upon the 2018 analysis, Hoyle Tanner’s project manager
concluded that there would be “no significant change in Connecticut River flow
regimes or increase in water surface elevations . . . despite relocation of US
Route 2 to the north of the [the defendants’ property] and the increased
driveway profile grade at its intersection with US Route 2.”
The trial court also noted that in his affidavit defendant Shane Beattie
asserted that “the Hydraulic Analysis performed by [Hoyle Tanner] amounted to
pretext, in that it was designed with an end-result in mind . . . allow[ing] DOT
to make good on its decision that it did not want to involve ‘the feds’ as part of
this Project.” In his affidavit, Beattie also claimed that a DOT official
commented to him that the DOT did not want “the feds” involved when Beattie
requested that the DOT prepare and file a CLOMR. The defendants also filed
another affidavit from the Lancaster town manager stating that he observed a
DOT representative telling Beattie that the DOT “was not going to file a
CLOMR.”
1 As the trial court explained, “A CLOMR is ‘FEMA’s comment on a proposed project that would,
upon construction, affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus
result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway.’” (Quoting 44 C.F.R. § 72.2).
According to the defendants “‘A CLOMR is a pre-project application to FEMA showing what
changes the proposed project will make to the local floodplain.’” (Quoting Hall v. City of Bryant,
379 S.W.3d 727, 729, n. 4 (Ark. Ct. App. 2010)).
2
However, the court observed that the defendants did not challenge the
Hoyle Tanner analyses as not performed in accordance with standard
engineering practices, and it found the information submitted in the
defendants’ affidavits constituted “general allegations” which did not “‘set forth
specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial.’” (Quoting Beckles
v. Madden, 160 N.H. 118, 122 (2010)). The court found persuasive the
deposition testimony of Hoyle Tanner’s project manager “that there were no
discussions between himself and the DOT, nor amongst Hoyle Tanner
employees, that the models must reflect that there would be no increase in
flood elevation levels in order for the State to avoid the CLOMR process.” The
court concluded that, prior to the construction of the Project, the State fulfilled
its regulatory obligations by “‘demonstrat[ing] through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses . . . that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase
in flood levels within the community’” (quoting 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(d)(3); therefore,
the State was not required to seek FEMA’s review through the CLOMR process
and the defendants’ claim to the contrary did not create a genuine issue of
material fact.
Next, the trial court rejected the defendants’ claim that the State’s
balancing test was flawed because the State assumed that the Project would be
constructed according to the original proposed plan, as opposed to the “as
built” plans. Although the defendants’ expert engineering consultant, the H.L.
Turner Group (Turner Group), conducted a preliminary investigation indicating
that the defendants “will likely see a slightly higher flood level and longer
duration of flooding as a result of the new Route 2 bridge and roadway
approach,” the court noted that the Turner Group’s analysis was incomplete
and a final report had not been submitted for the court’s consideration. In
addition, the court observed that the Turner Group’s lead civil engineer did not
offer an affidavit attesting to the final results of the Turner Group’s analysis.
Accordingly, the court concluded that this opinion “was based on incomplete
data and was not supported by specific facts to support a genuine issue of
material fact to survive a motion for summary judgment” and granted
summary judgment to the State. The defendants moved for reconsideration,
which the trial court denied. This appeal followed.
On appeal, the defendants argue that the trial court erred in granting
summary judgment to the State by: (1) improperly discounting the weight of
the defendants’ expert opinion challenging the Hoyle Tanner analyses; (2)
rejecting the defendants’ evidence that the State improperly avoided the
CLOMR process without an evidentiary hearing; and (3) failing to consider
certain allegedly uncontested facts introduced by the defendants that
presented genuine issues of material fact for trial. The State responds by
maintaining that the Project and taking were appropriate and constituted a
net-public benefit and that the trial court properly determined that the
defendants did not adequately dispute the State’s material facts. The State
also argues that the trial court properly determined that the defendants failed
3