THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0289, Paula Johnson v. City of Nashua &
a., the court on February 18, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Paula Johnson, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (English, J.) dismissing her complaint for declaratory and
injunctive relief against the defendants, the City of Nashua (city), its Board of
Aldermen (BOA), and the Nashua School District for failure to state a claim
upon which relief may be granted. We affirm.
In reviewing the trial court’s dismissal order, we consider whether the
allegations in the plaintiff’s pleadings are reasonably susceptible of a
construction that would permit recovery. See Szewczyk v. Continental Paving,
176 N.H. 148, 151 (2023). We assume the truth of the well-pleaded factual
allegations in the plaintiff’s complaint and construe all reasonable inferences
from those facts in the light most favorable to her. See id. We do not, however,
assume the truth of statements in the plaintiff’s pleadings that are conclusions
of law. See id.; ERG, Inc. v. Barnes, 137 N.H. 186, 190 (1993) (“The court will
not, however, assume the truth or accuracy of any allegations which are not
well-pleaded, including the statement of conclusions of fact and principles of
law.”). We will uphold the trial court’s decision if the facts pleaded do not
constitute a basis for relief. See Szewczyk, 176 N.H. at 151.
In her complaint, the plaintiff challenged a municipal election recount
conducted by the City Clerk pursuant to the city’s charter at the request of a
candidate for a seat on the city’s Board of Education (BOE). Following the
recount, the BOA declared that candidate to have received seven more votes
than the plaintiff, resulting in the plaintiff losing her seat on the BOE. In
dismissing the complaint, the trial court rejected the plaintiff’s claim that the
defendants violated certain provisions of RSA chapter 671 (2016 & Supp. 2023)
relative to school district elections and recounts. The court reasoned that,
because the BOE is a municipal board subject to provisions of the city’s charter
relative to municipal elections, and is not an independent school district, the
provisions of RSA chapter 671 relied upon by the plaintiff did not apply. On
appeal, the plaintiff argues that the trial court’s analysis was erroneous, and
that RSA chapter 671 preempts the city’s charter. We disagree.
In New Hampshire, the legislature has plenary control over
municipalities. City of Manchester Sch. Dist. v. City of Manchester, 150 N.H.
664, 666 (2004). Municipalities, in turn, have only those powers granted to
them by the State. Id. School districts are generally independent of
municipalities with extensive powers, including powers to sue and be sued, to
own and dispose of property, to contract, to raise money, and to pay debts. See
id. at 671. Nevertheless, the legislature may, through special legislation, grant
a municipality authority “to merge the school district with the municipal
corporation and make the school district a city department.” Id. at 672. The
City of Nashua is one such municipality. See id.; Lebel v. Beaulieu, 112 N.H.
250, 252 (1972) (identifying Nashua as one of several cities in which, through
an act of the legislature, “the school districts had lost their independent
corporate existence and had become a dependent part of their municipalities”).
Specifically, the legislature has provided that “[s]aid city [of Nashua] shall
constitute a single municipal corporation with powers for municipal and school
purposes, including all the powers of a school district.” Laws 1923, 227:2. The
legislature has further provided that “[a]ll provisions of law or of the charter of
said city [of Nashua] affecting school districts or schools shall, so far as not
inconsistent herewith, continue to apply to said city.” Id. (emphasis added).
Indeed, we have observed that the Nashua “school district and the city are
coterminous and constitute a single corporation.” Sullivan v. Flynn, 116 N.H.
547, 548 (1976); see also Wilcox v. Burnham, 98 N.H. 64, 65 (1953).
RSA chapter 671 generally governs the election of officers of “school
districts.” RSA 671:1. Under RSA 194:1 (2018), “[e]ach town shall constitute a
single district for school purposes; provided that districts organized under
special acts of the legislature may retain their present organization.”
(Emphasis added.) Under RSA 671:22, IV, “[n]othing in the provisions [of RSA
chapter 671] for election of school district officers at town meetings shall be
construed as affecting any city charter.”
The city’s charter defines the duties and powers of the BOE and
delineates its composition, including the number of its members, the length of
their terms, and that they are to be elected at general municipal elections. See
Lebel, 112 N.H. at 252. The charter additionally contains provisions governing
municipal elections, including a provision specifically governing recounts of
votes at a municipal election. In her brief, the plaintiff does not claim that the
election or recount procedure was contrary to the provisions of the city’s
charter or any provision of State law relative to municipal elections.
We conclude that the trial court did not err by determining that the
provisions of RSA chapter 671 relied upon by the plaintiff did not apply in this
case. As a “dependent part” of the city under the city’s organization and
governance, see Lebel, 112 N.H. at 252, the BOE election was subject to the
2
provisions of the city’s State-approved charter relative to elections and
recounts, and not to any inconsistent provisions of RSA chapter 671.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3