THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0074, Emily Butler v. Matthew McGrath,
the court on January 28, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The plaintiff, Emily Butler, appeals a decision of the Circuit
Court (Cross, J.), following a hearing, reconsidering its earlier order that had
awarded her $33,730 pursuant to RSA 540-A:4 (2021) for alleged violations of
RSA chapter 540-B, see RSA 540-B:7 (Supp. 2023), and dismissing her
petition. The plaintiff argues that the trial court erred by determining, on
reconsideration, that the defendant, Matthew McGrath, did not violate RSA
chapter 540-B in a manner that entitled her to damages under RSA 540-A:4,
and by waiving the alleged untimeliness of, and granting, the defendant’s
motion to reconsider. We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand.
We first address whether the trial court erred by considering the
defendant’s reconsideration motion despite its alleged untimeliness. We note
that, although the defendant moved to reconsider more than ten days after the
notice of decision on the trial court’s initial ruling, the trial court found that the
motion was, in fact, timely because the United States Postal Service had
returned the notice as undelivered, and because the defendant promptly moved
to reconsider after the trial court re-sent the notice to him. See Dist. Div. R.
1.1 (authorizing circuit court to waive application of any rule as good cause
appears and justice requires). Even if the motion to reconsider was untimely,
however, “the trial court’s discretionary power to hear an untimely motion may
be exercised, and prior exercise may be corrected, as sound discretion may
require, at any time prior to final judgment.” In the Matter of Nyhan and
Nyhan, 147 N.H. 768, 770 (2002) (quotation omitted).
In this case, the trial court’s initial ruling on the merits of the plaintiff’s
RSA 540-A:4 petition had not yet gone to final judgment when the trial court
expressly waived any untimeliness of the motion and scheduled it for a
hearing, and when the court ultimately issued its ruling on reconsideration.
Moreover, although the defendant filed an appeal concurrently with the motion
to reconsider, the record on appeal reflects that the appeal was premature and
not yet perfected when the trial court expressly waived any untimeliness of the
motion and scheduled the matter for a further hearing. See Jesurum v.
WBTSCC Ltd. P’ship, 169 N.H. 469, 482 (2016) (holding that, because appeal
was filed prior to trial court’s ruling on outstanding attorney’s fee issue, the
appeal was premature and did not deprive trial court of jurisdiction to act on
issue); Rautenberg v. Munnis, 107 N.H. 446, 447 (1966) (stating that this court
is vested with exclusive jurisdiction over subject matter of trial court
proceeding only after appeal is perfected). We conclude that the trial court did
not unsustainably exercise its discretion by waiving any untimeliness in the
motion for reconsideration, scheduling the matter for a further hearing, and
considering the motion on its merits. See Nyhan, 147 N.H. at 770.
Turning to the plaintiff’s remaining arguments, the trial court’s “findings
of fact shall be final but questions of law may be transferred to the supreme
court in the same manner as from the superior court.” RSA 540-A:4, V. “By
the statute’s plain terms, review is limited and, as to factual findings, it is
highly deferential.” Magee v. Cooper, 174 N.H. 647, 650 (2021). We will
uphold the trial court’s findings and rulings unless they lack evidentiary
support or are otherwise tainted by error of law. Id. at 651. “Our inquiry is to
determine whether the evidence presented to the trial court reasonably
supports its findings, and then whether the court’s decision is consonant with
applicable law.” Id. (quotation and brackets omitted).
RSA chapter 540-B “provides for an eviction process separate from the
judicial eviction process outlined in RSA chapter 540” if the property at issue is
a “shared facility.” Natal v. GMPM Co., 175 N.H. 74, 77 (2022); see RSA 540-
B:3, IV (Supp. 2024) (“Shared facilities governed by this chapter shall not be
subject to the eviction process of RSA 540.”).
A “shared facility” means real property rented for residential
purposes which has separate sleeping areas for each occupant and
in which each occupant has access to and shares with the owner
of the facility one or more significant portions of the facility in
common, such as kitchen, dining area, bathroom, or bathing area,
for which the occupant has no rented right of sole personal use.
RSA 540-B:1, I (2021). The statute requires that “the owner of the leased
property live in, and share the use and enjoyment of one or more significant
portions of, the facility in common with the occupants.” Natal, 175 N.H. at 78.
To evict an occupant of a shared facility, the statute simply requires the
owner to provide a written “notice of termination.” See RSA 540-B:3, I-III
(Supp. 2023). An owner may specifically “terminate any tenancy for,” among
other things, “behavior of the occupant or guest of any family member of the
occupant” that “adversely affects the health or safety of . . . the owner,” or for
“material [breach] of any rental agreement,” by providing the occupant with “[a]
written 72-hour notice of termination.” RSA 540-B:3, III. Unlike an “eviction
notice” under RSA chapter 540, see RSA 540:2, :3 (2021), nothing in RSA 540-
B:3 requires that the written notice of termination “state with specificity the
reason for the eviction,” RSA 540:3, III.
2
After providing the written notice of termination, the owner of a shared
facility is entitled to take possession of any areas of the property used by the
evicted occupant “at the end of the notice period,” and in so doing, may request
assistance of law enforcement for that purpose. RSA 540-B:8 (2021); see Natal,
175 N.H. at 77. The owner is required to “retain and exercise reasonable care
in the storage of the personal property of the occupant who has vacated the
premises for a period of 3 days after the date on which such occupant has
vacated,” and thereafter may dispose of such property without notice to the
occupant. RSA 540-B:9 (2021). In the absence of a written agreement to the
contrary, any security deposit “shall be returned within 20 days after the
occupant has vacated.” RSA 509-B:10 (2021). Violations of RSA chapter 540-
B are “subject to the remedies set forth in RSA 540-A:4,” but the “tenant shall
not enjoy the remedies set forth in RSA 540-A:4 in regard to tenant lockout if
the owner . . . of the shared facility has complied with the [notice] requirements
of RSA 540-B:3.” RSA 540-B:7, I, II (Supp. 2023).
In this case, the parties do not dispute that, for purposes of RSA chapter
540-B, the plaintiff rented a room in a “shared facility” owned by the
defendant. On November 7, 2023, the defendant, who was self-represented at
the time, provided the plaintiff with a written “eviction notice” on a New
Hampshire Judicial Branch form tailored to evictions under RSA chapter 540,
checking boxes on the form asserting that the plaintiff “fail[ed] to comply with a
material term of the lease,” and that she or members of her family engaged in
behavior that “adversely affect[ed] the health or safety of . . . the landlord.” We
note that the New Hampshire Judicial Branch does not, currently, provide a
notice of termination form tailored to RSA 540-B:3 for litigants.
With respect to the failure to comply with the lease allegation, the
defendant cited a provision of the parties’ “Roommate Agreement” that he
claimed the plaintiff had violated. With respect to the behavior adversely
affecting health or safety allegation, the defendant wrote that “[t]enant has
repeatedly demonstrated erratic troubling behavior,” that “there is a consistent
pattern of crossing bound[a]ries set by the landlord,” and that, “[a]s a result,
the landlord put a heavy lock on his room door to protect house pet and
petfood/and himself.” Notwithstanding the 72-hour written notice of
termination provision of RSA 540-B:3, III for both material breach of a rental
agreement and conduct that adversely affects the owner’s health or safety, the
judicial branch form utilized by the defendant had preprinted language stating
that notice of 30 days was required for failure to comply with a material term of
the lease, and that seven days was required for conduct adversely affecting
health or safety of the landlord, see RSA 540:2, II(c), (d), :3, II. The notice
requested that the plaintiff vacate the property on or before November 14, or
within seven days.
Evidence in the record establishes that after receiving the written notice,
the plaintiff moved out of the defendant’s residence four days later, on
3