THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0242, In the Matter of Warren Jackson
and Jean Jackson, the court on November 21, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The respondent, Jean Marie Jackson (wife), appeals a final
decree and subsequent orders of the Circuit Court (Curran, J.) in her divorce
from the petitioner, Warren Jackson (husband). We affirm.
The following facts were found by the trial court or are otherwise
supported by the record. The parties married in 1991 and have two adult
children. During their marriage, the husband enjoyed career success, while
the wife remained at home to raise the children and manage the parties’ affairs.
The husband filed for divorce in October 2020. During the pendency of the
proceedings, the parties lived together in the marital home.
Prior to the final hearing in July 2022, the wife filed two motions for
contempt against the husband: one asserting that the husband did not
produce court-ordered financial documents pursuant to Family Division Rule
1.25-A, and the other asserting, in part, that the husband did not return
personal property removed from the marital home. After the final hearing, the
court issued a narrative order and final decree in December 2022. In its
narrative order, the court deferred ruling on the issue of the husband’s alleged
failure to return property, required the husband to deliver the property to the
home, and ordered a show-cause hearing on the issue. The court otherwise
denied the wife’s motions for contempt, finding that the wife did not satisfy her
burden of proof to establish that the husband knowingly violated court orders.
Next, the trial court revised and adopted the wife’s proposed form decree.
This final decree provided that the husband “shall maintain a life insurance
policy in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 designating [the wife] as Death
Beneficiary.” The final decree also contained a checked box under the heading
“Compliance With Rule 1.25-A,” indicating that “[the wife] has and [the
husband] has not complied with Rule 1.25-A.” The decree also contained a
checked box titled “Miscellaneous,” which provided that the husband filed
“false and/or inaccurate” financial affidavits, thus causing the wife to receive
less temporary alimony than she was entitled to. The paragraph also stated
that the wife was awarded treble damages and attorney’s fees pursuant to RSA
458:15-b, I (2018).
The husband filed a motion to reconsider the final decree, which the
court granted in April 2023. The trial court explained that it “did not intend to
adopt the provisions incorporated in [the wife’s counsel’s] drafting” of the
language under the headings “Compliance With Rule 1.25-A” and
“Miscellaneous,” and that “by scrivener’s error or oversight did not excise these
terms from the subject pleading.” The court also stated that it intended to
modify the decree to require only $500,000 in life insurance. The court
accordingly issued a modified divorce decree, using the term “nunc pro tunc,”
crossing out the language under the subject headings and changing the
husband’s life insurance obligation from $1 million to $500,000.
In May 2023, the trial court held a show-cause hearing and determined
that the husband was not in contempt for failing to return personal property to
the marital residence. In March 2024, the trial court issued an order on
several post-final hearing motions and denied the wife’s motion for
reconsideration of the modified divorce decree. Based upon the equities of the
case, the trial court converted the final decree to be the controlling temporary
orders pending an appeal or the passage of 31 days. See Fam. Div. R. 2.29(b).
This appeal followed.
On appeal, the wife argues that the trial court erred by: (1) making
substantive changes to its original divorce decree and characterizing the
changes as scrivener’s errors; (2) refusing to find the husband in contempt for
his non-compliance with Family Division Rules 1.25-A and 2.16; (3) awarding
the husband 50% of the wife’s pension without excluding her premarital
portion pursuant to the Hodgins formula; (4) failing to establish an effective
date for the parties to divide their financial assets; (5) retroactively imposing
the final decree as a new temporary order; (6) taking no action on the wife’s
request for retroactive alimony; and (7) failing to issue a ruling on the
distribution of the parties’ personal property.
A trial court has broad discretion in fashioning a final decree of divorce
and in managing the proceedings before it. In the Matter of Spenard &
Spenard, 167 N.H. 1, 3 (2014). We will not overturn a trial court’s rulings
absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Id. We review the record only
to determine whether it contains an objective basis to sustain the trial court’s
discretionary judgments. Id. If the court’s findings can reasonably be made on
the evidence presented, they will stand. Id.
We first address the wife’s argument that the trial court’s changes to the
divorce decree should be reversed because the changes were substantive,
cannot be characterized as scrivener’s errors, and lack support in the record.
In modifying the divorce decree, the trial court explained that it “did not intend
2
to adopt the provisions incorporated in [the wife’s counsel’s] drafting” of the
subject language, and that “by scrivener’s error or oversight did not excise
these terms from the subject pleading.” The trial court has the inherent power
to revise its own orders and correct errors. See In the Matter of Stapleton &
Stapleton, 159 N.H. 694, 696-97(2010). Based upon our review of the
December 2022 divorce decree and narrative order, we conclude that the trial
court did not unsustainably exercise its discretion by modifying the divorce
decree. See In the Matter of Salesky & Salesky, 157 N.H. 698, 702 (2008)
(stating that interpretation of trial court order is a question of law, which we
review de novo).
In the original December 2022 divorce decree, the trial court edited and
adopted the wife’s proposed decree. The wife submitted this proposed decree
on a circuit court form titled, “Final Decree on Petition for Divorce, Legal
Separation, or Civil Union Dissolution.” Within the form, the wife typed in
additional proposed language, including the $1 million life insurance policy
and the text under the headings “Compliance With Rule 1.25-A” and
“Miscellaneous.” The court edited the proposed decree by hand, inserting
language consistent with its narrative order. In its narrative order, the court
denied the wife’s contempt motion, in which she contended that the husband
did not comply with Rule 1.25-A. In doing so, the court noted that “Rule 1.25-
A provides additional remedies if it can be shown that financial data was
withheld or misrepresented.” (Emphasis added). This language reflects that the
trial court did not find that the husband violated Rule 1.25-A and did not find
that the wife was entitled to additional remedies.
Regarding the life insurance term, the court explained in its order
modifying the decree that its intent in ordering life insurance was to ensure the
payment of alimony. It stated that “the alimony obligation over the set term
(exclusive of bonus monies) totals an amount short of $500,000,” and thus the
“life insurance term in the decree is so modified, as the court had intended, but
neglected to do in issuance of its final orders.” The court’s December 2022
narrative order supports this finding, as it awarded the wife alimony in the
amount of $3,833.33 per month, plus 23% of the husband’s net commissions,
for 10 years.
The language of the December 2022 narrative order supports the trial
court’s statement that it “did not intend to adopt the provisions incorporated in
[the wife’s counsel’s] drafting” of the proposed decree. The trial court’s
oversight in excising the subject terms can properly be characterized as
scrivener’s errors. See State v. Stern, 150 N.H. 705, 712, 714 (2004)
(determining that the trial court made a scrivener’s error in sentencing order
where the error “was clerical in nature and was not the product of judicial
reasoning or reflection” and that “when the court corrected its error, it was
merely conforming the record to reflect its original intent”). Accordingly, the
3