THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0674, Whittier Communications, Inc. v.
Town of Wakefield, the court on December 12, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Whittier Communications, Inc., appeals an
order of the Superior Court (Klass, J.) affirming decisions of the Planning Board
(Planning Board) and the Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) for the defendant,
the Town of Wakefield (Town), which granted site plan approval for the
intervenor, Vertex Tower Assets, LLC, to construct two personal wireless
service facilities (hereinafter, cell towers) in the Town. We affirm.
I. Background
The record reflects the following facts. In August 2021, the intervenor
submitted applications to the Planning Board for site plan approval to
construct two cell towers (the Vertex Towers) in the Town. The intervenor
submitted various supporting materials with its applications, including several
radio frequency coverage maps for each site, and an affidavit from a radio
frequency engineer representing that the Vertex Towers were needed to fill
certain wireless coverage gaps in the Town. The plaintiff owns a cell tower (the
Whittier Tower) which is 1.9 miles away from one proposed Vertex Tower and
2.25 miles away from the other proposed Vertex Tower. At the time of the
intervenor’s applications, the Whittier Tower was under construction.
The Planning Board denied the intervenor’s applications, concluding that
because the Whittier Tower was an “existing” structure within four miles of the
proposed Vertex Towers, the intervenor failed to satisfy Article 24, Section E.5
of the Wakefield Zoning Ordinance (Ordinance). See Ordinance Art. 24, § E.5
(providing that, “[i]f the applicant is proposing a new personal wireless service
facility,” the applicant must submit “written evidence demonstrating that no
existing facility within four miles of the proposed personal wire service facility
can accommodate the applicant’s needs”). The Planning Board also concluded
that the intervenor had not met its burden under Article 24, Section F of the
Ordinance. See id. Art. 24, § F (providing that, “[w]hen applying for
construction of a new tower, mast, monopole, or similar structure, the
applicant shall have the burden of proving that there are no existing structures
available and suitable to locate its personal wireless service facility”).
The intervenor appealed the decisions to the ZBA. After a hearing, the
ZBA concluded that, contrary to the Planning Board’s determination, the
Whittier Tower was not “in existence” when the Planning Board denied the
intervenor’s applications. Accordingly, the ZBA remanded the matters to the
Planning Board for further consideration consistent with its decision.
After the ZBA remanded the matters to the Planning Board, and before
the Planning Board issued its subsequent decisions, construction of the
Whittier Tower was completed. On remand, the Planning Board approved the
intervenor’s applications subject to certain conditions. The Planning Board
found that the proposed Vertex Towers “would provide coverage where none is
presently available assuming that the Whittier tower location was operational
with a carrier,” and that the intervenor had therefore satisfied Article 24 of the
Ordinance.
The plaintiff appealed the Planning Board’s decisions to the ZBA,
arguing, in part, that the intervenor failed to satisfy the requirements of the
Ordinance because it failed to: (1) prove that locating the Vertex Towers within
four miles of the Whittier Tower was necessary; (2) prove that there were no
suitable and available existing structures to locate its personal wireless service
facility; and (3) provide evidence in its applications that it contacted the
plaintiff to inquire whether the Whittier Tower was a suitable and available
structure to locate its personal wireless service facility. See id. Art. 24, §§ E.5,
F. After a hearing, the ZBA affirmed the Planning Board’s decisions, finding
that “even if the Whittier Tower is ‘existing’ as that term is used in the Town
ordinance, [the intervenor] presented sufficient evidence in support of its
applications.” The plaintiff moved for rehearing, which the ZBA granted. After
a rehearing, the ZBA again affirmed the Planning Board’s decisions.
The plaintiff appealed the Planning Board’s and the ZBA’s decisions to
the trial court. The trial court affirmed, determining that neither the Planning
Board nor the ZBA erred by finding that the intervenor met its burden under
the Ordinance. The plaintiff unsuccessfully moved for reconsideration. This
appeal followed.
II. Analysis
This appeal requires us to review the superior court’s order in an appeal
from decisions of the Planning Board and the ZBA. The superior court was
obligated to treat the factual findings of both boards as prima facie lawful and
reasonable and could not set aside their decisions absent unreasonableness or
an identified error of law. Monadnock Rod and Gun Club v. Town of
Peterborough, 177 N.H. 70, 74 (2024), 2024 N.H. 61, ¶10; see RSA 677:6, :15,
V (2016). We will uphold the superior court’s decision unless it is unsupported
by the evidence or is legally erroneous. Monadnock, 177 N.H. at 74, 2024 N.H.
61, ¶10.
2
The plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in upholding the decisions
of the Planning Board and the ZBA because the intervenor failed to provide
sufficient evidence that it satisfied the requirements of Article 24, Section E.5
of the Ordinance. Article 24, Section E.5 provides that, if an applicant is
proposing a new cell tower, the applicant must submit “written evidence
demonstrating that no existing facility within four miles of the proposed
personal wire service facility can accommodate the applicant’s needs.” This
proof can consist of substantial evidence that: (a) “no existing structures are
located within the geographic area”; (b) “existing facilities are not of sufficient
height to meet the applicant’s engineering requirements or do not have
sufficient structural strength to support [the] applicant’s proposed equipment”;
(c) “existing facilities have no additional capacity”; or (d) “co-location on an
existing facility would cause electromagnetic interference at the existing facility,
or vice-versa.” Ordinance Art. 24, § E.5(a)-(d). The applicant can also submit
“[o]ther substantial evidence as may reasonably be required.” Id. Art. 24, §
E.5(e).
The trial court ruled that the Planning Board and the ZBA did not err in
concluding that the intervenor submitted sufficient evidence to meet its burden
of proof under Article 24, Section E.5 of the Ordinance. We agree. The
intervenor submitted multiple sets of radio frequency coverage maps showing
the wireless coverage provided by existing and approved cell towers, including
the Whittier Tower, and the additional coverage that would be provided if the
Vertex Towers were constructed. A radio frequency engineer, in his capacity as
an independent consultant for the intervenor, submitted an affidavit in which
he stated that, based upon his analysis of the attached radio frequency
studies, reports and computer models prepared in connection with the project,
“there is a gap in wireless coverage and inadequate network service” in the
areas of the proposed Vertex Towers, and that wireless carriers would “be
unable to close this gap in coverage” without the Vertex Towers. Accordingly,
the Planning Board concluded that “the proposed towers would provide
coverage where none is presently available assuming that the Whittier tower
location was operational with a carrier.” In other words, notwithstanding the
existence of the Whittier Tower, the Planning Board found that the intervenor
had satisfied the Ordinance because the proposed Vertex Towers would provide
coverage to areas that the existing facilities could not reach.
The plaintiff counters that the evidence submitted by the intervenor was
“inaccurate and lacked credibility,” citing comments from the public and
members of the Planning Board “questioning the credibility of Vertex’s
evidence.” However, it is for the Planning Board and the ZBA to assess
credibility and weigh the evidence, not this court. See N.H. Alpha of SAE Trust
v. Town of Hanover, 172 N.H. 69, 77 (2019). Simply because the Planning
Board and the ZBA rejected evidence that the plaintiff cites and relied upon
contrary evidence does not mean that they acted unreasonably in reaching
their decisions. See id. In turn, the trial court was not obligated to second
3