THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0374, Mary Germaine v. Chantel Candido-
DaSilva, the court on May 15, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Chantel Candido-DaSilva, appeals the order
of the Circuit Court (Subers, J.), following a hearing, awarding damages to the
plaintiff, Mary Germaine, for breach of a lease agreement. The defendant
argues that the trial court erred in awarding damages to the plaintiff, asserting
that the plaintiff failed to mitigate her damages. She also argues that the court
“overlooked the possibility” that the plaintiff may be “obtaining a double
recovery” through separate litigation with her insurer. We affirm.
The parties entered into a residential lease agreement. The court found
that the leased premises became uninhabitable after the defendant failed to
keep oil in the furnace, which caused pipes to freeze and burst. The plaintiff
sought recovery under the lease for past due rent, late fees, and loss of rental
income.
The defendant argues that the plaintiff failed to mitigate her damages. A
party seeking to recover damages must take all reasonable steps to lessen his
or her resulting losses. Grenier v. Barclay Square Commercial Condo. Owners’
Assoc., 150 N.H. 111, 119 (2003). The defendant argues that the plaintiff
failed to mitigate her damages because, she asserts, the plaintiff did not seek
compensation from her insurance company for the losses, refused to accept
Section 8 housing payments, and failed to place the defendant and her family
in temporary lodgings. The defendant asserts that if the plaintiff had placed
her and her family in temporary lodgings, the plaintiff may have been able to
complete the repairs sooner, which would have reduced the loss of rental
income. The defendant also suggests that the plaintiff may have been seeking
compensation for the same damages in separate litigation against her insurer.
The defendant had the burden to prove that the plaintiff failed to mitigate
damages. Id. As the trial court noted, the plaintiff testified that there was no
agreement with the housing authority for Section 8 housing, and the defendant
presented no evidence that any such agreement existed.
We generally assume that the trial court made all findings necessary to
support its decision. Dietz v. Town of Tuftonboro, 171 N.H. 614, 619 (2019).
Here, we assume that the trial court found that the defendant failed to prove
that the plaintiff failed to mitigate her damages or sought a “double recovery.”
We will uphold the trial court’s assumed findings if they are supported by the
record. See In the Matter of Aube & Aube, 158 N.H. 459, 466 (2009).
In this case, the record does not show that the plaintiff (1) had insurance
coverage to compensate her for the damages sought from the defendant;
(2) could have obtained recovery from other sources; (3) could have completed
the repairs sooner by placing the defendant and her family in temporary
lodgings; or (4) received compensation for the same damages in litigation
against her insurer. Without more facts, the defendant’s assertions are
essentially speculative. See Witte v. Desmarais, 136 N.H. 178, 188 (1992)
(discussing speculative damage claims). Accordingly, we conclude that the
record supports the trial court’s assumed findings, see Aube, 158 N.H. at 466,
and we uphold its award of damages.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2