THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0346, Appeal of New Hampshire
Department of Corrections, the court on April 16, 2025, issued
the following order:
The court has reviewed the record submitted on appeal, has considered
the oral and written arguments of the parties, and has determined to resolve
the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The New Hampshire
Department of Corrections (DOC) appeals an order of the Personnel Appeals
Board (PAB or Board) granting summary disposition to the employee,
overturning the DOC’s termination decision, reinstating the employee with
back pay and benefits, and imposing alternative discipline. On appeal, the
DOC argues that the PAB erred by: (1) applying the superior court summary
judgment standard and case law when considering the appropriate standard
for summary disposition pursuant to New Hampshire Administrative Rule, Per-
A 206.05; (2) concluding that no material facts were in dispute such that it
could determine, as a matter of law, that the employee did not violate DOC’s
use of force policy; (3) not providing the parties with an opportunity to make
offers of proof and present oral arguments pursuant to New Hampshire
Administrative Rule, Per-A 207.02(e)(2) prior to issuing its order; and (4)
concluding that termination of the employee “would be an unjust result” as a
matter of law without first hearing testimony from DOC witnesses. We vacate
and remand.
The following facts were found by the PAB or are otherwise derived from
the administrative record. The DOC hired the employee as a correctional
officer in 2016. Thereafter, he received several promotions and met or
exceeded expectations in all of his performance evaluations. In 2023, when the
events at issue occurred, the employee had been promoted to the rank of
lieutenant.
On the morning of April 27, 2023, the employee and three other
correctional officers attempted to initiate the transfer of an inmate from the
Northern New Hampshire Correctional Facility in Berlin to the Men’s Prison in
Concord. The transfer of this inmate to Concord had been planned to occur
three days earlier, but the inmate claimed that he was suicidal and was able to
avoid the transfer based upon DOC’s suicide prevention policy. This policy
requires the immediate notification of the shift supervisor and behavioral
health or nursing staff whenever an inmate claims to have suicidal ideation.
After the first attempt to transfer the inmate, DOC medical staff examined the
inmate and determined that he was not credibly suicidal. When the officers
attempted to remove the inmate from a cell on April 27, the inmate again
claimed that he was suicidal. Believing that the inmate was feigning suicidal
impulses to avoid the transfer, the employee told the inmate that he would be
evaluated upon reaching Concord and proceeded to load the inmate into a
transport van. The inmate passively resisted until the officers began to seatbelt
him into the van. At that point, the inmate began slamming his head into the
plexiglass divider in front of his seat and started screaming that he was
suicidal. In response, the employee restrained the inmate from behind to
prevent him from slamming his head.
The sergeant in charge of the transport determined that he could not
safely transport the inmate due to his behavior. The employee agreed and
began to remove the inmate from the van while maintaining control over him.
When the inmate resisted, the employee applied a “mandibular angle pressure
point” technique, which is a pain compliance measure approved by the DOC.
The employee’s other arm was positioned at the inmate’s chin to control his
head to enable the application of the technique. The inmate began to comply
and the employee maintained his position and continued to apply the
technique until the inmate was returned to the cell. The inmate was
subsequently placed on a fifteen-minute “behavioral watch” rather than a
suicide watch, which would have been required had the inmate been
determined to be actively suicidal.
Following this incident, all personnel involved filed written reports. All of
the reports stated that the employee used the mandibular angle pressure point
technique, and no one suggested that the employee used inappropriate or
excessive force during the encounter. Nonetheless, the next day the DOC
suspended the employee with pay and issued a notice of investigation of the
employee’s encounter with the inmate. On May 8, the DOC terminated the
employee for using an illegal chokehold on the inmate and violating the DOC’s
suicide prevention policy.
The matter was also referred to the Public Integrity Unit (PIU) of the New
Hampshire Department of Justice to determine whether criminal charges
against the employee were warranted. The PIU issued a report as part of its
investigation and concluded that no evidence of criminal conduct was found
and that the employee’s use of force to gain compliance from the inmate was
reasonable and used in order to accomplish a lawful objective.
On May 22, the employee appealed his termination to the PAB. The PAB
initially scheduled a November hearing on the merits, at which the parties
would be permitted to make offers of proof, but the employee moved to
continue the hearing and the PAB granted his request. Prior to the
rescheduled hearing, the employee filed a motion for summary disposition in
February 2024.
2
In his motion, the employee argued that the undisputed evidence and
facts established that his termination violated the personnel rules and was
otherwise unjust. The motion for summary disposition included nearly 500
pages of exhibits. The DOC objected, arguing that it properly exercised its
authority to terminate the employee without prior warning or progressive
discipline because he violated multiple policies and directives, including the
suicide prevention policy. More specifically, the DOC maintained that the
employee’s failure to follow that policy “was egregious and endangered the
safety of everyone present during the attempted transfer,” and given that he
“was aware of the proper procedure to follow . . . because he had [previously]
followed that procedure” his “willful disregard of that [policy] properly resulted
in his termination by the [DOC].” The DOC further argued that “the parties
disagree on material facts particularly as they pertain to how [DOC policies]
should be interpreted and followed, and whether [the employee’s] actions
demonstrate a willful disregard of these [DOC] policies that placed the safety of
multiple people at risk.” The objection included approximately 57 pages of
exhibits.
The PAB issued an order granting the motion for summary disposition on
March 27. In its order, the PAB noted that the DOC terminated the employee
without speaking to any of the other correctional officers present during the
incident and that none of the officers’ reports suggested that the employee used
inappropriate or excessive force during the encounter. It further noted that the
PIU investigation concluded that the video evidence relied upon by the DOC to
justify the employee’s termination was not sufficiently detailed to support the
allegations claimed by the DOC.
The PAB reasoned that all of the witnesses who would testify at a hearing
on the merits would testify consistently with the statements they provided to
the PIU. Based upon the consistency of these statements, provided by a “broad
selection of first-person observers and the opinion of the DOC’s own use-of-
force expert, the Board determined that no reasonable factfinder could
determine that [the employee] had used inappropriate or excessive force on the
inmate.”
With respect to the claim that the employee failed to comply with the
DOC’s suicide prevention policy, the Board found that there was sufficient
evidence to conclude that the employee had violated the policy. Nevertheless,
the Board also found that terminating the employee based upon this violation
would be unjust. In light of the employee’s “exemplary” employment record
prior to the incident, and after considering all of the factual evidence, the PAB
concluded that the incident “should have been viewed as a ‘teachable moment,’
rather than a basis for immediate termination.” Consequently, the PAB
reinstated the employee with full rank, back pay and benefits, less a twenty-
day workday suspension.
3