THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0541, Judith Upham v. Metropolitan
General Insurance Company & a., the court on July 3, 2025,
issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Judith Upham, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Ruoff, J.) granting summary judgment in favor of defendant
Metropolitan General Insurance Company on the plaintiff’s claim of breach of
contract for canceling the plaintiff’s insurance policy. The plaintiff argues that
the trial court erred by determining that terms of an electronic payment
program through which the plaintiff paid the insurance premium were
unambiguous, and did not obligate the defendant to unsuccessfully attempt to
withdraw funds from the plaintiff’s bank account more than once before
changing the plaintiff’s payment method to direct billing and issuing a
cancellation notice for failure to timely pay the premium. The plaintiff further
invites the court to address an issue assumed in the plaintiff’s favor, but not
ruled upon, by the trial court in its analysis, namely, whether the terms of the
electronic payment program are part of the parties’ contract. We affirm.
It is the plaintiff’s burden, as the appealing party, to demonstrate
reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014). Based upon our
review of the trial court’s well-reasoned order, the plaintiff’s arguments, the
relevant law, and the record submitted on appeal, we are unpersuaded by the
plaintiff’s arguments and conclude that the trial court did not err by granting
summary judgment in favor of the defendant. See id. Under the
circumstances, we decline the plaintiff’s invitation to address whether the
terms of the electronic payment program are part of the parties’ contract.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk