THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0338, Town & Campus, Inc. v. Town of
Durham, the court on April 14, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Town & Campus, Inc., appeals the order of the
Superior Court (Edwards, J.) upholding the decision of the Town of Durham
Planning Board (board) approving an amendment to a site plan application
from the intervenor, Clark Properties, LLC, that the board had conditionally
approved. The plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in upholding the
board’s decision because: (1) the amendment allegedly rendered the plaintiff’s
lot nonconforming; (2) the board allegedly acted unreasonably in relying on the
town planner’s legal opinion; and (3) contrary to the court’s determination, the
plaintiff allegedly raised its issues in a timely manner. We affirm.
The trial court’s review of a planning board’s decision is governed by RSA
677:15 (2016), which provides that the trial court “may reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the decision brought up for review when there
is an error of law or when the court is persuaded by the balance of
probabilities, on the evidence before it, that [the board’s] decision is
unreasonable.” RSA 677:15, V. Thus, the trial court’s review is limited.
Trustees of Dartmouth Coll. v. Town of Hanover, 171 N.H. 497, 504 (2018).
The trial court must treat the factual findings of the planning board as prima
facie lawful and reasonable and cannot set aside its decision absent
unreasonableness or an identified error of law. Id. The appealing party bears
the burden of persuading the trial court that, by the balance of probabilities,
the board’s decision was unreasonable. Id. The trial court determines not
whether it agrees with the planning board’s findings, but whether there is
evidence upon which its findings could have reasonably been based. Id.
Our review is similarly limited. We will reverse a trial court’s decision on
appeal only if it is not supported by the evidence or is legally erroneous. Id.
We review the trial court’s decision to determine whether a reasonable person
could have reached the same decision as the trial court based upon the
evidence before it. Id.
The plaintiff first argues that the trial court erred in upholding the
board’s decision because the amendment allegedly rendered the plaintiff’s lot
nonconforming by eliminating the frontage required by the zoning ordinance.
A 1989 town ordinance discontinued vehicular traffic on Ballard Street between
Rosemary Lane and Main Street. In its 2018 decision approving the plaintiff’s
subdivision application, the board found that Ballard Street provided the
required frontage for the plaintiff’s lot. In this case, the trial court upheld the
board’s finding that Ballard Street continued to provide the required frontage
for the plaintiff’s lot because the amendment did not alter the status of Ballard
Street. We conclude that the trial court’s order upholding the board’s decision
on such grounds is supported by the evidence and not legally erroneous. See
Trustees of Dartmouth Coll., 171 N.H. at 504.
The plaintiff next argues that the trial court erred in concluding that the
board could have reasonably relied upon the town planner’s legal opinion. The
town planner opined that, when the plaintiff’s lot was subdivided from the
intervenor’s lot in 2018, Ballard Street provided the required frontage because
it remained a street right of way on paper. We conclude that the trial court’s
finding that the board could have reasonably relied upon the town planner’s
opinion is supported by the evidence and not legally erroneous. See Trustees
of Dartmouth Coll., 171 N.H. at 504.
The plaintiff next argues that the trial court erred in ruling that the
plaintiff’s argument is untimely. The trial court ruled that if the Ballard Street
right of way is insufficient to provide legal frontage, then the plaintiff should
have raised the issue in 2018, when it sought subdivision approval. Given our
decision affirming the trial court’s finding that Ballard Street continues to
provide the required frontage for the plaintiff’s lot, we need not address the
timeliness issue.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2