THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0544, State of New Hampshire v. Michael
P. Sexton, the court on September 3, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Michael P. Sexton, appeals his convictions
for driving with a suspended registration, see RSA 261:178 (2024), and theft of
services, see RSA 637:8 (2016). He argues that the Circuit Court (Greenhalgh,
J.) erred by depriving him of his right to due process and by crediting the
State’s evidence. He also asserts that the trial judge was biased against him.
We affirm.
The defendant first argues that the trial court deprived him of his right to
due process. The primary purpose of procedural due process is to provide
parties with the right to be heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful
manner. Bragg v. Director, N.H. Div. of Motor Vehicles, 141 N.H. 677, 679
(1997). As an initial matter, the defendant has failed to show that he was
denied adequate advanced notice of the State’s witnesses and evidence, as he
alleges. The State’s two witnesses were the sheriff who interacted with him and
the former host of the campground where he stayed overnight without paying
the required fee. Moreover, the record shows that the defendant was given
ample opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses. The court ended the
defendant’s cross-examination of the sheriff only after the cross-examination
had become repetitive. The fact that the judge threatened to find the defendant
in contempt for repeatedly interrupting him does not constitute a violation of
due process.
We construe the defendant’s next argument, that the trial court erred in
crediting the State’s evidence, as a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence
supporting the convictions, which we review de novo. State v. Collyns, 166
N.H. 514, 517 (2014). To prevail in his challenge to the sufficiency of the
evidence, the defendant must prove that no rational trier of fact, viewing all the
evidence and all reasonable inferences from it in the light most favorable to the
State, could have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Id.
The sheriff testified that, during a traffic stop on October 6, 2023, he
informed the defendant that the State of California had suspended his motor
vehicle registration. In support of the sheriff’s testimony, the State introduced
the defendant’s registration record from the State of California and a report
from the National Law Enforcement Telecommunications System, which stated
that the registration had been suspended on July 10, 2023. The sheriff
testified that when he informed the defendant of the suspension, the defendant
told him that he would rectify the problem immediately. The sheriff testified
that he later learned that the defendant did not re-register his vehicle until
January 2024. The campground host testified that the defendant stayed
overnight at the campground without paying the required fee.
The defendant suggests that, through his cross-examination, he
effectively discredited the testimony of the State’s witnesses and their
supporting evidence. He also asserts that the trial court should have afforded
greater weight to his Arizona insurance card as proof of insurance. Evaluation
of witness credibility, resolving conflicts in the testimony, and determining the
weight to be given to the evidence are matters within the province of the trier of
fact. See State v. Alwardt, 164 N.H. 52, 57 (2012). Moreover, the record fails
to show that the defendant introduced the Arizona insurance card into
evidence. See In the Matter of Birmingham & Birmingham, 154 N.H. 51, 56
(2006) (self-represented litigants are bound by the same procedural rules that
govern parties represented by counsel). Even if the insurance card was
admitted, the trial court was not compelled to find that, merely because the
defendant produced an Arizona insurance card, the State failed to prove that
he drove with a suspended license.
The defendant also asserts that the trial court lacked jurisdiction over
the theft of services charge because the campground was in a “U.S. fee area.”
However, the sheriff testified that there is a memorandum of understanding
between the U.S. Forest Service and the sheriff’s department that allows the
sheriff’s department to patrol the area, including the campground. We
conclude that the evidence was sufficient to support the convictions. See State
v. Collyns, 166 N.H. at 517.
The defendant next argues that the trial judge was biased against him.
A party seeking to disqualify a judge based upon a claim of bias must first raise
this issue in the trial court. In the Matter of Nassar & Nassar, 156 N.H. 769,
780 (2008). The defendant has failed to show that he raised this issue in the
trial court. Even if the defendant preserved this issue for review, he has failed
to demonstrate that a reasonable person would have questioned the
impartiality of the trial court. See Sup. Ct. R. 38, Canon 2.11; State v. Bader,
148 N.H. 265, 268 (2002).
To the extent that the defendant raises additional issues in his brief, we
conclude that they are insufficiently developed to warrant review. See Anna H.
Cardone Revocable Trust v. Cardone, 160 N.H. 521, 526 (2010) (“Judicial
review is not warranted for complaints regarding adverse rulings without
2
developed legal argument, and neither passing reference to constitutional
claims nor casual invocations of constitutional rights without support by legal
argument or authority warrants extended consideration.”).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3