THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0650, A.K. v. B.K., the court on May 30,
2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, A.K., appeals an order of the Circuit Court
(Katsirebas, J.), following a hearing, denying her request for a domestic
violence final protective order against the defendant, B.K. See RSA 173-B:5
(2022). She argues that the trial court erred in finding that she failed to prove
that the defendant poses a credible present threat to her safety. See RSA 173-
B:5, I. We vacate and remand.
To obtain relief under RSA chapter 173-B, a plaintiff must show “abuse”
by a preponderance of the evidence. Achille v. Achille, 167 N.H. 706, 716
(2015); RSA 173-B:5, I. “Abuse” has two elements: (1) commission or
attempted commission of one or more of the enumerated criminal acts by a
family or household member or a current or former sexual or intimate partner;
and (2) a finding that such misconduct “constitute[s] a credible present threat
to the [plaintiff’s] safety.” RSA 173-B:1, I (2022); see Achille, 167 N.H. at 716.
As the trial court noted, the plaintiff alleged at the hearing that, between
May and June 2024, the defendant physically shook her and put his hands on
her neck. The plaintiff also alleged that there were several incidents in which
the defendant painfully grabbed her wrist when she attempted to answer his
phone. In addition, the plaintiff alleged that the defendant attempted to initiate
sex when she was asleep.
At the outset, we note that our ability to review the trial court’s order is
constrained by the lack of express findings regarding the alleged acts of abuse.
The trial court found that the plaintiff failed to prove that the defendant’s
conduct constitutes a credible present threat to her safety, “[g]iven the totality
of [the] circumstances, and the weight of the credible evidence, in particular
the parties’ continued cohabitation and marital relations following the alleged
acts of violence.”
We have held that, “standing alone, a plaintiff’s in-person contact with
the defendant during the timeframe of the alleged abuse is an insufficient basis
for the court to conclude” that a plaintiff has failed to prove a credible present
threat to her safety. S.C. v. G.C., 175 N.H. 158, 165 (2022). Although the trial
court stated in its order that it considered “the totality of [the] circumstances,”
it is not clear from the order whether the circumstances it considered related
only to the plaintiff’s in-person contact with the defendant during the
timeframe of the alleged abuse. See id. Accordingly, we vacate the court’s
order dismissing the plaintiff’s petition and remand for further proceedings
consistent with this order.
Vacated and remanded.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2