THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0428, Stephen D. Anderson & a. v.
Geoffrey E. Snyder, the court on July 22, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has determined to
resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiffs,
Stephen D. Anderson, Daniel J. Ethier, Sonja Fridell Pomerleau, Mac Arthur
Johnson, Jr., Kathleen F. LeClair, Eric D. Lizotte, Thomas D. Mannion, Kellie M.
Pitt, James A. Ryan, III, and Robin B. Saunders, appeal an order of the Superior
Court (English, J.) dismissing this action on the ground that the court lacked
personal jurisdiction over the defendant, Geoffrey E. Snyder. We affirm.
The trial court’s order recited the following facts. The plaintiffs are a
proposed class of New Hampshire residents who, during the relevant time period,
were employed by Massachusetts-based employers. Prior to the COVID-19
pandemic, the plaintiffs physically worked in Massachusetts either full or part
time. After the pandemic prompted the Governor of Massachusetts to declare a
state of emergency, the plaintiffs worked from home in New Hampshire for their
Massachusetts-based employers.
The defendant, during the relevant time period, was Commissioner of the
Massachusetts Department of Revenue (Department). In that capacity, he
promulgated an emergency regulation — which became a formal rule on March
5, 2021 (the Tax Rule) — that provided:
[A]ll compensation received for personal services performed by a
non-resident who, immediately prior to the Massachusetts COVID-
19 state of emergency, was an employee engaged in performing such
services in Massachusetts, and who, during such emergency, is
performing such services from a location outside Massachusetts due
solely to the Massachusetts COVID-19 state of emergency, will
continue to be treated as Massachusetts source income subject to
personal income tax under M.G.L. c. 62 and personal income tax
withholding.
(Quotation omitted.) The regulation applied retroactively to March 10, 2020 and
prospectively as long as the state of emergency remained in effect. As a result,
from March 10, 2020 to September 13, 2021, Massachusetts income taxes were
withheld from the plaintiffs’ compensation notwithstanding that they were
physically working in New Hampshire. The Department sent one of the plaintiffs
a letter informing him that he was being audited and then a second letter
informing him that he owed Massachusetts nonresident income tax for the year
2020. The letters were on Department letterhead, which identified the defendant
as the commissioner, but did not bear his signature.
In August 2020, the New Hampshire Attorney General sent a letter to the
defendant, in his capacity as the commissioner of revenue, expressing concerns
about the impact of the emergency tax regulation on New Hampshire residents.
In September, the New Hampshire Attorney General requested a meeting with the
defendant to discuss the emergency regulation. The meeting was held, by video
conference, on September 29, 2020.
The plaintiffs filed the instant action against the defendant, in his
individual capacity, under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 alleging due process, equal
protection, privileges and immunities, and dormant commerce clause violations.
The defendant moved to dismiss, arguing that he lacked sufficient contacts with
New Hampshire for the court to exercise personal jurisdiction over him. The trial
court granted the motion and denied the plaintiffs’ motion to reconsider. In
particular, the court was unpersuaded “that the effects test articulated in Calder
v. Jones, 465 U.S. 783 (1984)[,] applies to this case,” but also concluded that
“even if the Calder effects test did apply in this case, Plaintiffs failed to establish
jurisdiction over Snyder in his individual capacity under that test.”
The plaintiffs now appeal, arguing that the trial court erred in concluding
that it lacked personal jurisdiction over the defendant. “The plaintiffs bear the
burden of demonstrating facts sufficient to establish personal jurisdiction.”
Fellows v. Colburn, 162 N.H. 685, 690 (2011). “Our standard of review for
rulings on motions to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction varies according to
the case’s procedural posture.” Seward v. Richards, 174 N.H. 401, 406 (2021)
(quotation omitted). “When, as in this case, the trial court rules upon the motion
without holding an evidentiary hearing, the trial court employs a prima facie
standard, and we review the trial court’s decision de novo.” Id. (quotation
omitted). “Under the prima facie standard, the inquiry is whether the plaintiff
has proffered evidence which, if credited, is sufficient to support findings of all
facts essential to personal jurisdiction.” Id. (quotation omitted). “Both the trial
court and we, when undertaking de novo review, must accept the plaintiff’s
(properly documented) proffers as true for the purpose of determining the
adequacy of the prima facie jurisdictional showing.” Id. at 406-07 (quotation
omitted). “The plaintiff’s evidentiary proffers must be construed in the light most
congenial to the plaintiff’s jurisdictional claim and facts put forward by the
defendant may be considered only if they are uncontradicted by the plaintiff’s
submissions.” Id. at 407 (quotation omitted).
Whether a court may exercise personal jurisdiction over a defendant is
determined under a two-part analysis: “First, the State’s long-arm statute must
2
authorize such jurisdiction. Second, the requirements of the federal Due Process
Clause must be satisfied.” N.H. Bank Comm’r v. Sweeney, 167 N.H. 27, 32
(2014) (quotation omitted). Because we have consistently interpreted the New
Hampshire long arm statute, RSA 510:4, I, “to grant jurisdiction whenever the
requirements of the Due Process Clause of the United States Constitution are
satisfied,” Staffing Network v. Pietropaolo, 145 N.H. 456, 458 (2000), “the due
process analysis is normally dispositive of the matter,” Sweeney, 167 N.H. at 32.
See RSA 510:4, I (2010). Accordingly, we turn to the due process analysis.
“Under the Federal Due Process Clause, a court may exercise personal
jurisdiction over a non-resident defendant if the defendant has minimum
contacts with the forum, such that the maintenance of the suit does not offend
traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice.” Seward, 174 N.H. at 407
(quotation omitted). Only the issue of specific jurisdiction is before us, because
the plaintiffs do not argue that the trial court had general jurisdiction over the
defendant. See id. (explaining difference between general and specific
jurisdiction).
To determine whether exercising specific personal jurisdiction over the
defendant comports with due process, we examine whether: “(1) the contacts
relate to the cause of action; (2) the [defendant has] purposefully availed [himself]
of the protection of New Hampshire’s laws; and (3) it would be fair and
reasonable to require the [defendant] to defend the suit in New Hampshire.”
Sweeney, 167 N.H. at 33. “Each factor must be evaluated on a case-by-case
basis, and all three factors must be satisfied for the exercise of jurisdiction to be
constitutional.” Id.
The trial court found neither of the first two factors satisfied, and the
plaintiffs challenge both findings. They first argue that because “Calder applies
broadly to cases involving statutory claims sounding in tort, including
§ 1983 claims for constitutional violations,” the trial court erred in finding the
Calder effects test inapplicable. For purposes of deciding this case only, we
assume, without deciding, that the Calder effects test applies and we accept the
plaintiffs’ general formulation of that test, as stated by the United States Court of
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in Burri Law PA v. Skurla, 35 F.4th 1207 (9th Cir.
2022). Accordingly, we assume that the “purposeful availment” factor would be
satisfied by a finding of “purposeful direction” that satisfies the Calder test. See
Schwarzenegger v. Fred Martin Motor Co., 374 F.3d 797, 803 (9th Cir. 2004)
(noting that the Ninth Circuit has interpreted Calder as standing “for the
proposition that purposeful availment is satisfied even by a defendant whose only
‘contact’ with the forum state is the ‘purposeful direction’ of a foreign act having
effect in the forum state” (quotations omitted)). As stated in Burri Law, “[t]he
Calder effects test . . . establishes that if a defendant: (1) commits an intentional
act, (2) expressly aimed at the forum state, that (3) causes harm the defendant
knew was likely to be suffered in the forum state, then the defendant has
purposefully directed conduct at the forum state.” Burri Law, 35 F.4th at 1213.
3