THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0418, Edwin Valdez-Aguilar v.
Commissioner, New Hampshire Department of Corrections, the
court on July 17, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Edwin Valdez-Aguilar, appeals an order of the Superior
Court (Bornstein, J.) dismissing his complaint seeking damages and injunctive
relief against the defendant, the Commissioner of the New Hampshire
Department of Corrections, for failure to state a claim upon which relief may be
granted. On appeal, the plaintiff advances several arguments collaterally
attacking the inmate disciplinary decision underlying this dispute, and asks this
court to reverse that disciplinary decision and award him costs and attorney’s
fees. We affirm.
“In reviewing an order granting a motion to dismiss, we assume the truth
of the facts as alleged in the plaintiff’s pleadings and construe all reasonable
inferences in the light most favorable to the plaintiff.” Beane v. Dana S. Beane &
Co., 160 N.H. 708, 711 (2010) (quotation omitted). “We will uphold the granting
of the motion to dismiss if the facts pled do not constitute a basis for legal relief.”
Id. (quotation and brackets omitted). In other words, although we do not assume
the truth of allegations that are merely conclusions of law, we test the facts
alleged in the pleadings against the applicable law and determine whether the
plaintiff’s allegations are reasonably susceptible of a construction that would
permit recovery. See id.
Here, based upon our review of the record, assuming the truth of the facts
alleged and construing all reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to the
plaintiff, we conclude that the trial court did not err in finding that the plaintiff’s
complaint failed to state a claim upon which relief may be granted. Although the
plaintiff advanced several arguments collaterally attacking the underlying
disciplinary decision and the consequences thereof, he failed to articulate any
valid legal basis for relief. Similarly, on appeal, the plaintiff advances some of the
same, and some new, collateral attacks on the disciplinary decision and its
consequences. With respect to the new arguments, they are not preserved for
appellate review. See State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 48 (2003) (observing that
we will not review any issue that was not first raised before the trial court). With
respect to the plaintiff’s remaining arguments, they are not only inadequately
developed for our review, see id. at 49 (explaining that complaints about adverse
rulings and issues raised without developed legal argument do not warrant
appellate review), but, ultimately, they fail to establish that the plaintiff’s
allegations in his complaint are reasonably susceptible of a construction that
would permit recovery, see Beane, 160 N.H. at 711. Accordingly, we conclude
that the trial court did not err in granting the defendant’s motion to dismiss. See
id.
Lastly, to the extent that the plaintiff contends that the trial judge was
biased, or that he otherwise should have disqualified himself, we disagree. Based
upon our review of the record, we cannot conclude that a reasonable person
would have questioned the trial judge’s impartiality. See Sup. Ct. R. 38, Canon
2.11; State v. Bader, 148 N.H. 265, 270-71 (2002) (observing, among other
things, that adverse rulings alone do not render a judge biased).
In light of our decision, the plaintiff’s request for an award of costs and
attorney’s fees is denied. See Sup. Ct. R. 23.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2