THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0252, In the Matter of Valerie Bois and
Alan Bois, the court on August 6, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The petitioner, Valerie Bois (Wife), appeals the Circuit
Court’s (Alfano, J.) temporary alimony order and the final decree recommended
by a Judicial Referee (LeFrancois, R.) and approved by the trial court in her
divorce from the respondent, Alan Bois (Husband). Husband cross-appeals the
property division and the court’s award of term alimony to Wife. We affirm.
I. Background
The record supports the following facts. The parties were married in
2001. The parties have two children who were born in 2002 and 2005. Wife
petitioned for divorce in 2022. Wife requested a temporary alimony award of
$3,000 per month. The trial court awarded Wife temporary alimony of $800
per month.
The trial court held a final hearing in December 2023. At the hearing,
the parties each offered testimony of appraisers who appraised a Florida home
owned by Wife. Wife’s appraiser valued the property at $525,000. Husband’s
appraiser valued the property at $850,000. The primary discrepancy leading to
the differing values was the exclusion of a third-floor bedroom by Wife’s
appraiser.
The parties were divorced by final decree in February 2024. “Looking at
all of the statutory factors,” the trial court found that a sixty percent marital
property distribution to Wife and a forty percent distribution to Husband was
equitable. The court found Husband’s appraisal of the Florida property to be
more reliable and, accounting for necessary repairs, thus valued the property
at $681,500.
Although Wife requested both term alimony and reimbursement alimony,
the court found that she had not established a basis for an award of
reimbursement alimony. The court observed that the statutory formula for
term alimony would provide ten years and six months of alimony at $2,501 per
month given the length of the parties’ marriage and their income. Because of
the unequal property division, the court found it equitable to reduce the
duration of alimony to a term of six years, with the first four years at the
guidelines rate of $2,501 per month and the last two years at half of that rate.
The parties each unsuccessfully moved for reconsideration. Wife’s appeal, and
Husband’s cross-appeal, followed.
II. Analysis
The trial court is afforded broad discretion in determining matters
of property distribution and alimony when fashioning a final divorce decree. In
the Matter of Letendre & Letendre, 149 N.H. 31, 34 (2002). We will not
overturn a trial court’s decision on these matters absent an unsustainable
exercise of discretion or an error of law. Id.; In the Matter of Silva & Silva, 171
N.H. 1, 9 (2018). This standard of review means that we review only whether
the record establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the discretionary
judgment made, and we will not disturb the trial court’s determination if it
could reasonably have been made. In the Matter of Braunstein & Braunstein,
173 N.H. 38, 47 (2020). We will not substitute our judgment for that of the
trial court; nor will we reweigh the equities. Id.
A. Wife’s Appeal
On appeal, Wife argues, among other things, that the trial court erred
when it: (1) ordered temporary alimony in an amount below the statutory
formula amount; (2) valued the Florida property; and (3) failed to make findings
in denying reimbursement alimony. We find no error.
We begin with Wife’s argument relating to the trial court’s temporary
alimony order. RSA 458:19, XIV (Supp. 2024) provides, in part:
“Temporary alimony” means periodic support payments to or on
behalf of a spouse while a case is pending and ending on the effective
date of the divorce, legal separation, or annulment.
In determining the amount of temporary alimony, the trial court looked to RSA
458:19-a, II(a) (Supp. 2024), which provides, in part, that “[t]he amount of a
term alimony order shall be the lesser of the payee’s reasonable need, or a
formula based on 23 percent of the difference between the parties’ gross
incomes at the time the order is created, unless the court finds that justice
requires an adjustment.” The trial court found Wife’s monthly income to be
$7,082 and Husband’s monthly income to be at least $17,958.
In ordering temporary alimony of $800 per month to Wife, it appears that
the court determined that Wife’s reasonable need was less than the formula
alimony amount. Contrary to Wife’s argument, nothing in the statutory
scheme required the trial court to issue temporary alimony based on the
statutory formula where, as here, Wife’s reasonable need was less than the
2
formula amount. Accordingly, we find no unsustainable exercise of discretion
or error of law in the court’s temporary alimony order.
Wife next argues that the trial court erred in valuing the Florida property
because it “failed to note the vast difference in square footage on the
appraisals.” (Bolding omitted.) Contrary to Wife’s argument, the court noted
that Husband’s appraiser was unaware of any problems accessing the third-
floor bedroom and that the appraiser included the bedroom as part of the total
square footage of the living area. This observation, combined with the court’s
finding that Husband’s appraisal was more reliable, reflects that the court
considered the difference in square footage between the appraisals and resolved
the conflict in favor of Husband’s appraisal. Wife’s argument effectively invites
us to reweigh the evidence. We decline the invitation because we defer to the
trial court’s judgment in resolving conflicts in testimony, evaluating the
credibility of the witnesses, and determining the weight to be accorded to the
evidence presented. Braunstein, 173 N.H. at 47. Accordingly, we cannot
conclude that the trial court’s valuation of the Florida property was an
unsustainable exercise of discretion.
Wife next argues that the trial court erred when it failed to make findings
when denying reimbursement alimony. Wife sought reimbursement alimony
based on working as an office manager and accountant for Husband’s business
from 2005 to 2013 without compensation. “The purpose of reimbursement
alimony is to compensate the payee for economic or non-economic contribution
to the financial resources of the payor, where the property subject to division
under RSA 458:16-a is either inappropriate or inadequate to provide such
compensation.” RSA 458:19-a, V (Supp. 2024).
To be sure, RSA 458:19-a, VI(b) (Supp. 2024) requires the trial court’s
order to include “[f]indings supporting the court’s decision to . . . deny the
requested alimony.” But the court’s order in this case includes such findings.
The court found that “[n]either party demonstrated that one or the other
contributed to the growth or diminution of marital assets during the marriage,
more than the other” and that “[t]hey both contributed to the family.” Further,
the court acknowledged that Wife’s argument for a sixty/forty property division
was based, in part, on the fact that she worked for Husband’s business without
compensation. While the court’s order does not explicitly state that it denied
reimbursement alimony because the property division in Wife’s favor was
adequate to provide compensation for unpaid work, “[w]e must assume that the
trial court made subsidiary findings necessary to support its general ruling.”
In the Matter of Kosek & Kosek, 151 N.H. 722, 725 (2005). Accordingly, we
cannot conclude that the trial court’s decision to deny reimbursement alimony
was an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
3