THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0004, State of New Hampshire v. Jeremy
M. Stinson, the court on February 19, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Jeremy M. Stinson, appeals his conviction,
following a jury trial in Superior Court (Temple, J.), on charges of prohibited
use of computer services, attempted felonious sexual assault, and attempted
endangering the welfare of a child, based upon the defendant’s acts of using
internet messaging applications to solicit a person he believed to be 14 years
old to engage in unlawful sexual activities, and subsequently traveling to a
predetermined location to meet the person. See RSA 629:1 (2016); RSA 632-
A:3, II (Supp. 2023); RSA 639:3, III (Supp. 2023); RSA 649-B:4, I (2016). On
appeal, the defendant challenges the sufficiency of the evidence to establish
that he believed the person with whom he was communicating and traveling to
meet was under the age of 16. We affirm.
A challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence raises a question of law that
we review de novo. State v. Seibel, 174 N.H. 440, 445 (2021). When
considering a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, we objectively review
the entire record, construing the evidence, and all reasonable inferences from
it, in the light most favorable to the State, and we determine whether any
rational trier of fact could have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Id. We
examine each item of evidence in the context of the entire case, not in isolation.
Id. The trier of fact is entitled to draw reasonable inferences from the facts
proved as well as from facts found as the result of other inferences so long as
they can reasonably be drawn therefrom. See id. This standard applies if the
proof consisted of both direct and circumstantial evidence, and we will uphold
the defendant’s conviction under it unless we determine that no rational trier of
fact could have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Id.
At trial, the defendant testified that he was a “scam baiter,” meaning that
he identifies persons who are online “scammers,” and engages with them to
ensure that they do not engage with other unsuspecting persons who may fall
prey to their schemes. He claimed that he had identified the person with whom
he engaged in this case, a detective assigned to the New Hampshire Internet
Crimes Against Children Task Force using a fictitious online profile of a
fourteen-year-old girl, as a scammer, and that he participated in graphic sexual
dialog with the person simply to keep the person engaged with him rather than
other potential targets. In arguing that the evidence was insufficient to
establish that he believed the person was less than 16 years old, the defendant
emphasizes evidence that (1) an internet application the parties used requires
users to be at least 18; (2) the fictitious profile listed the person’s age as 19; (3)
the fictitious profile, and a username associated with it, lacked information he
would expect of a real person; (4) the person was allegedly too “aggressive” and
“forward” in telling him that she was really 14; (5) the communications
occurred at times he would have expected a minor to be in school, and not
when he would have expected a minor to be online; (6) the person was allegedly
“too insistent” on meeting him in public; (7) the person would not engage in a
video chat with him or send a “live” photograph; and (8) the person did not use
language he would expect of a fourteen-year-old girl. On the evidence
presented, the defendant argues that the jury could not reasonably have found
that he believed the person with whom he was communicating was under the
age of 16. We disagree.
The evidence establishes not only that the defendant initiated
progressively-sexually-graphic communications with the fictitious person after
the person told him that she was 14, but that he did so in explanatory terms
after the person indicated that she was sexually inexperienced. Additionally,
the evidence establishes that the parties arranged to meet after the fictitious
person mentioned that she would be without parents for a few days with only a
grandmother checking on her, and in so doing, the defendant asked if he could
stay at her house and where he could park his car so that it would not be seen,
and stated, “Just make sure your grandmother does not ask me anything” and
“I’d rather she not know I exist.”
After the parties arranged to meet in person, the defendant drove from
his home in Penacook to the predetermined location in Nashua, bringing with
him gummy bears, a chicken sandwich from a fast-food restaurant, and
condoms, items the fictitious person had asked the defendant to bring.
Following his arrest, the defendant waived his Miranda rights and was
interviewed by law enforcement officers. During the interview, when asked how
he believed he had come to be arrested, the defendant responded that he was
“supposedly talking to somebody that was underage but I’m guessing is
probably a cop here.” The defendant additionally stated that the person he had
been communicating with said that she was 14, that his decision to engage
with a minor online was “not a good decision,” and that, although this was not
the first time he “met someone on line and . . . agreed to meet them,” it was
“the first underage one.” The jury viewed a video recording of the interview.
The jury was free to find the defendant not credible and to place little
weight on the evidence he emphasizes. See State v. Spinale, 156 N.H. 456, 465
(2007). Viewing the evidence and all reasonable inferences from it in the light
2
most favorable to the State, we conclude that a rational jury could have found,
beyond a reasonable doubt, that the defendant believed he was conversing
online with a fourteen-year-old minor. See Seibel, 174 N.H. at 445.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3