THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0589, Sheila Jenot v. Lyman Jenot, Jr. &
a., the court on October 28, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). Following a jury trial in Superior Court (St. Hilaire, J.) the
plaintiff, Sheila Jenot, appeals a directed verdict granted in favor of defendant
Joseph Anderson-Lopez, a jury verdict in favor of defendant Lyman Jenot, Jr.,
and related orders in her negligence action against both defendants. We affirm
in part, reverse in part, and remand for a new trial with respect to the
plaintiff’s claim against defendant Anderson-Lopez.
This case arises out of a two-car motor vehicle collision on Loudon Road
in Concord. Loudon Road is a four-lane way with two lanes of traffic in each
direction. At the time of the collision, the plaintiff was a passenger in the car of
defendant Jenot, her husband. The two were headed westbound when
defendant Jenot made a left-hand turn across the two eastbound lanes of
Loudon Road in order to enter the driveway of a business. At the same time,
defendant Anderson-Lopez was travelling eastbound on Loudon Road, and,
before defendant Jenot was able to complete the maneuver and cross the
outermost eastbound lane of Loudon Road, the two vehicles collided. Following
the accident, the plaintiff sued both defendants alleging that they were
negligent in the operation of their respective vehicles. At the close of the
plaintiff’s case, the court granted defendant Anderson-Lopez’s motion for a
directed verdict. In granting the motion, the trial court found that defendant
Anderson-Lopez had the right of way, and therefore determined that no
reasonable juror could conclude that he was liable. Thereafter, the case
against defendant Jenot was submitted to the jury, which returned a verdict
finding him not liable for the accident. The court denied the plaintiff’s motion
for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, and this appeal followed.
We first address the plaintiff’s argument that the trial court erred by
directing a verdict in favor of defendant Anderson-Lopez. “A plaintiff claiming
negligence must prove: (1) that the defendant owed the plaintiff a duty; (2) that
the duty was breached; (3) that the plaintiff suffered an injury; and (4) that the
defendant’s breach was the proximate cause of the injury.” Vachon v. New
England Towing, 148 N.H. 429, 430 (2002). Because motions for directed
verdict relate to the sufficiency of the evidence, they present questions of law
which we review de novo. 101 Ocean Blvd., LLC v. Foy Ins. Grp., Inc., 174 N.H.
130, 145 (2021). A party is entitled to a directed verdict only when the sole
reasonable inference that may be drawn from the evidence, viewed in the light
most favorable to the nonmoving party, is so overwhelmingly in favor of the
moving party that no contrary verdict could stand. Id. “The court cannot
weigh the evidence or inquire into the credibility of the witnesses, and if the
evidence adduced at trial is conflicting, or if several reasonable inferences may
be drawn, the motion should be denied.” Id. (quotation omitted).
On appeal, the plaintiff contends that, when viewed in the light most
favorable to her, the evidence demonstrates that defendant Anderson-Lopez
was not simply traveling in the outermost eastbound lane of Loudon Road, but
that, shortly prior to the collision, he had moved into that lane in order to pass
a slowing pickup truck on the right without considering that defendant Jenot
was in the process of crossing the eastbound lanes in front of the truck.
Regardless of whether defendant Anderson-Lopez had the right of way, the
plaintiff argues that there was evidence upon which the jury reasonably could
have found that defendant Anderson-Lopez failed to exercise reasonable care in
executing the pass, and that he proximately caused the collision. Accordingly,
the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred as a matter of law by treating the
statutory right of way as conclusive of liability and directing a verdict in
defendant Anderson-Lopez’s favor on that basis. We agree.
The mere fact that a motorist had the statutory right of way at the time of
a collision does not absolve the motorist of the duty to exercise reasonable care
in operating the vehicle. Grimes v. Labreck, 108 N.H. 26, 28 (1967); Powell v.
Gagne, 102 N.H. 256, 258 (1959). Whether defendant Anderson-Lopez
exercised reasonable care in passing the truck, or defendant Jenot exercised
reasonable care in turning across Loudon Road, were questions for the jury.
See Eckhart v. Linaberry, 113 N.H. 652, 656-57 (1973); Grimes, 108 N.H. at
28; Bissonnette v. Cheverette, 87 N.H. 211, 213 (1935). As noted above, the
jury here determined that defendant Jenot was not at fault for the collision.
In this case, there was evidence introduced at trial from which the jury
reasonably could have found that: (1) when defendant Jenot began the turn, a
truck traveling eastbound was approximately 200 feet in front of him in the
innermost eastbound lane and was braking to allow defendant Jenot to turn
left, defendant Anderson-Lopez was behind the truck in the same lane, the
outermost eastbound lane was completely clear of traffic, and defendant Jenot
had time to safely cross both lanes; (2) defendant Anderson-Lopez began to
pass the truck on the right after defendant Jenot had already started the turn
and had entered the outermost eastbound lane; (3) when defendant Anderson-
Lopez began to pass the braking truck, he was approximately 200 feet away
from defendant Jenot; (4) once defendant Anderson-Lopez entered the
outermost eastbound lane, he accelerated rapidly without regard for why the
truck was braking and did not slow or take any evasive maneuvers to avoid a
collision; and (5) defendant Anderson-Lopez struck the front half of the
2
passenger side of defendant Jenot’s car in the outermost eastbound lane,
heavily damaging both cars and causing the airbags in both cars to deploy.
Viewed in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, we conclude that the jury
reasonably could have found from this evidence that defendant Anderson-
Lopez did not exercise reasonable care in passing the truck and proximately
caused the collision. Accordingly, the trial court erred as a matter of law by
directing a verdict in defendant Anderson-Lopez’s favor, and we reverse and
remand for a new trial of the negligence claim against defendant Anderson-
Lopez. See 101 Ocean Blvd., 174 N.H. at 145.
The plaintiff next argues that the trial court erred by denying her motion
for judgment notwithstanding the verdict. The plaintiff concedes that, in
contending that the trial court erred by directing a verdict in favor of defendant
Anderson-Lopez, she “implicitly argues that there [was] evidence from which a
jury could [have found that defendant Jenot] did not violate a duty to yield the
right of way.” She asserts, however, that “if it is assumed . . . that the Motion
for Directed Verdict . . . was correctly granted, then liability must be found
against” defendant Jenot because the evidence would necessarily compel a
finding that he failed to exercise reasonable care in making the left-hand turn.
Because the plaintiff argues that the trial court should have granted her
judgment notwithstanding the verdict only “if the Motion for Directed Verdict
as to [defendant Anderson-Lopez] is upheld,” and because we have reversed the
directed verdict, we need not address whether the court erred by denying the
motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict.
Next, we address the plaintiff’s argument that the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion by excluding certain deposition
testimony of defendant Jenot as impermissible lay opinion testimony.1 See
N.H. R. Ev. 701. “We review the trial court’s evidentiary rulings for an
unsustainable exercise of discretion and reverse only if the court’s decision was
clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of the [appellant’s] case.”
State v. Racette, 175 N.H. 132, 135 (2022), modified on other grounds by State
v. Boudreau, 176 N.H. 1, 11-13 (2023). We consider whether the record
establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the trial court’s
discretionary ruling. Id. The plaintiff bears the burden of demonstrating that
the trial court’s ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice
of her case. See id. New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 701 allows a lay witness
to offer an opinion if it is “(a) rationally based on the witness’s perception; (b)
helpful to clearly understanding the witness’s testimony or to determining a
fact in issue; and (c) not based on scientific, technical or other specialized
knowledge within the scope of Rule 702.” N.H. R. Ev. 701.
1 Portions of defendant Jenot’s deposition testimony were admitted by agreement at trial due to
his inability to testify. See N.H. R. Ev. 804.
3