THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0564, In the Matter of Clara Carr and
Ryan Carr, the court on September 17, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). The respondent, Ryan Carr (Father), appeals a decision of the Circuit
Court (Steckowych, J.), issued following a hearing, that resulted in a modification
to his child support obligation payable to Clara Carr (Mother). We affirm in part
and vacate in part.
The parties have two minor children. On June 20, 2019, the trial court
approved the parties’ final divorce stipulation. The parties revised this
stipulation in February of 2022. Per that revised agreement, Father paid Mother
$174.00 biweekly. On October 23, 2023, Mother filed a petition to modify child
support and the parenting plan. Father filed a cross-petition regarding both
issues. The parties resolved their parenting-plan dispute by stipulation and thus
proceeded to a hearing as to child support only.
The record supports that in 2023 Father earned: $9,575.73 per month in
regular pay from his full-time employment; $14,464.80 as an annual bonus from
the same employer; and $178 per month in veteran’s benefits. Father testified
through counsel that his annual bonus, “broken out per month . . . would be
$1,205.33.” Mother earned $9,025.15 per month between her salary from her
regular employment and a $1,506.88 veteran’s benefit.
The parties stipulated that a “substantial change of circumstances,” see
RSA 458-C:7, I(a) (2018), justified a modification to child support. Specifically, at
trial, Father’s counsel identified the changed circumstances as “Mother has
relocated to a different home, and Father has started a new business[.]” Mother
sought child support in accordance with the statutory guidelines, and Father
sought a downward deviation.
The trial court declined to permit a downward deviation, and instead
ordered Father to pay guideline support of $1,785.50 per month. In doing so, the
trial court determined that:
Father has not met his burden of proof to show that he should be
awarded a downward deviation in the child support amount. Father
has not shown the court, or mother, the required information
relative to the expenses he claims are necessary and reasonable to
maintain this new business venture he started. It is unclear exactly
what expenses he incurred and how they were paid from what he
submitted.
In addition to guideline support, the trial court ordered Father to pay 50 percent
of the children’s extracurricular activity expenses and “other unanticipated
costs.”
On appeal, Father argues that the trial court unsustainably exercised its
discretion when it failed to provide a written analysis explaining its rejection of
each of the statutory bases upon which Father sought a downward deviation,
specifically, RSA 458-C:5, I(b)(l), (d), (h)(2)(A) to (C), and (j) (Supp. 2024). These
six statutory factors, Father asserts, are applicable because the parties have
approximately the same incomes, similar expenses, and an equal parenting
schedule. Father contends that because the statute requires the trial court “to
make written findings of the applicability of any of the cited grounds for
deviation,” see RSA 458-C:5, I, the trial court erred by not setting forth a written
analysis of the inapplicability of each statutory subsection identified by him.
Mother asserts that Father’s statutory argument is not preserved, and,
alternatively, that the statute requires written findings only when a trial court
deviates from the child support guidelines, which did not occur here. We agree
with Mother that RSA chapter 458-C does not mandate a written assessment of
each proffered basis for deviation when the trial court ultimately orders guideline
support.1
When interpreting a statute, we first look to the statutory language, and
whenever possible construe that language according to its plain and ordinary
meaning. In the Matter of Routhier & Routhier, 175 N.H. 6, 11 (2022). We
interpret the statute as written, and we will not consider what the legislature
might have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit to include. Id.
RSA 458-C:4, II (2018) provides that:
There shall be a rebuttable presumption in any proceeding for the
award of child support that the amount of the award which would
result from the application of guidelines provided under this chapter
is the correct amount of child support. A written finding or a specific
finding by the presiding officer on the record that the application of
the guidelines would be unjust or inappropriate in a particular case,
1 Although Father did not raise the specific issue regarding the text of RSA 458-C:5 requiring
written findings, we conclude that the argument is fairly derived from Father’s contention that
the trial court disregarded the statutory provisions that he claimed to support a deviation.
2
as determined by using the criteria set forth in RSA 458-C:5, shall
be sufficient to rebut the presumption in such case.
Id. (emphases added). RSA 458-C:5, I, provides, in relevant part, that:
Special circumstances, including, but not limited to, the following, if
raised by any party to the action or by the court, shall be considered
in light of the best interests of the child and may result in
adjustments in the application of support guidelines provided under
this chapter. The court shall make written findings relative to the
applicability of the following: . . . .
Id.
Thus, RSA 458-C:4 establishes a presumption of guideline support and
sets the threshold for rebuttal. RSA 458-C:4, II. It requires the trial court to
present factual findings to justify a deviation only. Id. Accordingly, when RSA
458-C:4 and :5 are read together, the plain language demonstrates that when a
court determines that no special circumstances under RSA 458-C:5 apply, the
presumption of guideline support remains intact, and written findings pertaining
to a party’s basis for a requested deviation are not required. See RSA 458-C:4-:5;
In the Matter of Blaisdell & Blaisdell, 174 N.H. 187, 193 (2021) (“[W]e do not
consider words and phrases in isolation, but rather within the context of the
statute as a whole.”). Here, the trial court determined that Father failed to satisfy
his burden of proof, thus it did not err by not making written factual findings
assessing the inapplicability of each of the six statutory factors under which
Father sought a deviation.
In addition to the statutory argument addressed above, Father presents
multiple other challenges to the trial court’s decision to decline to authorize a
downward deviation. Trial courts have broad discretion in reviewing and
modifying child support orders. In the Matter of Greenberg & Greenberg, 174
N.H. 168, 171–72 (2021). The trial court is in the best position to determine the
parties’ respective needs and their respective ability to meet those needs. Id. We
will not disturb the trial court’s rulings regarding child support absent an
unsustainable exercise of discretion or an error of law. In the Matter of Ndyaija &
Ndyaija, 173 N.H. 127, 140 (2020). We review only whether the record
establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the discretionary judgment
made, and we will not disturb the trial court’s determination if it could
reasonably have been made. In the Matter of Summers & Summers, 172 N.H.
474, 479 (2019). Our standard of review is not whether we would rule differently
than the trial court, but whether a reasonable person could have reached the
same decision as the trial court based upon the same evidence. Id. We will not
substitute our judgment for that of the trial court. Id. Nor will we reweigh the
equities. Id.
3