THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0323, In the Matter of Neuza Silva and
Luciano Silva, the court on November 24, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The respondent, Luciano Silva (husband), appeals the final
decree of the Circuit Court (Cooper, R., approved by Joseph, J.), following a
hearing, in his divorce from the petitioner, Neuza Silva (wife). The husband
argues that the Circuit Court (Burns, J.) erred in its award of temporary
alimony and attorney’s fees to the wife, and that, after a final hearing, the trial
court erred by allegedly “refusing” to reconsider the temporary orders. The
husband also argues that the trial court erred in denying his requests to
modify child support and in allegedly assuming, erroneously, that his English
language skills were sufficient to allow him to participate meaningfully in the
proceedings. We affirm.
The husband first argues that the trial court erred in its award of
temporary alimony and attorney’s fees to the wife. The wife counters that the
trial court’s temporary orders are no longer subject to review. But see In the
Matter of Stapleton & Stapleton, 159 N.H. 694 (2010) (recognizing trial court’s
authority to revise temporary orders). We assume that the temporary support
obligations may be challenged in this appeal from the final divorce decree. The
trial court is afforded broad discretion in awarding alimony. In the Matter of
Nassar & Nassar, 156 N.H. 769, 772 (2008). We will not overturn its decision
unless it is lacking in evidentiary support or legally erroneous. Id. Following a
temporary hearing, the trial court found that the wife, who had “no significant
earning history,” and who had “largely been a stay-at-home parent,”
demonstrated a need for support, and that the husband, whose gross income
in the prior year was $377,000, and whose “monthly income is likely higher
than that reported on his Financial Affidavit,” had the ability to pay alimony.
The court ordered the husband to pay temporary alimony of $609 per week.
The husband argues that the trial court’s temporary alimony award was
erroneously based upon the wife’s unsupported assertion at the hearing that
he earned $150,000 annually. The record does not support the husband’s
argument. On the contrary, the trial court specifically stated that “it cannot
conclude [the husband ] is earning $150,000 per year without engaging in
speculation.” Likewise, the record does not support the husband’s argument
that the trial court erroneously imputed income to him. Rather, the court
found that the husband was earning more than he claimed on his financial
affidavit.
The husband also argues that the trial court erred in awarding attorney’s
fees to the wife. We review the trial court’s award of attorney’s fees in a divorce
proceeding under our unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. See
Snyder v. Clifton, 139 N.H. 549, 552 (1995); State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295,
296 (2001) (explaining unsustainable exercise of discretion standard). The trial
court found that the wife, who did not have a bank account until she moved
out of the marital home, was struggling to pay expenses. The court granted
her request for $5,000 in attorney’s fees. Based upon this record, we conclude
that the husband has failed to show that the trial court’s award of attorney’s
fees constituted an unsustainable exercise of its discretion. See Snyder, 139
N.H. at 552; Lambert, 147 N.H. at 296.
The husband next argues that the trial court erred when it allegedly
“refused” to reconsider the temporary alimony award and the award of
attorney’s fees at the final hearing. The record does not support the husband’s
argument that the court “refused” to reconsider the temporary orders. Rather,
the trial court reviewed the temporary orders but rejected the husband’s claims
that they were erroneous. The court noted that the husband’s previous
challenges to the temporary orders were rejected based upon his lack of
credibility. For example, the court previously denied the husband’s request to
modify the alimony award because it did “not find it believable . . . that he has
not been able to afford the financial terms of the temporary orders.” We
conclude that the husband has failed to show that the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion by denying his request to reconsider the
temporary orders after the final hearing. In the Matter of Geraghty & Geraghty,
169 N.H. 404, 419 (2016) (we review trial court’s order on reconsideration
motion for unsustainable exercise of discretion).
The husband next argues that the trial court erred in denying his
motions to modify temporary child support. The trial court has broad
discretion in reviewing and modifying child support orders. In the Matter of
Ndyaija & Ndyaija, 173 N.H. 127, 140 (2020). We will not disturb the trial
court’s rulings absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Id. In his first
motion to modify, the husband asserted that he “struggled financially” under
the terms of the temporary orders, and that he was “forced to surrender his
business to the landlord.” In denying the husband’s motion, the court was
“not convinced that there [had] been any changes in [his] financial
circumstances which he did not orchestrate himself.” In his second motion,
the husband asserted that he was seeking to have the minor child reside
primarily with him, and to terminate his child support obligation “effectively
immediately.” The final parenting plan provides that the child shall reside with
the father, with parenting time with the mother as agreed by the parties, and
2
orders the father to pay $50 per month in child support. However, the
temporary parenting plan provided that the child would reside with the mother
during the week, and with the father on weekends. We conclude that the
husband has failed to show that the trial court unsustainably exercised its
discretion in denying his request to modify the child support orders. See id.
Finally, the husband argues that the trial court erred when it allegedly
assumed, erroneously, that his English language skills were sufficient to allow
him to participate meaningfully in the proceedings. The husband
acknowledges that the court “consistently required Brazilian Portuguese
Interpreters for both parties for all substantive hearings in this case.” The
record fails to show that the husband sought additional language assistance
that was denied by the court. Moreover, it does not appear that the husband is
seeking relief from this court, given the assertion in his brief that “[t]here is no
remedy that this Court can provide.” Accordingly, we find no error.
Affirmed.
Donovan, Countway, and Gould, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3