THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0700, John R. Griffin, Jr. v. Jackson
Lewis, P.C. & a., the court on August 19, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, John R. Griffin, Jr., appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Frizzell, J.) dismissing his civil complaint for defamation
against the defendants, Jackson Lewis, P.C. and Kevin M. Sibbernsen, Esq., on
the basis that the allegedly defamatory statements were entitled to absolute
privilege immunity. We affirm.
“It is well established that statements made in the course of judicial
proceedings are absolutely privileged from liability in civil actions, provided
they are pertinent to the subject of the proceedings.” Pickering v. Frink, 123
N.H. 326, 329 (1983); see McGranahan v. Dahar, 119 N.H. 758, 763 (1979). In
this case, the trial court determined that the relevant statements identified in
the plaintiff’s complaint “fall within the scope of . . . absolute privilege
immunity.” On appeal, the plaintiff challenges that determination, arguing
that the relevant statements, which defendant Sibbernsen made in a written
submission on behalf of the plaintiff’s former employer in the course of
defending an employment claim brought by the plaintiff against his former
employer, did not meet the requirements for absolute privilege immunity.
It is the plaintiff’s burden to demonstrate reversible error. Gallo v.
Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014). Based upon our review of the trial court’s
order, the plaintiff’s arguments, the relevant law, and the record submitted on
appeal, we conclude that the plaintiff has not established that the trial court
erred by determining that the challenged statements were entitled to absolute
privilege immunity. See id.; Pickering, 123 N.H. at 329. In light of this order,
the plaintiff’s motion “to obtain status of this case after four months” is moot.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk