THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0006, State of New Hampshire v. Joseph
Davis, the court on March 4, 2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant was indicted on charges of criminal
threatening with a deadly weapon, see RSA 631:4, I(e)(2016); RSA 625:11, V
(2016); felon in possession of a dangerous weapon; see RSA 159:3, I (2023);
and criminal mischief; see RSA 634:2, II (2016). Because the State amended
the criminal mischief charge from a Class A misdemeanor to a Class B
misdemeanor prior to trial, that charge did not go to the jury. See RSA 634:2,
II-a (Supp. 2024). Following trial, the defendant was convicted on all three
charges. On appeal, he seeks reversal of his convictions for criminal
threatening and felon in possession. He argues that the Trial Court (Messer,
J.) erred: (1) when it failed to sever the felon in possession charge from the
charges of criminal threatening and criminal mischief; and (2) by excluding
evidence that the victim was previously convicted of a felony. We affirm.
The jury heard the following evidence. On December 30, 2022, the
victim stopped at a Manchester restaurant to get food and drinks after work.
When the victim exited the restaurant, he found the defendant leaning against
the victim’s car, “arguing with” a woman. When the victim asked them to
move, the defendant began calling him names and took out a boxcutter and
swung at him. The victim offered to fight with the defendant as long as he put
the boxcutter down. The defendant’s friend, Ramon Ramos, then pointed a
gun at the victim’s face. After onlookers told Ramos to put the gun away,
Ramos did so and got into his car. The victim then tried to leave but the
defendant told him “you’re not going anywhere” and slit the front tire of the
victim’s car. The defendant ran toward Ramos’ car and the victim chased him.
When the victim reached Ramos’ car, Ramos shot him in the shoulder. The
victim returned to the restaurant and waited for an ambulance. Three police
officers responded to the restaurant where they aided the victim and
interviewed patrons. One patron had witnessed the confrontation and told the
officers that she had seen the defendant at the restaurant that night with her
friend. She then identified the defendant from photos posted on her friend’s
Facebook page and said that he was the one with the boxcutter.
The defendant was arrested and subsequently indicted on charges of
criminal threatening and being a felon in possession of a deadly weapon. He
filed a motion in limine to introduce the victim’s 2012 conviction for simple
assault. He argued that because the sentence received by the victim had been
suspended for three years it expired in 2015 and was therefore admissible
under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 609. The trial court denied the
motion, finding that the charge was “highly prejudicial” and that it did not bear
on the victim’s credibility, and concluding that its probative value did not
outweigh its prejudicial effect.
The defendant also filed a motion requesting that the court adopt “an
amended procedure” to try the felon in possession charge or that the charges
be severed. Under his proposed “amended procedure,” the jury would be asked
to determine only whether he was guilty of criminal threatening. If the jury
found him guilty, the trial court would then enter a conviction for being a felon
in possession of a deadly weapon. The State objected, arguing that the
proposed procedure could allow the jury to reach a not guilty verdict on the
felon in possession charge even if the jury reached a not guilty verdict on
“something other than the State’s failure to prove the Defendant used the
boxcutter as a deadly weapon.” The trial court denied the defendant’s motion,
finding that it was “part and parcel of . . . the entirety of this case.” The trial
court also stated that if the defendant did not want his actual prior convictions
before the jury, he could stipulate to being a felon.
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred in denying his
motion to sever the felon in possession charge from the other charges. The
trial court’s decision to join or sever charges is discretionary; absent an
unsustainable exercise of discretion, we will affirm its ruling. State v. Girard,
173 N.H. 619, 623 (2020). To establish an unsustainable exercise of
discretion, the defendant must demonstrate that the trial court’s ruling was
clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Id.
Our Rules of Criminal Procedure provide:
If a defendant is charged with two or more related offenses, either
party may move for joinder of such charges. The trial judge shall
join the charges for trial unless the trial judge determines that
joinder is not in the best interests of justice.
N.H. R. Crim. P. 20(a)(2).
On appeal, the defendant argues that although the charged offenses are
related, the court should have severed the charges in the interests of justice.
Severance is required under “the best interests” standard when conducting a
single trial would jeopardize the defendant’s right to a fair trial. State v. Rivera,
175 N.H. 496, 502 (2022). We have identified several factors to be considered
by the trial judge when making its determination. These factors include: (1)
whether the number of offenses charged and complexity of the evidence to be
2
offered will impede the trier of fact’s ability to distinguish the evidence and
apply the law intelligently to each offense; (2) whether some charges are likely
to unusually inflame the jury against the defendant; (3) whether the evidence of
some offenses is weak while the proof of others is strong; (4) whether the
defendant’s available defenses for the different charged offenses is inconsistent;
and (5) whether the defendant wishes to testify as to one offense but not as to
others. Id.
In this case, none of the factors identified in Rivera required severance.
There were two charged offenses. The identity of the individual who used the
boxcutter was the key issue to be established for each charge. As the State
observes, both the criminal threatening and felon in possession charges
required that the State introduce the same evidence to establish identity, the
defendant’s primary defense. Additionally, to obtain a felon in possession
conviction, the State was required to prove that the defendant used or intended
to use the boxcutter in a manner known to be capable of producing death or
serious bodily injury. See RSA 625:11,V (2016). Moreover, the trial court also
instructed the jury that it was prohibited from using the parties’ stipulation
about the defendant’s prior felony conviction “for any purpose other than for
proof of the element of the offense that the Defendant has been convicted of a
felony against the person or property of another.” See, e.g., State v. Colbath,
171 N.H. 626, 637 (2019) (jury is presumed to follow trial court’s instructions).
Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court did not err in denying the
defendant’s motion to sever. Given the charges in this case, we also conclude
that the trial court sustainably exercised its discretion in declining to adopt an
amended procedure for trial of the charged offenses. See Girard, 173 N.H. at
623.
The defendant also contends that the trial court erred when it denied his
motion in limine which sought permission to introduce the victim’s 2012
conviction and sentence for simple assault. The victim had received a sentence
of not less than one and no more than two years in prison for the conviction;
the sentence was suspended for three years.
At trial, the defendant argued that the conviction was admissible under
New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 609(a)(1)(A) because the victim was subject to
the suspended sentence until 2015, which was less than ten years prior to
trial. He further contended that the conviction “must be admitted” subject to
Rule of Evidence 403 and that application of the Rule 403 balancing test did
not bar its admission. The trial court denied the defendant’s motion, ruling:
“The conviction is not one that tends to bear on credibility and the nature of
the charge, an assault, is highly prejudicial.”
We review a trial court’s ruling to admit evidence of prior convictions
under an unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. State v. Long, 161
N.H. 364, 367 (2011). To establish an unsustainable exercise of discretion, the
3