THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0652, Floros Realty Trust v. Goodfellas
Properties, LLC d/b/a Hammer Pub and Grille & a., the court on
October 10, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Floros Realty Trust, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Schulman, J.), following a bench trial and a view, finding that
the use of an alley by defendants 3West Property Management, LLC, and its
tenant, Goodfellas Properties, LLC d/b/a Hammer Pub and Grille (Hammer
Pub), to store trash containers does not interfere with the plaintiff’s reasonable
use of its right of way. The plaintiff argues that the trial court’s order is
contrary to the language of the deed and factually erroneous. We affirm.
The parties’ dispute involves the use of an alley behind their adjacent
commercial buildings. Their deeds contain, for the benefit of adjacent
landowners, “a right of way ten feet wide” which “shall forever remain open and
unencumbered.” After a bench trial and a view, the court found that the
defendants’ use of the alley to store wheeled and mobile trash containers, with
certain limitations, was a reasonable use of the right of way.
We apply the “rule of reason” to determine whether a particular use of an
easement is unreasonably burdensome. Heartz v. City of Concord, 148 N.H.
325, 332 (2002). “Reasonableness is a question of fact that is determined by
considering the surrounding circumstances, such as location and the use of
the parties’ properties, and the advantages and disadvantages to each party.”
Id. We will uphold the trial court’s findings and rulings unless they lack
evidentiary support or are legally erroneous. Loon Valley Homeowner’s Ass’n v.
Pollock, 171 N.H. 75, 78 (2018). “We will not substitute our judgment for that
of the trier of fact if it is supported by the evidence, especially when he has
been assisted in reaching his conclusions by a view.” Shearer v. Raymond, 174
N.H. 24, 36 (2021) (quotation omitted).
The trial court found that the Hammer Pub has been in continuous
operation, under two different owners, since 1978 or 1982. The court found
that, for approximately forty years, the pub has stored wheeled, mobile trash
receptacles in the alley, which the court found to be “strong and compelling
evidence of reasonableness.” The court found that when the trash bins are
stored in their current location alongside the wall, they reduce the width of the
entrance to the alley to slightly less than ten feet. However, the court found,
most vehicles can pass without difficulty, and “[w]hen larger trucks need
access, the trash containers can be easily moved out of the way.”
The trial court found that “[t]he Hammer Pub would be put out of
business if it could not store its garbage containers in the alley.” The court
found that “[f]or obvious reasons, and as explained at trial, garbage containers
must be separated from food supplies and cooking areas,” and that “there is no
space for a garbage container” in the defendant’s pub.
Considering the surrounding circumstances, such as the location and
the use of the parties’ properties, and the advantages and disadvantages to
each party, see Heartz, 148 N.H. at 332, the trial court found that the
defendants’ use of the alley behind their building to store wheeled and mobile
trash containers does not interfere with plaintiff’s reasonable use of its right of
way, provided that: (a) “[t]he trash containers do not extend any further into
the alleyway than the containers observed by the court during the view;”
(b) “[t]he trash containers are turned so that the longest side is parallel to the
building;” and (c) “[t]he wheeled trash containers, like the containers viewed by
the court, can be moved by hand.”
We reject the plaintiff’s assertion that the trial court’s findings and
rulings are contrary to the language in the easement or the doctrine of
reasonable use. Based upon our review of the record, we conclude that the
trial court’s findings and rulings are supported by the evidence and are not
legally erroneous. See Loon Valley Homeowner’s Ass’n, 171 N.H. at 78.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, and Gould, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2