THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0519, State of New Hampshire v. Donald
Thompson, the court on September 12, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Donald Thompson, appeals his conviction,
following a bench trial in the Circuit Court (Swegart, J.), on charges of
disobeying a police officer and resisting arrest. See RSA 265:4 (2024)
(amended 2024); RSA 642:2 (2016). The defendant argues that the trial court
erred by (1) determining that the State was not required to prove that he acted
with a purpose to evade a pursuit by a law enforcement officer in order to
convict him of disobeying a police officer; (2) allegedly determining that the
State was not required to prove that he had specific intent to resist arrest in
order to convict him of resisting arrest; and (3) finding sufficient evidence to
convict him of both crimes. We affirm.
We first address the defendant’s arguments that the trial court erred by
determining that the State did not have to prove that he acted with a purpose
to evade a pursuit by a law enforcement officer to convict him of disobeying a
police officer, and by finding sufficient evidence to convict him of that crime.
The interpretation of a statute raises a question of law that we review de novo.
State v. Jordan, 176 N.H. 34, 38 (2023). We look first to the statutory
language itself and, if possible, construe it according to its plain and ordinary
meaning. Id. We interpret the statute as written, and do not consider what the
legislature might have said or add language that it did not see fit to include.
Id.
A challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence likewise raises a question of
law that we review de novo. State v. Seibel, 174 N.H. 440, 445 (2021). When
considering a challenge to the sufficiency of evidence to support a conviction,
we objectively review the entire record, construing the evidence, and all
reasonable inferences from it, in the light most favorable to the State, and
determine whether any rational trier of fact could have found guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt. Id. We examine each item of evidence in the context of the
entire case, not in isolation. Id. The trier of fact is entitled to draw reasonable
inferences from the facts proved as well as from facts found as the result of
other inferences so long as they can reasonably be drawn therefrom. See id.
The defendant bears the burden of demonstrating that the evidence was
insufficient to prove guilt. State v. Saintil-Brown, 172 N.H. 110, 117 (2019).
When the evidence as to one or more of the elements is solely circumstantial,
the defendant must establish that the evidence does not exclude all reasonable
conclusions except guilt. Id. The proper analysis is not whether every possible
conclusion consistent with innocence has been excluded, but whether all such
reasonable conclusions based on the evidence have been excluded. Id. When
solely circumstantial evidence is at issue, “the critical question is whether, even
assuming all credibility resolutions in favor of the State, the inferential chain of
circumstances is of sufficient strength that guilt is the sole rational
conclusion.” Seibel, 174 N.H. at 445 (quotation omitted).
RSA 265:4, I provides:
No person, while driving or in charge of a vehicle, shall:
. . .
(c) Purposely neglect to stop when signaled to stop by any
law enforcement officer who is in uniform or who displays his
badge conspicuously on the outside of his outer coat or garment,
or who signals such person to stop by means of any authorized
audible or visual emergency warning signals; or otherwise willfully
attempt to elude pursuit by a law enforcement officer by increasing
speed, extinguishing headlamps while still in motion or
abandoning a vehicle while being pursued
RSA 265:4, I(c). “A person acts purposely with respect to a material element of
an offense when his conscious object is to cause the result or engage in the
conduct that comprises the element.” RSA 626:2, II(a) (2016).
In this case, the defendant was charged by a complaint alleging that he
“[p]urposely[,] while driving a motor vehicle, . . . neglected to stop when
signaled to stop by . . . a law enforcement officer . . . by means of authorized
visual emergency blue light warning signals . . . and further neglected to stop
after being signaled by means of authorized audible siren and emergency blue
lights.” At trial, the defendant argued that the State was required to prove that
he willfully attempted to elude the officer’s pursuit of him when he purposely
neglected to stop, and that there was no evidence that he was attempting to
elude a pursuit. In convicting the defendant, the trial court rejected this
argument, ruling that “the State [did not] need to prove a purpose to elude.”
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in so ruling,
asserting that under the statute, the State was required to prove the following
elements: “(1) Operating a motor vehicle; (2) A law enforcement officer signaling
the person to stop; and (3) A wilful [sic] attempt to elude pursuit, by
2
purposefully neglecting to stop or by increasing speed, extinguishing
headlamps while still in motion or abandoning a vehicle while being pursued.”
We disagree.
In State v. Hall, we interpreted RSA 265:4, I(c) as follows: “Under RSA
265:4, I(c), the elements of disobeying an officer are: (1) driving a motor vehicle,
and (2) purposely neglecting to stop when signaled by a law enforcement officer
or willfully attempting to elude pursuit by a law enforcement officer.” State v.
Hall, 133 N.H. 446, 450 (1990) (emphasis added). Consistent with Hall, the
trial court correctly construed the plain and ordinary meaning of the language
used in RSA 265:4, I(c) as containing two independent variants of the crime,
one requiring proof that the defendant purposely neglected to stop when
signaled to stop by a law enforcement officer, and a second, not charged in this
case, requiring proof that the defendant willfully attempted to elude pursuit by
a law enforcement officer. See Hall, 133 N.H. at 450. The defendant’s
argument not only contradicts Hall, but reads into the first clause of RSA
265:4, I(c) language not used by the legislature, namely, that the State must
prove a willful attempt to elude a pursuit by purposely neglecting to stop.
To the extent the defendant challenges the sufficiency of the evidence to
support his conviction for disobeying a police officer, his argument largely
turns upon his erroneous interpretation of RSA 265:4, I(c), asserting that the
evidence did not establish a willful attempt to elude a law enforcement pursuit.
To the extent he is challenging the sufficiency of the evidence to prove that he
purposely neglected to stop when signaled to do so by a law enforcement
officer, we disagree. The evidence at trial, including video footage from the
officer’s body-worn and dashboard-mounted cameras, demonstrates that the
defendant (1) drove for seven-tenths of a mile and for more than a minute after
the officer had activated his emergency blue lights and begun to pursue him;
(2) continued to drive, and briefly accelerated by ten miles per hour, even after
the officer had activated his emergency siren directly behind him; (3) signaled
to the officer with his hand at least four times, acknowledging the officer’s
presence behind him; (4) passed several locations where he could have safely
stopped prior to where he eventually stopped; and (5) told the officer, after
stopping, that “you don’t have to stop until you’re in a public place.” Viewing
the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, we conclude that a
rational trier of fact could have found, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the
defendant purposely neglected to stop when signaled to do so by a law
enforcement officer. See Seibel, 174 N.H. at 445.
We next address whether the trial court erred by allegedly determining
that the State was not required to prove that the defendant had specific intent
to resist arrest in order to convict him of resisting arrest. RSA 642:2 provides,
“A person is guilty of a misdemeanor when the person knowingly or purposely
3