THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0086, Altamir Nunes v. Aline Da Silva, the
court on December 19, 2024, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The plaintiff, Altamir Nunes, appeals a decision of the
Circuit Court (Hall, J.) dismissing his small claim complaint against the
defendant, Aline Da Silva, and awarding the defendant $9,750 on her
counterclaim, based upon the plaintiff’s failure to attend a hearing. We
construe the plaintiff’s brief to challenge both the trial court’s decision not to
strike the default on his motion for reconsideration, and its damages award to
the defendant. We affirm the trial court’s decision not to strike the default,
vacate its damages award, and remand for a hearing on damages.
We first address whether the trial court erred by declining to strike the
default. In a small claim, the trial court is required to issue judgment in favor
of the defendant if the plaintiff fails to attend, or in favor of the plaintiff if the
defendant fails to attend, either the pre-trial hearing or trial. Dist. Div. R.
4.4(b), 4.6(c). We will not disturb a decision denying a request to vacate a
default unless the trial court erred as a matter of law or unsustainably
exercised its discretion. Brito v. Ryan, 151 N.H. 635, 637 (2005). It is the
plaintiff’s burden on appeal to establish that the trial court reversibly erred.
See Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014).
The record establishes that the plaintiff did not attend a scheduled
hearing in the case. Accordingly, the trial court did not err by dismissing his
small claim complaint and entering judgment in favor of the defendant on her
counterclaim. Dist. Div. R. 4.4(b), 4.6(c). Although the plaintiff apologized in
his motion to reconsider for “the mistake regarding the scheduled time” of the
hearing, he did not otherwise explain why he had failed to attend the hearing.
Moreover, although the plaintiff requested in the motion that he be allowed to
“present the bill of sale signed by [the defendant] when she purchased the car,”
the existence and terms of the sale contract, which was the basis for both the
plaintiff’s small claim and the defendant’s counterclaim, do not appear to have
been in dispute. Even if the contract were disputed, the plaintiff failed to
explain why good cause or justice required the trial court to allow him to
introduce it notwithstanding his default. See Dist. Div. R. 1.1 (allowing trial
court to waive application of any rule as good cause appears and as justice
may require). Finally, although the plaintiff claimed in the motion “that New
Hampshire does not have a lemon law for used vehicles,” he failed to establish
why, even if true, that claim would compel the trial court to grant him a
hearing on the merits. Under these circumstances, we cannot conclude that
the trial court erred as a matter of law or unsustainably exercised its discretion
by declining to strike the default. See Brito, 151 N.H. at 637.
We next address whether the trial court erred by awarding the defendant
$9,750 on her counterclaim. In their briefs, the parties agree that in October
2022, they entered into a contract for the sale of a used car, that the defendant
paid the plaintiff an amount toward the purchase price at the time of the sale,
and that the parties agreed to an installment payment plan for the balance of
the sale price. The parties further agree that the defendant requested her
money back shortly after entering into the contract, and that the plaintiff
refused the defendant’s request. According to the plaintiff, the defendant failed
to pay anything toward the car other than the initial downpayment.
The plaintiff has appended to his brief documents that he represents are
the contract documents entered into by the parties, including a bill of sale
reflecting a total purchase price of $9,750. The defendant does not dispute the
authenticity of the contract documents provided by the plaintiff; however, in
her brief, she states that the purchase price under the contract was $10,000,
and that she paid $7,500 toward the purchase price at the time of the sale.
The defendant claims that she learned shortly after the sale that the car
needed a new transmission, that she requested either that the plaintiff refund
the money she had paid or, alternatively, that the remaining amount she owed
go toward the cost to replace the transmission, and that she in fact spent
$2,655 to replace the transmission.
A default ordinarily results in the admission of all well-pleaded
allegations of fact, requiring the trial court to assess damages upon proper
proof. See Cole v. Hobson, 143 N.H. 14, 16 (1998); cf. Douglas v. Douglas, 143
N.H. 419, 426 (1999) (discussing decrees pro confesso in equity proceedings).
Within the context of contracts, the goal of a damages award is to put the non-
breaching party in the same position that the party would have occupied but
for the breach. See Mentis Sciences v. Pittsburgh Networks, 173 N.H. 584, 588
(2020); Fassi v. Auto Wholesalers, 145 N.H. 404, 407 (2000) (upholding
damages for breach of warranty under RSA 382-A:2-714(2) (1994) to
purchasers of used car consisting of amount it would cost them to repair the
car “to satisfy the warranty for which they bargained,” observing that the award
“placed the plaintiffs in the position they would have enjoyed had the
defendant fully performed the contract”); see also RSA 382-A:2-714(2) (2011)
(setting forth general measure of damages to buyer of accepted goods for
breach of warranty under Uniform Commercial Code).
In this case, the award of $9,750 effectively returned the entire contract
price to the defendant, notwithstanding the following facts: (1) the defendant
does not dispute that she paid only a portion of the contract price; (2) the
2
defendant repaired the car, expending, according to her representations, only
$2,655 to repair it; and (3) the defendant was allowed to maintain title to and
possession of the car. Accordingly, the damages award appears to have placed
the defendant in a far better position than she would have occupied but for the
plaintiff’s breach, resulting in a significant windfall to her. Under these
circumstances, we vacate the damages award to the defendant, and remand for
a hearing limited to the issue of the damages incurred by the defendant as a
result of the plaintiff’s breach. See Cole, 143 N.H. at 16 (discussing limited
scope of damages hearing following entry of default).
Affirmed in part; vacated in
part; and remanded.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3