THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0714, In the Matter of Genevieve
Pimentel and Rui Pimentel, the court on November 24, 2025,
issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The respondent, Rui Pimentel, appeals a final decree entered
by the Circuit Court (Zaino, J.), following a hearing on the merits, in his divorce
from the petitioner, Genevieve Pimentel. He argues that the trial court erred by
denying his motion to dismiss the petition for lack of jurisdiction and by not
enforcing a divorce decree that he obtained from a court in Portugal while the
present case was pending. He further argues that the trial court erred by
determining the values of the marital home in New Hampshire and a separate
property in Portugal, and by not crediting him with expenditures he made
toward the properties. We affirm in part, vacate in part, and remand.
We first address the respondent’s arguments that the trial court erred by
not dismissing the case for lack of jurisdiction, and by not enforcing the divorce
decree he obtained from the court in Portugal. The respondent argues that the
Portuguese divorce decree, which he sought and obtained after the present
case began, effectively deprived the New Hampshire court of continuing
jurisdiction and should have been enforced. We disagree.
“Jurisdiction of the cause for divorce exists when it wholly arose or
accrued while the plaintiff was domiciled in the state, and not otherwise.” RSA
458:6 (2018). “A divorce obtained in another jurisdiction shall be of no force or
effect in this state, if both parties to the marriage were domiciled in this state
at the time the proceeding for the divorce was commenced.” RSA 459:1 (2018).
The term “jurisdiction” in RSA 459:1 includes not only “jurisdictions within the
United States, but also those of sovereign states existing outside of our
national borders.” In the Matter of Ramadan & Ramadan, 153 N.H. 226, 230
(2006) (applying RSA 459:1 to a divorce decree obtained in Lebanon).
In this case, the trial court found, and the respondent does not dispute,
that the parties moved to the United States from Portugal in 2014, initially
living with the petitioner’s parents for two years before purchasing the marital
home in Pelham, and that they had filed joint tax returns in the United States
in 2017, 2018, 2019, and 2020. The trial court further found that in her April
2021 divorce petition, the petitioner represented that the respondent was then
residing in the Pelham home, that the petitioner had a mailing address in a
different location in Pelham, that the petitioner had resided in New Hampshire
for seven years, and that irreconcilable differences had caused the irremediable
breakdown of the marriage. The respondent filed an answer admitting that he
was living in the Pelham home, that the wife had resided in New Hampshire for
seven years, and that irreconcilable differences had caused the breakdown of
the marriage, and requesting an equitable division of the parties’ property.
More than a year later, in July 2022, the respondent addressed a letter
to the court, which the clerk of court rejected as an improperly formatted
motion, requesting that the court “cancel” the divorce and allow the parties to
divorce in Portugal. In the letter, the respondent represented, “I live in New
Hampshire now,” but stated that he had filed for divorce in Portugal in 2022.
In February 2023, the respondent moved to dismiss, asserting that the
court in Portugal had issued a decree. The petitioner objected, asserting that
she had never been served with the Portuguese divorce and that the
respondent had procured the decree fraudulently. The trial court held a
hearing on the motion, at which the petitioner introduced evidence that (1)
although the respondent represented to the Portuguese court that he resided in
Portugal, he resided in Pelham and had represented that he was a Pelham
resident to an immigration court for the purpose of obtaining United States
citizenship; (2) the respondent disclosed the petitioner’s residential address to
the Portuguese court as a street address in Massachusetts where her employer,
and other employers, are located, despite knowing that she resided in Pelham;
(3) the petitioner was never, in fact, served with process in the Portuguese
divorce; and (4) the respondent did not notify the petitioner of the Portuguese
divorce decree until 60 days after it had become final. In response, the
respondent’s counsel made the following offer of proof: “So I was just
discussing with my client that he never represented to Portugal that he was a
resident of Portugal at that time of the filing of the divorce, or now. He’s
represented that he’s a U.S. citizen, that he resides in New Hampshire.”
In determining that it had jurisdiction, the trial court reasoned,
Both parties were living in New Hampshire when petitioner filed for
divorce [on] April 19, 2021. At that time, no other divorce
proceedings were filed in any other jurisdiction, the parties owned
a marital home in New Hampshire, and the cause for divorce,
irreconcilable differences, arose while the parties were domiciled in
New Hampshire based on the parties’ separation in 2020 when
they were living in New Hampshire.
Therefore, since the parties were domiciled in New
Hampshire when the husband filed for divorce in Portugal, the
Portugal divorce decree has no effect in New Hampshire under RSA
2
459:1, regardless of its validity in Portugal. See [Ramadan, 153
N.H. at 230].
On appeal, the respondent argues that, in determining the parties’ domicile,
the trial court erroneously focused solely on where they were living and failed
to consider whether they intended to make New Hampshire their home. See
Casey v. N.H. Sec’y of State, 173 N.H. 266, 274 (2020). He claims that
although “he was certainly present in New Hampshire, he had not intended to
make New Hampshire his home.” The evidence summarized above, however, is
more than sufficient to support the implied finding that both parties intended
to make New Hampshire their home. Because the evidence supports the trial
court’s determination that both parties “were domiciled in New Hampshire
when the husband filed for divorce in Portugal,” the Portuguese decree was of
no force or effect, RSA 459:1, and we need not address the respondent’s
argument that the trial court erred by declining to enforce the Portuguese
decree under principles of comity, see Ramadan, 153 N.H. at 230-31 (holding
that, notwithstanding comity argument, RSA 459:1 precluded enforcement of
Lebanese divorce decree as a matter of law).
We next address the respondent’s arguments challenging the trial court’s
division of property. The trial court has broad discretion in fashioning a final
divorce decree. In the Matter of Spenard & Spenard, 167 N.H. 1, 3 (2014). Its
discretion includes decisions concerning property distribution. Id. We will not
overturn the trial court’s rulings on such matters absent an unsustainable
exercise of discretion, reviewing the record only to determine whether it
contains an objective basis to sustain the court’s discretionary judgments. Id.
If the trial court could reasonably have reached its findings on the evidence
before it, they will stand. Id. We defer to the trial court’s judgment in
evaluating the credibility of the witnesses and determining the weight of the
evidence presented. In the Matter of Aube & Aube, 158 N.H. 459, 465 (2009).
RSA 458:16-a, II (2018) requires the trial court to divide marital property,
including marital debt, see Maldini v. Maldini, 168 N.H. 191, 195 (2015), in a
manner that is equitable, see In the Matter of Sarvela & Sarvela, 154 N.H. 426,
431 (2006). When dividing marital property, the court must presume that an
equal division is equitable unless it determines, after considering one or more
statutory factors, that an equal division would not be equitable or appropriate.
RSA 458:16-a, II; Sarvela, 154 N.H. at 430-31. The court is not required to
divide the property by some mechanical formula, but in a manner that it deems
just based on the evidence and the equities. Sarvela, 154 N.H. at 431.
The parties own two parcels of real property, the marital home in
Pelham, secured by a mortgage in the petitioner’s name, in which the
respondent had resided since the parties’ separation, and a property in
Portugal secured by a mortgage in the respondent’s name. The trial court
awarded both properties to the respondent but divided the equity in the
3