THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0468, State of New Hampshire v. Heidi
Holt, the court on October 9, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Heidi Holt, appeals her convictions in the
Circuit Court (Tenney, J.) of theft by willful concealment. See RSA 637:3-a
(2016). She argues that the trial court erred in allowing the State to proceed to
trial, allegedly without providing complete discovery, including the witness list
and all available video evidence. We affirm.
“The trial court has broad discretion in managing the proceedings before
it, including pre-trial discovery.” State v. Larose, 157 N.H. 28, 39 (2008)
(quotation and citation omitted). We will not disturb the trial court’s decision
unless the defendant demonstrates that it was clearly unreasonable to the
prejudice of her case. Id. The record shows that, during her cross-
examination of the State’s first witness, the defendant, who was self-
represented at trial, asked the court, “Is there a way that I can at least get the
rest of the file and the footage?” The trial court asked the prosecutor to
address the defendant’s apparent discovery concern. The prosecutor explained
that he sent the defendant her discovery by email and told her that if she
wanted to review any video footage, she should “make arrangements” with him.
According to the prosecutor, the defendant never contacted him prior to trial.
The prosecutor observed that the defendant did not bring with her to
trial all the discovery that he sent her, but represented to the court that
“there’s nothing else in the file that she hasn’t seen” and that “the State is not
utilizing information that it has that she doesn’t have here today.” After
hearing from both parties, the court allowed the prosecutor to proceed.
Based upon this record, we cannot conclude that the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion in allowing the prosecutor to proceed
with the trial. The record fails to show that the defendant raised in the trial
court any issue regarding the witness list. Accordingly, this issue is not
preserved for our review. See State v. Batista-Salva, 171 N.H. 818, 822 (2019);
see also In the Matter of Birmingham & Birmingham, 154 N.H. 51, 56 (2006)
(self-represented litigants are bound by the same procedural rules that govern
parties represented by counsel).
The defendant’s constitutional arguments were not preserved, see id., are
not adequately briefed, see State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 48 (2003), and
warrant no further discussion, see Keenan v. Fearon, 130 N.H. 494, 499 (1988)
(“off-hand invocations” of constitutional rights supported by neither argument
nor authority warrant no extended consideration).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, and Gould, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2