THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0254, Michael L. McLaughlin v. J. Martin
McLaughlin, the court on October 7, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The
defendant, J. Martin McLaughlin, appeals an order of the Superior Court
(Colburn, J.) imposing a constructive trust in favor of the plaintiff, Michael L.
McLaughlin, over fifty percent of the shares of McLaughlin Moving Company,
Inc. (MMCI or the company). On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial
court erred in determining that: (1) clear and convincing evidence supported
the imposition of the constructive trust; and (2) the statute of limitations did
not bar the plaintiff’s action. See RSA 508:4 (2010). We affirm.
I. Facts
The trial court found, or the record otherwise supports, the following
facts. The plaintiff and the defendant are brothers. Their grandfather started
a moving company during the 1930s. John H. McLaughlin (John H.) — the
father of the plaintiff and defendant — became the owner of this moving
company after the grandfather passed away.
Then, while the parties were children, John H. acquired several other
moving-related companies. In the 1980s, John H. transferred ownership of
these companies to the plaintiff and the defendant. Some of these companies
were consolidated into a larger company called McLaughlin Transportation
Systems, Inc. (MTSI). The plaintiff and the defendant jointly own MTSI.
This case concerns a dispute between the plaintiff and the defendant
over the ownership of MMCI, another family company. In 1973, the defendant
signed a purchase and sale agreement to acquire this Portsmouth-based
company from third-party sellers.
The plaintiff, however, recalled that he, the defendant, and John H.
entered into an oral agreement prior to the purchase. Pursuant to this
agreement, John H. purchased the company for his sons, placed ownership
under the defendant’s name because the plaintiff was a minor at the time, and
the defendant agreed to distribute the plaintiff’s shares at some point in the
future.
During the following decades, the companies remained separate on paper
but operated as a single entity. The plaintiff managed the operations side of
both companies, and the defendant managed the financial aspects. The
companies shared employees, insurance policies, and technology and
advertising services. Based upon this operating model and the oral agreement,
the plaintiff believed that he owned fifty percent of MMCI. In 2019, however, a
friend informed him that the defendant claimed one hundred percent
ownership of MMCI.
In July 2020, the plaintiff filed a complaint in superior court against the
defendant claiming, among other things, that the defendant’s retention of one
hundred percent of the company constituted unjust enrichment and seeking
the imposition of a constructive trust over fifty percent of MMCI’s stock. The
defendant moved to dismiss all claims. As relevant to this appeal, the trial
court denied the motion with respect to the plaintiff’s claim seeking the
imposition of a constructive trust. The defendant subsequently moved for
summary judgment and later for partial summary judgment. The trial court
denied both motions.
In November 2023, the trial court held an eight-day trial and empaneled
a jury to issue an advisory verdict with respect to, as relevant here, the unjust
enrichment claim that sought a constructive trust as a remedy. See RSA
491:16 (2010). The jury unanimously issued an advisory verdict in favor of the
plaintiff on this claim. The plaintiff filed a motion to adopt the advisory jury
verdict, while the defendant moved to set it aside.
The trial court issued an order imposing a constructive trust in favor of
the plaintiff over fifty percent of the company’s shares in April 2024.
Specifically, the trial court ruled that the plaintiff established the three
necessary elements of a constructive trust by clear and convincing evidence.
The trial court further ruled that no statute of limitations defense applied
because the plaintiff had proven by a preponderance of the evidence that he did
not discover or have the reasonable opportunity to discover the defendant’s
claim of complete ownership of MMCI until 2019.
The defendant subsequently filed a motion for partial reconsideration, to
which the plaintiff objected. The defendant also filed a motion for clarification
and, alternatively, to stay the order. Before the court ruled on these motions,
the defendant filed an appeal with this court. The trial court subsequently
denied the motion for partial reconsideration and granted the motion to stay
the order during the pendency of the appeal.
2
II. Analysis
A. Constructive Trust
We first address the defendant’s argument that the trial court erred by
finding that clear and convincing evidence supported the imposition of a
constructive trust in favor of the plaintiff over fifty percent of MMCI’s shares.
We review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a matter of law. Salisbury v.
Lowe, 140 N.H. 82, 83 (1995). We will uphold the findings and rulings of the
trial court unless they are lacking in evidentiary support or tainted by error of
law. In re Estate of Couture, 166 N.H. 101, 113 (2014).
It is within the trier of fact’s province to determine the weight to be
accorded the evidence presented. Salisbury, 140 N.H. at 83. Inquiry into the
weight of evidence is treated as a matter of fact. Id. We view the evidence in
the light most favorable to the plaintiff. In re Estate of Couture, 166 N.H. at
113. Our task is to determine whether a reasonable person could reach the
same conclusion as the trial court on the basis of the evidence presented. See
Shaka v. Shaka, 120 N.H. 780, 782 (1980).
No rigid requirements exist for imposing a constructive trust. Elter-
Nodvin v. Nodvin, 163 N.H. 678, 681 (2012). Rather, a constructive trust may
be imposed when clear and convincing evidence shows that a confidential
relationship existed between two people, that one of them transferred property
to the other, and that the person receiving the property would be unjustly
enriched by retaining the property, regardless of whether the person obtained
the property honestly. Id. The principle rests upon the doctrine that
restitution will be compelled to prevent unjust enrichment. Patey v. Peaslee,
101 N.H. 26, 29 (1957). On appeal, the parties’ dispute focuses on the trial
court’s findings and rulings with respect to the second and third elements. We
address these in turn.
1. The Oral Agreement
First, we consider whether the trial court correctly determined that clear
and convincing evidence established that John H. transferred property to the
plaintiff and defendant by entering into an oral agreement to purchase MMCI
for them with the intent that the defendant would temporarily reserve fifty
percent of the shares of MMCI to be distributed to the plaintiff in the future.
The defendant asserts that the record contained insufficient evidence to
support the trial court’s finding that the oral agreement existed. After
reviewing all the evidence in the record, we disagree.
In its order, the trial court determined that both direct evidence and
“significant circumstantial evidence” supported the existence of the agreement.
The trial court found that the “plaintiff credibly testified that in 1973, when he
3