THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
Case No. 2024-0439
Citation: State v. Trueman, 2026 N.H. 35
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
RICHARD TRUEMAN
Argued: April 7, 2026
Opinion Issued: September 24, 2026
John M. Formella, attorney general, and Anthony J. Galdieri, solicitor
general (Robert L. Baldridge, assistant attorney general, on the brief and
orally), for the State.
Pamela E. Phelan, senior assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
GOULD, J.
[¶1] The defendant, Richard Trueman, appeals his conviction, following a
jury trial in Superior Court (Will, J.), of selling a controlled drug resulting in
death, see RSA 318-B:26, IX (2025). We reverse and remand.
I. Statement of Facts
[¶2] The jury could have found the following facts. On September 29,
2020, the victim repeatedly attempted to communicate with the defendant
through Facebook Messenger. The communications began at 10:55 a.m. when
the victim attempted to call the defendant through Facebook Messenger. The
defendant did not answer. The victim attempted four more calls to the
defendant over the course of five minutes that went unanswered.
[¶3] Around 11:00 a.m., the victim asked his friend and co-worker (the
driver) for a ride to conduct errands in Rochester before their work shifts. The
victim offered twenty dollars to the driver for his help. The driver agreed, and
the victim asked him “how quick can you get here?” The driver told the victim
that he could leave right away.
[¶4] Between 11:00 and 11:02, the victim messaged “Yo,” “Times [sic] not
on my side,” and “U in roch[ester]” to the defendant. In the next fifteen
minutes, the victim attempted seven calls to the defendant that went
unanswered. During that time, the victim also messaged the defendant
“Duuuude” and “Dude your [sic] active, answer meeeee.”
[¶5] Around 11:30, the driver picked up the victim in Dover. The victim
then renewed his efforts to communicate with the defendant. Between 11:30
and 11:37, the victim attempted twenty-eight calls to the defendant. At 11:35,
the victim messaged “Can u call me bud” to the defendant. At 11:39, the
victim reached the defendant in a call that lasted 45 seconds. The driver
overheard this call though he did not hear the substance of the conversation.
At 11:42, the victim messaged the defendant, “Do u kno [sic] how long it will
be?” and eight minutes later, “Just want to kno [sic] how long man.” The
victim attempted another five calls to the defendant around this time. The
driver and the victim arrived at a supermarket at around 11:45, and the victim
entered the store.
[¶6] After ten to fifteen minutes in the supermarket, the victim returned,
gave the driver twenty dollars, and directed the driver to drive him to a location
on Winter Street in Rochester. The location was about one block away from the
defendant’s home on Winter Street. At 11:57, the victim messaged the
defendant, “At least tell me how long bro, I’ll give u 60 for a ticket bro.” At
12:00 p.m., the defendant messaged the victim, “I am ready.” At about the
same time, the driver and the victim arrived at the location on Winter Street
and the victim left the car. Two minutes later, the victim completed an eighty-
eight second call to the defendant. At 12:08, the victim attempted another call
to the defendant, and a minute and a half later the victim completed a sixty-
four second call to the defendant. The victim returned to the car at around
12:20.
2
[¶7] The driver set off for work with the victim. A few minutes later, the
driver heard the victim “snort” what the driver assumed to be heroin. The
victim began slurring his words and slumping over. Once the driver and the
victim arrived at work, the victim’s eyes began rolling back in his head. The
victim became unresponsive and the driver sought emergency medical
attention. The victim was transported to a hospital and died on October 1,
2020, from complications caused by fentanyl toxicity. Subsequent
investigation by police revealed that the victim’s wallet contained a baggie filled
with 0.425 grams of material containing fentanyl.
[¶8] On July 15, 2021, a Strafford County grand jury indicted the
defendant for knowingly dispensing fentanyl to the victim who died as a result
of inhaling that drug. The defendant was tried before a jury in April 2024. The
jury found the defendant guilty, and the defendant now appeals.
II. Analysis
[¶9] On appeal, the defendant argues that: (1) the trial court erred in
admitting otherwise inadmissible evidence pursuant to the opening the door
specific contradiction doctrine and (2) there was insufficient evidence to
support his conviction. The State argues that the trial court did not err in its
evidentiary ruling, but if there were any error it was harmless beyond a
reasonable doubt. It also argues that the evidence was sufficient to convict the
defendant. We address each issue in turn.
A. 404(b) Evidence
[¶10] Rule 404(b)(1) provides:
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove
the character of a person in order to show that the person acted in
conformity therewith. It may, however, be admissible for other
purposes, such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent,
preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, or absence of mistake or
accident.
N.H. R. Ev. 404(b)(1). The purpose of Rule 404(b) “is to ensure that the
defendant is tried on the merits of the crime as charged and to prevent a
conviction based upon evidence of other crimes or wrongs.” State v. Rouleau,
176 N.H. 400, 407 (2024), 2024 N.H. 2, ¶19 (quotation omitted).
[¶11] Before trial, the defendant moved, pursuant to New Hampshire
Rule of Evidence 404(b), to, among other things, exclude Facebook account
communications suggesting that the defendant sold drugs to third parties
other than the victim. Following a hearing, the trial court granted the
defendant’s motion over the State’s objection. The court thereafter denied the
3
State’s motion to reconsider. In its order denying reconsideration, the trial
court concluded that the probative value of the third-party drug transactions
was low “and the unfair prejudice of evidence tending to show that the
defendant deals drugs is extremely high, through the very significant risk that
the jury would convict the defendant based on propensity or their belief that he
is guilty of any number of other crimes.” The court’s ruling excluding the
evidence is not at issue on appeal.
[¶12] On the first day of trial, the driver, a witness for the State,
acknowledged on cross-examination that on the day the victim overdosed, the
police did not search his car and did not ask for his fingerprints. Later, a
Dover Police Department officer testified on cross-examination that he did not
ask the driver for consent to search his car and did not attempt to obtain a
warrant to search the car. The officer also acknowledged that he did not
request that the baggie found in the victim’s wallet be tested for fingerprints or
DNA. Finally, the officer confirmed that he did not take any pictures of the
driver’s car or the victim’s wallet. The cross-examinations of the driver and the
officer supported the defendant’s opening statement which forecast that the
evidence would show that the police did not thoroughly search the driver’s car
or home and that the police did not properly collect evidence for fingerprint or
DNA testing.
[¶13] On the second day of trial, the State moved to admit some of the
evidence previously excluded by the trial court, arguing that the defendant had
opened the door to the introduction of testimony regarding the defendant’s
drug-sales-related Facebook communications with third parties. In particular,
the State argued that defense counsel’s cross-examination of the driver and the
officer created a misleading impression that the police investigation was not
thorough. The State also observed that “there were references in Defense
counsel’s opening statement that would have opened the door” because the
opening statement “already brought into view the sufficiency of the
investigation into [the driver].”
[¶14] The State asked the trial court to admit testimony that the police
viewed the defendant’s Facebook communications with third parties regarding
drug sales, without admitting the communications themselves, to “rebut the
implied charge of an insufficient police investigation.” The State observed that
on September 30, 2020, the police obtained access to the victim’s phone which
included his communications with the defendant from the previous day. These
communications caused the police to obtain search warrants to obtain the
defendant’s Facebook account records that showed the defendant’s
involvement with other drug sales. The police did not receive these records
until December 14, 2020, however, more than two months after the victim’s
death.
4
[¶15] The trial court ruled that this evidence was “admissible pursuant to
the specific contradiction theory” because it “is pertinent to rebutting at least
one strand of the defense, which is that the investigation was not thorough.”
The court observed that a defense theme had emerged that there was a poor
investigation into the driver despite the existence of reasons why “the
investigation didn’t focus on [the driver] after September 29th.” The court did
not admit the communications themselves, but permitted the State to elicit
testimony from a detective summarizing their substance.
[¶16] The detective testified:
I focused on the communications of September 29th, 2020 . . .
[a]nd looking at those communications, I could see
communications that were exchanges of controlled drugs,
discussion about the sale of controlled — sorry — discussions
about the — the price of controlled drugs, discussions about the
types of controlled drugs . . . between Mr. Trueman and other
people.
The witness later testified that “[t]here were communications about exchanges
of controlled drugs, prices, quantity, and slang between . . . the
scottytrueman24 account, and . . . other parties.” As part of its closing
argument, the State contended:
How do we know that [the detective] did a full and complete
investigation in this case is that [sic] when he received the
Facebook search warrant for the second account, he also observed
conversations with third parties about controlled drugs — not
marijuana, guys. Other controlled drugs. Quantities, prices, and
exchanges. That’s how we know that the Dover Police Department
did a thorough and complete investigation. That’s how they could
rule out [the driver].
[¶17] The trial court issued the following jury instruction after closing
arguments:
You heard testimony about messages law enforcement obtained
through a search warrant from a Facebook account the State
contends belongs to the Defendant. The testimony included
general descriptions of messages in which the owner of the account
and third parties had conversations that law enforcement officers
interpreted as concerning drug transactions. I now instruct you
that this testimony is admitted for the limited purpose of rebutting
a claim that law enforcement did not conduct a thorough
investigation in this case. As with all testimony, you are free to
accept it or reject it. But if you accept any or all of it, you may
5
consider this evidence only for that limited purpose and may not
consider it for any other purpose, such as, for example, as tending
to prove that the Defendant engaged in drug transactions with
third parties unrelated to the case.
[¶18] On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred by
admitting the otherwise inadmissible Rule 404(b) evidence under the specific
contradiction doctrine. The defendant argues that his counsel did not create a
misleading impression and that the evidence of other communications about
the sale of controlled drugs did not counter any such impression. The State
disagrees.
[¶19] We review a trial court’s decision regarding the admissibility of
evidence under the opening the door doctrine pursuant to the unsustainable
exercise of discretion standard. State v. Roman, 176 N.H. 367, 370 (2023). To
prevail, the defendant must show that the trial court’s decision was clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Id. at 371.
[¶20] The opening the door doctrine comprises two variants. See id. The
first, which we have described as the doctrine of “curative admissibility,” arises
when inadmissible prejudicial evidence has been erroneously admitted by one
party, and the opposing party seeks to introduce otherwise inadmissible
evidence to counter the prejudice. See id. The second, which we have
described as the doctrine of “specific contradiction,” applies more broadly to
situations in which a party introduces admissible evidence that creates a
misleading advantage for that party, and the opposing party is then permitted
to introduce previously suppressed or otherwise inadmissible evidence to
counter the misleading advantage. Id. With respect to both variants, the fact
that the “door has been opened” does not permit all evidence to “pass through”
because the doctrine is remedial and is intended to prevent unfair prejudice.
See id. The doctrine is not to be subverted into a mechanism for the wholesale
introduction of all prejudicial evidence on the subject as to which the door has
been opened. See id.
[¶21] In this case, as reflected above, the trial court relied on the specific
contradiction variant of the doctrine to admit the Rule 404(b) evidence. The
court gave as its rationale that the evidence rebutted a “strand of the defense,
which is that the investigation was not thorough.” We disagree that the
opening statement and the testimony created a misleading advantage and that
the evidence was probative of whether the investigation was thorough. The
existence of a misleading advantage is a prerequisite to admitting evidence
under the specific contradiction doctrine. Here, the opening statement and
cross-examination of the driver established that the police did not conduct
certain investigative steps to eliminate the driver as the source of the fentanyl.
There was nothing misleading about the opening statement and evidence;
indeed, they were accurate.
6
[¶22] The trial court’s ruling admitting the evidence of third party, drug-
related communications under the specific contradiction doctrine was error for
three reasons. First, as discussed above, there was no misleading advantage
to counteract. Second, the police did not obtain the Facebook communications
with the other parties until December 14, 2020, which means the
communications could not have informed the police’s decision to focus
exclusively on the defendant early in the investigation. Third, the State made a
proffer to the trial court that on September 30 police received the Facebook
communications between the defendant and the victim. This proffer arguably
explained why the police focused their investigation on the defendant such that
the introduction of the otherwise inadmissible Rule 404(b) evidence was
unnecessary. See State v. Trempe, 140 N.H. 95, 99 (1995) (concluding that
introducing Rule 404(b) evidence was unnecessary to correct a misleading
impression because the prosecutor could have elicited other admissible
testimony to correct the impression); see also State v. Morrill, 154 N.H. 547,
552 (2006) (concluding that the State had presented evidence which placed any
misleading evidence into the proper context such that it was improper to admit
inadmissible hearsay testimony). As the trial court observed in its ruling, the
police’s discovery on September 30, 2020 of the victim’s communications with
the defendant from September 29, “steered . . . law enforcement to the
Defendant and his Facebook account,” and therefore “there was a reason not to
pursue [a theory regarding the Driver].” Accordingly, we hold that the trial
court misapplied the specific contradiction doctrine in admitting the evidence
and thereby unsustainably exercised its discretion.
[¶23] We turn now to the State’s argument that any error in admitting
the evidence was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. “To establish harmless
error, the State must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the error did not
affect the verdict.” Rouleau, 176 N.H. at 407, 2024 N.H. 2, ¶20. “To determine
whether the State has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that an error did not
affect the verdict, we must evaluate the totality of the circumstances at
trial.” Id.
The factors that we consider in assessing whether an error did not
affect the verdict include, but are not limited to: (1) the strength of
the State’s case; (2) whether the admitted or excluded evidence is
cumulative or inconsequential in relation to the strength of
the State’s case; (3) the frequency of the error; (4) the presence or
absence of evidence corroborating or contradicting the erroneously
admitted or excluded evidence; (5) the nature of the defense; (6) the
circumstances in which the evidence was introduced at trial; (7)
whether the court took any curative steps; (8) whether the evidence
is of an inflammatory nature; and (9) whether the other evidence of
the defendant’s guilt is of an overwhelming nature.
7
Id. at 407-08, 2024 N.H. 2, ¶21. “No one factor is dispositive.” Id. at 408,
2024 N.H. 2, ¶21. “We may consider factors not listed above, and not all
factors may be implicated in a given case.” Id.
[¶24] The State argues that any error in admitting the challenged
evidence is harmless because its case against the defendant was strong, the
challenged evidence was not inflammatory or prejudicial, and any unfair
prejudice was eliminated by the trial court’s jury instruction. We disagree.
[¶25] We conclude that this case does not present one of “the rare
instance[s] of a harmless 404(b) error.” State v. Smith, 141 N.H. 271, 278
(1996). The evidence proving that the defendant sold the fentanyl to the victim,
while sufficient to convict the defendant as discussed below, was entirely
circumstantial. See State v. Woodbury, 124 N.H. 218, 222 (1983) (finding error
not harmless where the other evidence in the case was circumstantial).
Indeed, there was no direct evidence that the defendant dispensed the fentanyl
to the victim or that the defendant was even in Rochester at the time the victim
was there. The admission of evidence showing the defendant’s engaging in
unrelated drug sales on the date the victim consumed the drug created a
substantial risk that the jury would construe the circumstantial evidence as
establishing the defendant’s guilt. This evidence unfairly transformed the
State’s case from one in which there was a steady stream of urgent but non-
specific messages from the victim to the defendant after which the victim met
with the defendant, and then overdosed into one in which the victim was
urgently messaging a drug dealer, met with him, and died shortly thereafter
from an overdose. Without the Rule 404(b) evidence, the evidence of the
defendant’s guilt was not overwhelming.
[¶26] For the same reason, the challenged evidence was also undoubtedly
prejudicial. See State v. Pelkey, 145 N.H. 133, 136 (2000) (finding that
evidence showing that the defendant was a drug dealer had “extreme”
“potential for prejudice”). Indeed, the trial court had described the “extremely
high” risk of unfair prejudice from this evidence in its pretrial order denying
reconsideration of its ruling excluding the evidence.
[¶27] Nor was the trial court’s jury instruction sufficient to cure the
prejudicial effect of the challenged evidence. As we have noted, there are
bounds on the efficacy of limiting instructions to prevent prejudice from the
introduction of other acts evidence tending to show a propensity. See State v.
Montgomery, 178 N.H. ___, ___ (2026), 2026 N.H. 24 ¶27 (concluding that
“there was a significant risk that the jury would draw [an] impermissible
inference” from propensity evidence); Pelkey, 145 N.H. at 136-37 (concluding
that evidence showing that the defendant was a drug dealer was “odious” such
that “cautionary or limiting instructions would not have been able to erase the
taint of the prejudicial evidence”). Here, the instruction was insufficient to
mitigate the risk that the jury would consider the evidence for the purpose of
8
establishing that because the defendant engaged in drug transactions with
third parties, he sold the drug to the victim in this case. Furthermore, the
efficacy of the limiting instruction was further diminished by the lack of a
nexus between the stated purpose of the evidence (rebuttal of the argument
that the early investigation prematurely excluded other suspects) and the date
on which the police received the evidence. The instruction, moreover, was
internally inconsistent because the “limited purpose” for which the evidence
was admitted was to establish that because the defendant was a drug dealer it
was reasonable for the police to focus upon him as the principal suspect. If the
jury could not infer from the evidence that “the Defendant engaged in drug
transactions with third parties” as the trial court instructed, however, it was
irrelevant to the reasonableness of singling out the defendant as the principal
suspect.
[¶28] We also note that the challenged evidence was referred to twice by
the detective and referenced in the State’s closing argument. See Rouleau, 176
N.H. at 407-08, 2024 N.H. 2, ¶21 (noting that “the frequency of the error” is a
factor we consider).
[¶29] Considering the above factors, we cannot conclude beyond a
reasonable doubt that the admission of the challenged evidence did not affect
the verdict. See State v. LaBranche, 118 N.H. 176, 180 (1978) (“The State here
should not have the windfall of having the jury be influenced by evidence
against a defendant which, as a matter of law, they should not consider but
which they cannot put out of their minds.” (quotation omitted)). Therefore, the
defendant’s conviction is reversed and the case remanded.
B. Sufficiency of the Evidence
[¶30] We next address the defendant’s argument that the circumstantial
evidence was insufficient to support his conviction and thus “[n]o reasonable
jury could have found that the evidence proved beyond a reasonable doubt that
he supplied [the victim] with the fentanyl that caused his death.” If the
defendant were to prevail on this argument, the Double Jeopardy Clauses of
the State and Federal Constitutions would bar a second trial. See State v. Ojo,
166 N.H. 95, 98 (2014); Burks v. United States, 437 U.S. 1, 18 (1978).
[¶31] We begin by observing that there is a difference between our
assessment of whether an error is harmless and whether the evidence is
sufficient to support a conviction. While in both circumstances we review all
the evidence in the record, we do so for different purposes and within differing
legal frameworks. In the harmless error context, we review the record to
determine “whether the State has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that an
error did not affect the verdict.” Rouleau, 176 N.H. at 407, 2024 N.H. 2, ¶20.
We do not view the evidence in the light most favorable to the State as part of
this review; instead we “evaluate the totality of the circumstances at trial.” Id.
9
In contrast, when considering sufficiency of the evidence challenges, we
objectively review the entire record to determine whether a rational jury could
have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, considering the evidence, and all
reasonable inferences drawn therefrom, in the light most favorable to the State.
State v. Seibel, 174 N.H. 440, 445 (2021).
[¶32] In reviewing the sufficiency of the evidence, we examine each item
of evidence in the context of the entire case, and not in isolation. Id. The trier
of fact may draw reasonable inferences from facts proved as well as from facts
found as the result of other inferences, provided they can be reasonably drawn
therefrom. Id. Because the defendant chose to present a case, we review the
entire trial record to determine the sufficiency of the evidence. Id. The
defendant bears the burden of proving that the evidence was insufficient to
prove guilt. Id. A challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence raises a question
of law, which we review de novo. Id.
[¶33] If the evidence presented at trial consists of both direct and
circumstantial evidence, we apply the standard set forth above and uphold the
verdict unless no rational trier of fact could have found guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt. Id. If, however, the record contains only circumstantial
evidence as to an element of the offense, the defendant must establish that the
evidence fails to exclude all reasonable conclusions except guilt. See id.
Consistent with the standard of proof in criminal cases, the proper analysis is
not whether the evidence excludes every possible conclusion consistent with
innocence but whether it has excluded all reasonable conclusions other than
guilt. See id. It is not enough that the defendant has suggested another
possible hypothesis that could explain the events in an exculpatory fashion.
Id. Rather, we evaluate the evidence in the light most favorable to the State
and determine whether the alternative hypothesis offered by the defendant is
sufficiently reasonable that a rational trier of fact could not have found proof of
guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Id. Where solely circumstantial evidence is
at issue, the critical question is whether, even assuming all credibility
resolutions in favor of the State, the inferential chain of circumstances is of
sufficient strength that guilt is the sole rational conclusion. Id.
[¶34] In this case, because the record contains only circumstantial
evidence that the defendant provided the fentanyl to the victim, the defendant
must establish that the evidence fails to exclude all reasonable conclusions
except guilt. See id. Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the
State, we conclude that the prosecution established that: (1) the victim used
illegal drugs; (2) the victim was trying to contact the defendant on dozens of
occasions within the space of an hour and ten minutes; (3) the victim
succeeded in reaching the defendant and proposed to purchase a “ticket” from
the defendant; (4) the victim was let off by the driver a block from the
defendant’s home and returned approximately twenty minutes later; (5) upon
returning to the driver’s vehicle the victim “snorted” a substance and shortly
10
thereafter began exhibiting signs of an overdose; (6) the police found a
substance containing fentanyl in the victim’s wallet; and (7) the victim died as
a result of fentanyl toxicity. This evidence permitted a rational jury to have
found proof of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
[¶35] The defendant’s alternative theories do not change this conclusion.
For example, the defendant argues that the evidence did not exclude “the
reasonable possibility that someone other than [the defendant] supplied [the
victim] with the drugs.” This argument does not view the evidence in the light
most favorable to the State as we must in this context. Considering the
evidence in this light, the jury could rationally conclude that the theoretical
possibility that the victim obtained the fentanyl elsewhere did not create a
reasonable doubt of the defendant’s guilt. The defendant’s other theories fare
no better based upon the evidence, when viewed in the light most favorable to
the State. Accordingly, we hold that the defendant has not met his burden of
demonstrating that the evidence was insufficient to prove guilt.
Reversed and remanded.
DONOVAN and COUNTWAY, JJ., concurred; MACDONALD, C.J., sat for
oral argument but did not participate in the final vote.
11