THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0419, In the Matter of Taylor Coyne and
Ashley Blanchfield, the court on October 30, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The respondent, Ashley Blanchfield (Mother), appeals an
order of the Circuit Court (Pendleton, J.) ruling that it retains exclusive,
continuing jurisdiction over a child custody matter between Mother and the
petitioner, Taylor Coyne (Father). We affirm.
I. Background
The trial court found the following facts, or they are supported by the
record. Mother and Father are unmarried and have two children who were
born in 2020. In December 2021, the parties filed a joint stipulation “regarding
relocation and parenting” with the trial court, in which the parties agreed,
among other things, to allow Mother to relocate to Maine with the children for
work purposes. (Capitalization and bolding omitted.) The stipulation provides:
“Both Parties agree that New Hampshire shall maintain jurisdiction over this
matter during the Mother’s relocation and while she resides in Maine for a
minimum of 6 months to one year.” The trial court approved the stipulation in
December 2021 (hereinafter, the relocation order), and Mother moved to Maine
with the children. In January 2023, the court entered a final uniform support
order and a final parenting plan.
In August 2023, Mother filed an affidavit and request to register a foreign
child custody order (the Maine petition) with the Maine District Court pursuant
to Maine’s Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction and Enforcement Act (UCCJEA).
Mother represented that the Maine court had jurisdiction to modify the foreign
child custody order because “[t]he court of the other state has determined that
it no longer has exclusive, continuing jurisdiction . . . or that a Maine court
would be a more convenient forum.” Mother moved to hold Father in contempt
under the final parenting plan and to modify the final plan. Father moved to
dismiss the Maine petition, arguing that the court lacked jurisdiction over the
final parenting plan because New Hampshire maintains exclusive, continuing
jurisdiction over this case.
Following a hearing, the Maine court granted the motion to dismiss. The
court stated that Maine law requires that the New Hampshire court must
determine that it no longer has exclusive, continuing jurisdiction or that a
Maine court would be a more appropriate forum and, in this case, “the New
Hampshire court has not made any such determinations.” The Maine court
found that “[t]he fact that the parties agreed in December 2021 that the New
Hampshire court’s jurisdiction would continue for ‘six months to a year’ does
not surpass or override the requirements of the UCCJEA.” Accordingly, the
court dismissed the Maine petition for lack of jurisdiction.
Mother then filed a petition in the New Hampshire trial court asking it to
relinquish jurisdiction over this case to Maine pursuant to RSA chapter 458-A
(2018). Mother asked the court to confirm that the relocation order
relinquished the court’s jurisdiction over this matter at the end of one year or,
alternatively, to conclude that New Hampshire is an inconvenient forum and
that Maine is a more appropriate forum pursuant to RSA 458-A:18. After
briefing and argument on the issue, the trial court concluded that New
Hampshire retains exclusive, continuing jurisdiction over this matter and that
New Hampshire is not an inconvenient forum. Mother unsuccessfully moved
for reconsideration. This appeal followed.
II. Analysis
Mother argues that the trial court: (1) erred in concluding that New
Hampshire continues to maintain exclusive, continuing jurisdiction over this
matter, see RSA 458-A:13; and (2) unsustainably exercised its discretion by
failing to conclude that New Hampshire is an inconvenient forum and that
Maine is a more appropriate forum, see RSA 458-A:18. We address these
arguments in turn.
A. Exclusive, Continuing Jurisdiction
The task of avoiding jurisdictional conflicts begins with an initial
determination as to which state maintains exclusive, continuing jurisdiction
over child custody determinations. In the Matter of McAndrews & Woodson,
171 N.H. 214, 218 (2018). RSA 458-A:13, I, provides:
I. Except as otherwise provided in RSA 458-A:15, a court of this
state which has made a child-custody determination consistent
with RSA 458-A:12 or RSA 458-A:14 has exclusive, continuing
jurisdiction over the determination until:
(a) A court of this state determines that neither the child, nor
the child and one parent, nor the child and a person acting as a
parent have a significant connection with this state and that
substantial evidence is no longer available in this state
2
concerning the child’s care, protection, training, and personal
relationships; or
(b) A court of this state or a court of another state determines
that the child, the child’s parents, and any person acting as a
parent do not presently reside in this state.
The use of the phrase “[a] court of this state” in subsection (a) makes it clear
that the original decree state is the sole determinant of whether jurisdiction
continues under that subsection. See In the Matter of Yaman & Yaman, 167
N.H. 82, 88 (2014). A party seeking to modify a custody determination under
that subsection must obtain an order from the original decree state stating that
it no longer has jurisdiction. See id.
New Hampshire initially had exclusive, continuing jurisdiction over this
matter because a court of this state made a child custody determination, and
Father resides here. See RSA 458-A:13, I. Mother argues, however, that New
Hampshire no longer maintains exclusive, continuing jurisdiction because the
trial court relinquished jurisdiction over this matter pursuant to the terms of
the relocation order. See id.
The interpretation of a court order is a question of law, which we
review de novo. In the Matter of Sheys & Blackburn, 168 N.H. 35, 39
(2015). In construing a court order, we look to the plain meaning of the words
used in the document. Id. We construe subsidiary clauses so as not to conflict
with the primary purpose of the trial court’s decree. Id. at 39-40. As a general
matter, a court decree or judgment is to be construed with reference to the
issues it was meant to decide. Id. at 40.
The relocation order granted Mother permission to move to Maine with
the children, and states in part: “Both Parties agree that New Hampshire shall
maintain jurisdiction over this matter during the Mother’s relocation and while
she resides in Maine for a minimum of 6 months to one year.” We are
unpersuaded that this language provides that the trial court relinquished
jurisdiction. The relocation order does not provide that New Hampshire loses
jurisdiction over this matter after one year; rather, it sets a minimum
timeframe during which the court will not relinquish jurisdiction. Further, the
relocation order neither references RSA 458-A:13, which provides the
requirements for New Hampshire courts to relinquish jurisdiction over child
custody determinations, nor does it make the requisite findings under that
statute. Accordingly, we conclude that the relocation order does not provide
that the court loses exclusive, continuing jurisdiction over this matter.
3