THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0444, Julianne Mallet v. Winchester
School District, the court on April 30, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, the mother of B.M., appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Smith, J.) dismissing her amended complaint against the
defendant, the Winchester School District. The plaintiff argues that the trial
court erred in ruling that her negligence claim against the defendant was
barred by municipal immunity pursuant to RSA chapter 507-B (2010 & Supp.
2024), and that the complaint failed to state a claim for gross negligence under
RSA chapter 193-F (2018 & Supp. 2023), the anti-bullying statute. We affirm.
The standard of review when considering a motion to dismiss is whether
the plaintiff’s allegations are reasonably susceptible of a construction that
would permit recovery. Barufaldi v. City of Dover, 175 N.H. 424, 427 (2022).
When reviewing a motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim upon which
relief may be granted, we assume the truth of the facts alleged by the plaintiff
and construe all reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to the
plaintiff. Lamb v. Shaker Reg’l Sch. Dist., 168 N.H. 47, 49 (2015). This
threshold inquiry involves testing the facts alleged in the pleadings against the
applicable law. Barufaldi, 175 N.H. at 427. We need not, however, assume the
truth of the statements in the pleadings that are merely conclusions of law.
Lamb, 168 N.H. at 49. If the facts do not constitute a basis for legal relief, we
will uphold the granting of a motion to dismiss. Id.
In her complaint, the plaintiff alleges that B.M. was in first grade during
the 2017-2018 school year, when there was a confrontation with another
student. B.M. notified his teacher, but the defendant did not notify B.M.’s
mother until after the teacher reported the event to the principal. Later, there
was another physical confrontation between B.M. and the other student. B.M.
informed his teacher, who did not notify the plaintiff. Thirty days later, B.M.
was separated from the other student.
B.M. attended school during the 2018-2019 school year, and after a
period of homeschooling, B.M. returned to the school in 2021 for fifth grade.
Prior to his return, the defendant assured B.M.’s mother that the other student
would not be allowed near B.M. However, on the first day of B.M.’s return,
there was a confrontation between B.M. and the other student.
RSA chapter 507-B provides that “[n]o governmental unit shall be held
liable in any action to recover for bodily injury, personal injury or property
damage except as provided by this chapter or as is provided or may be provided
by other statute.” RSA 507-B:5 (2010). One exception to RSA 507-B:5 is set
forth in RSA 507-B:2 (2010), which provides, in relevant part, that “[a]
governmental unit may be held liable for damages in an action to recover for
bodily injury, personal injury or property damage caused by its fault or by fault
attributable to it, arising out of ownership, occupation, maintenance or
operation of all motor vehicles, and all premises.” RSA 507-B:2 requires a
nexus between the plaintiff’s claims and the governmental unit’s ownership,
occupation, maintenance, or operation of its vehicles or its physical premises.
Lamb, 168 N.H. at 51.
The plaintiff argues that the exception to general municipal immunity,
RSA 507-B:2, applies in this case because B.M.’s injuries arose from incidents
that occurred on the defendant’s premises. She asserts that the nexus
between B.M.’s injuries and the defendant’s operation of the physical premises
is that the defendant assured the plaintiff that B.M. would be kept separate
from the other student on the premises, creating a duty to protect B.M. from
the other student while on the premises. The defendant breached this duty,
she alleges, when B.M. returned to the school for fifth grade, only to have the
other student confront him on the premises.
The plaintiff’s argument is foreclosed by our decision in Lamb.
“Operation of the premises” means operation of the real property and any
structures built upon it. Lamb, 168 N.H. at 51. An injury does not arise out of
the operation of the physical premises simply because it occurs in connection
with the enterprise conducted on the premises. Id. In this case, the plaintiff’s
claims do not arise out of the operation of the physical premises; rather, they
arise out of the supervision of students at the school, part of the enterprise
conducted on the premises. Therefore, we conclude that the trial court
correctly ruled that the plaintiff’s claims do not fall within the exception to
municipal immunity created by RSA 507-B:2.
The plaintiff next argues that the trial court erred in ruling that the
complaint failed to state a claim for gross negligence under RSA chapter 193-F,
the anti-bullying statute. RSA 193-F:4 (2018) requires school districts to adopt
written policies prohibiting bullying, including procedures for responding to
incidents of bullying. RSA 193-F:9 (Supp. 2023) provides that “[a]ny person
aggrieved as a result of gross negligence in violation of any provision of RSA
193-F:4 may initiate an action against a school district . . . and may recover
court costs and reasonable attorney’s fees.” The statute defines “gross
negligence” to mean “deliberate indifference.” See id.
2
The plaintiff argues that the defendant acted with deliberate indifference
because it “knew of the prior harassment and injury to [B.M.], was notified that
[B.M.] was returning to school, assured [the plaintiff] he would be protected
and failed” to protect B.M. Deliberate indifference is “a stringent standard of
fault, requiring proof that a municipal actor disregarded a known or obvious
consequence of his action or inaction.” M.L. v. Concord Sch. Dist., 86 F.4th
501, 511 (1st Cir. 2023) (quotation omitted). Under this standard, the
defendant’s response must have been “clearly unreasonable in light of the
known circumstances.” Id. (quotation omitted). We conclude that the trial
court correctly ruled that, even assuming the truth of the plaintiff’s allegations
and construing all reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to her, the
plaintiff has failed to state a claim of gross negligence under this standard.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3