THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0555, State of New Hampshire v. William
Philpot, the court on May 15, 2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, William Philpot, appeals his convictions,
following a jury trial in Superior Court (Leonard, J.), on two counts of
misdemeanor domestic violence. See RSA 631:2-b (Supp. 2025). On appeal,
he argues that the trial court erred when it denied his motion to dismiss based
on the sufficiency of the evidence. We affirm.
A challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence raises a question of law that
we review de novo. State v. Seibel, 174 N.H. 440, 445 (2021). When
considering a challenge to the sufficiency of evidence to support a conviction,
we objectively review the entire record, construing the evidence, and all
reasonable inferences from it, in the light most favorable to the State, and
determine whether any rational trier of fact could have found guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt. Id. We examine each item of evidence in the context of the
entire case, not in isolation. Id. The trier of fact is entitled to draw reasonable
inferences from the facts proved as well as from facts found as the result of
other inferences so long as they can reasonably be drawn therefrom. See id.
The defendant bears the burden of demonstrating that the evidence was
insufficient to prove guilt. State v. Saintil-Brown, 172 N.H. 110, 117 (2019).
When the evidence as to one or more of the elements is solely circumstantial,
the defendant must establish that the evidence does not exclude all reasonable
conclusions except guilt. Id. The proper analysis is not whether every possible
conclusion consistent with innocence has been excluded, but whether all
reasonable conclusions based on the evidence have been excluded. Id.
If the defendant chooses to present a case, we review the entire trial
record to determine the sufficiency of the evidence. Id. In evaluating the
defendant’s challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence in this case, we are
mindful that “matters such as weighing evidence, determining witness
credibility, and resolving conflicts in witness testimony are left to the jury.”
State v. Woodbury, 172 N.H. 358, 364 (2019). “In determining witness
credibility, the jury may accept some parts and reject other parts of testimony,
and adopt one or the other of inconsistent statements by witnesses.” Id.
As relevant to this appeal, the defendant was charged with three counts
of misdemeanor domestic violence, alleging that he purposely caused
unprivileged physical contact by pushing the victim’s chest, kicking her legs,
and striking her arm. See RSA 631:2-b, I(a). At trial, the jury heard evidence,
which included testimony from both the victim and the defendant, establishing
the following facts. On the day that the charged acts occurred, the victim and
the defendant, who were then engaged, had taken horses out for a recreational
ride. The defendant’s horse exhibited discomfort during the ride and when
they returned they discovered that the horse had suffered a large laceration in
the vicinity of her hoof. The victim left to get medical supplies, and when she
returned, she saw the defendant cleaning the wound in a manner she believed
was too aggressive and was causing the horse unnecessary pain. The parties
argued as they attended to the wound.
The defendant then mounted the horse owned by the victim and began
kicking the horse aggressively in order to prompt the horse to move. The victim
believed that the defendant was hurting her horse, and a further argument
ensued that gave rise to a physical altercation. Specifically, the victim testified
that during the verbal exchange, the defendant threatened to punch her,
dismounted the horse, “became insane with rage,” “shoved [the victim] in the
chest hard” causing her to stumble backwards, and kicked her legs out from
under her causing her to fall. According to the victim, the defendant then
attempted to punch her in the head while she was on the ground, a punch she
successfully deflected so that it struck her arm.
Although the defendant did not dispute that a physical altercation had
occurred during which he took the victim to the ground, he disputed that he
had punched her in the arm, and he claimed that in taking her to the ground,
he had acted in self-defense. Specifically, he testified that prior to his taking
her to the ground, the victim had slapped him multiple times, and that after he
mounted her horse, she grabbed and pulled him such that he fell from the
horse. The defendant testified that at that point, he attempted to walk away
from the victim, but that she ran after him, and that when he turned around,
her hand was “up in the air as though she was ready to slap [him] again.” The
defendant described the altercation that ensued as follows:
As she was about to strike me, I stopped her strike by putting my
hand up in the air and moved my hand across her chest plate. I
put my foot in back of her opposite foot, and [in] a tripping motion
and sweeping motion, I brought her down to the ground.
The victim, however, testified that prior to the physical altercation, she had not
pushed the defendant, touched him, attempted to pull him off the horse,
charged at him, or threatened to strike him in any manner.
2
When a law enforcement officer arrived to investigate the incident, the
defendant stated that there had been an argument, and before the officer had
even asked if there had been a physical altercation, he told the officer that it
had not become physical. The defendant did not tell the officer that the victim
had pulled him from a horse or that he had acted in self-defense. Although the
officer observed that there was an odor of alcohol coming from the defendant’s
breath and that his eyes were red and glassy, the defendant initially denied
that he had been drinking. He later admitted that he had consumed some
wine, and after the officer spoke with the victim and told the defendant that he
was aware that there had been a physical altercation, the defendant claimed
that the victim had pushed him. At trial, the defendant admitted that he had
not been truthful with the officer regarding whether he had been drinking or
whether there had been a physical altercation.
After a two-day trial, the jury acquitted the defendant of the simple
assault charge alleging that he struck the victim’s arm, but it convicted him of
the simple assault charges alleging that he pushed the victim’s chest and
kicked her legs. On appeal, the defendant argues that the evidence failed to
prove that the physical contact was unprivileged and unjustified. Specifically,
he contends that the State failed to prove that he “knowingly acted without
privilege to rebuff [the victim], or that he did not reasonably believe that he
faced an imminent use of unlawful force, or that the . . . force he used was
unjustified.” According to the defendant, because there was undisputed
evidence that the victim was angry at him for mounting her horse and upset at
how he was treating the horses, “[t]he circumstantial evidence does not exclude
reasonable conclusions that [the defendant] acted with privilege and
justifiably.”
The jury was entitled to believe the victim’s account and disbelieve the
defendant’s account. The victim’s testimony, if credited by the jury, provided
direct evidence of unprivileged contact and disproved self-defense. Viewing the
evidence in the light most favorable to the State and resolving all credibility
issues in the State’s favor, we conclude that the evidence was sufficient to
support the conclusion that the contact with the victim was unprivileged, that
the defendant had knowledge of this fact, and that he did not reasonably
believe that the contact was necessary to defend against imminent unlawful,
non-deadly force. See Seibel, 174 N.H. at 445; Woodbury, 172 N.H. at 364-65.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3