THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0712, Appeal of Michael Messina, the
court on January 6, 2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The claimant, Michael Messina, appeals an order of the New
Hampshire Compensation Appeals Board (CAB) ruling that he failed to prove
that his injury arose out of employment. We affirm.
I. Background
This is the second appeal of this case. See Appeal of AmGUARD
Insurance Group & a., No. 2022-0373 (non-precedential order), 2024 WL
3178142 (N.H. June 26, 2024). The underlying facts are as follows. The
claimant was employed by Baroody & Greenwood, LLC as a handyman and
maintenance worker whose primary duties were cleaning the company’s office
in Manchester and a gym “a couple doors down” from the office. Id. at *1
(quotation omitted). The claimant did other maintenance projects at other
locations as needed, received assignments from his employer during the
workday by phone, and considered himself “always on call.” Id. (quotation
omitted).
On November 10, 2020, the claimant requested and received permission
from his supervisor to leave work and retrieve his motorcycle from his home,
approximately twenty miles away from his primary worksites, so that he could
put it in storage for the winter. Id. After picking up his motorcycle, and while
on his way back to work in downtown Manchester, the claimant was hit by a
van and severely injured. Id. There is no evidence that the employee was
responding to a call from his employer at the time of the accident. Id.
The CAB found that the claimant was injured in the course of his
employment and that his injury was compensable. Id. The CAB determined
that “while [the claimant] was riding his motorcycle he was still acting in an
activity related to his employment since he had never ‘left’ work and could be
called on his way back to downtown Manchester.” Id. (quotation omitted). On
appeal, we vacated the CAB’s order and remanded for the CAB to make a
finding on the first element of the test articulated in Murphy v. Town of
Atkinson, 128 N.H. 641 (1986) — whether the claimant’s injury resulted from a
risk created by his employment. Id. at *2.
On remand, after a hearing, the CAB issued a written order. It found as
a matter of fact that: “travel was not an essential part of [the claimant’s] job”;
he used his personal vehicle “to perform any varied errands”; he was not paid
mileage or reimbursed for gas; and, with the exception of “limited, intermittent
assignments,” his job was “primarily associated with maintenance at the
employer’s facilities located at 977 and 1015 Elm Street in Manchester NH.”
Accordingly, the CAB rejected the claimant’s assertion that he “was a ‘traveling
employee’ and therefore, the hazards of the travel route [become] a hazard of
employment throughout the sojourn.” The CAB also found that “[t]he record
showed that the trip the claimant was making was solely for his own personal
benefit, i.e., putting his motorcycle in winter storage.” Therefore, the CAB
concluded that the claimant did not meet his burden of proving “that the injury
arose out of employment by demonstrating that it resulted from a risk created
by the employment.” The claimant unsuccessfully moved for reconsideration.
This appeal followed.
II. Analysis
On appeal, the claimant argues that the CAB erred (1) “in determining
that [he] was not a traveling employee at the time of his injury” and (2) “in
finding that [his] injury resulted from a ‘personal risk.’” (Quotation omitted.)
We will not disturb the CAB’s decision absent an error of law, or unless,
by a clear preponderance of the evidence, we find it to be unjust or
unreasonable. Appeal of Doody, 172 N.H. 802, 805 (2020); see RSA 541:13
(2021). The CAB’s factual findings are prima facie lawful and reasonable. See
RSA 541:13. We review the CAB’s factual findings deferentially and will uphold
them unless the evidence does not support them. Doody, 172 N.H. at 805. We
review the CAB’s legal rulings de novo. Id. We construe the Workers’
Compensation Law liberally to give the broadest reasonable effect to its
remedial purpose. Id. Thus, when construing it, we resolve all reasonable
doubts in favor of the injured worker. Appeal of Estate of Dodier, 174 N.H.
548, 553 (2021). Here, as the appealing party, the plaintiff has the burden to
show reversible error. See Appeal of Hawes, 175 N.H. 221, 223 (2022).
To obtain workers’ compensation benefits, a claimant must show that his
or her injuries arose “out of and in the course of employment.” RSA 281-A:2,
XI (2023). “The phrase ‘arising out of’ employment refers to the causal
connection between a claimant’s injury and the risks of employment and
requires proof that the injury resulted from a risk created by the employment.”
Hawes, 175 N.H. at 223 (citation and quotation omitted). “The phrase ‘in the
course of’ employment refers to whether the injury occurred within the
boundaries of time and space created by the terms of employment and in the
performance of an activity related to employment.” Id. (citation and quotations
omitted). “The test, thus, contains three elements, and the failure to prove any
one of them is fatal to a claimant’s workers’ compensation claim.” Id. at 224.
2
The limited issue before us is whether the claimant proved that the injury
arose out of employment by demonstrating that it resulted from a risk created
by the employment.
The claimant first argues that he was a “traveling employee” at the time
of his injuries and, as such, his injuries “arose out of employment, in that they
resulted from a risk created by the employment, thereby satisfying the first
prong of the Murphy test.” (Quotation, italics, and bolding omitted.) He
asserts that “travel was a required component of [his] work duties, when he
frequently ventured to various locations at the request of [his employer],” and
that at the time of the accident, he “was traveling from his home to a Zoo gym
work location, separate from his employer’s office space” and was “on call while
traveling.”
A traveling employee is one “whose business requires that he be away
from home,” Appeal of Griffin, 140 N.H. 650, 654 (1996), or “employees for
whom travel is an integral part of their jobs, such as those who travel to
different locations to perform their duties, as differentiated from employees who
commute daily from home to a single workplace,” Appeal of Pelmac Indus., 174
N.H. 528, 537 (2021). For example, in Appeal of Griffin, the employee’s work
entailed duties associated with wrecking and demolition at various locations,
including Maine, Massachusetts, and Rhode Island. Griffin, 140 N.H. at 652.
At the time of his injury, the employee had been on a work site in Rhode Island
for approximately two weeks, which required him to remain overnight in Rhode
Island. Id. During his work assignment, he received daily meal allowances
and motel accommodations provided by his employer, and was permitted to
use the company vehicle for transportation. Id. Because the employee “was
required by his employment to live away from home, the risk of injury to him
during travel necessary to take his meals was created by his employment,” and,
therefore, the injury he incurred returning from the restaurant to his motel
“arose out of employment.” Id. at 654-55. Similarly, in Appeal of Pelmac,
where the decedent’s employment “involved extensive travel throughout New
Hampshire, and he usually traveled directly between the remote work sites and
his home in a company van,” his injury from a motor vehicle accident while
traveling home from a work site arose “out of employment by resulting from a
risk created by employment.” Pelmac, 174 N.H. at 538-39.
By contrast here, the CAB found that the claimant’s job was “primarily
associated with maintenance at the employer’s facilities located at 977 and
1015 Elm Street in Manchester NH.” As the claimant testified, he would begin
every workday at the office, and the office building and the Zoo gym on Elm
Street were “within walking distance.” Accordingly, the “travel” required by the
claimant’s job on the day he suffered his injury was between two buildings on
the same street within walking distance of one another. Thus, the claimant’s
choice to travel twenty miles away on a personal errand did not constitute
travel required by his employment such that “the hazards of the route [became]
3