THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
6th Circuit Court-Franklin Family Division
Case No. 2024-0092
Citation: In re M.T., 2025 N.H. 4
IN RE M.T.
Argued: October 10, 2024
Opinion Issued: January 22, 2025
John M. Formella, attorney general, and Anthony J. Galdieri, solicitor
general (Audriana Mekula, assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally),
for the State.
Thomas Barnard, deputy chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the juvenile.
DONOVAN, J.
[¶1] The juvenile, M.T., appeals orders of the Circuit Court (Mace, J.)
committing him to the Sununu Youth Services Center (SYSC) for the remainder
of his minority. He contends that the decision was erroneous because: (1) the
court should not have considered the lack of available placements when it
committed him to SYSC; and (2) his right to counsel was violated because he
did not have counsel present for a Comprehensive Assessment for Treatment
(CAT) interview. We conclude that the trial court sustainably exercised its
discretion in placing M.T. at SYSC and that M.T. waived his argument
regarding his right to counsel for a CAT interview. Accordingly, we affirm.
I. Facts
[¶2] The following facts are taken from the trial court’s orders or are
otherwise supported by the record. The State filed two delinquency petitions
against M.T., who was then a 16-year-old juvenile, for simple assault and
willful concealment. At his arraignment, M.T.’s parents stated that they did
not feel safe with M.T. in their home and requested that he be placed in
residential treatment. Approximately one week later, M.T. was removed from
his parents’ custody and placed in shelter care. Less than two weeks later, the
shelter requested that the New Hampshire Department of Health and Human
Services (DHHS) remove M.T. “due to a rather significant number of critical
incidents and physical restraints and very concerning, dangerous behavior.”
Those instances included kicking a peer in the head after threatening the same
peer with a broken CD, swinging from sprinkler pipes, and stealing keys to
access the roof. As a result of these incidents, the shelter exercised its right to
terminate its treatment of M.T.
[¶3] At the November 29, 2023 adjudicatory hearing, M.T. pled true to
both delinquency petitions, which prompted the trial court to schedule a
dispositional hearing. See RSA 169-B:18 (2022). In the interim, M.T. required
placement and the trial court heard arguments regarding that issue pending
the dispositional hearing. M.T.’s juvenile probation and parole officer (JPPO)
explained that she had “referred [M.T.] to every placement in New Hampshire
and New England as a whole,” but that she had not received any responses.
The clinical director for the shelter testified that, when the shelter requests
removal, DHHS typically identifies an alternative placement within 48 hours
and returns the child to their home if no other placement is identified. She
described the circumstances leading to the request for M.T. to be removed from
the shelter, explaining the shelter was “unable to keep [M.T.] safe.”
[¶4] Based upon a lack of “less restrictive, more appropriate” options,
including the conclusion that M.T. should not return to his parents’ home, the
State, through the JPPO, recommended that M.T. be detained at the SYSC.
The State argued that the shelter was “not fully equipped to handle” M.T., and
that allowing M.T. to remain in the shelter would put M.T., the staff, and others
in danger. The State also asked the trial court to authorize a placement
search. M.T. requested that he remain at the shelter program pending DHHS’s
identification of an appropriate alternative. M.T.’s counsel also requested that
the trial court require that counsel be present during any CAT.
[¶5] The trial court issued an order finding that “the State carried its
burden to demonstrate probable cause to believe [M.T.] engaged in the alleged
2
conduct and carried its burden to prove by clear and convincing evidence [that]
secured detention is necessary to ensure [M.T.’s] safety, property interests and
the prospect of harm, including serious bodily harm to others.” The court
explained that “[g]iven [M.T.’s] parents’ unwillingness to allow him back home,
[the shelter’s] contractual removal right – now exercised formally – and the lack
of other less restrictive residential placement options, there is no other
alternative to secured detention the Court can order.” Accordingly, the court
ordered that M.T. be detained at the SYSC but that “DHHS may place [M.T.] in
a less restrictive placement as soon as one is located.” In addition, the court
ordered DHHS to provide M.T.’s counsel with information relating to the matter
and allowed M.T.’s counsel to attend Child and Adolescent Needs and
Strengths (CANS) “or similar interviews where the right to counsel attaches.”1
[¶6] The court also required that M.T. and his mother participate in a
CAT for the purpose of recommending an appropriate setting to the court. The
CAT involved several components that factored into recommending the
appropriate placement setting. One such component was an interview with
M.T., although M.T.’s counsel was not informed of it and consequently did not
attend the interview. The CAT report recommended that M.T. be placed in a
Level 4 “[h]igh intensity residential treatment.”
[¶7] M.T. moved for reconsideration of the trial court’s order, to which
the State objected. M.T. also moved to strike the CAT report, arguing that
because his counsel was not present during the CAT interview, the court
should not consider the report during the dispositional hearing. However, M.T.
later amended his motion and requested instead that the court “accord [the
CAT report] the appropriate weight it deserves in light of the fact that [M.T.]
was not afforded the assistance of counsel at his CAT interview.” M.T. argued
that “the CAT Outcome Report may form part of the basis for the State’s
request as to [M.T.’s placement] and this Court’s ordering of a particular
disposition for [M.T.] under RSA 169-B:19, I,” and therefore “it constitutes a
‘critical stage’ of the delinquency proceeding against him, thereby entitling
[M.T.] to the assistance of counsel during the CAT interview.”
[¶8] At the dispositional hearing, M.T.’s counsel requested a second CAT.
The State did not object to a second CAT at which M.T.’s counsel could be
present. Regarding M.T.’s placement, the State explained that it had “received
10 major incident reports [regarding M.T.] while at SYSC.” The JPPO testified
that “it’s very apparent that [M.T.] could benefit from the supports and services
that Juvenile Justice, as a whole, can provide him,” which “would include . . . a
rather intense level of clinical services that could be provided through an out-
of-home placement, whether that be a facility setting like SYSC or a residential
1 M.T. appealed the court’s order following the adjudicatory hearing to this court. The State
moved to dismiss or otherwise stay the appeal pending the trial court’s final dispositional order.
We dismissed that appeal as moot following the trial court’s issuance of dispositional orders.
3
placement setting.” As a result, the State requested that M.T. be committed to
SYSC pending the identification of an alternative placement. M.T. requested
that he be returned to the care of his parents, arguing that “it is an unusual
punishment to place” him until his eighteenth birthday at SYSC.
[¶9] Following that hearing and a detention review hearing, the trial court
ordered that M.T. be committed to SYSC for the remainder of his minority,
reasoning that SYSC was the only available option that “balances the public’s
right to safety with [M.T.]’s need for intensive care and supervision.” The court
elaborated that “[p]ut bluntly, continuing detention for [M.T.] is the only option
available to the Court in this case,” and “it remains the case [that] New
Hampshire lacks alternative residential options for juveniles like [M.T.] who
struggle with obvious mental illness and lack the capacity without intensive
treatment to avoid the maladaptive behaviors that routinely and regularly flow.”
It further ordered DHHS “to expand its search for less restrictive options to
providers offering services in other states.”
[¶10] When the second CAT occurred, M.T.’s attorney was contacted
multiple times to schedule an interview with M.T. The attorney did not
respond and M.T. was not re-interviewed. The second CAT report also
recommended that a high intensity setting would be appropriate. M.T.’s
counsel filed a motion to reconsider the dispositional orders, which was denied.
This appeal followed. M.T. has since been placed in an out-of-state residential
treatment facility.
II. Analysis
[¶11] We review placement decisions under our unsustainable exercise of
discretion standard. See RSA 169-B:19, I (Supp. 2023). This standard
requires that we review whether the record establishes an objective basis for
the trial court’s discretionary judgments. See L.C. v. W.C., 174 N.H. 355, 361
(2021). “[O]ur task is not to determine whether we would have found
differently, but only to determine whether a reasonable person could have
reached the same decision as the trial court on the basis of the evidence before
it.” Id. (quotation and brackets omitted).
[¶12] We first address M.T.’s contention that the trial court erred by
considering the unavailability of non-secure placement facilities when it
committed M.T. to SYSC. In its order, the trial court stated that detention at
SYSC is “the only option available to the Court” because New Hampshire “lacks
alternative residential options for juveniles.” M.T. argues that the trial court
cannot consider unavailability in its placement decision because RSA 169-B:19
is silent as to whether availability may be considered. Pursuant to RSA 169-
B:19, I, “[i]f the court finds that a minor is delinquent, the court shall order the
least restrictive of the following dispositions, which the court finds is the most
4
appropriate.” Subsection (j) authorizes the court to “[c]ommit the minor to the
custody of the department of health and human services for the remainder of
minority.” RSA 169-B:19, I(j).
[¶13] M.T. contrasts that statute with RSA 169-B:14, I (2022), which
allows the court, following arraignment of a minor but pending the
adjudicatory hearing, to order the minor “[d]etained at a facility . . . for
detention of minors pursuant to” certain enumerated restrictions. RSA 169-
B:14, I(e). One restriction is that “[a] minor shall not be securely detained
unless secure detention is necessary . . . [t]o provide care and supervision for a
minor who is in danger of self-inflicted harm when no parent, guardian,
custodian, or other suitable person or program is available to supervise and
provide such care.” RSA 169-B:14, I(e)(2)(B).
[¶14] M.T. asserts that “[t]he absence of this language from RSA 169-
B:19 demonstrates that the legislature did not intend for courts to entertain
the purported unavailability of placement options when fashioning a child’s
disposition.” We disagree.
[¶15] When interpreting statutes, we “will not consider what the
legislature might have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit
to include.” In re Alex C., 161 N.H. 231, 235 (2010) (quotation omitted). We
review issues of statutory interpretation de novo. Id. Although RSA 169-B:19,
I(j) does not specify availability as a consideration, it mandates that the trial
court determine the “least restrictive” and “most appropriate” placement. RSA
169-B:19, I. That mandate vests the trial court with discretion to determine
the “least restrictive” and “most appropriate” placement. See id. In exercising
that discretion, the court could sustainably determine that the “most
appropriate” placement for a minor is one that is available. See id. In this
particular statutory setting, whether a placement is appropriate presents a
fact-specific inquiry — what is appropriate in one situation may be
inappropriate in another. Here, no other option was available to provide for
M.T.’s needs, despite DHHS’s efforts. In fact, M.T.’s JPPO testified that she
unsuccessfully attempted to place M.T. in every suitable facility in New
England. Therefore, the court sustainably exercised its discretion when it
considered the lack of available placements.
[¶16] Accordingly, we also conclude that the trial court sustainably
exercised its discretion by committing M.T. to SYSC for the remainder of his
minority because it was the least restrictive and most appropriate placement.
Although other less restrictive options may have existed, these options were not
available to M.T. RSA 169-B:19, I, provides a variety of dispositional options to
the court. See id. M.T. requested that he return to the care of his parents.
The court could not place M.T. with his parents because they were unwilling
and unable to provide for his needs at their home. See RSA 169-B:19, I(a). Nor
5
could the court release M.T. to DHHS for placement in a non-secure facility
because M.T. was not accepted into any such facility in New England.2 See
RSA 169-B:19, I(f). In addition, in light of M.T.’s unabated behavior and prior
dangerous conduct, SYSC was well-equipped to provide M.T. with the intensive
treatment and supervision he required. See Appeal of Alexander, 163 N.H.
397, 399 (2012) (“SYSC is a secure facility that provides detention, treatment
and rehabilitation services for serious, chronic and/or violent juvenile
offenders.” (parentheses omitted)). With no other option available and M.T.
requiring “intensive care and supervision,” the court reasonably determined
that it was necessary to commit M.T. to SYSC for the remainder of his minority.
Based upon the record before us, we conclude that the trial court sustainably
exercised its discretion in ruling that SYSC was the least restrictive and most
appropriate placement.
[¶17] M.T. next requests that his disposition “be vacated, and a new CAT
be completed — with his lawyer present for the interview — in advance of any
future dispositional hearing” because his lawyer was not present for the initial
CAT interview. We decline to address this issue because the minor waived it
before the trial court. In the trial court, M.T.’s counsel stated that he did not
want a repeat CAT because the delay associated with conducting another
interview and assessment would prejudice M.T. Instead, he asked that the
court accord the CAT report its appropriate weight given that the interview was
conducted without counsel, and the court agreed to do so. Under these
circumstances, we conclude that the minor waived this issue, and we decline to
address it.
III. Conclusion
[¶18] For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that: (1) the court did not
err when it considered availability when deciding to place M.T. in SYSC for his
minority; and (2) M.T. waived his argument regarding his right to counsel for a
CAT interview. Accordingly, we affirm.
Affirmed.
MACDONALD, C.J., and BASSETT and COUNTWAY, JJ., concurred.
2 M.T. also argues that “the State expressly disavowed its responsibility to maintain non-secure
placements” because it must fund placements other than SYSC for minors such as M.T. We
disagree. The State referred M.T. to every placement in New England, and he had not been
accepted into any. In addition, M.T.’s behavior eliminated any potentially available alternatives.
In light of those considerable efforts, and the limitations posed by M.T.’s behavior, we cannot
conclude that the State shirked its responsibilities.
6