THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0172, Matthew Sinclair, DBA Four Tree
Landscaping v. Richard Davis, the court on March 27, 2025,
issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). The defendant, Richard Davis, appeals an order of the Circuit Court
(Murray, J.) defaulting him, and entering judgment in favor of the plaintiff,
Matthew Sinclair, DBA Four Tree Landscaping, in a small claims action arising
out of a contract between the parties for the provision of certain landscaping
services. The defendant argues that the trial court erred by defaulting him for
his failure to appear at the hearing on the merits. We affirm.
Under District Division Rule 4.6(c), if the defendant fails to appear at the
hearing on the merits, “a judgment shall be issued in favor of the plaintiff.” Dist.
Div. R. 4.6(c). Under District Division Rule 4.4(b), “[a] default judgment shall not
be stricken except upon a finding of good cause by the court.” Dist. Div. R.
4.4(b). On appeal, it is well settled that we will not disturb a trial court’s ruling
on default absent a clear unsustainable exercise of discretion or error of law.
Douglas v. Douglas, 143 N.H. 419, 422 (1999); cf. State v. Lambert, 147 N.H.
295, 296 (2001) (explaining unsustainable exercise of discretion standard).
In this case, the defendant expressly acknowledges that he received notice
of the scheduled hearing. Nonetheless, the defendant argues that, because he
had filed a motion seeking to continue the hearing in order to accommodate his
vacation plans, and because, by the date of the hearing, he had not yet been
notified of the trial court’s decision denying that motion, the trial court erred by
defaulting him for his failure to appear. We disagree. A trial court is not
obligated to grant a party’s request for a continuance; rather, “[t]he decision to
grant or deny a motion for a continuance is within the sound discretion of the
trial court.” In the Matter of Kempton & Kempton, 167 N.H. 785, 793 (2015).
Here, given that proceedings in this case had already been continued due to the
defendant’s earlier vacation plans — and then further delayed apparently due to
an administrative error on the part of the court — we conclude that the trial
court was within its discretion to deny the defendant’s request for another
continuance to accommodate a vacation. See id.; Dist. Div. R. 1.8-B.
Accordingly, given that the defendant had received notice of the scheduled
hearing, it was incumbent upon him to attend that hearing absent a ruling
granting his motion to continue. Thus, we further conclude that the trial court
did not unsustainably exercise its discretion by defaulting the defendant, and
entering judgment against him, for his failure to appear. See Dist. Div. R. 4.6(c);
Douglas, 143 N.H. at 422.
To the extent that the defendant also argues that the trial court’s order is
“invalid[]” due to a scrivener’s error with respect to its date, his argument
warrants no further discussion. See Vogel v. Vogel, 137 N.H. 321, 322 (1993).
Lastly, we note that the plaintiff’s motion to file a response regarding a
procedural matter, which was previously resolved in his favor, is moot.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2