THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0102, State of New Hampshire v. Dujae
Richards, the court on May 21, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Dujae Richards, appeals his convictions,
following a jury trial in Superior Court (Temple, J.), on one count of theft by
unauthorized taking, see RSA 637:3 (2016), three counts of fraudulent use of a
credit card, see RSA 638:5 (2016), and twelve counts of identity fraud, see RSA
638:26 (2016). The defendant argues that the trial court erred in ruling that
the State sufficiently authenticated certain “monthly reports” that he prepared
for the victim. We affirm.
The decision to admit or exclude evidence is within the discretion of the
trial court. State v. Palermo, 168 N.H. 387, 391 (2015). In determining
whether a ruling is a proper exercise of judicial discretion, we consider whether
the record establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the discretionary
decision made. Id. To show an unsustainable exercise of discretion, the
defendant must demonstrate that the trial court’s ruling was clearly untenable
or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Id.
The requirement of authentication or identification as a condition
precedent to admissibility is satisfied by evidence sufficient to support a finding
that the matter in question is what its proponent claims. N.H. R. Ev. 901(a).
“The bar for authentication of evidence is not particularly high.” Palermo, 168
N.H. at 392 (quotation omitted).
Although Rule 901(a) requires the proponent to present evidence of
authenticity, the rule does not establish formal requirements as to the nature
or quantum of proof. Id. Rather, Rule 901(b) provides a non-exhaustive list of
methods of authentication or identification that conform to the requirements of
Rule 901(a), including “[t]estimony that an item is what it is claimed to be,” and
“[t]he appearance, contents, substance, internal patterns, or other distinctive
characteristics of the item, taken together with all the circumstances.” N.H. R.
Ev. 901(b)(1), (4).
In this case, the State authenticated the monthly reports through a
witness who lived with the victim and helped him with his personal care,
laundry, and cooking. The witness’s daughter was married to the defendant.
When the daughter moved to Jamaica, and the defendant needed a place to
live, the witness suggested that he move into the victim’s home. In exchange
for helping the victim with his personal finances, the defendant did not pay
rent. The victim asked the defendant to prepare financial reports, which were
referred to as “monthly reports.”
When the prosecutor showed certain financial documents to the witness,
she recognized them as the monthly reports. She specifically recognized the
blue and green colors on the documents. She testified that she knew the
defendant prepared the monthly reports for the victim because he reviewed
them with the victim when they were having dinner together, and the witness
was seated at the table, having dinner with them. The witness recalled that the
victim would pay close attention to the information in the reports regarding the
TD Bank account. The victim would sometimes ask the witness to file the
reports in manila folders and bins.
The defendant argues that the trial court erred in ruling that the witness
sufficiently authenticated the monthly reports because she lacked personal
knowledge about the creation and contents of the documents. “The proof
necessary to connect an evidentiary exhibit to a defendant may be made by
circumstantial evidence.” Palermo, 168 N.H. at 392 (quotation omitted). “The
proponent need not rule out all possibilities inconsistent with authenticity, or
prove beyond any doubt that the evidence is what it purports to be.” Id.
(quotation and ellipsis omitted). We conclude that the State’s authentication
evidence, taken together with all the circumstances, provided sufficient
identifying details to show that the defendant prepared the reports. See N.H.
R. Ev. 901(b)(1), (4).
Finally, the defendant argues that the witness’s ability to identify the
documents as the monthly reports may have been influenced by the State’s
pretrial witness preparation procedure. “[C]ontested evidence, if otherwise
relevant, should be admitted once a prima facie case has been made on the
issue of authentication.” Palermo, 168 N.H. at 392. The defendant’s concerns
regarding the State’s witness preparation affected the weight, not the
admissibility, of the evidence. See State v. Stangle, 166 N.H. 407, 413 (2014).
“Once the evidence is admitted, the rest is up to the jury.” Id. at 410
(quotation omitted). Defense counsel thoroughly cross-examined the witness
regarding the State’s pretrial preparation procedure. We conclude that the trial
2
court sustainably exercised its discretion in admitting the monthly reports.
See Palermo, 168 N.H. at 391.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3