THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0046, BDP Holdings, LLC v. The Eideard
Group, LLC & a., the court on August 1, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve this case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3).
The defendants, Ronald L. Roberts (now deceased)1, The Eideard Group, LLC,
and Roberts Asset Mgt., LLC, a/k/a Roberts Asset Management, LLC, appeal a
jury verdict in the Superior Court (Delker, J.) awarding the plaintiff, BDP
Holdings, LLC (BDP), nearly $28 million in damages based upon its claims
against the defendants for breach of fiduciary duty, negligence, breach of
contract, and negligent misrepresentation. We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. In 2004, the six adult
children of Robert and Cynthia Hoehl formed BDP as an investment entity.2
They were advised by Roberts, who worked as a family office manager, and
Roberts’ investment advisory firm, The Eideard Group. Roberts also served as
BDP’s managing member. In that role, he had full discretionary authority to
make decisions on BDP’s behalf. The Eideard Group agreed to create an asset
allocation strategy for BDP that would be consistent with the Hoehls’ risk
tolerance and investment objectives. According to the Hoehls, they intended
that BDP would pursue a conservative, low-risk investment strategy.
In 2012, the defendants, on BDP’s behalf, began making private equity
investments in a company named G-Form. Roberts also co-invested his own
funds in G-Form and joined its board of directors, without informing all of the
Hoehls of either his personal investment or his position on G-Form’s board.
The following year, the defendants also caused BDP to extend a substantial line
of credit, with favorable terms, to G-Form. Roberts eventually became the
chair of G-Form’s board and received what he characterized as a “very minority
position” of 750,000 shares in the company, which he did not disclose to all of
the other members of BDP.
1 Michael Dean Kenney, as the personal representative of Roberts’ estate, has been substituted for
Roberts as a party in this appeal.
2 The Hoehl siblings collectively held a 99.75% interest in BDP, and Roberts held a 0.25% interest.
Notwithstanding BDP’s funding, G-Form struggled financially over the
next several years. The defendants continued, however, to invest BDP’s assets
in G-Form; by 2017, BDP had invested more than $8 million in the company.
By early 2018, BDP’s investment had grown to approximately $12 million, and
there was $21 million in outstanding debt on its line of credit to G-Form.
Roberts acknowledged that, at one point, 40% of BDP’s assets were invested in
G-Form. When G-Form struggled to make loan payments, Roberts agreed to
reduce the interest rate on BDP’s loans and reduce G-Form’s repayment
obligation. Even after Roberts made these accommodations for G-Form, in
2017 and 2018, G-Form made no interest payments to BDP and defaulted on
the loans.
During this time, The Eideard Group distributed quarterly investment
performance reports to the Hoehls. With the exception of the second and third
quarters of 2016, the reports did not specify the extent of BDP’s involvement
with G-Form. Rather, the reports listed general categories of “Alternative
Assets,” such as “Promissory Notes” and “Venture Capital,” not the names of
specific investments.
In May 2018, counsel for one of the Hoehl siblings (John Hoehl) wrote a
letter to Roberts inquiring about BDP’s performance and requesting an
evaluation of John Hoehl’s holdings. The following month, Roberts provided
his written responses to the inquiries. Although he briefly mentioned the
“revolving line of credit secured by all the assets of G-Form” and that G-Form
had not paid interest payments since the beginning of 2017, his responses
failed to reveal the extent of G-Form’s financial losses.
At a meeting in February 2019, Roberts discussed G-Form in greater
detail with the Hoehls. He disclosed his concerns regarding G-Form’s finances
and his plan to convert the approximately $30 million in G-Form debt held by
BDP into equity shares in order to raise additional capital for G-Form. In
addition, Roberts proposed that BDP issue an additional investment of
approximately $3 million in G-Form. The Hoehls agreed to defer to Roberts’
judgment as to whether they should invest additional funds in G-Form.
The Hoehls thereafter learned of numerous conflicts of interest relating to
the defendants and, in particular, Roberts’ roles in BDP and G-Form. BDP
terminated its relationship with The Eideard Group in 2020. In May 2021,
BDP filed a complaint against the defendants and other employees of The
Eideard Group alleging, inter alia, breach of fiduciary duty, negligence, breach
of contract, and negligent misrepresentation. The defendants subsequently
moved for partial summary judgment, arguing that any damages claimed by
BDP arising from its investments made prior to May 2018 are time-barred by
the applicable statute of limitations. The trial court reserved ruling until trial.
2
At trial, BDP presented expert testimony that it “suffered damages of . . .
between 55 and 80 million dollars” arising from the unsuccessful investment in
G-Form. The jury also heard evidence that the defendants failed to comply
with industry standards relating to investment advisors and disclosure of
conflicts of interest. After BDP rested, the defendants moved for a directed
verdict, arguing that BDP had failed to prove that their conduct was the
proximate cause of BDP’s harm. The court denied the motion. The court also
denied the defendants’ motion for partial summary judgment, concluding that,
based upon the evidence presented, the Hoehls did not have actual knowledge
of, and could not reasonably have discovered, the harm caused by the
defendants’ conduct until June 2018 at the earliest and, therefore, that BDP’s
claims were not time-barred by the statute of limitations.
The jury subsequently found the defendants liable on theories of breach
of fiduciary duty, negligence, breach of contract, and negligent
misrepresentation. It concluded that the defendants’ conduct was the legal
cause of BDP’s injuries and awarded BDP approximately $27.6 million in
damages. The defendants subsequently moved to set aside the jury’s verdict,
which the court denied. The defendants also unsuccessfully moved for
reconsideration of the trial court’s ruling regarding the statute of limitations.
This appeal followed.
On appeal, the defendants first argue that the trial court erred in
determining that the discovery rule applies and that BDP’s claims were not
time-barred. BDP counters that the trial court sustainably exercised its
discretion in concluding that BDP was not on inquiry notice of the defendants’
breach until, “at the earliest, June 6, 2018.” We agree with BDP.
RSA 508:4, I, codifies the common law discovery rule. Balzotti Global
Grp., LLC v. Shepherds Hill Proponents, LLC, 173 N.H. 314, 320 (2020). It
provides that all personal actions, except those for slander and libel, must be
brought within three years of the act or omission complained of “except that
when the injury and its causal relationship to the act or omission were not
discovered and could not reasonably have been discovered at the time of the
act or omission,” then the action must be commenced within three years of “the
time the plaintiff discovers, or in the exercise of reasonable diligence should
have discovered, the injury and its causal relationship to the act or omission
complained of.” RSA 508:4, I (2010). Once a defendant has established that
the statute of limitations would bar an action, the plaintiff has the burden of
raising and proving that the discovery rule is applicable to an action that would
otherwise be barred by the statute of limitations. Balzotti, 173 N.H. at 320.
Pursuant to RSA 508:4, I, the three-year limitations period does not
begin to run until two prongs are satisfied: first, a plaintiff must know or
reasonably should have known that it has been injured; and second, a plaintiff
must know or reasonably should have known that its injury was proximately
3