THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0135, In the Matter of Nichole Flynn and
Luke Quimby, the court on March 25, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). The respondent, Luke Quimby (father), appeals a final decree of the
Circuit Court (Prevett, J.), issued following a hearing, adopting, among other
things, a parenting plan with respect to him and the petitioner, Nichole Christine
Flynn (mother), and their child in common. We construe the father’s brief to
argue that the trial court erred in weighing the evidence and finding that his
ability to parent was substantially impaired due to concerns surrounding his
mental health. We affirm.
The trial court is afforded wide discretion in determining matters of
parental rights and responsibilities; accordingly, when reviewing such decisions,
“our role is limited to determining whether it clearly appears that the trial court
engaged in an unsustainable exercise of discretion.” In the Matter of Kurowski &
Kurowski, 161 N.H. 578, 585 (2011). “We consider only whether the record
establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the discretionary judgment
made, and we will not disturb the trial court’s determination if it could
reasonably have been made.” Id. (quotation omitted). “The trial court’s
discretion necessarily extends to matters such as assigning weight to evidence
and assessing the credibility and demeanor of witnesses.” Id. “Conflicts in the
testimony, questions about the credibility of witnesses, and the weight assigned
to testimony are matters for the trial court to resolve.” Id. Indeed, resolution of
what is in the best interest of a child, which is the trial court’s overriding
concern, depends to a large extent upon the firsthand assessment of the
credibility of witnesses; accordingly, the findings of the trial court are binding
upon this court if supported by the evidence. See id.; In the Matter of Hampers &
Hampers, 154 N.H. 275, 281 (2006). “To the extent an appealing party argues
that the trial court committed error involving questions of law, we review such
issues de novo.” Kurowski, 161 N.H. at 585.
As the appealing party, the father has the burden of demonstrating
reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014). Based upon our
review of the trial court’s decision, the father’s challenges to it, the relevant law,
and the record submitted on appeal, we conclude that the father has not
demonstrated reversible error and affirm the court’s decision. See id.; Sup. Ct. R.
25(8).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2