THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0358, Catherine Turner & a. v. TD Bank,
N.A., the court on December 30, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, TD Bank, N.A., appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Howard, J.) that: (1) enjoined its foreclosure of a mortgage on
property formerly owned by the late Leslie and Nathalie Turner (the Turners);
and (2) quieted title to the property in the plaintiff, Catherine Turner, as
executor of the estate of Leslie Turner and Trustee of the Leslie Turner Trust –
2019 (the Trust), free and clear of any claim, right, title or interest of the
defendant. We vacate and remand.
The following facts were found by the trial court on offers of proof and
exhibits submitted at the final hearing, are undisputed by the parties, or relate
the contents of documents in the record. The plaintiff is the Turners’ daughter.
In 1996 and 1997, the Turners took title to two adjoining parcels in New
Durham, which were later treated as a single lot on the Town’s tax map (Lot
6C) and known by a single street address — first 80 Old Route 11 and later,
when Old Route 11 was renamed, 80 Tash Road.
In 2004, the State of New Hampshire quitclaimed to Leslie Turner a .23-
acre parcel located on Route 11 and referred to by the trial court and the
parties as “the sliver” or “the strip.” The sliver is located, according to the
plaintiff’s representation, “across the river and around the corner from” Lot 6C.
The quitclaim deed is recorded at Book 3051, Page 769 in the Strafford County
Registry of Deeds.
In 2006, the Turners signed a mortgage in favor of the defendant to
secure a home equity line of credit note with a credit limit of $100,000 (the
mortgage). The mortgage deed identified the mortgaged property as “THAT
CERTAIN PIECE OR PARCEL OF LAND, AND THE BUILDINGS AND
IMPROVEMENTS THEREON, KNOWN AS 80 Old Route 11, IN THE TOWN OF
New Durham . . . AND BEING MORE PARTICULARLY DESCRIBED IN A DEED
RECORDED IN BOOK 3051, PAGE 769.” Thus, the book and page number
referenced the sliver. According to the plaintiff, there were no buildings or
improvements on the sliver.
Sometime around 2010, the Turners filed for bankruptcy. Their
bankruptcy petition listed their residence at 80 Tash Road as being
encumbered by a mortgage in favor of the defendant. The trial court found that
“the promissory note for the $100,000 line of credit was discharged.” The
defendant has not appealed this finding.
On February 16, 2017, Leslie Turner brought a petition against the
defendant to quiet title to two lots he had subdivided (referred to therein as
Lots 7-0 and 7-1 shown on New Durham Tax Map 257) from property that
included the sliver. The petition alleged that the two lots should not be
encumbered by the mortgage notwithstanding its reference to the book and
page number of the quitclaim deed to the sliver. It further alleged that the
mortgage was “internally inconsistent as far as the property it is intended to
encumber” because it referred to both the book and page number for the sliver
and an address — 80 Old Route 11 — that is not the sliver’s location. Rather,
the petition noted, the sliver is “located on current Route 11.” At the hearing
on the 2017 quiet title petition, Leslie Turner’s counsel represented to the court
that Turner “own[ed] property on Tash Road, and it’s our belief that [this] is the
property that [the mortgage] was intended to encumber.”
Though properly served with the quiet title petition, the defendant did
not appear, defend, or file any counterclaims. However, on February 27, 2017,
the defendant filed with the Strafford County Registry of Deeds a purported
“corrective mortgage” to “correct the legal description” in the original mortgage.
(Capitalization omitted.) In that document, the defendant crossed out the
original property description and replaced it with the metes and bounds
description of Lot 6C. The defendant recorded the corrective mortgage without
sending it to the Turners or obtaining their consent and without notifying their
counsel in the pending quiet title action. After the hearing on the petition, a
default judgment issued in that action, quieting title to Lots 7-0 and 7-1 in
Leslie Turner (the 2017 decree).1
Following the deaths of both Leslie and Nathalie Turner, the plaintiff, as
Trustee of the Trust, became the owner of Lot 6C. The plaintiff’s counsel
represented to the trial court that at the time Leslie Turner’s estate was
probated, the defendant “hadn’t sent a statement in literally a decade.” In early
2023, the defendant commenced foreclosure proceedings on Lot 6C. This
action to enjoin the foreclosure and to quiet title followed.
The trial court determined that the case presented two dispositive
questions: “(1) Did the original 2006 mortgage deed adequately describe the
residential property (Lot 6C) at 80 [T]ash Road as the encumbered property;
1 The court’s order stated, in relevant part: “Now, therefore, a default judgment having issued, and
upon the Plaintiff’s Motion, the Court finds and rules that title to the above property is vested in
the Plaintiff free and clear of any interest of the Defendant.”
2
and (2) if it did not, was the ‘corrective deed’ recorded by [the defendant] in
2017 valid?” Answering both questions in the negative, the court enjoined
foreclosure and quieted title to Lot 6C in favor of the plaintiff. The defendant
now appeals.
“We will uphold the trial court’s determination [in a quiet title action]
unless it is erroneous as a matter of law or unsupported by the evidence.”
Brentwood Volunteer Fireman’s Assoc. v. Musso, 159 N.H. 461, 463 (2009).
“We will uphold the decision of the trial court with regard to the issuance of an
injunction absent an error of law, unsustainable exercise of discretion, or
clearly erroneous findings of fact.” Pike v. Deutsche Bank Nat’l Trust Co., 168
N.H. 40, 45 (2015) (quotation omitted).
The defendant first argues that “the trial court erred when it failed to find
that the Mortgage remained a valid and enforceable lien against the Property
following the entry of the [2017] Decree.” The defendant contends that the
2017 decree “amended” the mortgage by “strik[ing] off the legal description.” It
then argues that “what remained following the entry of the [2017 decree] was a
mortgage with the correct street address and no legal description, which
remained a legally valid encumbrance against [Lot 6C].” The plaintiff counters
that the court in 2017 “did not remove, or excise, or strike, any portion of the
mortgage deed,” but merely determined that the mortgage did not encumber
the sliver. She argues that “[t]he mortgage was originally encumbered by [sic]
the Sliver. When the Sliver was declared unencumbered, the mortgage was no
longer secured.”
We agree with the plaintiff only in part. The 2017 decree, by its terms,
merely vested title to Lots 7-0 and 7-1 in Leslie Turner “free and clear of any
interest of the Defendant.” It did not reform or otherwise affect the mortgage.
The remainder of the plaintiff’s argument, however, is premised upon the
proposition that the original mortgage encumbered only the sliver, which is a
ruling by the trial court that the defendant challenges on appeal. Accordingly,
we now turn to that issue.
The defendant argues that the trial court erred in concluding that the
mortgage encumbered the wrong property; namely, the sliver. The trial court
ruled:
The original mortgage deed signed in 2006, by its very terms
specifically and particularly described the sliver of land reflected in
Book 3051, Page 769 as the encumbered property. While the
description of the encumbered [property] was further identified as
the property at “80 Old Route 11,” the provision of the address did
nothing to supersede, alter or clarify the description of the
intended encumbered property.
3