THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0576, Old Tyme Manufacturing 4 Corp. &
a. v. CMAB Associates II, LLC & a., the court on November 7,
2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiffs, Old Tyme Manufacturing 4 Corp. (Old Tyme),
Cheers P.R. & C. Gaming Corp., and 286 Hospitality Corp. appeal an order of
the Superior Court (Schulman, J.) granting summary judgment in favor of the
defendants, CMAB Associates II, LLC (CMAB), Anthony Berni, Jr., and Carl
Berni. The defendants cross-appeal an order of the Superior Court (Attorri, J.)
partially denying their motion to dismiss the plaintiffs’ complaint and an order
of the Superior Court (Schulman, J.) denying their motion for judgment on the
pleadings. We affirm.
The following facts are taken from the trial court’s orders or recite the
contents of documents in the record. In August 2016, Old Tyme leased a
commercial property in Salem from CMAB. The lease provided that the
property would be used “only for the purpose of a charity poker operation.”
Substantial improvements were necessary to make the property suitable for
that purpose. The plaintiffs’ complaint alleges that they “spent over
$4,809,308 in time, materials, and labor” improving the property and that they
made some repairs and improvements based on the expectation of a credit
towards rent. It further alleges that the defendants refused to sign documents
required by the New Hampshire Lottery Commission, which led to the forced
closure of the business. Although the plaintiffs were later able to resume
operations, CMAB had already commenced a landlord and tenant action
against Old Tyme for non-payment of rent. CMAB was granted judgment in its
favor in an order noticed on August 30, 2018 and regained possession of the
property on January 15, 2019. The complaint alleges that, having evicted Old
Tyme, the defendants “are presently enjoying the benefit of the [plaintiffs’]
capital improvements, labor, good faith, service, goods, and materials.”
The plaintiffs commenced the instant action by complaint dated
December 27, 2021. They alleged claims for breach of contract, breach of the
covenant of good faith and fair dealing, violation of the New Hampshire
Consumer Protection Act, unjust enrichment and/or quantum meruit, and
promissory estoppel. The defendants filed a motion to dismiss the claims as
untimely, which the court granted as to all claims except unjust enrichment
and/or quantum meruit. The defendants subsequently moved for judgment on
the pleadings as to that count, which the trial court denied, and then for
summary judgment, which the trial court granted on the ground that the
plaintiffs were lawfully evicted for nonpayment of rent and the parties’ lease
agreement entitled the defendants to the delivery of the property along with all
fixtures, alterations, and additions upon termination of the lease. The parties
now respectively appeal and cross-appeal the orders adverse to them.
The plaintiffs challenge the grant of the defendants’ motion for summary
judgment. A moving party is entitled to summary judgment “if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with
the affidavits filed, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact
and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.” RSA
491:8-a, III (2010). When reviewing a trial court’s grant of summary judgment,
we consider the parties’ affidavits, other evidence, and all inferences properly
drawn from them in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Robinson
v. 1 Bouchard Street Realty, 177 N.H. 59, 61 (2024), 2024 N.H. 59, ¶6. If there
is no genuine issue of material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law, the grant of summary judgment is proper. Id. We
review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de novo. Id.
The plaintiffs appear to challenge various factual statements in the trial
court’s order relative to their payment of rent and the extent of any forbearance
agreed to by the defendants. They fail, however, to explain how those alleged
factual discrepancies are relevant to their claim on appeal that the trial court
erred in granting summary judgment in the defendants’ favor on the unjust
enrichment and/or quantum meruit claim. Accordingly, we decline to address
the plaintiffs’ factual claims.
“Unjust enrichment is an equitable remedy that is available when an
individual receives a benefit which would be unconscionable for him to retain.”
Axenics, Inc. v. Turner Constr. Co., 164 N.H. 659, 669 (2013) (quotation
omitted). The trial court ruled that although “the Landlord benefited from the
improvements[,] . . . it is not unconscionable to allow the Landlord the benefit
of the premises, as improved, per the terms of the lease agreement.”
(Emphasis added.) “It is a well-established principle that the court cannot
allow recovery under a theory of unjust enrichment when there is a valid,
express contract covering the subject matter at hand.” Id.
Here, the lease provided that Old Tyme would perform certain work “[t]o
be outlined as plans and approvals are completed.” It provided that Old Tyme
may also “make improvements and alterations to the Premises” as approved by
CMAB, and placed the responsibility on Old Tyme “to obtain all necessary
permits and approvals” for work both originally contemplated and later
approved. It further required Old Tyme to “discharge any liens for labor or
materials” provided in connection with such work. Finally, the lease provided
that upon its termination, Old Tyme “shall deliver to [CMAB] the Premises, the
2
Equipment . . . and other fixtures connected therewith and all alterations and
additions made to or upon the Premises.” Because the lease expressly provided
that the plaintiffs would deliver the property with all fixtures, alterations, and
improvements upon termination, there can be no recovery for unjust
enrichment for their value. See id.
The defendants argue that “notwithstanding Count 4’s invocation of the
words ‘quantum meruit,’ the Complaint does not reveal any intent to seek
damages under a substantive quantum meruit theory of recovery.” We agree
that the theory of recovery pled in count 4 is not entirely clear. Nevertheless, if
a quantum meruit theory is pled, it also fails based on the express contract
covering the subject matter. See, e.g., Page v. Marsh, 36 N.H. 305, 310 (1858)
(holding recovery under quantum meruit barred where “[t]here could have been
no expectation of any other compensation for [the plaintiff’s minor son’s]
services than that stipulated in the indenture to be rendered to the son”).
Accordingly, we affirm the court’s grant of summary judgment in favor of
the defendants. In light of our disposition of the plaintiffs’ appeal, we need not
address the defendants’ cross-appeal.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Countway and Gould, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3