THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0296, George Sideris v. LE Liquidation,
Inc., the court on January 13, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The plaintiff, George Sideris, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (St. Hilaire, J.), following a hearing, upholding a finding by the
New Hampshire Commission for Human Rights (commission) of no probable
cause on the plaintiff’s claims of employment discrimination and retaliation by
the defendant, LE Liquidation, Inc. See RSA 354-A:21, II(a) (2022). We affirm.
Under RSA 354-A:21, II(a), a member of the commission is required to
promptly investigate any complaint of unlawful discrimination. If the
investigating commissioner “finds no probable cause to credit the allegations in
the complaint,” the commission must dismiss the complaint “subject to a right
of appeal to superior court.” Id. In superior court, the plaintiff bears the
burden to establish “by a clear preponderance of the evidence” that the
commission’s decision was “unlawful or unreasonable.” Id. The trial court
must uphold the investigating commissioner’s factual findings “as long as the
record contains credible evidence to support them.” Id.
On appeal to this court, it is the plaintiff’s burden, as the appealing
party, to establish that the trial court reversibly erred. See Gallo v. Traina, 166
N.H. 737, 740 (2014). Based upon our review of the written arguments, the
relevant law, the record on appeal, and the trial court’s thorough and well-
reasoned decision, we find the plaintiff’s arguments unpersuasive, and we
affirm the trial court’s decision. See id. In light of this order, the request in
the defendant’s brief that we strike the plaintiff’s brief and dismiss the appeal
for failure to comply with Supreme Court Rule 16 is moot.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk