THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0240, BW Land Company, LLC v. Town of
Hooksett & a., the court on April 11, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, BW Land Company, LLC, appeals an order of
the Superior Court (Kissinger, J.) dismissing its claim against its abutting
landowner, defendant Eileen M. Bens, Trustee of the Eileen M. Bens Revocable
Trust, seeking a declaratory judgment that the Town of Hooksett has an
easement burdening the abutting landowner’s property. We note that the
plaintiff does not appeal the trial court’s resolution of any of its other claims
asserted against defendant Town of Hooksett. In dismissing the request for a
declaratory judgment against defendant Bens, the trial court determined that
the plaintiff lacked standing to establish that the town has a valid easement
burdening its abutting landowner’s property. On appeal, the plaintiff argues
that the trial court erred by determining that it lacked standing to pursue its
declaratory judgment claim against its abutting landowner, and by not ruling,
as a matter of law, that the town has a valid easement burdening the abutting
landowner’s property. We affirm.
It is the plaintiff’s burden to establish standing — that it and the
abutting landowner “have personal legal or equitable rights that are adverse to
one another, with regard to an actual, not hypothetical, dispute, which is
capable of judicial redress.” Richard v. Governor, 177 N.H. ___, ___ (2024),
2024 N.H. 53, ¶8. A lack of standing implicates the court’s subject matter
jurisdiction. See id. at ___, 2024 N.H. 53, ¶7. A party generally lacks standing
to assert the rights of another. See ACG Credit Co. v. Gill, 152 N.H. 260, 264
(2005).
As the appealing party, the plaintiff has the burden of demonstrating
reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014). Based upon our
review of the trial court’s well-reasoned order, the plaintiff’s arguments, the
relevant law, and the record submitted on appeal, we conclude that the plaintiff
has not demonstrated that the trial court erred by determining that the plaintiff
lacked standing to establish that the town has a valid easement burdening the
property of its abutting landowner. See id.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2