THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0144, State of New Hampshire v. Marc J.
Manchon, the court on April 4, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Marc J. Manchon, appeals his convictions,
following a bench trial in the Circuit Court (McIntyre, J.), of disorderly conduct,
see RSA 644:2, III(b) (2016), and obstructing government administration, see
RSA 642:1, I (2016). The defendant argues that: (1) the evidence was
insufficient to support his convictions; (2) the convictions violate his rights to
free speech and to petition the government for redress; (3) the trial judge was
biased; and (4) the prosecutor engaged in misconduct. We affirm.
We first address the defendant’s argument that the evidence was
insufficient to support his convictions of disorderly conduct and obstructing
government administration. To prevail in his challenge to the sufficiency of the
evidence, “the defendant must prove that no rational trier of fact, viewing all of
the evidence and all reasonable inferences drawn therefrom in the light most
favorable to the State, could have found the essential elements of the offense
beyond a reasonable doubt.” State v. Cullen, 175 N.H. 628, 630 (2023). To
prove the defendant guilty of disorderly conduct, the State was required to
prove that the defendant purposely caused a public inconvenience by
disrupting the orderly conduct of business in a public or governmental facility.
RSA 644:2, III(b). To prove the defendant guilty of obstructing government
administration, the State was required to prove that the defendant engaged in
unlawful conduct, namely, disorderly conduct, with a purpose to interfere with
a public servant performing an official function. See RSA 642:1, I.
A police dispatcher testified that the defendant entered the police
department lobby and “immediately became quite emotional” when he learned
that there was an eight dollar fee for documents he had requested. After the
defendant raised his voice, became “escalated,” and “continued to yell and
swear,” the dispatcher contacted a police officer for assistance. The defendant
threatened the officer that, if he could not have his documents without paying
a fee, he would “go live” and have his social media followers “flood” the station’s
phone lines. The defendant then started “live streaming his experience” at the
police department, telling his followers to “flood the station” with phone calls.
The defendant then provided his viewers with the dispatcher’s full name, age,
and home address. The police department started receiving calls that “were
disturbing in nature,” some of which were “borderline threatening.” Between
7:00 p.m. and midnight, the department received 699 phone calls, when
normally the department would receive “single to low double-digit phone calls.”
The previous Thursday, for example, the department received 14 calls in the
same period. The dispatcher testified that the volume of calls made her job
“almost impossible to do.”
The defendant argues that the evidence was insufficient to support the
convictions because the calls were made to the police department’s non-
emergency number. The dispatcher testified, however, that people sometimes
call the non-emergency number even when they have an actual emergency.
She explained that she could not “ignore any of those incoming calls because
any one of them might be an emergency call for help.” Moreover, regardless of
which phone number the defendant urged his followers to call, the evidence
showed that his purpose was to disrupt the orderly conduct of police business.
We conclude that the evidence was sufficient to support the convictions. See
State v. Cullen, 175 N.H. at 630.
The defendant argues that his convictions violated his rights under the
State and federal constitutions to free speech and to petition the government
for redress of grievances. We conclude that the trial court correctly ruled that
the defendant’s conduct was not constitutionally protected because it was not
intended to accomplish a legitimate purpose but, rather, “to incite lawless
action” that obstructed government operations. See State v. Comley, 130 N.H.
688, 691-92 (1988). Because the Federal Constitution offers the defendant no
greater protection than the State Constitution in these circumstances, see id.;
Grayned v. City of Rockford, 408 U.S. 104, 116 (1972), we reach the same
conclusion under the Federal Constitution.
The defendant argues that the trial judge was biased against him
because the judge did not consider his constitutional arguments. The record
shows, however, that the judge carefully considered the defendant’s
constitutional arguments but was not persuaded by them. The trial court’s
ruling against the defendant does not demonstrate bias. See State v. Bader,
148 N.H. 265, 271 (2002).
Finally, the defendant argues that the prosecutor’s conduct during the
trial “may have unfairly influenced the judge’s decision.” However, he does not
identify any specific conduct that he found objectionable. Accordingly, we
conclude that this issue is not adequately briefed. See State v. Blackmer, 149
N.H. 47, 49 (2003).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2