THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0563, In the Matter of Donald Coates, Jr.
and Teresa Shanley, the court on September 12, 2025, issued
the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The petitioner, Donald Coates, Jr. (father), appeals the final
parenting plan ordered by the Circuit Court (LeFrancois, R., approved by Lown,
J.), regarding his child with the respondent, Teresa Shanley (mother). The
father argues that the trial court’s parenting plan constitutes an unsustainable
exercise of discretion. We affirm.
“In determining parental rights and responsibilities, the court shall be
guided by the best interests of the child.” RSA 461-A:6, I (Supp. 2023); see In
the Matter of Ndyaija & Ndyaija, 173 N.H. 127, 146 (2020). “When reviewing a
trial court’s decision on parenting rights and responsibilities, our role is limited
to determining whether it clearly appears that the trial court engaged in an
unsustainable exercise of discretion.” In the Matter of Kurowski & Kurowski,
161 N.H. 578, 585 (2011). “It is not our role to calculate how much weight the
trial court should afford specific evidence, second guess its decisions regarding
witness credibility, or substitute our judgment for that of the trial court on a
discretionary ruling.” Id. at 600. “We consider only whether the record
establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the discretionary judgment
made, and we will not disturb the trial court’s determination if it could
reasonably have been made.” Id. at 585 (quotation omitted).
On August 18, 2023, the trial court granted the mother’s motion to
relocate with the child to Hardwick, Massachusetts. Temporary orders
provided the father with weekend parenting time. The final parenting plan
reduced his parenting time to every other weekend. In determining a child’s
best interests, one factor for the court to consider is the support of each parent
for the child’s relationship with the other parent. See RSA 461-A:6, I(g). The
trial court found that the reduction in the father’s parenting time was
warranted because he had consistently engaged in conduct designed to
“interfere with [the] mother’s relationship with [the child]” and that “tend[ed] to
alienate [the child’s] affections for her mother.”
The father asserts that the record does not support the trial court’s
findings. The guardian ad litem (GAL) testified that that the father denigrated
the mother in communications with the parent of one of the child’s friends,
stating that the mother was “not capable or stable.” The father also conveyed
his negative feelings about the mother in texts shared with the child. The GAL
testified that the eleven-year-old child was calling the mother an “unfit parent,”
“incompetent and incapable,” and “not financially or mentally stable,”
descriptions that she had learned from the father. We conclude that the record
supports the trial court’s finding that the father engaged in conduct that did
not support the child’s relationship with the mother. See RSA 461-A:6, I(g).
We reject the father’s assertion that the GAL’s report was “flawed and
incomplete.”
The father also asserts that the trial court ignored evidence that the
mother “struggles to meet basic parenting skills.” The court found that both
parents are able to care for the child and provide her with “adequate food,
clothing, shelter, medical care, and a safe environment.” See RSA 461-A:6, I(b)
(trial court shall consider “[t]he ability of each parent to assure that the child
receives adequate food, clothing, shelter, medical care, and a safe
environment”). The court found that any complications from the mother’s
medical issues “do not prevent [her] from properly caring for [the child].”
Accordingly, we reject the father’s assertions that the trial court ignored
evidence that the mother was unable to care for the child.
The father also asserts that the court failed to acknowledge his strengths
as a parent and his positive influence on the child. As the trial court noted, the
pastor of the father’s church testified that the father is an active member of the
church community and teaches vacation Bible school. The court also found,
however, that the pastor “does not know how [the] father interacts with [the]
mother,” and that the record “is replete with examples of [the] father’s
uncharitable words and actions towards [the] mother and the maternal
grandparents.” It is not our role to determine how much weight the trial court
should give to the testimony of witnesses. See In the Matter of Kurowski, 161
N.H. at 600. The court acknowledged that the father is able to provide the
child with food, clothing, shelter, medical care, and a safe environment.
Accordingly, we reject the father’s assertion that the trial court ignored
evidence of his strengths as a parent or his positive influence on the child.
The father also asserts that the trial court erred by disregarding the
child’s stated preference regarding parental rights and responsibilities. The
best interest statute provides that, “[i]f the court finds by clear and convincing
evidence that a minor child is of sufficient maturity to make a sound judgment,
the court may give substantial weight to the preference of the mature minor
child as to the determination of parental rights and responsibilities.” RSA 461-
A:6, II. The statute further provides that “the court shall also give due
consideration to other factors which may have affected the minor child’s
preference, including whether the minor child’s preference was based on
undesirable or improper influences.” Id. In this case, the court found that the
2
eleven-year-old child was not of sufficient maturity to make a sound judgment
regarding parental rights and responsibilities. The court found that the
“father’s overbearing communications with [the child] demeaning mother and
promising to overturn the relocation order are improper influences by [the]
father on [the child’s] perceived preference.” We conclude that the record
supports the court’s decision not to give substantial weight to the child’s stated
preference.
The father also asserts that the court ignored the mother’s “dependency
on her parents.” The court found that the mother was fully capable of
parenting the child without her parents, noting that although the mother
initially moved in with her parents, she now has her own apartment with the
child. Accordingly, we reject the father’s assertion that court ignored evidence
that the mother is dependent on her parents, or that the parenting plan
effectively awards parenting time to the maternal grandparents.
Finally, the father argues that the trial court unsustainably exercised its
discretion by reducing his telephone time with the child. The temporary orders
allowed the father to communicate by phone at reasonable times without
restriction. The final parenting plan limited the father’s telephone time with
the child to no more than one half hour on Tuesday and Thursday evenings at
7:00 p.m. The court found that the father “has not shown an ability to
. . . temper his communications with [the child] to keep her out of the dispute
between father and mother.” We conclude that the record supports the court’s
findings, and we reject the father’s assertion that this reduction in telephone
time is incompatible with the provision of the parenting plan regarding
decision-making responsibility.
We conclude that the record provides an objective basis sufficient to
sustain the trial court’s discretionary judgment that the parenting plan is in
the child’s best interest, and that the father has failed to demonstrate that the
court unsustainably exercised its discretion. See In the Matter of Kurowski,
161 N.H. at 585.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3