THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0208, Lefebvre’s Towing, LLC v. Shakira
Caraballo, the court on January 24, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The plaintiff, Lefebvre’s Towing, LLC, appeals an order of the
Circuit Court (Zaino, J.), following a hearing, dismissing its small claim seeking
towing and storage costs against the defendant, Shakira Caraballo, the “last
registered owner” of a motor vehicle, see RSA 262:40-a, IV (2024), on grounds
that the defendant established that she had “transfer[red] ownership [of the
vehicle] to another person,” see id., and that that fact was undisputed. The
plaintiff additionally appeals a pre-hearing order (Kane, R., approved by
Guptill, J.) denying its motion for discovery, and a post-dismissal order (Alfano,
J.) denying its motion to reconsider the dismissal. We affirm.
It is the plaintiff’s burden, as the appealing party, to provide a record
that is sufficient to decide the issues being raised. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop.
Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004). In the absence of a transcript, we assume
that the evidence was sufficient to support the result reached by the trial court.
Id. It is likewise the plaintiff’s burden on appeal to support the issues raised in
its brief with fully developed legal arguments. See State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H.
47, 49 (2003). These procedural rules are not relaxed for parties who are not
represented by legal counsel. See In the Matter of Birmingham & Birmingham,
154 N.H. 51, 56-57 (2006).
In this case, the plaintiff has not provided a transcript of the hearing at
which the trial court found that the defendant established that she had
“transfer[red] ownership [of the vehicle] to another person” for purposes of RSA
262:40-a, IV, and that that fact was undisputed. Accordingly, we must assume
that the record supports these findings. Nor has the plaintiff fully developed
any of the arguments it is raising. See Blackmer, 149 N.H. at 49.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk