THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0373, Town of Hanover v. John Doe & a.,
the court on June 17, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). Defendant John Doe appeals an order of the Superior Court
(MacLeod, J.) granting summary judgment in favor of defendant John Smith on
a petition for declaratory judgment brought by the Town of Hanover concerning
whether it is required to release Doe’s annulled arrest record pursuant to
Smith’s Right-to-Know law request. Doe argues that his agreement to enter a
pretrial diversion program, pursuant to which the prosecutor represented that
Doe’s arrest file with the Hanover Police Department would be sealed upon his
successful completion of the program, constitutes a special circumstance or
overriding consideration requiring that his arrest record be sealed. Doe further
argues that his arrest file is exempt from disclosure pursuant to RSA 91-A:5
(2023). Finally, Doe argues that the trial court erred by not ordering the town
to produce a “Vaughn index” to assist the parties in determining what specific
records may or may not be exempt from disclosure. We affirm.
In reviewing the trial court’s decision granting summary judgment, we
consider the evidence in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party, and if
no genuine issue of material fact exists, we determine whether the moving
party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Hardy v. Chester Arms, LLC,
176 N.H. 421, 426 (2024), 2024 N.H. 5, ¶7. We will affirm the trial court’s
grant of summary judgment if our review of the evidence discloses no genuine
issues of material fact, that is, facts that would affect the outcome of the case,
and if the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. See id. We
review the trial court’s application of law to the facts de novo. Id.
As the appealing party, Doe bears the burden on appeal of demonstrating
reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014). Based upon our
review of the trial court’s thorough and well-reasoned decision, Doe’s
arguments, the relevant law, and the record submitted on appeal, we conclude
that Doe has not demonstrated reversible error. See id.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2