THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0653, C.S. v. N.V., the court on April 14,
2025, issued the following order:
The plaintiff’s motion for an exemption from e-filing is granted to the
limited extent that the plaintiff seeks an exemption with respect to the brief
that the plaintiff conventionally filed on February 21, 2025. In all other
respects, the motion is denied. The defendant’s “motion to deem plaintiff’s
arguments as conceded” contains arguments that oppose the plaintiff’s motion
for an exemption from e-filing, that are responsive to the plaintiff’s
conventionally filed brief, and that further challenge the trial court’s decision in
favor of the plaintiff. Accordingly, we treat the motion as both an objection to
the plaintiff’s motion for an exemption from e-filing and a timely-filed reply
brief. To the extent that the “motion to deem plaintiff’s arguments as
conceded” seeks affirmative relief from this court, it is denied.
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, N.V., appeals a civil stalking final order of
protection issued by the Circuit Court (Walch, J.), following a hearing, in favor
of the plaintiff, C.S. See RSA 633:3-a, III-a (2016). We construe the
defendant’s brief to be challenging the sufficiency of the evidence to support
the trial court’s decision. We affirm.
Any stalking victim “may seek relief by filing a civil petition in the
[circuit] court”; upon proof by a preponderance of the evidence, the court “shall
grant such relief as is necessary to bring about a cessation of stalking.” RSA
633:3-a, III-a. “Stalking” includes “[p]urposely, knowingly, or recklessly
engag[ing] in a course of conduct targeted at a specific person which would
cause a reasonable person to fear for his or her personal safety or the safety of
a member of that person’s immediate family, and the person is actually placed
in such fear.” RSA 633:3-a, I(a) (2016). “A person acts purposely with respect
to a material element of an offense [under the criminal code] when his
conscious object is to cause the result or engage in the conduct that comprises
the element.” RSA 626:2, II(a) (2016). By contrast,
[a] person acts recklessly . . . when he is aware of and consciously
disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that the material
element exists or will result from his conduct. The risk must be of
such a nature and degree that, considering the circumstances
known to him, its disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the
conduct that a law-abiding person would observe in the situation.
RSA 626:2, II(c) (2016).
“‘Course of conduct’ means 2 or more acts over a period of time, however
short, which evidences a continuity of purpose.” RSA 633:3-a, II(a) (2016).
Acts that may constitute a “course of conduct” include, but are not limited to,
“[t]hreatening the safety of the targeted person,” “[a]ppearing in close proximity
to . . . the person’s residence,” and engaging in “[a]ny act of communication, as
defined in RSA 644:4, II.” RSA 633:3-a, II(a)(1), (3), and (7). RSA 644:4, II
(Supp. 2024) defines “communicates” for purposes of RSA 644:4, I (Supp.
2024), to mean, “to impart a message by any method of transmission,
including, but not limited to . . . personally delivering or sending or having
delivered any information or material by . . . electronic transmission.” In turn,
under RSA 644:4, I(e), it is unlawful to communicate “a threat to the life or
safety of another” with “the purpose to annoy or alarm another.”
The trial court’s “findings of facts shall be final, but questions of law may
be transferred from the circuit court to the supreme court.” RSA 173-B:3, VI
(2022); see RSA 633:3-a, III-a (providing that, in civil stalking proceedings, “the
procedures and burdens of proof to be applied . . . shall be the same as those
set forth in RSA 173-B”). We review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a
matter of law and will uphold the trial court’s findings and rulings unless they
lack evidentiary support or are tainted by error of law. Despres v. Hampsey,
162 N.H. 398, 401 (2011). We view the evidence in the light most favorable to
the plaintiff, deferring to the trial court’s evaluation of the witnesses’ credibility,
id. at 401, 404, recognizing that the trial court has the benefit of observing the
demeanor of the witnesses first-hand, see State v. Giles, 140 N.H. 714, 718-19
(1996) (“We defer to the jury’s findings on credibility in part because a trial
transcript provides no indication of a witness’s tone of voice or demeanor, two
useful tools in the assessment of credibility.”).
In this case, the trial court found that the defendant recklessly engaged
in a course of conduct targeted at the plaintiff when he: (1) told the plaintiff
that he was going to burn down the building in which the parties worked; (2)
further told the plaintiff that a “cartel” was after the defendant, that he carries
a firearm, that he would shoot members of the cartel who showed up at their
place of employment, and that the plaintiff might get caught in crossfire; and
(3) began driving by the plaintiff’s home after the plaintiff asked the defendant
not to contact her anymore. The trial court further found that the course of
conduct reasonably caused the plaintiff to fear for her personal safety. The
evidence submitted at trial, including text messages exchanged between the
parties and the parties’ testimony, supports these findings. Although the
defendant offers a different interpretation of the evidence and argues why the
2
plaintiff was not credible, it was for the trial court to assess the credibility of
the parties and the weight of the evidence presented. See Despres, 162 N.H. at
401, 404. Viewing the evidence in this case in the light most favorable to the
plaintiff, we conclude that the trial court’s findings and rulings are neither
lacking in evidentiary support nor tainted by error of law. See id. at 401.
The defendant’s remaining arguments either are insufficiently developed,
see State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 49 (2003), were not raised in the trial
court, see id. at 48, or do not otherwise warrant further discussion, see Vogel v.
Vogel, 137 N.H. 321, 322 (1993).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3