THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0448, State of New Hampshire v. Madison
T. West, the court on August 18, 2026, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The
defendant, Madison T. West, appeals his convictions on three counts of
aggravated felonious sexual assault (AFSA), see RSA 632-A:2, I(l) (2016),
following a jury trial in Superior Court (Will, J.). On appeal, the defendant
argues that the trial court erred when it: (1) allowed the State to impeach its
own witness with prior inconsistent statements where the witness otherwise
offered no substantive or relevant testimony; (2) admitted a child declarant’s
statements to a medical provider under the hearsay exception for statements
made for the purpose of medical diagnosis or treatment, see N.H. R. Ev. 803(4);
and (3) excluded certain testimony offered by the defendant’s expert witness.
We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. In August 2020, J.C. and
her friend R.M. were both four years old. R.M.’s mother, who was divorced
from R.M.’s father, was dating the defendant. The defendant lived in a home in
Strafford with R.M., her mother, and R.M.’s older sister.
One afternoon, J.C.’s father dropped her off at R.M.’s house for a
playdate. R.M.’s mother was gone for part of the afternoon, during which time
the defendant was at the house with J.C., R.M., and R.M.’s older sister. The
defendant told J.C. and R.M. that they were going to a “fun party” and led the
girls into the walk-in closet in the master bedroom. Inside the closet, the
defendant “made [them] put [their] mouths” on the defendant’s penis. J.C. did
not want to put her mouth on the defendant’s penis, and the defendant called
her a “[p]arty pooper” and told her she “ha[d] to do it.” The defendant also
performed cunnilingus on J.C.1 The defendant told J.C. and R.M. not to tell
anyone what had happened or else “[h]e would get taken away.”
R.M.’s mother returned to the house and found the defendant, J.C.,
R.M., and R.M.’s older sister in the kitchen. Later that evening, the defendant
1 The State charged the defendant in separate indictments with performing cunnilingus on both
J.C. and R.M. In her testimony, J.C. testified that the defendant performed cunnilingus on both
children. The jury acquitted the defendant of performing cunnilingus on R.M.
brought J.C. back to her house. After the defendant left, J.C. told her parents
about the incident with the defendant and R.M. J.C.’s parents notified the
police and took her to the emergency room the following morning. Later, J.C.
and R.M. each participated in two interviews with the Child Advocacy Center
(CAC). J.C. was also examined by Dr. Amy Roy, a pediatrician with the Child
Advocacy and Protection Program.
Both J.C. and R.M. testified at trial, at which point each girl was eight
years old. J.C. testified about the events that transpired in the closet, while
R.M. testified that she could not remember or otherwise did not know about
the incident with the defendant, although she recalled having playdates with
J.C. and recalled her mother dating a man with the defendant’s name.
Following a four-day trial, the jury found the defendant guilty of two counts of
AFSA involving J.C., one for engaging in fellatio and one for engaging in
cunnilingus. The jury also found the defendant guilty of one count of AFSA
involving R.M. for engaging in fellatio. This appeal followed.
Each of the defendant’s arguments on appeal challenges the trial court’s
admission or exclusion of certain evidence. We accord the trial court
considerable deference in determining the admissibility of evidence, and we will
not disturb its decision absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. State
v. Munroe, 173 N.H. 469, 479 (2020). To demonstrate an unsustainable
exercise of discretion, the defendant must show that the trial court’s ruling was
clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Id. We
determine only whether the record establishes an objective basis sufficient to
sustain the discretionary judgment made. State v. Roy, 174 N.H. 622, 627
(2021). Our task is not to determine whether we would have found differently,
but is only to determine whether a reasonable person could have reached the
same decision as the trial court on the basis of the evidence before it. Id.
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred when it permitted
the State to impeach its own witness, R.M., with her prior inconsistent
statements. After J.C. reported the assaults to her parents, R.M. later
disclosed to her biological father that the defendant had assaulted her and J.C.
R.M. also stated during an interview with the CAC that her mother “was really
angry” about J.C. accusing the defendant of the assaults. At trial, the State
used these prior statements to impeach R.M. after R.M. testified that she either
did not remember making these statements or otherwise did not know why her
mother was angry, as described in her CAC interview. The defendant contends
that, because R.M. did not offer substantive testimony that was instrumental
to building the State’s case, the State could not impeach her with her prior
inconsistent statements. See State v. Soldi, 145 N.H. 571, 574 (2000) (“Where
the State has called a witness whose corroborating testimony is instrumental
to constructing the State’s case, the State has the right to question the witness,
and to attempt to impeach her, about those aspects of her testimony that
2
conflict with the State’s account of the same events.” (quotation and brackets
omitted)).
The State counters that this argument was never presented to the trial
court and therefore is not preserved for our review. Generally, we do not
consider issues raised on appeal that were not presented in the trial court.
State v. Batista-Salva, 171 N.H. 818, 822 (2019). This preservation
requirement, expressed in both our case law and Supreme Court Rule 16(3)(b),
reflects the general policy that trial forums should have an opportunity to rule
on issues and to correct errors before they are presented to the appellate court.
Id. The defendant, as the appealing party, bears the burden of demonstrating
that he specifically raised the arguments articulated in his appellate brief
before the trial court. Id.
The defendant contends that his substantive testimony argument was
preserved at trial by: (1) his objection during R.M.’s testimony to the admission
of her prior statements from her CAC interview; and (2) his objection during
R.M.’s father’s testimony to the admission of statements that R.M. made to her
father. In both instances, however, the defendant objected to the State’s
attempted impeachment of R.M. on the ground that the State could not
impeach R.M.’s answers of “I don’t know” and “I don’t remember” with prior
inconsistent statements in order to demonstrate that R.M. did, at one point,
know or remember the events inquired about by the State. In both instances,
the court overruled the defendant’s objection, concluding that R.M.’s answers
of “I don’t know” were effectively denials that the State could impeach with her
prior statements. The defendant never argued before the trial court, as he does
on appeal, that the State could not impeach R.M. with her prior inconsistent
statements because R.M.’s testimony “offered no relevant substantive
evidence.” Thus, the trial court did not have the opportunity to consider the
argument the defendant raises on appeal.2 We therefore conclude that this
argument is unpreserved. See id. at 822-23.
We further conclude that the trial court did not commit plain error when
it permitted the State to impeach R.M. with her prior statements. “For us to
find plain error: (1) there must be error; (2) the error must be plain; and (3) the
2 We further note that the defendant had ample opportunity to raise this argument before the trial
court. Prior to trial, defense counsel informed the court that “[a]s far as we know, when [R.M.]
gets on the stand, she is not going to testify that any of these acts occurred,” and that “[a]t most,
[R.M.] will say that she does not remember.” At trial, after the conclusion of R.M.’s testimony, the
defendant could have renewed his objection and raised the argument he now asserts on appeal:
that R.M.’s lack of substantive testimony should have barred the State from impeaching her with
her prior statements. At the end of trial or after trial, the defendant could have sought
reconsideration of the court’s ruling or otherwise alerted the court to his view that the court
erroneously allowed the State to impeach R.M. on this basis. See State v. Gay, 169 N.H. 232, 248
(2016) (concluding defendant failed to preserve argument where “[t]he record on appeal [did] not
demonstrate that the defendant sought reconsideration of the court’s ruling or otherwise alerted
the court to his view that the court erroneously ruled that statements” of witness were irrelevant).
3