THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0141, Three Ponds Investment, LLC v.
Town of Milton & a., the court on January 14, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The plaintiff, Three Ponds Investment, LLC, appeals the
order of the Superior Court (Howard, J.) upholding the decision of the Town of
Milton Planning Board (board) denying its application for site plan approval.
The plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in: (1) ruling that the board did
not fail to provide reasonable assistance in the site plan review process; and
(2) affirming the board’s decision to deny the application for failing to comply
with the town’s ordinance. We affirm.
The trial court’s review of a planning board’s decision is governed by RSA
677:15 (2016), which provides that the trial court “may reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the decision brought up for review when there
is an error of law or when the court is persuaded by the balance of
probabilities, on the evidence before it, that [the board’s] decision is
unreasonable.” RSA 677:15, V. Thus, the trial court’s review is limited.
Trustees of Dartmouth Coll. v. Town of Hanover, 171 N.H. 497, 504 (2018).
The trial court must treat the factual findings of the planning board as prima
facie lawful and reasonable and cannot set aside its decision absent
unreasonableness or an identified error of law. Id. The appealing party bears
the burden of persuading the trial court that, by the balance of probabilities,
the board’s decision was unreasonable. Id. The trial court determines not
whether it agrees with the planning board’s findings, but whether there is
evidence upon which its findings could have reasonably been based. Id.
Our review is similarly limited. We will reverse a trial court’s decision on
appeal only if it is not supported by the evidence or is legally erroneous. Id.
We review the trial court’s decision to determine whether a reasonable person
could have reached the same decision as the trial court based upon the
evidence before it. Id.
The plaintiff first argues that the trial court erred in ruling that the board
did not violate Part I, Article 1 of the State Constitution by failing to provide
reasonable assistance in the subdivision and site plan review process. We have
recognized that, in furtherance of Part I, Article 1 of our State Constitution,
municipalities have an obligation to assist persons seeking approval under
zoning ordinances. Richmond Co., Inc. v. City of Concord, 149 N.H. 312, 314-
15 (2003). The plaintiff asserts that, “[f]rom the outset, the [b]oard was
vehemently opposed to the [a]pplication.” However, the board, in fact, granted
the plaintiff’s waiver request to allow for the construction of multi-family
dwellings within the town’s open space subdivision, where typically only single-
family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and manufactured housing are
permitted. Milton, N.H., Rev. Ordinances art. VI, § 6 (2021).
When the plaintiff submitted its site plan application for review, the town
planner determined that the application was incomplete because it lacked draft
condominium documents, proposed conservation easements, and elevation
views for the proposed structures. The plaintiff withdrew and resubmitted its
application with the required documents. Based upon the view of at least one
board member that the plaintiff’s owner, an experienced developer, should have
known that these documents were required, the board denied the plaintiff’s
request to waive the filing fee for the resubmitted application. The plaintiff
asserts that the board’s decision evidenced its “intent to frustrate, rather than
assist,” the plaintiff in its effort to obtain site plan approval.
The plaintiff asserts that the board then “sought to kill the [p]roject
through dilatory tactics, vague directives, and repeatedly moving the goal
posts.” However, as the trial court observed, the plaintiff “describes a process
flush with feedback from the [b]oard, and, indeed, a back-and-forth between
the [b]oard and [the plaintiff] across multiple public hearings.”
At a February 1, 2022 hearing, after receiving feedback from the board,
the plaintiff presented the board with two, alternative conceptual drawings,
rather than a complete, reviewable site plan. The plaintiff asked the board for
guidance as to which concept it preferred. The board voted to “deny the plan
as presented,” but to allow the plaintiff to reapply. The plaintiff argues that the
board’s refusal to provide guidance at this stage also demonstrated its failure
to provide reasonable assistance in the site plan review process. Based upon
this record, we cannot conclude that the board acted unreasonably, or that it
failed to fulfill its constitutional obligation to assist the plaintiff. See Richmond
Co., 149 N.H. at 314-15.
The plaintiff next argues that the trial court erred in affirming the board’s
decision to deny its application for failing to comply with building height
restrictions in the town’s ordinance. Under the ordinance, building heights
within an open space development are limited to 35 feet; however, the board
may waive that limitation and allow for an increase of 25 per cent by
conditional use permit. Milton, N.H., Rev. Ordinances art. VI, § 9(a), (f). The
plaintiff requested a waiver of the height restrictions, but the board voted
against it.
2
To satisfy the 35-foot height restriction, the plaintiff proposed
constructing retaining walls around the buildings and piling dirt between the
walls and the buildings, thereby lowering the buildings’ height through site
work. The height of the buildings relative to the surrounding landscape would
remain unchanged. The trial court found that, “[i]n essence, the [plaintiff]
explained that it would substitute retaining walls for foundations to achieve the
height of 35 feet, bringing buildings that are up to 56 feet high down to 35
feet.” The board denied the application as presented.
Finally, the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in affirming the
board’s decision to deny its application for failing to comply with the town’s
100-foot vegetative buffer requirement. The ordinance provides that,
“[d]epending on the abutting land uses, the Open Space Development may have
a buffer of less than 100 feet between abutting land uses and the
development.” Milton, N.H., Rev. Ordinances art. VI, § 9(h). The plaintiff
argues that, given this language, the board could not properly deny its proposal
for a smaller buffer “[a]bsent compelling evidence that a 100-foot buffer was
necessary.” We agree with the trial court that the board was not required to
provide evidence to support its decision to require a 100-foot buffer. We find
the trial court’s decision to be supported by the evidence and not legally
erroneous. See Trustees of Dartmouth Coll., 171 N.H. at 504.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3