THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0193, Joan Shack v. DeMoulas Super
Markets, Inc., the court on February 19, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). The defendant, DeMoulas Super Markets, Inc., appeals a jury’s verdict
in Superior Court (Temple, J.) in favor of the plaintiff, Joan Shack, in a personal
injury case. The defendant argues that the trial court erred in admitting:
(1) evidence that the display of reduced price goods (reduced rack) was moved
after the accident; and (2) video evidence that was not authenticated by the
videographer. We affirm.
The decision to admit or exclude evidence is within the trial court’s
discretion. State v. Furgal, 164 N.H. 430, 438 (2012). When determining
whether a ruling is a proper exercise of judicial discretion, we consider whether
the record establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the trial court’s
decision. Id. The defendant must demonstrate that the court’s ruling was clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of its case. Id.
The plaintiff fell near the reduced rack at the Market Basket in Hudson.
The defendant first argues that evidence that the reduced rack was moved after
the accident was inadmissible evidence of a subsequent remedial measure.
Under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 407, evidence of subsequent remedial
measures is inadmissible “to prove negligence or culpable conduct in connection
with the event, [but is admissible] when offered for another purpose, such as
proving ownership, control, or feasibility of precautionary measures, if
controverted, or impeachment.” MacDonald v. B.M.D. Golf Assocs., 148 N.H.
582, 585 (2002); N.H. R. Ev. 407.
The plaintiff testified on cross-examination that she continues to shop at
the Market Basket in Hudson, and that she feels that the reduced rack area is a
“safe place to be.” David Slater was the chairperson of the safety committee at
the Hudson store on the date of the plaintiff’s injury. At the time of trial, he was
an assistant store manager at a different Market Basket store. Slater testified
that he believed that the reduced rack at the Hudson store remained in the same
location, and that he would be surprised if it had been moved to a different
location.
To correct the misimpression created by Slater’s testimony that the
reduced rack remained at the same location, the plaintiff sought to introduce
testimony that the rack had been moved. The defendant objected that the
testimony would be inadmissible evidence of a subsequent remedial measure.
The trial court ruled that the evidence was admissible with a limiting instruction.
The court instructed the jury that the testimony was being offered to clarify that
the reduced rack was now in a different location, and that the jury should “not in
any way . . . consider the movement of this rack to another location as evidence
of negligence.” We presume the jury followed the court’s instructions. Nilsson v.
Bierman, 150 N.H. 393, 403 (2003). Based upon this record, we conclude that
the trial court sustainably exercised its discretion in admitting the testimony.
See Furgal, 164 N.H. at 438.
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred in admitting video
evidence without authenticating testimony from the videographer. New
Hampshire Rule of Evidence 901(a) provides that “[t]o satisfy the requirement of
authenticating or identifying an item of evidence, the proponent must produce
evidence sufficient to support a finding that the item is what the proponent
claims it is.” N.H. R. Ev. 901(a). The bar for authentication of an exhibit is not
particularly high, and the proponent need not rule out all possibilities
inconsistent with authenticity, or prove beyond any doubt that the evidence is
what it purports to be. State v. Chandler, 176 N.H. 216, 223 (2023). “Once the
evidence is admitted, the rest is up to the jury.” State v. Ruggiero, 163 N.H. 129,
136 (2011) (quotation omitted).
Thomas Lavoie, a grocery clerk at the Hudson store on the date of the
plaintiff’s injury, was pulling the pallet jack that caused the plaintiff to fall. The
parties agreed to play the videotaped deposition of Lavoie for the jury because he
was unavailable for trial. Two short videos depicting the scene of the plaintiff’s
fall were played during Lavoie’s deposition. According to the plaintiff’s attorney,
the videos were taken by the plaintiff’s daughter-in-law. During the deposition,
Lavoie confirmed that the videos depicted the area where the plaintiff fell. The
store’s surveillance video showing the plaintiff’s fall also was played during
Lavoie’s deposition, and at trial. The plaintiff sought to admit the other videos at
trial to show pallets moving through the area from a different angle than shown
on the surveillance video. The defendant objected, noting that the pallets in one
video were empty, the pallets in the other video were full, and that neither video
depicted pallets as they were when the plaintiff fell. The trial court noted that the
jury had seen the surveillance video showing the plaintiff’s fall and could
compare the surveillance video to the other two videos. The court ruled that it
would admit the videos with a limiting instruction.
The trial court reminded the jury that they had “seen the surveillance
video,” which showed “the conditions and actions of the various parties on the
date of the incident,” and instructed the jury that the other “two videos are
2
offered to give you another view of the area and the pallets.” The court instructed
the jury that the pallets shown in the two videos “are not necessarily the pallet
that was being operated” at the time of the plaintiff’s fall, and that “[t]hey don’t
have the same items on [them].”
On appeal, the defendant argues that the plaintiff’s failure to lay a
foundation for the videos through the videographer deprived it of an opportunity
to cross-examine the videographer. Authentication of video evidence does not
require testimony from the videographer. See Chandler, 176 N.H. at 223-24.
Lavoie had personal knowledge of the area where the plaintiff fell, and he
authenticated the videos through his testimony. Issues regarding the weight of
the video evidence were for the jury. See Ruggiero, 163 N.H. at 136. Based upon
this record, we conclude that the trial court sustainably exercised its discretion
in admitting the video evidence. See Furgal, 164 N.H. at 438.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3