THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0530, RJH Builders, LLC v. Robert Thistle
& a., the court on June 2, 2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The
defendants, Robert Thistle and Priscilla Thistle (collectively, the Thistles),
appeal an order of the Superior Court (Kissinger, J.) awarding damages to the
plaintiff, RJH Builders, LLC (RJH), in connection with claims arising from
RJH’s construction of a custom home for the Thistles. The Thistles argue that
the trial court erred when it: (1) accepted RJH’s late-filed answer, which raised
the affirmative defense of waiver to the Thistles’ counterclaim; (2) found that
the parties waived the change order provision of the construction contract; and
(3) awarded damages to RJH. We affirm.
The following facts are taken from the trial court’s order or are otherwise
supported by the record. RJH is a general contractor with experience building
homes and additions, including installing roofs and siding. Robert Harrison is
the sole member of RJH.
In September 2018, the Thistles and RJH entered into a Construction
Agreement whereby RJH agreed to build a custom home for the Thistles. The
Construction Agreement was a fixed-price contract requiring the Thistles to pay
$510,000 to RJH to build a home in accordance with plans dated August 2018
and construction specifications dated September 2018. To finance the project,
the Thistles acquired a construction loan from a bank, and the bank created a
payment schedule for RJH’s work. The payment schedule provided for the
release of allocated funds for specific portions of the construction upon their
completion by RJH, subject to inspection and approval by the bank and
approval by the Thistles. The Construction Agreement included a “change
order provision” that provided that any changes to the work, materials, or
specifications be agreed upon in a writing signed by both parties, that the
writing identify the associated costs and delays, and that any additional costs
be paid for prior to commencement of the work.
After signing the Construction Agreement, the Thistles revised the house
plans between November and December 2018. The parties did not execute
written change orders for these revisions. Shortly after construction began,
Mr. Thistle asked Mr. Harrison via text message how much it would cost to
finish the home’s bonus room, which the construction specifications described
as an unfinished room. Mr. Thistle told Mr. Harrison that he would pay him
directly to finish the bonus room rather than involving the bank. Mr. Harrison
replied that he would give Mr. Thistle an answer by the end of the week. At
trial, Mr. Harrison testified that he later gave Mr. Thistle an oral estimate of
$20,000 to $25,000 to finish the bonus room, and Mr. Thistle agreed. Mr.
Thistle testified that he and Mr. Harrison never discussed any additional cost
to finish the bonus room. The parties did not execute a written change order to
finish the bonus room. Later, in August 2019, RJH provided the Thistles with
Invoice #398 for extra work done at the Thistles’ request, including adding
windows and a dormer above the garage and finishing the bonus room. The
Thistles paid Invoice #398.
Throughout the construction and after paying Invoice #398, the Thistles
requested other modifications and additions, including custom-built curved
stairs supported by a post, a sunroom beam, custom closets and shelving,
extra crown molding, several doors, balusters and rail parts, custom kitchen
paint, exterior decking, and other items. In November 2019, RJH issued
Invoice #404 for charges relating to these items, as well as extra drilling and
hydrofracking for a well. Mr. Thistle testified that he received no prior notice
from RJH that these items would incur additional costs. Mr. Thistle disputed
the price of particular items on Invoice #404 and whether the items were
included under the Construction Agreement and whether the Thistles should
have accordingly received a credit for these items. The Thistles did not pay
Invoice #404.
In January 2020, RJH requested inspection and payment from the bank
for certain work covered by the Construction Agreement (Inspection #4). The
bank inspected and approved this work. The Thistles did not authorize
payment to RJH following Inspection #4. RJH then stopped work on the
project.
RJH brought a complaint against the Thistles alleging, among other
things, breach of contract and unjust enrichment, and the Thistles
counterclaimed for breach of contract. Nearly three years after the Thistles
filed their counterclaim and with a scheduled trial date approaching, RJH
moved to file a late answer to the Thistles’ counterclaim. Over the Thistles’
objection, the Superior Court (Tucker, J.) granted RJH’s motion to file a late
answer. In its answer, RJH asserted as an affirmative defense that the parties
waived the change order provision of the Construction Agreement. The Thistles
then moved to strike RJH’s waiver defense, and RJH objected. The Superior
Court (Kissinger, J.) deferred ruling on the Thistles’ motion until trial, which
was continued from December 2023 to May 2024.
The trial court held a three-day bench trial and subsequently issued an
order on RJH’s claims and the Thistles’ counterclaim. As to RJH’s waiver
defense, the trial court implicitly denied the motion to strike by concluding that
2
“the parties’ conduct demonstrate[d] that they waived both the written
requirement and substantive terms of the Construction Agreement’s change
order provision.” The trial court observed that “[b]oth parties failed to comply
with these requirements throughout the project.” Given that the parties waived
the change order provision, the trial court concluded that the Thistles had not
proved their breach of contract counterclaim based upon RJH’s failure to abide
by the change order provision. The trial court also determined that RJH had
failed to demonstrate a breach of the Construction Agreement. Nevertheless, it
concluded that RJH was entitled to relief on a theory of breach of an oral
contract, unjust enrichment, or quantum meruit and determined that it need
not decide upon which theory RJH prevailed because RJH’s remedy — recovery
for labor and materials — would be the same under any of these theories. The
trial court then awarded RJH equitable damages for its labor and materials
related to the Inspection #4 work, which the Thistles acknowledged was
substantially completed. The trial court also awarded damages to RJH for
certain items in Invoice #404 based on the additional work it performed outside
of the Construction Agreement at the Thistles’ request, as well as a payment
RJH made for finish plumbing and fixture upgrades. This appeal followed.
We first address the Thistles’ argument that the trial court erred in
allowing RJH’s late-asserted affirmative defense of waiver. Under Superior
Court Rule 9(a), RJH was required to file its answer to the Thistles’
counterclaim within 30 days of receiving it. See Super. Ct. R. 9(a). The trial
court, however, may waive the application of any rule “[a]s good cause appears
and as justice may require.” Super. Ct. R. 1(d). The trial court has “broad
discretion in determining whether to waive its rules,” and “we will not reverse
its decision absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion.” Anna H. Cardone
Revocable Trust v. Cardone, 160 N.H. 521, 525 (2010).
Here, the trial court found good cause to accept RJH’s late answer,
noting that the parties agreed that they had “conducted the litigation in the
expectation that the counterclaim would be litigated at trial” and that the
Thistles never moved for a default judgment on their counterclaim. Under
these circumstances, we cannot conclude that the trial court unsustainably
exercised its discretion when it determined that, “[g]iven the history of the case
and the way the parties have managed the litigation,” there existed good cause
to accept RJH’s late answer. See id.; Super. Ct. R. 1(d).
The Thistles next contend that the trial court erred in allowing the late
waiver defense because RJH’s answer, which merely stated that the “Thistles
waived the contractual requirement for change orders,” was vague and
provided insufficient factual support for the waiver defense, thereby providing
insufficient notice to the Thistles. We disagree. The parties’ relevant filings —
the Thistles’ counterclaim, RJH’s answer, and RJH’s objection to the Thistles’
motion to strike — demonstrate that the Thistles had adequate notice of the
factual basis for RJH’s waiver defense. Cf. Walters v. Performant Recovery,
3