THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0403, Bellevue Properties, Inc. v. Town of
Conway, the court on July 24, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Bellevue Properties, Inc., appeals the order of
the Superior Court (Attorri, J.) upholding the decision of the Town of Conway
Planning Board (board) granting conditional site plan and subdivision approval
to the intervenor, Settlers’ R2, Inc., for a change in use of one building in a
larger development. The plaintiff argues that the superior court erred in
affirming the board’s decisions to: (1) include three lots as one “site” for parking
purposes; and (2) allow the use of an alternative parking standard. We affirm.
The superior court’s review of a planning board’s decision is governed by
RSA 677:15 (2016), which provides that the superior court “may reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision brought up for review when
there is an error of law or when the court is persuaded by the balance of
probabilities, on the evidence before it, that [the board’s] decision is
unreasonable.” RSA 677:15, V. Thus, the superior court’s review is limited.
Trustees of Dartmouth Coll. v. Town of Hanover, 171 N.H. 497, 504 (2018).
The superior court must treat the factual findings of the planning board
as prima facie lawful and reasonable and cannot set aside its decision absent
unreasonableness or an identified error of law. Id. The appealing party bears
the burden of persuading the superior court that, by the balance of
probabilities, the board’s decision was unreasonable. Id. The superior court
determines not whether it agrees with the planning board’s findings, but
whether there is evidence upon which its findings could have reasonably been
based. Id.
Our review is similarly limited. We will reverse a superior court’s
decision on appeal only if it is not supported by the evidence or is legally
erroneous. Id. We review the superior court’s decision to determine whether a
reasonable person could have reached the same decision as the superior court
based upon the evidence before it. Id.
The plaintiff first argues that the superior court erred in upholding the
board’s decision to include three lots as one “site” to determine parking
requirements under Section 110.21 of the Conway Site Plan Review
Regulations. The intervenor applied for a change in use for a building known
as “Building O.” Building O is part of a shopping center that includes three
lots, referred to as the “1675 W.M.H. lot,” the “Market Basket lot,” and the
intervenor’s lot. The board previously considered the three lots to be one “site”
for purposes of determining shared parking requirements. The board
reasonably applied the same analysis when it approved the change in use for
Building O. Accordingly, the 400-foot limitation for “off-site” parking did not
apply. Moreover, as the superior court found, even if the 400-foot limitation
applied, there was sufficient parking for Building O within 400 feet of the
intervenor’s lot.
The plaintiff next argues that the superior court erred in upholding the
board’s decision to allow the use of an alternative parking standard without
explaining why the alternative standard would better accomplish the intent of
the site plan review regulations. As the superior court noted, one reason why
the board allowed the use of the alternative parking standard is that it used the
same standard for the Market Basket lot and other site plan applications at the
same shopping center. We conclude that the board’s prior use of the
alternative standard is a sufficient reason for applying the same standard in
approving the intervenor’s change of use application. Accordingly, we find the
superior court’s decision to be supported by the evidence and not legally
erroneous. See Trustees of Dartmouth Coll., 171 N.H. at 504.
Affirmed.
Donovan and Countway, JJ., concurred; Nadeau, J., retired superior
court chief justice, specially assigned under RSA 490:3, concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2