THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0343, State of New Hampshire v. Tailor
Lemieux, the court on September 15 , 2026, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Tailor Lemieux, appeals his convictions,
following a jury trial in the Superior Court (Wageling, J.), on six counts of
second degree assault, see RSA 631:2, I(d), (f) (2016), one count of criminal
threatening, see RSA 631:4, I(d) (2016), and one count of endangering the
welfare of a child as a principal or accomplice, see RSA 639:3 (2016), 626:8
(2016). We affirm.
I. Background
The jury could have found the following facts. In 2017, the defendant
married a woman who had four minor children: daughters R, L, and M, and
son D. The family moved into a home in Newbury. R and L shared a bedroom
on the first floor, while D and M each had a room on the second floor. The
defendant and his wife locked the children inside their rooms each night such
that they could not exit their rooms until the parents unlocked the rooms in
the morning.
The defendant and his wife also restricted when the children could use
the bathroom. As a result, the children often had urinary accidents, which
angered the defendant. Consequently, at times, the defendant manually
choked R, L, and D. The defendant also once hit R’s head against a table. On
another occasion, the defendant threatened to cut D’s penis off with a
pocketknife.
At trial, the trial court dismissed a criminal threatening charge and a
second degree assault charge after the State rested its case. The jury convicted
the defendant on the charges described above and acquitted him on one count
of first degree assault and two counts of second degree assault. This appeal
followed.
II. Analysis
A. Hearsay Evidence
The defendant first argues that the trial court improperly admitted
testimony from a nurse that L, D, and M nodded in agreement when R
described to the nurse that the defendant assaulted the children. The
defendant argues that the testimony was inadmissible hearsay that prejudiced
his case because it “indicated that the other three children spontaneously
joined [R’s] accusation at a time when, it could seem, they had not yet had an
opportunity to coordinate a false allegation.” While we agree with the
defendant that the evidence was improperly admitted, we conclude that the
error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
At trial, a pediatric nurse practitioner testified regarding a medical visit
during which she examined the children. She testified that R told her that the
defendant “would grab her by the throat and squeeze very hard and choke her,
and . . . would body slam her and throw [her] against the wall” and “the other
kids, too, as well.” The nurse testified that “the other kids did nod, and that
they agreed that it had happened to them as well.” The defendant moved to
strike the nurse’s testimony regarding the children’s head nods. The trial court
admitted this testimony under the present sense impression exception to the
hearsay rule. See N.H. R. Ev. 803(1).
We review the trial court’s ruling on the admissibility of evidence for an
unsustainable exercise of discretion, and will reverse only if it was clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of the defendant’s case. State v.
Rouleau, 176 N.H. 400, 405 (2024), 2024 N.H. 2, ¶13. In applying our
unsustainable exercise of discretion standard of review, we determine only
whether the record establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the
discretionary judgment made. Id. “The defendant bears the burden of
demonstrating that the trial court’s ruling was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.” State v. Noucas, 165 N.H. 146, 158
(2013).
Hearsay is a statement that “the declarant does not make while testifying
at the current trial or hearing” that “a party offers in evidence to prove the
truth of the matter asserted in the statement.” N.H. R. Ev. 801(c). Hearsay is
inadmissible unless it falls within one of the exceptions provided in the rules of
evidence. Simpkins v. Snow, 139 N.H. 735, 737 (1995). One such exception
relates to statements “describing or explaining an event or condition, made
while or immediately after the declarant perceived it.” N.H. R. Ev. 803(1). To
qualify for this exception, statements must be “essentially contemporaneous
with the event.” Simpkins, 139 N.H. at 738 (quotation omitted).
2
To the extent that the children’s nodding amounted to statements
describing or explaining the defendant’s abuse, the statements were not
“contemporaneous with the event,” and thus were not admissible under Rule
803(1). See id. at 738-39. Accordingly, the trial court erred when it failed to
grant the defendant’s motion to strike the testimony. The State does not argue
that if the trial court erred that the error did not prejudice the defendant’s case
for the purposes of the unsustainable exercise of discretion standard.
Therefore, we turn to the State’s argument that any error was harmless beyond
a reasonable doubt.
To establish harmless error, the State must prove beyond a reasonable
doubt that the error did not affect the verdict. Rouleau, 176 N.H. at 407, 2024
N.H. 2, ¶20. This standard applies to both the erroneous admission and
exclusion of evidence. Id. We consider the alternative evidence presented at
trial as well as the character of the erroneously admitted evidence itself. Id. To
determine whether the State has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that an
error did not affect the verdict, we must evaluate the totality of the
circumstances at trial. Id.
The factors that we consider in assessing whether an error did not affect
the verdict include, but are not limited to: (1) the strength of the State’s case;
(2) whether the admitted or excluded evidence is cumulative or inconsequential
in relation to the strength of the State’s case; (3) the frequency of the error; (4)
the presence or absence of evidence corroborating or contradicting the
erroneously admitted or excluded evidence; (5) the nature of the defense; (6)
the circumstances in which the evidence was introduced at trial; (7) whether
the court took any curative steps; (8) whether the evidence is of an
inflammatory nature; and (9) whether the other evidence of the defendant’s
guilt is of an overwhelming nature. Id., 2024 N.H. 2, ¶21. No one factor is
dispositive. Id. We may consider factors not listed above, and not all factors
may be implicated in a given case. Id.
The challenged evidence here was both cumulative and inconsequential
in relation to the strength of the State’s case. The import of the testimony was
that L, D, and M agreed with R that the defendant physically abused the
children. Yet, the children’s testimony at trial had already described the
defendant’s abuse. The challenged evidence added little to the State’s case in
light of the children’s testimony. While it is true that the defendant’s theory at
trial was that the children fabricated the allegations and the defendant testified
in his own defense denying the allegations, we cannot conclude that the
challenged testimony caused the jury to believe the children rather than the
defendant.
Each of the children provided detailed testimony regarding the
defendant’s conduct. See id. at 408, 2024 N.H. 2, ¶22 (finding harmless error,
in part, because the victim provided detailed testimony about the defendant’s
3