THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0010, National Lumber Company v. Paxor
Construction LLC & a., the court on December 19, 2024, issued
the following order:
The defendant having filed a reformatted brief with the questions presented
and citations to the record, see Sup. Ct. R. 16(3)(b), the plaintiff’s motion to strike
the defendant’s brief is denied.
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(2). The defendant, Paxor Construction LLC, appeals the order of the
Superior Court (Temple, J.), following a four-day bench trial, awarding damages
to the plaintiff, National Lumber Company, on a claim for breach of contract and
rejecting the defendant’s counterclaim. The defendant argues that the trial court
erred in: (1) determining the amount due under the parties’ contract;
(2) awarding costs, interest, and attorney’s fees; (3) approving credit card fees and
price increases without agreement; (4) failing to apply the doctrine of equitable
estoppel to bar the plaintiff’s claims; and (5) dismissing its counterclaim for bad
faith business practices. We affirm.
The trial court found that the defendant breached the parties’ contract by
failing to pay for building materials purchased from the plaintiff. The court
determined that the amount remaining due for delivered materials was
$23,344.89, based upon the plaintiff’s records, which it found to be “wholly
accurate.” The defendant first argues that the trial court erred in determining
the amount due under the contract. We will uphold the trial court’s factual
findings unless they lack evidentiary support or are legally erroneous. Maddock
v. Higgins, 176 N.H. 182, 187 (2023).
The defendant argues that the amount remaining due was $12,846.48,
which was less than its $16,793.16 “offer of judgment.” The defendant asserts
that the trial court erroneously relied upon the plaintiff’s “open invoices” as the
measure of damages, and argues that the court should have relied upon the
evidence presented by its witnesses. The trial court found the plaintiff’s records
to “accurately reflect all purchases, returns, and payments related to [the
defendant’s] credit account.” On the other hand, the trial court found that the
defendant “did not keep any detailed records of the deliveries.” The trial court
also found that the plaintiff’s witnesses were “significantly more credible” than
the defendant’s manager. We conclude that the record supports the trial court’s
determination of the amount due on the contract. See Maddock, 176 N.H. at
187.
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred in awarding costs,
interest, and attorney’s fees to the plaintiff, asserting that the award is contrary
to its prior ruling that any disputes arising from the parties’ credit agreement
must be brought in Massachusetts. The parties agreed that Massachusetts law
governed the parties’ credit agreement; however, the trial court did not rule that
claims arising from the credit agreement must be brought in Massachusetts.
Rather, the court ruled, based upon language in the agreement that “any dispute
relative to this guaranty shall be brought forth in a Massachusetts court,” that
the plaintiff’s claims against the guarantors must be brought in Massachusetts.
Accordingly, we find no error.
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred in its award because,
it asserts, the materials supply agreement did not allow the plaintiff to charge
credit card fees or to increase prices without agreement. However, in the credit
application, the defendant “agrees and acknowledges” that “[i]n regard to
payments made by credit card,” the plaintiff “may impose an additional fee for
processing for commercial accounts.” In addition, the plaintiff notified the
defendant that its price quotes were valid for fourteen days. The trial court found
that the defendant ordered its supplies more than fourteen days after the prices
were quoted, without obtaining updated quotes or an agreement on pricing. The
trial court found that the plaintiff charged the defendant the then-current prices,
which it found to be commercially reasonable. The trial court did not find
credible the testimony of the defendant’s witness that the plaintiff overcharged
the defendant for materials. We defer to the trial court’s judgment as to the
credibility of witnesses. Maddock, 176 N.H. at 187. We conclude that the record
supports the trial court’s findings. See id.
The defendant next argues that the plaintiff was not entitled to recover
attorney’s fees because it did not sign the credit application. Under
Massachusetts law, “[a] written contract, signed by only one party, may be
binding and enforceable even without the other party’s signature if the other
party manifests acceptance.” Haufler v. Zotos, 845 N.E.2d 322, 331 (Mass.
2006). The defendant’s manager signed the agreement on the defendant’s behalf.
The trial court found that the plaintiff manifested acceptance of the credit
agreement by extending credit to the defendant after receiving the credit
agreement bearing the defendant’s signature. Accordingly, we find no error.
The defendant next argues that any award of attorney’s fees and interest
should be barred based upon the doctrine of equitable estoppel. The plaintiff
counters that the defendant did not preserve this argument for review because it
was not raised in the trial court. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H.
248, 250 (2004). Assuming, without deciding, that the issue is preserved, we
2
cannot conclude that the trial court erred. In support of its argument, the
defendant relies upon an oral representation made by its attorney at a hearing on
the plaintiff’s request for a pre-judgment attachment. The court noted that, at
the attachment hearing, the defendant “offered to settle the case by making a
payment for $21,995.18 within five days.” However, this amount was less than
the amount sought in the complaint, and it did not include interest or attorney’s
fees. Accordingly, we find no error.
Finally, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in dismissing its
counterclaim for bad faith business practices. The defendant’s support for this
argument is based upon factual assertions that the trial court rejected, including,
for example, the defendant’s assertions that the plaintiff imposed charges without
notice and failed to fully credit the defendant’s payments. The record supports
the court’s factual findings in favor of the plaintiff on these issues. See Maddock,
176 N.H. at 187. Accordingly, we cannot conclude that the trial court erred in
dismissing the defendant’s counterclaim for bad faith business practices.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3