THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0084, In the Matter of Adam Gage and
Jenna Gage, the court on November 25, 2024, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The petitioner, Adam Gage (father) appeals the final
parenting plan ordered by the Circuit Court (Tenney, J.) for his child with the
respondent, Jenna Gage (mother). The petitioner argues that the trial court
erred by allegedly: (1) failing to apply the best interest standard, see RSA 461-
A:6 (Supp. 2023); and (2) unsustainably exercising its discretion. We affirm.
In determining parental rights and responsibilities, the court shall be
guided by the best interest of the child. RSA 461-A:6, I. When reviewing a trial
court’s decision on parenting rights and responsibilities, our role is limited to
determining whether it clearly appears that the court engaged in an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. In the Matter of Kurowski & Kurowski,
161 N.H. 578, 585 (2011). We consider only whether the record establishes an
objective basis sufficient to sustain the discretionary judgment made, and we
will not disturb the trial court’s determination if it could reasonably have been
made. Id.
By the time of the final hearing, the parties had been following a shared
parenting schedule for approximately one year pursuant to temporary orders.
At the final hearing, each parent sought to expand his or her own parenting
time based upon allegations concerning the other parent’s care for the child.
After hearing the evidence, the trial court found that neither party had shown a
valid reason to change the shared parenting schedule. Accordingly, the court
sought to make the temporary plan final, expressly concluding that doing so
was in the child’s best interest.
On reconsideration, the court agreed with the mother that its intent was
to maintain the temporary schedule as amended, and it corrected its final plan
to reflect the temporary schedule as amended. Accordingly, the court changed
the Friday exchange time from 3:30 p.m. to 9:00 a.m., and the weekend
exchange time from Monday at 7:00 a.m. to Sunday at 6:00 p.m., consistent
with the schedule the parties had been following.
The court further amended the final parenting plan to provide that the
mother has the child on Mother’s Day, and that the father has the child on
Father’s Day, from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. each day, rather than for the entire
weekend, to avoid placing the child with one parent for multiple weekends in a
row.
The father argues that the trial court failed to apply the best interest
standard when it modified the parenting plan on reconsideration. We disagree.
The court expressly stated that it found the parenting schedule the parties had
been following to be in the child’s best interest. The court modified that
schedule for Mother’s Day and Father’s Day so that the child would not be
without one of the parents for multiple weekends in a row. We assume that the
trial court found this change to be in the child’s best interest. See In the
Matter of Kosek & Kosek, 151 N.H. 722, 725 (2005). The record supports this
assumed finding.
The father next argues that the trial court unsustainably exercised its
discretion by failing to consider his testimony in favor of a different weekend
exchange time. The father testified that the exchange time on Sunday at 6:00
p.m. was difficult for him because it interrupts his activities, and that he would
prefer the exchange time to be Monday at 7:30 a.m. The trial court expressly
stated that it “heard the testimony” from the father, but concluded that a
Monday morning exchange time would not be in the child’s best interest
because “the child’s going to go to school at some point.”
Based upon this record, we cannot conclude that the trial court failed to
apply the best interest standard or that the court unsustainably exercised its
discretion in its parenting plan.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2