THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0619, In the Matter of Melissa Dugan and
Aaron Dugan, the court on March 24, 2026, issued the following
order:
The petitioner’s assented-to motion for late entry of her brief and
appendices is granted.
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The respondent, Aaron Dugan (husband), appeals the final
decree of the Circuit Court (Mace, J.), following a hearing, in his divorce from
the petitioner, Melissa Dugan (wife). The husband argues that the trial court
erred in: (1) developing its parenting plan for the parties’ child; and
(2) awarding the wife’s retirement account entirely to her. We affirm.
The husband first argues that the trial court erred in its parenting plan.
We review the trial court’s order on parenting rights and responsibilities under
our unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. See In the Matter of
Kurowski & Kurowski, 161 N.H. 578, 585 (2011). Under this standard, we
consider only whether the record establishes an objective basis sufficient to
sustain the trial court’s discretionary judgment, and we will not disturb the
court’s decisions if they could reasonably have been made. Id. We will affirm
the trial court’s findings and rulings unless they are unsupported by the
evidence or erroneous as a matter of law. In the Matter of Nyhan and Nyhan,
147 N.H. 768, 770 (2002).
The husband argues that there is no objective basis to support the
court’s decision to limit his parenting time to three weekends per month. In
determining parental rights and responsibilities, the court shall be guided by
the best interests of the child. RSA 461-A:6, I (Supp. 2025). In this case, the
court found that additional parenting time for the husband “is simply not
achievable in the interests of safety and in a manner consistent with [the
child’s] best interests.” Among the many reasons it gave for reaching this
conclusion, the court found that the husband experienced “significant
childhood and [military] service-related trauma,” and that he “is still
manifesting . . . antisocial behaviors” that “prevent the Court from granting
[him] a more expansive role in parenting [the child] at this time.” The court
based its decision, in part, on its finding that the husband abused the wife, as
defined in RSA 173-B:1, I, and on “the impact of the abuse on the child and on
the relationship between the child and the abusing parent.” See RSA 461-A:6,
I(j). The court also found that the husband had experienced episodes of
uncontrolled and disproportionate rage resulting in acts of violence, and that
he “acted antithetically to [the child’s] best interests with respect to [the child’s]
psychological and medical wellbeing.”
In recognition of the father’s history of trauma, the court ordered the
husband to undergo a comprehensive forensic psychological evaluation and to
attend at least twelve sessions with a board-certified psychologist or therapist
specializing in trauma. The court further ordered that, after the husband has
completed this process, he may petition the court for a change in the parenting
plan. To the extent that the court’s parenting plan may be inconsistent with
the recommendations of the guardian ad litem (GAL), we note that the court, in
the exercise of its discretion, was not required to follow the GAL’s
recommendations. See In the Matter of Heinrich & Curotto, 160 N.H. 650, 657
(2010) (GAL recommendations do not carry greater weight than other evidence).
Based on this record, we cannot conclude that the trial court unsustainably
exercised its discretion in its parenting plan. See In the Matter of Kurowski,
161 N.H. at 585.
The husband next argues that the trial court erred by awarding the wife’s
retirement account entirely to her. We review the trial court’s property division
under our unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. In the Matter of
Hampers & Hampers, 154 N.H. 275, 285 (2006). The trial court in its
discretion may award a particular asset in its entirety to one party. In the
Matter of Nadeau & Nadeau, 177N.H. 126, 135 (2024). In this case, the court
awarded each party the retirement funds in their own names. Although the
husband argues that the trial court did not specify the reasons for its decision,
the court stated that, in determining an equitable property division, it
considered, among other things, the short duration of the marriage. The record
shows that, during the parties’ five-year marriage, they separated at least once
before they “separated for a second time and the marriage eroded irremediably
in the late fall of 2021.”
The equitable division of property at the conclusion of a short-term
marriage may be considered differently from a division after a long-term
marriage. In the Matter of Crowe & Crowe, 148 N.H. 218, 221 (2002). “In a
short-term marriage, it may be easier to give back property brought to the
marriage and still leave the parties in no worse position than they were in prior
to it.” Id.
The husband argues that an unequal division of the retirement accounts
cannot be justified solely on the grounds that the parties had been married for
five years. The husband concedes that he accumulated no retirement assets
during the marriage. The court “in essence” adopted the wife’s proposed
property division and found that an equitable property division in this case
“does not require a more mechanistic analysis given the relative equities
2
expressed herein.” See In the Matter of Kempton & Kempton, 167 N.H. 785,
799 (2015) (noting that “marital property is not to be divided by some
mechanical formula but in a manner deemed ‘just’ based upon the evidence
presented and the equities of the case”). The court also detailed multiple
incidents in which the husband intentionally devalued the marital estate.
Based on this record, we cannot conclude that the trial court unsustainably
exercised its discretion by awarding the wife’s retirement account entirely to
her. See In the Matter of Hampers, 154 N.H. at 285.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3