THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0168, In the Matter of Devanne Scoltch
and Michael Scoltch, Jr., the court on February 19, 2025, issued
the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The intervenor, Debra Davis (grandmother), appeals the
order of the Circuit Court (Greenhalgh, J.), following a hearing, dismissing her
petition for grandparent visitation. See RSA 461-A:13 (2018). She argues that
the trial court erred in dismissing her petition for lack of standing. She also
argues that our decision in Kauble should be overruled. We affirm the trial
court’s ruling, and we decline to reconsider our decision in Kauble.
The parties are the parents of two minor children. On August 19, 2022,
following an incident of domestic violence, the wife filed for divorce. The court
issued its final divorce decree on July 31, 2023. While the divorce was
pending, the grandmother petitioned for visitation. There is no dispute that the
grandmother has not seen the children since September 2022.
The grandmother argues that she has standing to request court-ordered
visitation because the father’s felony act of domestic violence, which preceded
the parents’ divorce, and which resulted in his conviction, incarceration, and
the divorce filing, caused the dissolution of the nuclear family.
RSA 461-A:13, I, provides:
Grandparents, whether adoptive or natural, may petition the court
for reasonable rights of visitation with the minor child as provided
in paragraph III. The provisions of this section shall not apply in
cases where access by the grandparent or grandparents to the
minor child has been restricted for any reason prior to or
contemporaneous with the divorce, death, relinquishment or
termination of parental rights, or other cause of the absence of a
nuclear family.
If a grandparent’s access to the grandchild was restricted prior to, or
contemporaneously with, the applicable condition set forth in RSA 461-A:13, I,
the grandparent does not have standing to seek visitation. In the Matter of
P.B. & T.W., 167 N.H. 627, 630 (2015). We recently held that the phrase “other
cause of the absence of a nuclear family” in RSA 461-A:13, I, is limited to
circumstances that are the same, or similar to, the circumstances that are
specifically enumerated in the statute: divorce, death, and the relinquishment
or termination of parental rights. In the Matter of Kauble & Kauble, 176 N.H.
200, 203 (2023). We held that the distinguishing feature is that “all are final,
or, at a minimum, are not transitory circumstances.” Id. “Accordingly, in
order for some other condition to fall within the general category of ‘other cause
of the absence of a nuclear family,’ it must also share that characteristic.” Id.
In this case, the father’s felony act of domestic violence, and the subsequent
conviction, incarceration, and divorce filing are transitory circumstances that
cannot be considered an “other cause of the absence of a nuclear family” under
the standard set forth in Kauble.
The grandmother argues that our decision in Kauble should be overruled
because it creates a disadvantage for the grandparents of grandchildren whose
parents are married, as compared to the grandparents of grandchildren whose
parents are unmarried. She also argues that a felony assault, and subsequent
conviction, incarceration, and divorce filing should provide sufficient
circumstances to constitute another “cause of the absence of a nuclear family.”
“[W]hen asked to reconsider a holding, the question is not whether we would
decide the issue differently de novo, but whether the ruling has come to be
seen so clearly as error that its enforcement was for that very reason doomed.”
State v. Quintero, 162 N.H. 526, 539 (2011) (quotation omitted). The
grandmother, having failed to brief the stare decisis factors set forth in
Quintero, see id. at 532-33, has not persuaded us to reconsider our decision in
Kauble.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2