THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0578, Laurie Ortolano v. City of Nashua &
a., the court on February 10, 2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Laurie Ortolano, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Temple, J.) in this action seeking disclosure under the Right-
to-Know Law, RSA ch. 91-A (2023 & Supp. 2025), of records held by the
defendants, the City of Nashua (the City) and 201 Main Street Real Estate
Corporation and 201 Main Street Financing Corporation (201 Corporations).
The trial court found, in part, that the defendants violated RSA chapter 91-A,
though not in every instance alleged by the plaintiff. The City filed a cross-
appeal. We affirm.
The following facts either were found by the trial court or are supported
by the record. The plaintiff presented the defendants with multiple requests
seeking information about, as relevant to this appeal and cross-appeal: (1) the
City’s construction of barriers in downtown Nashua to create additional
outdoor dining space during the coronavirus pandemic; and (2) the
construction and financing of the Nashua Performing Arts Center (NPAC).
Subsequently, the plaintiff filed petitions in superior court against the
defendants pursuant to RSA 91-A:7 (2023), arguing that the defendants failed
to adequately respond to her requests or otherwise failed to comply with the
requirements of RSA chapter 91-A. The trial court consolidated her petitions
and held a six-day bench trial, after which it found several violations of RSA
chapter 91-A by the City and a single violation by the 201 Corporations.
At trial, the plaintiff argued that these violations were committed in bad
faith and that the individuals responsible, namely City officials, should be
assessed civil penalties under RSA 91-A:8, IV (2023). The trial court
determined that it could not assess civil penalties against these individuals
because the plaintiff did not name them as defendants in her petitions.
Nonetheless, the trial court opined that certain City officials acted in bad faith,
and that had these officials been named defendants, the trial court “would have
seriously considered civil penalties.” This appeal and cross-appeal followed.
In her appeal, the plaintiff alleges numerous errors by the trial court. We
address only the issues that are properly before us. See State v. Blackmer, 149
N.H. 47, 49 (2003).
We first address the plaintiff’s argument that the trial court erred when it
consolidated her petitions. The superior court has discretionary power to order
consolidation of cases. See Barnard v. Elmer, 128 N.H. 386, 388 (1986)
(consolidation warranted where cases have “much common evidence” and
complaining party not prejudiced by lack of notice); Assoc. Home Util’s, Inc. v.
Town of Bedford, 120 N.H. 812, 815 (1980) (stating that the superior court’s
discretionary power to consolidate cases is “limited only by the requirements of
justice”); 5 Gordon J. MacDonald, New Hampshire Practice: Wiebusch on New
Hampshire Civil Practice and Procedure § 41.06, at 41-3 (4th ed. 2014) (stating
that a motion to consolidate is “addressed to the trial court’s discretion” and
“will generally be granted if the cases involve common issues of material fact or
if they turn on the same principles of law, and the court can see that the trial
of both cases will be simplified and shortened” by consolidation). Here, each
petition shared the same plaintiff and a common defendant, the City. The trial
court also found that the petitions arose from “the same circumstances
surrounding the Nashua Performing Arts Center” and that they involved
“common issues of law and fact under RSA 91-A” before concluding that
judicial economy would be furthered by consolidating the petitions. These
findings are supported by the record. We thus conclude that the trial court did
not unsustainably exercise its discretion when it consolidated the petitions.
See Barnard, 128 N.H. at 388.
We next consider the plaintiff’s arguments that the trial court erred in
making its discovery rulings. We review a trial court’s rulings on the
management of discovery under an unsustainable exercise of discretion
standard. N.H. Ball Bearings v. Jackson, 158 N.H. 421, 429 (2009). The
plaintiff first argues that the trial court erred when it limited discovery. The
plaintiff represented to the trial court that she was opposed to discovery in this
matter. In turn, the trial court issued an order permitting discovery only by
court order. The trial court did not unsustainably exercise its discretion when
it ruled that discovery would be limited in this matter. See Super. Ct. Admin.
Order 2013-08 (considering Right-to-Know cases exempt from civil discovery
rules).
The plaintiff next argues that the trial court erred when it denied the
plaintiff’s request to depose certain City officials and board members of the 201
Corporations. The plaintiff admitted that she was seeking to depose witnesses
for information that was not required under the Right-to-Know Law. We
conclude that the trial court did not unsustainably exercise its discretion when
it denied her requests for depositions on this basis. See N.H. Ball Bearings,
158 N.H. at 429.
Next, the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in finding that she
failed to prove that the Capital Campaign Committee (CCC), an organization
involved in fundraising for the NPAC project, was subject to the Right-to-Know
Law. She contends that the CCC was a subcommittee of the Performing Arts
2
Center (PAC) Steering Committee, and therefore subject to the Right-to-Know
Law. See RSA 91-A:1-a, VI(d) (2023) (defining “[p]ublic body”). When reviewing
a trial court’s decision rendered after a trial on the merits, we uphold the trial
court’s factual findings and rulings unless they lack evidentiary support or are
legally erroneous. O’Malley v. Little, 170 N.H. 272, 275 (2017). Here, the
president of the 201 Corporations — who also served on the CCC — and the
City’s Director of Economic Development both testified that the CCC was not a
subcommittee of the PAC Steering Committee, nor affiliated with the City.
Each testified, rather, that the CCC was a group of individuals committed to
raising private funds for the NPAC project. The Director explained that the
group came together after an independent fundraising consultant advised City
officials that a private group should coordinate the raising of private funds for
the project. Thus, the trial court’s finding that the CCC was not subject to the
Right-to-Know Law was supported by the record, and it accordingly did not err.
See id.
The plaintiff’s remaining arguments either do not warrant further
discussion, see Vogel v. Vogel, 137 N.H. 321, 322 (1993); Sup. Ct. R. 25(8), are
not sufficiently developed, or are waived, see Blackmer, 149 N.H. at 49
(providing that we do not address arguments that were not preserved, were not
sufficiently developed for appellate review, or were not briefed).
We now turn to the City’s cross-appeal. The City argues that the trial
court erred when it found that an email from the chair of the Downtown
Improvement Committee (DIC), which was not provided to the plaintiff, was
responsive to her request for documents relating to “the Downtown Barrier
Committee.” It argues that the “Downtown Barrier Committee” — which was
never established — and the DIC are not one and the same, and that the trial
court mistakenly conflated the two in finding that the email from the chair of
the DIC was responsive. We find no reversible error. See O’Malley, 170 N.H. at
275 (“We do not decide whether we would have ruled differently than the trial
court, but rather, whether a reasonable person could have reached the same
decision as the trial court based upon the same evidence.” (quotation omitted)).
The record supports the trial court’s finding that the DIC email was
responsive to the plaintiff’s request. The plaintiff requested from the City: (1)
“[t]he names of the people ‘stakeholders’ selected to serve on the Downtown
Barrier Committee” along with the “document or record with the names for this
group and the name of the group”; (2) “[a]ny postings for meetings of the
Downtown Barrier Committee”; and (3) “the record of the regulation, legislation,
or statute that authorized the person authorized to select the committee as well
as the process for approving the committee.” The record shows that the
plaintiff made this request after City officials represented to the plaintiff and
others that a committee would be formed to make decisions regarding
downtown barriers.
3