THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
Case No. 2024-0180
Citation: Doe v. Concord Police Department & a., 2025 N.H. 48
JANE DOE
v.
CONCORD POLICE DEPARTMENT & a.
Submitted: September 16, 2025
Opinion Issued: November 19, 2025
Krupski & Beaudoin, PLLC, of Concord (Marc G. Beaudoin on the brief),
for the plaintiff.
City Solicitor’s Office, of Concord (Danielle L. Pacik, city solicitor, on the
memorandum of law), for defendant City of Concord Police Department.
John M. Formella, attorney general, and Anthony J. Galdieri, solicitor
general (Samuel R.V. Garland, senior assistant attorney general, and Brandon
F. Chase on the memorandum of law), for defendant New Hampshire
Department of Justice.
DONOVAN, J.
[¶1] The plaintiff, Jane Doe, appeals an order of the Superior Court
(Tucker, J.) granting a motion for summary judgment filed by defendant New
Hampshire Department of Justice (DOJ) and joined by defendant City of
Concord (City) Police Department. The plaintiff sought an order requiring that
her name be removed from the Exculpatory Evidence Schedule (EES). See RSA
105:13-d (2023). On appeal, she argues that the trial court erred by granting
the defendants’ motion because: (1) her “alleged misstatement of fact” was
immaterial to the misconduct being investigated; and (2) the records pertaining
to the misconduct and termination of her employment were removed from her
personnel file. Alternatively, she argues that the summary judgment order
should be reversed and the case remanded following this court’s decision in
Doe v. New Hampshire Attorney General (Activity Logs), 176 N.H. 806 (2024),
2024 N.H. 50, because there is no reasonably foreseeable case in which
information pertaining to her misconduct would be admissible. We affirm.
I. Facts
[¶2] The following facts are taken from the trial court’s summary
judgment order or are otherwise established by the record. In 2013, a Concord
police officer discovered that her firearm was missing from the firearms lockers
at the police station. The officer had the key to her locker, and she noticed that
only one other locker was closed and locked. She recalled that the plaintiff,
who was also a Concord police officer, had recently been in the booking area
but had left to transport a prisoner to a local hospital. Each locker could be
opened only with an individual key or with a master key kept in the watch
commander’s office.
[¶3] The officer reported her missing firearm to her supervisors. A
Concord police sergeant called the plaintiff, who was still at the hospital, and
asked her for the serial number of the firearm in her possession. The sergeant
confirmed that the plaintiff had the other officer’s firearm. According to the
sergeant, the plaintiff told him that she realized she had forgotten her firearm
while she was still at the police station, and she asked another officer to
retrieve it for her. The plaintiff told the sergeant that the officer must have
inadvertently taken the wrong firearm.
[¶4] Upon returning to the police station, the plaintiff spoke with the
sergeant and a lieutenant about the incident. She maintained that she first
realized she had forgotten her firearm while she was still at the police station
and that another officer retrieved the firearm for her while she was still at the
station. The plaintiff’s partner, however, told the officer whose firearm was
missing that the plaintiff did not notice that her firearm was missing until she
was at the hospital. Upon learning what the plaintiff had told her supervisors,
2
the officer then informed the sergeant and the lieutenant that the plaintiff had
lied about when she realized that she had forgotten her firearm.
[¶5] The Concord Police Department opened an internal affairs
investigation into the allegation that the plaintiff was untruthful during her
conversations with her colleague and supervisors regarding the firearm. The
plaintiff claimed that, when the sergeant first contacted her, she told him that
she realized that she forgot her firearm while at the hospital and that “he was
mistaken or confused” in remembering otherwise. The investigators found that
the plaintiff struggled to answer specific questions during the investigation and
that her statements lacked credibility. They concluded that it was “more likely
that [the plaintiff was] lying about this incident because she believed she would
have been in trouble if she properly reported this to the on-duty supervisor.”
They further determined that the plaintiff “had ample opportunities to have
reported the incident the way it transpired but went to great lengths to cover
up the facts” and that she “circumvent[ed] the chain of command . . . in order
to skirt detection.”
[¶6] The investigators recommended that the allegations be sustained.
They recommended finding that the plaintiff: (1) lied to a colleague and her
supervisors about when she first knew that she had forgotten her firearm; (2)
“failed to answer questions truthfully to her superior officers during the
investigation”; (3) falsely stated that she had not spoken to the lieutenant and
the sergeant about the incident when she had; and (4) offered facts to another
lieutenant that were inconsistent with the statement she provided to the
sergeant.
[¶7] The police chief sustained the allegations, and the City terminated
the plaintiff’s employment. The chief also sent a letter to the City prosecutor
and county attorneys submitting the plaintiff’s name for inclusion on the
“Laurie List,” see State v. Laurie, 139 N.H. 325 (1995), which was subsequently
renamed as the EES, see N.H. Ctr. for Pub. Interest Journalism v. N.H. Dep’t of
Justice, 173 N.H. 648, 651 (2020); RSA 105:13-d, I. The plaintiff appealed the
termination decision to the City’s Personnel Appeals Board (PAB), which also
found that the plaintiff lacked credibility and upheld the decision.
[¶8] The plaintiff subsequently filed a complaint against the City in
superior court alleging, among other things, gender discrimination and
wrongful termination. The parties reached a settlement agreement, which
included a provision requiring the City to remove documents relating to the
firearm incident and termination of the plaintiff’s employment from the
plaintiff’s personnel file and maintain those documents “in a separate
investigative file.” The City also agreed to notify the police standards and
training council that the plaintiff’s “departure from the police department was a
negotiated resignation.”
3
[¶9] Years later, the plaintiff filed a complaint in superior court, naming
the City and the DOJ as defendants, seeking the removal of her name from the
EES pursuant to RSA 105:13-d. She argued that the City erred in
recommending her name for inclusion on the list, that “the underlying conduct
is not potentially exculpatory,” and that keeping her name on the list would
serve little purpose given the passage of time. The DOJ filed a motion for
summary judgment, which the City joined. The trial court granted the
defendants’ motion. The plaintiff unsuccessfully moved for reconsideration.
This appeal followed.
II. Analysis
[¶10] When reviewing a trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we
consider the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn
from them, in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Troy v. Bishop
Guertin High Sch., 176 N.H. 131, 135 (2023). If there is no genuine issue of
material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law,
the grant of summary judgment is proper. Id. We review the trial court’s
application of the law to the facts de novo. Id.
[¶11] The plaintiff first argues that her “alleged misstatement of fact” was
immaterial to the internal investigation and therefore does not constitute
misconduct as defined by RSA chapter 106-L. See RSA 106-L:2, V (2023)
(defining “misconduct” as, inter alia, a “sustained finding that the officer has
engaged in conduct negatively reflecting on the officer’s trustworthiness or
credibility, including but not limited to” a “deliberate and material lie during a
civil, administrative, or criminal proceeding, in a police report, an internal
investigation, or an investigation conducted by the New Hampshire police
standards and training council” (emphasis added)). More specifically, she
maintains that the moment at which she “first realized that she left her firearm
in the lockbox at the police station” is “immaterial to any policy violation.”
[¶12] The defendants assert that the definition of misconduct set forth in
RSA chapter 106-L is inapplicable in this case, which is instead governed by
RSA 105:13-d. We agree with the defendants. The definition upon which the
plaintiff relies applies only to proceedings under RSA chapter 106-L. See RSA
106-L:2 (2023) (enumerating definitions applicable “[i]n this chapter”). RSA
chapter 106-L pertains to the police standards and training council, which
may, among other things, “[e]stablish minimum educational and training
standards for employment as a police officer,” “[c]ertify persons as being
qualified under the provisions of this chapter to be police officers,” conduct
disciplinary hearings, and impose “sanctions on a law enforcement officer’s
certification.” RSA 106-L:5, III-V, XXV (2023). RSA chapter 106-L does not set
forth the standard applicable to determining whether a law enforcement
officer’s name should be included on the EES.
4
[¶13] That standard, as the defendants observe, is set forth in RSA
105:13-d. See RSA 105:13-d, I (“The [EES] shall consist of a list of all current
or former law enforcement officers whose personnel information contain
potentially exculpatory evidence.”). RSA 105:13-d does not refer to the
definitions set forth in RSA chapter 106-L, nor does it identify what conduct
may constitute “potentially exculpatory evidence.” Id. Moreover, RSA chapter
106-L acknowledges that a prosecutor’s duty to disclose “potentially
exculpatory materials” in a criminal proceeding is governed by a separate
statutory section, RSA 105:13-b. See RSA 106-L:22 (2023).
[¶14] Therefore, the definition of misconduct set forth in RSA 106-L:2 is
inapplicable to the determination of whether an officer’s placement on the EES
is appropriate pursuant to RSA 105:13-d.1 We conclude that the trial court
applied the proper standard, RSA 105:13-d, in addressing the plaintiff’s
arguments regarding her placement on the EES.
[¶15] The plaintiff next argues that the trial court erred by granting
summary judgment in favor of the defendants because the documents
pertaining to her misconduct and the termination of her employment were
removed from her personnel file and maintained in a separate file pursuant to
a negotiated settlement agreement with the City. She reasons that because
“the alleged misconduct is no longer in [her] official police personnel file,” her
“name should no longer be included on the EES pursuant to RSA 105:13-d, I.”
We are not persuaded.
[¶16] The plaintiff’s argument equates the removal of documents from
her “personnel file” with the absence of those documents from her “personnel
information,” RSA 105:13-d, I. In New Hampshire Center for Public Interest
Journalism, we examined the language of RSA 105:13-b and observed that
“[t]he express focus of RSA 105:13-b is on information maintained in the
personnel file of a specific police officer.” N.H. Ctr. for Pub. Interest
Journalism, 173 N.H. at 656; see RSA 105:13-b, I (2023) (“Exculpatory
evidence in a police personnel file of a police officer who is serving as a witness
in any criminal case shall be disclosed to the defendant.”). We explained that
“[h]ad the legislature intended RSA 105:13-b to apply more broadly to
personnel information, regardless of where it is maintained, it would have so
stated.” N.H. Ctr. for Pub. Interest Journalism, 173 N.H. at 656.
[¶17] Shortly after our decision in New Hampshire Center for Public
Interest Journalism, the legislature enacted RSA 105:13-d, which, as we have
1 Even if RSA chapter 106-L were controlling here, we could not agree that the timing of the
plaintiff’s realization that she had forgotten her firearm is immaterial. The record establishes
that it is a more egregious breach of policy for an officer to transport a prisoner to a hospital
without a firearm than it is to discover being unarmed before leaving the police station.
5
noted, provides that “[t]he [EES] shall consist of a list of all current or former
law enforcement officers whose personnel information contain potentially
exculpatory evidence.” RSA 105:13-d, I (emphasis added). The language
“personnel information” evidences the legislature’s intent for RSA 105:13-d to
apply to a broader category of files kept by law enforcement agencies. See id.;
N.H. Ctr. for Pub. Interest Journalism, 173 N.H. at 656. This conclusion is
consistent with the purpose of the EES, which is used by the State as “a tool to
identify information about police officers . . . that is subject to possible
disclosure.” Doe (Activity Logs), 176 N.H. at 811, 2024 N.H. 50, ¶10.
[¶18] Here, pursuant to the settlement agreement between the plaintiff
and the City, the documents relating to the “incident and/or investigation into
the incident” must be “maintained solely by the Concord Police Department
and Human Resources Department in a separate investigative file.” Although
these documents are no longer kept in the plaintiff’s “permanent personnel
files,” we agree with the trial court that they nonetheless constitute “personnel
information for purposes of the EES.” See RSA 105:13-d, I.
[¶19] Finally, the plaintiff argues that her name should be removed from
the EES because “there are no reasonably foreseeable criminal cases where she
would be a witness.” Relying upon our decision in Doe (Activity Logs), the
plaintiff asserts that because she is retired and has not been a police officer for
more than 10 years, “[t]he likelihood that [she] would be required to testify as a
former police officer for a criminal case is essentially zero,” and her placement
on the EES “would serve no purpose other than to publicly embarrass her.”
The plaintiff reads Doe (Activity Logs) as standing for the proposition that an
officer’s inclusion on the EES would be inappropriate simply because it is
unlikely that he or she will be called as a witness at a future criminal case.
This reading, however, misapprehends Doe (Activity Logs).
[¶20] In Doe (Activity Logs), we explained that “considerations made to
determine the admissibility of evidence, such as the age of the conduct and its
materiality to an officer’s general credibility, should factor into the
determination of whether information in an officer’s personnel file warrants his
or her inclusion on the EES.” Doe (Activity Logs), 176 N.H. at 815, 2024 N.H.
50, ¶20. We further stated that “[i]f there is no reasonably foreseeable case in
which ‘potentially exculpatory evidence’ relating to an officer’s conduct would
be admissible, due to the passage of a significant length of time or some other
factor weighing on the conduct’s relevance, an officer’s inclusion on the EES
would be inappropriate.” Id.
[¶21] We take this opportunity to clarify the standard set forth in Doe
(Activity Logs). Our explanation in Doe (Activity Logs) was informed by our
Laurie List jurisprudence. See id. at 815-16, 2024 N.H. 50, ¶¶21-22. In
Duchesne v. Hillsborough County Attorney, for example, we determined that
even if the allegations of “excessive use of force” against the plaintiffs were true,
6
evidence of that alleged misconduct, “without something more (such as
evidence that [they] lied or misrepresented the facts) would not be admissible”
to impeach the plaintiffs’ general credibility. Duchesne v. Hillsborough County
Attorney, 167 N.H. 774, 784 (2015). We explained that “even if a future case
were to arise” involving the plaintiffs’ conduct, “the prior incident would not be
admissible simply to show [their] propensity to engage in such conduct.” Id.
(emphasis added). We therefore concluded that “the fact that adverse
information regarding a police officer’s background is not of the type usually
admissible to attack the officer’s general credibility has a strong bearing on the
propriety of maintaining the officer’s name on” the Laurie List. Id. By contrast,
we observed that in Laurie, where “the adverse information . . . was probative
of [the officer’s] general credibility as a witness, and, as such, would likely have
been admissible in any case in which [he] testified,” maintaining the officer’s
name on a list to be disclosed to the court “makes sense and upholds the
prosecutor’s legal and ethical responsibility.” Id. at 783-84.
[¶22] Guided by Doe (Activity Logs), Duchesne, and Laurie, the proper
inquiry in this context is whether, assuming “a future case were to arise,” it is
reasonably foreseeable that evidence of the plaintiff’s misconduct would be
admissible. Id. at 784 (recognizing that admissibility “has a strong bearing on
the propriety of maintaining the officer’s name on a list that is used as the
basis for automatically disclosing the information to the trial court or the
defendant in any case in which the officer may testify”); Doe (Activity Logs), 176
N.H. at 815, 2024 N.H. 50, ¶20. If it is not reasonably foreseeable that an
officer’s prior misconduct would be admissible if he or she is called to testify in
a future case, then the officer’s inclusion on the EES would be inappropriate.
Doe (Activity Logs), 176 N.H. at 815, 2024 N.H. 50, ¶20. Contrary to the
plaintiff’s interpretation of Doe (Activity Logs), this standard does not require
courts to assess the likelihood that a criminal case would be brought at which
the officer would be called as a witness.
[¶23] In this case, we cannot conclude that there is no reasonably
foreseeable case in which evidence of the plaintiff’s misconduct would be
admissible. See id. There is no dispute that, after multiple proceedings, the
plaintiff was found to have been untruthful. The sustained findings that the
plaintiff lied to her colleagues and supervisors could be admissible to impeach
her credibility if, in the future, there arises a criminal case at which she is
called as a witness. See N.H. R. Ev. 608(b). Therefore, we cannot conclude
that maintaining the plaintiff’s name on the EES would be inappropriate. See
Doe (Activity Logs), 176 N.H. at 815, 2024 N.H. 50, ¶20.
[¶24] We note that the underlying conduct in this case, the plaintiff’s
untruthful statements, is dissimilar to the underlying conduct in Duchesne,
“excessive use of force.” See Duchesne, 167 N.H. at 784; cf. Doe v. Salem
Police Dep’t (Off-duty Speeding), 177 N.H. 20, 27 (2024), 2024 N.H. 54, ¶¶20-
21 (concluding that removal from EES was warranted because “nothing in the
7
complaint or accompanying documentation suggest[ed] that the plaintiff acted
dishonestly or attempted to conceal his conduct,” and conduct was over ten
years old). Here, the plaintiff’s misconduct relates to her credibility and is
“reasonably capable of being material to guilt or to punishment.” Doe (Activity
Logs), 176 N.H. at 814, 2024 N.H. 50, ¶18; see also Laurie, 139 N.H. at 327
(“[T]he jury’s estimate of the truthfulness and reliability of a given witness may
well be determinative of guilt or innocence, and it is upon such subtle factors
as the possible interest of the witness in testifying falsely that a defendant’s life
or liberty may depend.” (quotation omitted)).
[¶25] Although the trial court’s decision preceded our articulation of the
applicable standard in Doe (Activity Logs), its reasoning is consistent with that
standard. See Doe (Activity Logs), 176 N.H. at 815, 2024 N.H. 50, ¶20. In its
order, the trial court considered the age of the misconduct and the
misconduct’s materiality to the plaintiff’s general credibility, and the court
explained that “[d]epending on the case, a trial court might admit the findings
of untruthfulness as acts probative of [the plaintiff’s] general credibility and
character for truthfulness or untruthfulness.” It concluded that “the law is not
such that use of the information would be barred necessarily at a trial in which
[the plaintiff] served as a witness” and “[w]hether a trier of fact that learned of
the nature of the falsehoods and the surrounding circumstances would attach
less significance to the credibility challenge, would go to the weight of the
evidence, but not its admissibility.”
[¶26] Therefore, we conclude that the trial court correctly determined
that the plaintiff’s personnel information contains “potentially exculpatory
evidence” and correctly granted summary judgment in favor of the defendants.
Accordingly, we affirm.
Affirmed.
MACDONALD, C.J., and COUNTWAY and GOULD, JJ., concurred.
8