THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0599, Estate of Dennis Bezanson,
Executor Sandra J. Bezanson v. Exeter Hospital, Inc. & a., the
court on October 28, 2025, issued the following order:
The plaintiff’s request to hold this appeal in abeyance is denied.
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Sandra J. Bezanson, as Executor of the Estate
of Dennis Bezanson, appeals the order of the Superior Court (Kennedy, J.)
granting the motion for final judgment filed by defendant Exeter Hospital, and
dismissing the plaintiff’s amended complaint with prejudice as a sanction for
failing to provide complete responses to the defendant’s discovery requests.
She raises numerous issues on appeal. We affirm.
We review the trial court’s decision to dismiss the plaintiff’s complaint for
failing to comply with her discovery obligations under our unsustainable
exercise of discretion standard. Estate of Sicotte v. Lubin & Meyer, 157 N.H.
670, 673 (2008). Under this standard, the plaintiff must demonstrate that the
trial court’s decision was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of
her case. Figlioli v. R.J. Moreau Cos., 151 N.H. 618, 626 (2005).
On January 12, 2024, the defendant sent the plaintiff discovery requests,
to be answered within 30 days. See Super. Ct. R. 24, 25. Thirty days later, on
February 13, 2024, the defendant sent the plaintiff a letter “check[ing] in”
regarding the status of the plaintiff’s responses. The letter advised the plaintiff
that, upon written request, the defendant would extend the due date to March
12, 2024. See Super. Ct. R. 23(i) (noting that parties may extend discovery
deadlines by written agreement). The defendant’s letter also noted that the
plaintiff’s automatic discovery disclosures were past due. See Super. Ct. R. 22.
After the plaintiff failed to respond to the discovery requests by March 12,
2024, the defendant moved for a conditional default. See Super. Ct. R. 29(d).
On March 20, 2024, the court entered a conditional default against the plaintiff
for failure to answer interrogatories, noting that the conditional default would
be vacated if the plaintiff responded to the interrogatories within ten days of
receiving notice and moved to strike the conditional default.
Although the plaintiff did not respond to the interrogatories within ten
days, she moved to strike the conditional default on March 28, 2024, asserting
that she had not seen the defendant’s discovery requests until she received a
copy of them as an attachment to the defendant’s motion for conditional
default.
On April 22, 2024, the defendant moved for entry of final judgment on
the basis that the plaintiff had not responded to its discovery requests. On
June 28, 2024, following a hearing, the court denied the motion for entry of
final judgment, affording the plaintiff ten days from July 1, 2024 in which to
provide “full and complete answers to the interrogatories.” On July 25, 2024,
the defendant renewed its motion for entry of final judgment on the basis that
the plaintiff’s interrogatory answers and responses to document requests were
inadequate.
The court concluded that the plaintiff failed to comply with its order
requiring her to provide full and complete answers to the defendant’s
interrogatories. The court found that the plaintiff’s responses to be “woefully
inadequate,” and that they “reflect a blatant failure to follow clear instructions,
thus depriving Defendant of necessary substantive information.” The court
concluded that the plaintiff’s conduct constituted discovery abuse as defined in
Superior Court Rule 21(d), causing the defendant undue burden and expense,
and misleading the defendant with evasive discovery responses. See Super. Ct.
R. 21(d).
The trial court considered lesser sanctions other than dismissal, such as
an “issue sanction” ordering certain facts to be taken as established by the
defendant, or an “evidence sanction” prohibiting the plaintiff from introducing
certain matters into evidence. See Super. Ct. R. 21(d)(2). The court concluded,
however, that “the scope of Plaintiff’s discovery abuse is so broad that if the
Court were to impose all issue and evidence sanctions warranted as a result,
Plaintiff would be unable to establish the elements necessary to prove her
claims.” “In other words,” the court found, “given the scope of Plaintiff’s
discovery abuse, imposing appropriate issue or evidence sanctions would
amount to an order of dismissal.” The court concluded, therefore, that “the
only appropriate remedy at this juncture is dismissal.”
We note that it is the burden of the appealing party, here the plaintiff, to
provide this court with a record sufficient to decide her issues on appeal. See
Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250-51 (2004); Sup. Ct. R. 13; see
also In the Matter of Birmingham & Birmingham, 154 N.H. 51, 56 (2006) (self-
represented litigants are bound by the same procedural rules that govern
parties represented by counsel). In this case, the plaintiff failed to provide us
with copies of the discovery requests at issue or her responses. Nor has she
provided us with copies of all relevant pleadings and court orders. Based upon
the limited record provided for our review, we cannot conclude that the trial
2
court unsustainably exercised its discretion in dismissing the plaintiff’s
complaint with prejudice. See Figlioli, 151 N.H. at 626.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Hantz Marconi, Donovan, Countway, and Gould,
JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3