THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0368, State of New Hampshire v. Kyle
Babb, the court on January 30, 2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The
defendant, Kyle Babb, appeals his convictions following a jury trial in Superior
Court (Delker, J.) on two counts of simple assault. See RSA 631:2-a (2016).
He argues that the trial court erred because it failed to instruct the jury on the
defense of mutual consent. We affirm.
I. Background
The jury could have found the following facts. The defendant was
walking on a street in Manchester when he encountered the victim, who was,
the defendant concedes, intoxicated and had stumbled and sat down after
leaving a pub. The two exchanged insults and the defendant approached the
victim. The victim swung his cane at the defendant, missed, and fell to the
ground motionless. The defendant then repeatedly kicked the victim while he
was on the ground.
The defendant was charged with two counts of second degree assault for
kicking the victim in the face and stomping on his head while he was lying on
the ground. At trial, the jury was instructed on the lesser-included offense of
simple assault. The defendant requested an additional instruction on the
defense of mutual consent, asserting that “by swinging his cane at [the
defendant],” the victim “enter[ed] into a fight,” and thus the charged conduct
occurred in a fight entered into by mutual consent. See RSA 631:2-a, II. The
trial court denied the motion. The defendant was found guilty on two counts of
simple assault. This appeal followed.
II. Analysis
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred because it
failed to instruct the jury on the defense of mutual consent. The trial court
denied the request because it would not be “rational for the jury to arrive at
that conclusion.” We agree with the trial court.
Although the scope and wording of jury instructions are generally within
the sound discretion of the trial court, the court must grant a defendant’s
requested jury instruction on a specific defense if there is some evidence to
support a rational finding in favor of that defense. State v. Miller, 177 N.H.
249, 255 (2025), 2025 N.H. 11, ¶14. Some evidence means more than a
minutia or scintilla of evidence. Id. To be more than a scintilla, evidence
cannot be vague, conjectural, or the mere suspicion of a fact, but must be of
such quality as to induce conviction. Id. However, the evidentiary support
need not be overwhelming, nor must the evidence presented be uncontradicted.
Id. When there is simply no evidentiary basis to support the theory of the
requested jury instruction, the party is not entitled to such an instruction, and
the trial court may properly deny the party’s request. Id. Because we are
asked to review the “trial court’s denial of a defendant’s request for a jury
instruction on a defendant’s theory of defense,” our standard of review is de
novo. State v. Brooks, 177 N.H. 264, 270 (2025), 2025 N.H. 12, ¶12.
“A person is guilty of simple assault if he . . . [p]urposely or knowingly
causes bodily injury or unprivileged physical contact to another . . . . ” RSA
631:2-a, I(a). “Simple assault is a misdemeanor unless committed in a fight
entered into by mutual consent, in which case it is a violation.” RSA 631:2-a,
II. Mutual consent requires that both parties agree to participate in the fight,
either expressly or by implication. Miller, 177 N.H. at 255, 2025 N.H. 11, ¶15.
The defendant testified that the victim called him a slur and threatened
to stab him. After the defendant approached the victim, the victim swung his
cane at him, causing the victim to fall to the ground. The defendant testified
that he “tried to get [the] cane away from [the victim],” “started kicking,”
“kicked at the cane,” and “probably even hit [the victim] once.”
On this record, there is no evidence to support a rational finding that the
charged conduct, i.e., kicking the victim in the face and stomping on his head
after he fell to the ground motionless occurred in a fight entered into by mutual
consent. Regardless of the words and conduct the victim might have initially
directed at the defendant, there is no evidence that, after the victim swung his
cane and fell to the ground, the victim said or did anything suggesting that he
intended to engage in a fight with the defendant. To the contrary, the
defendant testified that the intoxicated victim did not swing his cane at him
again after he was on the ground motionless. Instead, as the defendant
testified, he “started kicking” the victim while purportedly trying to disarm him.
Even when the defendant’s testimony is viewed in the light most favorable to
him, “there is a gap between what could be perceived as mutual argument,
mutual combat, and the conduct alleged in the . . . complaint” that precludes a
rational finding that the charged conduct occurred in a fight entered into by
mutual consent. Id. at 256, 2025 N.H. 11, ¶17 (quotation omitted).
2
Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court did not err when it declined to
instruct the jury on the defense of mutual consent.
Affirmed.
MACDONALD, C.J., and DONOVAN, COUNTWAY, and GOULD, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3