THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case Nos. 2024-0569 and 2024-0570, In the Matter of
Trilby Dutra and Brandon Dutra, the court on August 22, 2025,
issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The petitioner, Trilby Dutra (mother), appeals the order of
the Circuit Court (Hall, J.), following a hearing, denying her request to exercise
temporary emergency jurisdiction pursuant to New Hampshire’s Uniform Child
Custody Jurisdiction and Enforcement Act (UCCJEA), see RSA ch. 458-A
(2018), to issue parenting and protective orders. We affirm.
The UCCJEA provides that a court may exercise temporary emergency
jurisdiction “if the child is present in this state and the child has been
abandoned or it is necessary in an emergency to protect the child because the
child . . . is subjected to or threatened with mistreatment or abuse.” RSA 458-
A:15, I. “The comments to the UCCJEA explain that the exercise of temporary
emergency jurisdiction is intended to be narrowly circumscribed.” In the
Matter of Yaman & Yaman, 167 N.H. 82, 98 (2014). “According to those
comments, temporary emergency jurisdiction is an extraordinary jurisdiction
reserved for extraordinary circumstances.” In the Matter of Akin & Suljevic,
174 N.H. 743, 752 (2022) (quotation omitted).
The respondent, Brandon Dutra (father), and the mother are married
with three children. From 2021 until shortly before the mother filed her
divorce petition and motion for ex parte relief, the parties lived with their
children in Milan, Italy. In June 2024, the mother traveled to New Hampshire
with the children to visit family, while the father remained in Italy. The mother
alleges that while in New Hampshire, one of the children disclosed that the
father had assaulted her. The mother alleged that the other children
subsequently disclosed that the father had also abused them. The mother
alleged that, as a result of these disclosures, a federal office opened a criminal
investigation of the father, and that the New Hampshire Division for Children,
Youth and Families also initiated an investigation. She further alleged that she
was not allowed to return to Italy.
At a hearing on the mother’s motion, she testified that the father
informed her in text messages that he plans to come see his children, but she
admitted that she had “no idea when that would be, where that would be, [or]
how that would happen.” The father testified that he was in the process of
relocating to California and had “no intention to come back to . . . New
Hampshire to take the children.”
In her brief, the mother concedes that, “[a]t the time [she] filed the
emergency petition, the children may not have been in any immediate danger of
violence from Father because he was in Italy,” and that “she had no way of
knowing when, if ever, Father would have access to the children.” She asserts,
nevertheless, that grounds for temporary emergency jurisdiction existed
because the father had parenting rights which he intended to exercise, she
could not return to Italy to obtain orders of protection, and she had “nowhere
else to go.” As a result, she argues, the children were at risk of further abuse.
She also alleged that the trial court placed too much weight on the parties’
memorandum of agreement, in which they agreed that the children would
relocate to California unless both parties agreed to a new location. She
asserted that she entered into the agreement before learning of the father’s
alleged abuse.
Under these facts, we conclude that the trial court was not compelled to
find that it was “necessary in an emergency to protect the [children] because
[they were] subjected to or threatened with mistreatment or abuse.” See RSA
458-A:15, I. Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court did not err by
declining to exercise temporary emergency jurisdiction under the UCCJEA.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2