THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0075, In the Matter of Anne Morse and
Frank Morse, the court on April 8, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The petitioner, Anne Morse, and the respondent, Frank
Morse, stipulated to a final divorce decree on April 14, 2022. The decree and
incorporated property settlement required Frank to pay Anne $850,000. The
funds for that payment were to have originated from Frank receiving a
subdivision loan on property the parties owned in New Hampshire. Frank
failed to make full payment to Anne. Anne filed four motions for contempt over
the course of ten months for failing to pay the property settlement. The Circuit
Court (Garner, J.) found Frank in contempt and awarded Anne, among other
things, the New Hampshire property outright. Frank appeals. We affirm.
I. Background
The following facts are supported by the record. Frank and Anne were
married for thirty-four years. During their marriage, Frank owned and
operated an excavation business. Anne worked with Frank in the business. In
April 2022, the parties, by agreement, stipulated to a final divorce decree. The
decree incorporated a property settlement, which awarded one lot and the
house in New Hampshire to Anne, the rest of the New Hampshire land and a
Massachusetts home to Frank, and required Frank to pay Anne $850,000.
Frank and Anne had originally intended to subdivide the New Hampshire land
into smaller lots to sell to developers.
The property settlement required Frank, among other things, to pay
Anne $850,000 in payments between April 2022 and January 2025. The first
$50,000 was to be paid on a graduated schedule through July 1, 2022. The
next $550,000 was due by September 1, 2022. The settlement stated that
“Frank shall make a due diligent effort to transfer funds as soon as possible.”
The next $200,000 was to be paid by March 1, 2024. The remaining $50,000
was to be paid by January 1, 2025. Anne was also to receive a lien against the
Massachusetts property securing payment of the final $250,000. The
settlement required Anne to sign quitclaim deeds to the parties’ properties and
to vacate the Massachusetts house after Frank paid the first $600,000.
The trial court found that the underlying assumption of the property
settlement was that Frank would be able to mortgage parts of the New
Hampshire property to obtain the monies necessary to pay Anne. The record
reflects that there was no other source for this money in the marital estate.
Frank paid Anne $50,000 in three payments between April 2022 and
July 2022 as required by the property settlement. He failed to make the
required $550,000 payment by September 1, 2022. Anne subsequently filed a
motion for contempt against Frank. The court “reserved” a finding of contempt,
required Frank to pay $25,000 “forthwith,” and scheduled a hearing for
October 2022.
Based on Frank’s continued failure to pay the $550,000 and the newly
ordered $25,000, Anne filed a second motion for contempt on October 3, 2022.
After a hearing, the trial court issued an order on November 1, extending
Frank’s deadline to pay the $550,000 “for a period of nine months” because in
order to receive loan approval, Frank needed “deeded title to the property for a
period of six months.” The trial court further ordered that “[Frank] will provide
[Anne] a written confirmation from the lender that the loan is approved,” and
that “[u]pon such proof,” Frank would have nine months to provide the
$550,000 payment to Anne.
In January 2023, Anne filed her third motion for contempt because
Frank had failed to provide “written and signed confirmation from the lenders
that the loan was approved or proof of the loan and its terms.” Anne also
requested attorney’s fees for the three contempt motions.
In May, the parties agreed that Frank would remove Anne’s name from
the Massachusetts home’s mortgage obligation and that the parties “shall
proceed to close on the loan” in order to pay Anne $550,000, plus interest. The
agreement also gave Anne liens on the Massachusetts and New Hampshire
properties to account for the remaining $250,000 owed by Frank.
The court approved the stipulated agreement. In June 2023, the court
granted Anne’s third motion for contempt and ordered Frank to pay Anne
$7,500 in attorney’s fees.
In June 2023, Anne filed her fourth motion for contempt based on
Frank’s failures to comply with the previous orders, to provide proof of the loan
approval, and to pay the attorney’s fees. The motion alleged that Frank’s co-
signer had “backed out,” Frank had “no other co-signer,” he “was denied all
financing,” and the loan “process had failed.” Anne requested that the marital
property be “liquidated” and distributed so that she “receive the full property
settlement payment, minus any payments [Frank] made.” Anne asserted that
any further delay in receiving funds was “highly prejudicial” to her. In
2
response to this motion, the court scheduled a hearing and instructed the
parties to file “proposed orders and exchange financial affidavits.”
Following a hearing on October 25, the trial court issued an interim
order and a final narrative order. The interim order explained that Frank had
not paid the attorney’s fees of $7,500 and again ordered him to do so. The
court acknowledged that although Frank had been making monthly $1,500
payments to Anne, she could not provide for her own needs. The trial court’s
final order explained that “[a]lthough the Court earlier found that the payment
of $550,000 was not strictly contingent on completion of the subdivision, the
Court also found that there was no other source of funds within the marital
estate.” The court stated that because the “subdivision is not now likely to
occur . . . the parties’ agreement has been frustrated and is not now capable of
performance.” The trial court concluded that “[f]indings of contempt are
mandated by [Frank’s] failure to make payments toward both the property
settlement and [Anne’s] attorney’s fees despite having funds available.” The
court ordered that Anne receive the New Hampshire property and Frank receive
the Massachusetts property. The order also required: (1) that Frank pay the
mortgage and property taxes on the New Hampshire property until it was
transferred to Anne; (2) that Frank pay statutory interest on the $550,000
amount from previous orders; and (3) that Anne’s lien on the Massachusetts
property in the amount of $100,000 remain in place until the payments were
completed.
The court also issued a Uniform Alimony Order requiring that Frank
“continue to pay $1,500 per month ongoing, and for a period of three years
after title to the properties are transferred to the parties.” Frank moved for
reconsideration, in part seeking clarification of the trial court’s order. The trial
court clarified Frank’s payment obligation and otherwise denied the
motion. This appeal followed.
II. Analysis
On appeal, Frank argues that the trial court erred by: (1) “awarding
alimony to the petitioner that is substantially in excess of the statutory
formulas without finding that respondent has the ability to pay”; (2) “modifying
the property settlement in the stipulated April 14, 2022 final decree”; and (3)
awarding “petitioner a windfall of a substantially larger portion of the marital
assets.” (Bolding and capitalization omitted.) We address these arguments in
turn.
Frank argues that the trial court erred in awarding alimony to Anne and
that the trial court may order term alimony only “if it finds that the payor has
the ability to pay to meet his own needs while also meeting Petitioner’s needs”
under RSA 458:19-a (Supp. 2024).
3