THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0631, In the Matter of Danielle Morello
and Jesse Morello, the court on November 21, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). Accordingly, the petitioner’s motion for oral argument is
denied. The petitioner, Danielle Morello (wife), appeals the final decree of the
Circuit Court (Gorman, J.), following a hearing, in her divorce from the
respondent, Jesse Morello (husband). The wife argues that the trial court erred
by: (1) denying her request for alimony; (2) ordering the sale of the marital
home; (3) failing to rule on a marital debt; (4) failing to consider fault grounds
in its division of the marital estate; and (5) awarding firearms to the husband.
We affirm.
The wife first argues that the trial court erred by denying her request for
alimony. We review the trial court’s decision to grant or deny a request for
alimony under our unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. In the
Matter of Kempton & Kempton, 167 N.H. 785, 802 (2015). The wife argues that
the trial court failed to consider evidence demonstrating her need for alimony.
However, a trial court may award alimony only if it finds that the party from
whom alimony is sought is able to meet his own reasonable needs while
meeting those of the party seeking alimony. See RSA 458:19-a (Supp. 2023).
In this case, the trial court found that the “[husband’s] financial affidavit does
not show that he is able to meet his own reasonable expenses, pay guideline
support and make alimony payments even if mother could show a need.”
The wife also asserts that the trial court, in denying her request for
alimony, failed to consider the husband’s fault. The court expressly considered
the husband’s behavior throughout the marriage, which supported its decision
to grant a fault-based divorce. However, this finding does not require that
alimony be awarded to the wife. See In the Matter of Peirano & Larsen, 155
N.H. 738, 746 (2007) (fault grounds are just one factor for trial court’s
consideration in determining alimony). To the extent that the wife argues that
the trial court erred because its temporary orders included an alimony award,
the trial court is not required to afford the same relief in its final order as it did
in its temporary orders. See In the Matter of Stapleton & Stapleton, 159 N.H.
694, 697 (2010). Based on this record, we cannot conclude that the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion by denying the wife’s request for
alimony. See In the Matter of Kempton, 167 N.H. at 802.
The wife next argues that the trial court erred in ordering the sale of the
marital home. The court may require the sale of the marital home if it is
required for an equitable division of the property. See RSA 458:16-a, V (Supp.
2023). The trial court found the marital home to be “the largest asset in the
marital estate,” and that if it were to award the home to the wife, “the
assignment of other assets to [the husband] will not enable the court to
equitably divide the marital assets.” The court further found that,
“[a]ssignment of substantial debt to [the wife] as an offset will only place her in
a more precarious financial situation if she is paying on substantial debts while
paying the costs associated with the marital home.”
In her reply brief, the wife argues that the court failed to consider
“alternatives like deferred sale or refinancing.” However, the court expressly
considered refinancing, noting that “even if [the wife] could make the monthly
mortgage payments, it is highly unlikely that she could refinance the home
within a reasonable period of time and pay [the husband] for his share of the
equity.” In her motion for reconsideration, the wife averred that she could
“refinance the home after forty-eight (48) months following completion of her
National Debt relief program.” However, a trial court should award a property
settlement that can be achieved immediately where practicable, to avoid future
conflicts between the parties. In the Matter of Harvey & Harvey, 153 N.H. 425,
436 (2006), overruled on other grounds by In the Matter of Chamberlin &
Chamberlin, 155 N.H. 13, 15-17 (2007). Based on this record, we cannot
conclude that the trial court erred in ordering the sale of the marital home.
The wife next argues that the trial court erred by failing to rule on a
marital debt, the Upstart loan. In her motion for reconsideration, the wife
represented that the Upstart loan, along with several other debts, was rolled
into her debt relief program with National Debt Relief. In her reply brief, the
wife contends that she repaid the Upstart loan from her tax refund. Based on
this record, we conclude that the wife failed to argue before the trial court that
the Upstart loan was marital debt. As a result, it was not error for the trial
court to disregard that loan in its order. See Coyle v. Battles, 147 N.H. 98, 100
(2001) (appellant has burden to demonstrate error).
The wife next argues that the trial court failed to consider fault grounds
in its division of the marital estate. We afford trial courts broad discretion in
determining matters of property distribution in fashioning a final divorce
decree. In the Matter of Hampers & Hampers, 154 N.H. 275, 285 (2006). The
court is responsible for dividing the parties’ marital property equitably. In the
Matter of Routhier & Routhier, 175 N.H. 6, 11 (2022). In determining an
equitable division of the marital estate, the trial court may consider fault
grounds, if the fault caused “substantial physical or mental pain and suffering”
or resulted in “substantial economic loss to the marital estate or the injured
party.” See RSA 458:16-a, II(l) (2018). However, the trial court is not required
2
to award an unequal division of the marital estate in a fault-based divorce. See
id. In this case, the trial court awarded the wife sixty percent of the equity in
the marital residence, the parties’ largest marital asset. The wife argues that a
60/40 division of the marital home fails to adequately consider the fault
grounds for the divorce and other equitable considerations. Based on this
record, we cannot conclude that the trial court unsustainably exercised its
discretion in its division of the marital estate. See In the Matter of Hampers,
154 N.H. at 285.
Finally, the wife argues that the trial court erred in awarding firearms to
the husband given an existing no contact order. The wife provides no legal
authority to support her argument. See State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 49
(2003) (on appeal, we address only issues that are fully briefed). Moreover, as
stated in the court’s decree, the firearms awarded to the husband will remain
in the possession of the New Boston and Milford Police Departments until the
husband is granted approval for their return. Based on this record, we
conclude that the wife has failed to demonstrate that the trial court erred in
awarding firearms to the husband. See Coyle, 147 N.H. at 100.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, and Gould, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3