THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0019, Mahmoud Chatila v. Charles Smith,
III & a., the court on March 14, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant1, Charles Smith, III, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Ruoff, J.) granting the plaintiff’s, Mahmoud Chatila, motion for
summary judgment seeking specific performance of an option to purchase
clause in a commercial lease. We affirm.
I. Factual Background
The following facts are supported by the summary judgment record or
were otherwise found by the trial court. On February 20, 2017, the parties
entered into a commercial lease agreement (Agreement) by which the plaintiff
leased the defendant’s property in Derry (the Property). The Agreement
provided for a term of four years ending on March 1, 2021 and a monthly
rental payment of $3,750. Paragraph 18 of the Agreement contained a
purchase option, which provided, in relevant part:
The LESSEE may exercise the option to buy the property at any
time during this term of the lease or immediately upon the
termination of the lease. The agreed upon price of the option is
$350,000 less the 50% taxes paid during the first year and any
extra payments made during the four year term of the lease.
On November 10, 2020, plaintiff’s counsel contacted then-counsel for the
defendant by email informing her of the plaintiff’s intention to exercise the
option to purchase the Property. That same day, plaintiff’s prospective lender
contacted plaintiff’s counsel and indicated that an executed purchase and sales
agreement (P&S) would be required to obtain financing for the purchase. On
November 16, counsel for the defendant contacted plaintiff’s counsel indicating
that the defendant had “no problem proceeding with [the purchase option]” and
asking for a draft P&S. Plaintiff’s counsel emailed a draft P&S to defendant’s
counsel on December 22. On January 14, February 3, and February 9, 2021,
he contacted her inquiring about the status of the contract.
1 Originally, the plaintiff named the defendant’s former spouse, Maxine Smith, as a defendant.
However, the parties agreed to dismiss her from the case after learning that she no longer
maintained an interest in the Property following her divorce.
Throughout February and March, plaintiff’s counsel emailed defendant’s
counsel repeatedly asking about the status of the P&S without a substantive
response other than apologizing and indicating that she had not heard from the
defendant.2 In April, defendant’s counsel provided a revised P&S to plaintiff’s
counsel who promptly responded with proposed revisions to the agreement.
The defendant did not respond until June, when his counsel initially indicated
that the defendant would sign the agreement. Five days later, defendant’s
counsel informed plaintiff’s counsel that she had not received the defendant’s
approval of the revised P&S.
In July and August, plaintiff’s counsel repeatedly contacted defendant’s
counsel seeking information regarding the status of the P&S and actions
necessary to complete the transaction. In August, defendant’s counsel emailed
plaintiff’s counsel that the plaintiff had informed the defendant that “he is no
longer able to purchase the property due to a large payment to Harvard for his
child;” and she asked that he “confirm with [the plaintiff] that the sale is off
and let me know.” The next day, plaintiff’s counsel emailed defendant’s
counsel informing her that her information was inaccurate, that the plaintiff
intended to “go forward with the sale,” and asking for a response by the end of
the week. The plaintiff received no further response from the defendant or his
counsel until January 3, 2022, when a new attorney representing the
defendant contacted plaintiff’s counsel’s firm regarding the sale of the Property.
From January to August, the parties engaged in further negotiations
concerning the P&S and the defendant’s removal of personal property,
including a significant number of motor vehicles, from the Property prior to the
closing on the purchase. Frequently, the defendant did not respond to the
plaintiff’s inquiries for weeks or months. On July 15, plaintiff’s counsel
informed defendant’s new attorney that the plaintiff had sufficient funds to
purchase the Property and wished “to proceed with a cash sale.” Nevertheless,
the defendant refused or failed to respond to the plaintiff’s inquiries regarding
the removal of the defendant’s property, the precise terms of the P&S that
would regulate any post-closing removal of the personal property, or a closing
date. The record is devoid of information indicating that, during the November
2020 to September 2022 timeframe, the defendant asked for the immediate
tender of the purchase price, or that he claimed either that the purchase option
had expired or that the plaintiff was in default of the terms of the Agreement.
II. Procedural Background
The plaintiff filed a complaint in the superior court on September 27,
2022 claiming a breach of contract and seeking specific performance of the sale
of the Property and damages associated with having to continue paying rent to
the defendant after attempting to exercise his right to purchase the Property.
2 As previously noted, the original lease term expired on March 1, 2021.
2
The complaint also alleged that the plaintiff had continued to pay the monthly
rent pursuant to the Agreement after it expired in March 2021.
In April 2023, the plaintiff moved for summary judgment, arguing that
there were no genuine issues of material fact as to whether the defendant
breached the Agreement. More specifically, the plaintiff alleged that “[a]fter
more than two years of intentional delay and willful breach of contract, it has
become clear that [the defendant] has acted in bad faith” and that the
defendant had “failed to offer any adequate denials or evidence to the contrary
of [his] breaches.” These circumstances, the plaintiff argued, supported his
claim for specific performance, restitution damages associated with his
continued payment of rent after he attempted to exercise the purchase option,
and attorney’s fees.
The defendant objected to the summary judgment motion, arguing that
the plaintiff “failed to certify that he was ready, willing and able to purchase the
property” under the terms of the Agreement, because the plaintiff required
financing that was contingent upon “additional items, such as an appraisal, an
environmental study and Plaintiff’s financials.” The defendant further argued
that issues of material fact remained in dispute, such as the plaintiff’s ability
and willingness to purchase the Property without contingencies, whether the
parties “came to a meeting of the minds concerning the terms and conditions of
the purchase option,” and whether the plaintiff “should be precluded from
obtaining the equitable remedy of specific performance while [the plaintiff] was
in breach of the lease.”
After a hearing on the summary judgment motion, the trial court issued
an order granting the plaintiff summary judgment, ordering specific
performance, and awarding restitution. As to liability, the court found that
“[t]he uncontroverted record overwhelmingly supports the conclusion that there
was a valid lease and contract for the sale of the [P]roperty.” With respect to
the defendant’s contention that material facts remained in dispute, the court
found that “whether the plaintiff was ‘ready, willing, and able’ to purchase the
[P]roperty” was not a “genuine issue of material fact” and whether the plaintiff
defaulted on certain terms of the Agreement was immaterial because the
“undisputed material fact remains that the lease was still valid, and the
plaintiff’s right to purchase the [P]roperty [was] never removed or rescinded,
during his tenancy.”
Based on these summary judgment findings, the court granted equitable
relief by ordering the defendant to convey the Property to the plaintiff within 30
days at a purchase price of $344,150 ($350,000 purchase price less the 50%
taxes paid during the first year of the lease and any extra payments made
during the four-year term). As to the plaintiff’s demand for restitution for the
rent he paid during the pendency of the suit, the trial court found that the
record supported that theory of recovery. The court reasoned that the
3