THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0099, Fieldstone Land Consultants, PLLC
v. Sebastian Barthelmess, the court on January 10, 2025, issued
the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The defendant, Sebastian Barthelmess, appeals a decision of
the Circuit Court (Prevett, J.), following a hearing on the merits, granting
judgment in favor of the plaintiff, Fieldstone Land Consultants, PLLC, on the
plaintiff’s small claim for breach of a contract to prepare a boundary survey,
and dismissing the defendant’s counterclaim for breach of contract. The
defendant argues that the trial court erred by (1) finding that the plaintiff
substantially performed the parties’ contract; (2) not finding the plaintiff in
material breach of the contract by failing to perform contracted-for work,
including work allegedly “discussed in email communications,” and by allegedly
trespassing upon a neighboring property; (3) determining that the work for
which the plaintiff charged the defendant was within the scope of the contract;
and (4) denying the defendant’s motion to dismiss based upon the plaintiff’s
failure to timely “file” its trial exhibits. We affirm.
We first address the defendant’s argument that the trial court erred by
denying his motion to dismiss. The record indicates that the defendant moved
to dismiss because the plaintiff did not comply with a provision of the pretrial
order requiring the parties to exchange trial exhibits ten days prior to trial, and
stating that failure to timely exchange exhibits “may result in the court
prohibiting their use at trial.” After the plaintiff represented that it had sent its
trial exhibits to the defendant “seven days prior to the deadline,” the trial court
asked the defendant to explain how “the fact that [the exhibits] were filed 7
days beforehand, as opposed to 10 days,” had prejudiced his defense. In
response, the defendant claimed that he had only received the exhibits in the
mail that morning, and that the version of the contract provided by the plaintiff
had been changed from the version he had executed.
We note that the trial court examined both the contract submitted by the
plaintiff and the copy submitted by the defendant. The court summarized their
differences as follows: (1) the copy provided by the defendant was “not the
entire contract,” but only one page of it; (2) the copy provided by the defendant
lacked his signature, his printed name, his title, and the date; and (3) the
plaintiff’s exhibit had handwritten annotations stating the date on which it had
received the defendant’s retainer payment and assigning a job number. The
defendant agreed with the trial court that there were not “any amendments or
any changes to the actual underlying work that” was set forth in both copies of
the contract provided by the parties. We note further that the defendant has
not provided the copy of the contract submitted by the plaintiff at trial, but has
provided only a copy of it that is consistent with the trial court’s description of
the version he submitted. It is the burden of the defendant, as the appealing
party, to provide those portions of the trial court record necessary to decide the
issues he is raising. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250
(2004); In the Matter of Rokowski & Rokowski, 168 N.H. 57, 62 (2015)
(applying Bean to appealing party’s failure to provide exhibits admitted into
evidence at evidentiary hearing). Finally, we note that the plaintiff introduced a
tracking receipt demonstrating that it had mailed the package seven days
before trial, and that the package was delivered six days before trial.
The trial court has broad discretion in managing and supervising
discovery and the conduct of trial. See Blagbrough Family Realty Trust v. A &
T Forest Prods., 155 N.H. 29, 40 (2007). To establish that the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion, the defendant must demonstrate that
its ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.
Id. We conclude that the defendant has not established that the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion by denying his motion to dismiss.
We next address the defendant’s arguments that the trial court erred by
finding that the plaintiff substantially performed its obligations under the
contract, that it did not materially breach the contract, and that the work it
performed was within the scope of the contract. “Substantial performance” of a
contract is generally required for a contracting party to recover damages for
breach of contract. See R. J. Berke & Co. v. J. P. Griffin, Inc., 116 N.H. 760,
764 (1976); Robinson v. Crowninshield, 1 N.H. 76, 79 (1817). Conversely, a
“material breach” of contract discharges the other party’s duty to perform
under it. Gaucher v. Waterhouse, 175 N.H. 291, 296 (2022). “[A] breach of
contract occurs when there is a failure without legal excuse to perform any
promise which forms the whole or part of a contract.” Keene Auto Body v.
State Farm Mut. Auto Ins. Co., 175 N.H. 503, 511 (2022) (quotation omitted).
“A breach is material if: (1) a party fails to perform a substantial part of the
contract or one or more of its essential terms or conditions; (2) the breach
substantially defeats the contract’s purpose; or (3) the breach is such that
upon a reasonable interpretation of the contract, the parties considered the
breach as vital to the existence of the contract.” Gaucher, 175 N.H. at 296.
Whether a party has substantially performed or materially breached a
contract are questions of fact for the trial court to resolve based upon the facts
and circumstances of the case. See id.; Fitz v. Coutinho, 136 N.H. 721, 725
(1993). Likewise, “[w]hen there is a disputed question of fact as to the
existence and terms of a contract, [the question] is to be determined by the
2
trier of fact.” Syncom Indus. v. Wood, 155 N.H. 73, 82 (2007). When parties to
a contract reduce their agreement to a writing intended to express their
complete agreement, parol evidence is generally not admissible to add terms to
the agreement not otherwise expressed in the writing. See Lapierre v. Cabral,
122 N.H. 301, 306-07 (1982).
We will uphold the trial court’s findings and conclusions unless they are
lacking in evidentiary support or are tainted by error of law. Syncom Indus.,
155 N.H. at 82. We defer to the trial court’s judgment on issues such as
resolving conflicts in testimony, evaluating the credibility of witnesses, and
determining the weight to be given to the evidence presented, mindful that the
trial court is not compelled to believe even uncontested evidence. See Gaucher,
175 N.H. at 296; Loon Valley Homeowner’s Ass’n v. Pollock, 171 N.H. 75, 78
(2018). “We do not decide whether we would have ruled differently than the
trial court, but, rather, whether a reasonable person could have reached the
same decision based upon the same evidence.” Gaucher, 175 N.H. at 295-96.
We assume that portions of the evidentiary record, including trial exhibits, that
have not been provided on appeal support the trial court’s decision. See Bean,
151 N.H. at 250; Rokowski, 168 N.H. at 62. We likewise assume that the trial
court made all findings necessary to support its decision. See Bennett v. Town
of Hampstead, 157 N.H. 477, 486 (2008).
We note that the defendant has not provided all the exhibits submitted at
trial, including email correspondence between the parties and the signed
version of the contract submitted by the plaintiff, and thus, we assume that
those exhibits support the trial court’s findings. See Bean, 151 N.H. at 250;
Rokowski, 168 N.H. at 62. Based upon our review of the record, including the
transcript of the evidentiary hearing and the version of the contract provided by
the defendant, we conclude that the evidence supports the trial court’s findings
that the plaintiff “substantially performed the contractually agreed-upon
services,” that the plaintiff did not charge the defendant for services that were
outside the scope of the contract, and that the parties did not agree that the
plaintiff would perform additional services that were not articulated within the
written contract. The evidence additionally supports the trial court’s implied
finding that the defendant materially breached the contract by refusing to pay
for the invoiced services, thereby excusing the plaintiff’s obligation to complete
its performance. See Gaucher, 175 N.H. at 296.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3