THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0198, State of New Hampshire v. John
Delee, the court on August 28, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, John Delee, appeals the order of the
Superior Court (Delker, J.), denying his motion for services other than counsel.
See RSA 604-A:6 (Supp. 2024). He argues that the trial court unsustainably
exercised its discretion in denying his request for funds for a
neuropsychological evaluation for use at sentencing. We affirm.
On December 4, 2023, a jury convicted the defendant of second degree
murder, see RSA 630:1-b (2016), and reckless conduct, see RSA 631:3 (Supp.
2024). The defendant, who was 22 years old, shot and killed the victim
following an altercation outside a bar. On February 2, 2024, prior to
sentencing, the defendant moved ex parte for services other than counsel,
requesting funds for a neuropsychological evaluation for use at sentencing. In
his motion, the defendant asserted that the evaluation “would assist in
understanding whether [his] impulsive conduct arose out of his [young] age or
out of some other factor impacting his brain development.” The defendant
argued that, “[g]iven [his] age, the characteristics of his conduct in this case,
his history of playing football, and the potential for the Court to impose any
sentence up to and including life, a neuropsychological evaluation would
enable the Court to discharge its sentencing duties as fairly as possible.”
At a hearing on the motion, defense counsel asserted that the defendant
“played football for a number of years, and was starting on the line in high
school, which is a position where there is a lot of helmet-to-helmet contact.”
Defense counsel also asserted that the “impulsivity of the behavior in this case,
and [defendant’s] youth,” together with “peer pressure,” “a dispute over a girl,”
and factors relating to “early adulthood brain development” supported the need
for neuropsychological testing to assist the court in sentencing. After the
hearing, the trial court denied the request, ruling that the defense had failed to
prove that such an evaluation was necessary. The court noted that there was
“no specific evidence that the defendant suffers from a neurocognitive deficit
beyond that he played football in high school.” The court also noted that there
was “no evidence that the defendant suffered from a concussion (or even had a
particular traumatic head injury).” The court found that “the defendant’s
behavior may be explained by his age and the general proposition that a young
adult’s brain does not reach full maturity until he is in his mid-20s.”
“In any criminal case in which counsel has been appointed to represent a
defendant who is financially unable to obtain investigative, expert or other
services necessary to an adequate defense in his case, counsel may apply
therefor to the court . . . .” RSA 604-A:6. “[U]pon finding that such services
are necessary and that the defendant is financially unable to obtain them, the
court shall authorize counsel to obtain the necessary services on behalf of the
defendant.” Id.
At the outset, the State argues that the defendant was not eligible to
apply for funds for services other than counsel under RSA 604-A:6 because he
was not represented by appointed counsel. But see State v. Brouillette, 166
N.H. 487, 492 (2014) (holding that RSA 604-A:6 does not prohibit receipt of
funds for services other than counsel by indigent criminal defendants who are
not represented by appointed counsel). For purposes of this appeal, we
assume that the defendant was eligible to apply for funds for services other
than counsel, and that the statute authorizes the expenditure of funds not only
for trial, but also for sentencing.
We review the trial court’s decision whether to grant a motion for funds
for an expert under our unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. State v.
Wellington, 150 N.H. 782, 784 (2004). To obtain funds for an expert, a
defendant must demonstrate to the trial court that the expert is necessary to
ensure effective preparation of his defense. See State v. Sweeney, 151 N.H.
666, 674 (2005). It is not enough merely to allege in general or conclusory
terms that expert services would be helpful. Wellington, 150 N.H. at 784.
Rather, a defendant must demonstrate by reference to the facts and
circumstances of his particular case that the assistance he seeks is necessary
to ensure effective preparation of his defense by his attorneys. Id. To succeed
on appeal, the defendant “must demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence
that his request to the court included as complete a showing of necessity for
the desired services as could be expected of him, and that the denial of funds
substantially prejudiced him at trial.” Id.
The defendant argues that he made as complete a showing of necessity
as could be expected of him because, although he presented no evidence of
specific head injuries, his “lengthy history of both offensive and defensive
lineman play gives rise to a showing of possibility of brain damage.” He also
asserts that research shows that brain damage may occur without evidence of
specific injuries.
We conclude that the defendant has not established, by clear and
convincing evidence, that his request for authorization to obtain expert services
at public expense included as complete a showing of necessity as could be
expected of him, and that the denial of funds substantially prejudiced him at
2
sentencing. See Wellington, 150 N.H. at 784. As the trial court noted, beyond
his general assertions that he played football in high school, and that “[f]ootball
is a sport which has been linked to brain injuries,” the defendant offered no
reasons why a neuropsychological evaluation was necessary. Moreover, the
defendant failed to show prejudice because he did not establish that any
potential medical reasons for his conduct would have affected the court’s
sentencing decision.
To the extent that the defendant relies upon the federal and state
constitutions as separate grounds for his appeal, we conclude that his
arguments are insufficiently developed to warrant review. See Anna H.
Cardone Revocable Trust v. Cardone, 160 N.H. 521, 526 (2010) (“Judicial
review is not warranted for complaints regarding adverse rulings without
developed legal argument, and neither passing reference to constitutional
claims nor casual invocations of constitutional rights without support by legal
argument or authority warrants extended consideration.”).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3