THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0602, In the Matter of Daniel Rochford
and Katlynn Hamel, the court on May 30, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). Daniel Rochford (Father) appeals an order of the Circuit Court (Tenney,
J.), issued following a hearing, that permits the child’s paternal grandmother,
intervenor Kerry Horn, (Grandmother) visitation with the child. We affirm.
In 2019, when the child was three months old, she was placed with
Grandmother in conjunction with an investigation by the New Hampshire
Division for Children, Youth and Families (DCYF). Grandmother became the
child’s legal guardian, and the child resided with Grandmother for the next five
years, with Father beginning regular visitation in December of 2022 and
gradually progressing to overnight weekend parenting time. The trial court
terminated the guardianship in August of 2024. The trial court found that
Father and Grandmother “have a very poor relationship featuring a very high
level of conflict, negative perceptions of each other, and a complete lack of trust.”
When it terminated the guardianship, the trial court maintained the existing
residential schedule, which included the child residing with Grandmother on
weekdays, pending further order.
Shortly after the termination, Father retained custody of the child for an
entire week in violation of the order. Thereafter, Grandmother filed a petition for
grandparent visitation. Following a hearing, the trial court established a
transition plan whereby Grandmother’s court-ordered visitation would diminish
between September 2024 and June 2025. The guardian ad litem agreed that this
type of gradual transition was necessary given the child’s “significant attachment
to [Grandmother].” The trial court concluded that a transition was necessary
because the child “has a very strong bond with Ms. Horn and absent an order
from this Court, [the child] would never see her[,]” which the trial court found
“with certainty” was “not in [the child’s] best interest.”
Father raises multiple arguments challenging the trial court’s factual
findings and alleging violations of his constitutional right to parent his child. As
the appealing party, Father bears the burden to support the issues raised in his
brief with fully developed legal arguments, see State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 49
(2003), and to demonstrate reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740
(2014). These procedural rules are not relaxed for parties who are not
represented by legal counsel. See In the Matter of Birmingham & Birmingham,
154 N.H. 51, 56-57 (2006).
Father fails to adequately develop the various legal arguments presented in
his brief. Consequently, based upon our review of the trial court’s order, Father’s
challenges to it, the relevant law, and the record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that Father has not demonstrated reversible error. See Gallo, 166 N.H.
at 740; see also Petition of Lussier, 161 N.H. 153, 159–60 (2010) (“[N]either
passing reference to constitutional claims nor offhand invocations of
constitutional rights without support by legal argument or authority warrants
extended consideration.”).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2