THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0505, State of New Hampshire v. Max
Giroux, the court on September 1, 2026, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The
defendant, Max Giroux, appeals his convictions on three counts of aggravated
felonious sexual assault (AFSA), see RSA 632-A:2, I(l) (2007), following a jury
trial in the Superior Court (St. Hilaire, J.). The defendant argues that the trial
court erroneously admitted evidence concerning: (1) the defendant’s prior acts;
and (2) the complainant’s forensic interview with the Child Advocacy Center
(CAC). Because we conclude that any alleged error was harmless, we affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. The defendant began
dating A.A.’s mother in 2008 when A.A. was about three years old. In 2009,
A.A. and her mother moved in with the defendant, and in 2010, A.A.’s mother
and the defendant had a son. A.A., her mother, and A.A.’s newborn brother
lived with the defendant until August 2012, when A.A.’s mother moved out
with the children. After moving out with their mother, A.A. and her brother
continued to spend time with the defendant.
In the summer of 2013, when A.A. was seven years old, she and her
younger brother would visit the defendant’s home and often stay overnight.
During one visit that summer, while A.A. and the defendant were sitting on a
recliner in the defendant’s living room, the defendant used his fingers to
massage and insert his fingers into A.A.’s vagina. This happened twice more
during subsequent visits to the defendant’s home that summer; once when the
defendant called A.A. into the bathroom as he was getting out of the shower,
and once when the defendant climbed into bed with A.A. one night.
Following this last incident, A.A.’s friend told her parents that she
believed the defendant had touched A.A. A.A.’s mother learned what the friend
had told her parents and then asked A.A. if the defendant had touched her,
and A.A. denied that he had. Afterward, A.A.’s mother relayed this
conversation to the defendant, and the defendant acknowledged that “now I feel
like maybe I did do something wrong.” He also suggested that he should “keep
his distance” for a while and “lay low [until] this all . . . blew over.” A.A.’s
mother did not go to the police because she “wanted to believe [her] daughter”
that the allegations were not true.
A.A. did not tell anybody that the defendant had assaulted her until
2021, when she told her best friend what had happened with the defendant.
Several months later, A.A. disclosed the assaults to her mother, who then
alerted the authorities.
The defendant was charged with three counts of AFSA. At trial, the jury
heard testimony from A.A., who at that point was 18 years old. Over the
defendant’s objection, the jury also heard from another witness (A.W.), the
significant other of the defendant’s brother. A.W. testified that, late one
evening in the summer of 2012, a year before the charged incidents, she was at
the defendant’s home socializing with the defendant, his brother, and the
defendant’s friend. A.W. observed the defendant bring A.A. into her room to
put her to bed and close the door. A.W. began to worry because the defendant
was with A.A. in her room for “a significant amount of time.” According to
A.W., the defendant’s friend eventually opened the door to A.A.’s room, said
that the defendant was “laying down with [A.A.]” and then shut the door. The
jury also heard testimony from other witnesses, including a detective with the
Pittsfield Police Department who, over the defendant’s objection, described the
general process of a CAC interview. The detective also testified that A.A.
participated in an interview with the CAC, although he did not testify to the
content of this interview. Following a two-day trial, the jury convicted the
defendant on all three counts of AFSA. This appeal followed.
The defendant argues we must reverse his convictions because the trial
court erroneously allowed the State to introduce evidence that: (1) the
defendant was seen in bed with A.A. approximately one year prior to the
charged incidents; and (2) A.A. participated in a forensic CAC interview.
Specifically, he argues that evidence that he was seen in bed with A.A. a year
before the charged incidents was inadmissible other acts evidence and that he
suffered prejudice as a result of its admission. See N.H. R. Ev. 404(b). He also
argues that, although the jury did not hear any testimony regarding what A.A.
said during her CAC interview, evidence that A.A. participated in a CAC
interview at all was irrelevant and prejudicial because the jury would have
inferred that the trained professionals participating in and observing the
interview believed A.A.’s allegations, thereby bolstering her credibility. We need
not decide whether the trial court erred by admitting any of this evidence,
however, because even if we assume that it did, we conclude that any
purported error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
To establish harmless error, the State must prove beyond a reasonable
doubt that the error did not affect the verdicts. State v. Boudreau, 176 N.H. 1,
11 (2023). This standard applies to both the erroneous admission and
exclusion of evidence. Id. To determine whether the State has met its burden,
we must evaluate the totality of the circumstances at trial. Id. at 11-12. In
doing so, we consider the other evidence admitted at trial as well as the
character of the erroneously admitted evidence itself. Id. at 11.
2
The factors that we have considered in assessing whether an error did
not affect the verdict include, but are not limited to: (1) the strength of the
State’s case; (2) whether the admitted or excluded evidence is cumulative or
inconsequential in relation to the strength of the State’s case; (3) the frequency
of the error; (4) the presence or absence of evidence corroborating or
contradicting the erroneously admitted or excluded evidence; (5) the nature of
the defense; (6) the circumstances in which the evidence was introduced at
trial; (7) whether the court took any curative steps; (8) whether the evidence is
of an inflammatory nature; and (9) whether the other evidence of the
defendant’s guilt is of an overwhelming nature. Id. at 12. No one factor is
dispositive. Id. We may consider factors not listed above and not all factors
may be implicated in a given case. Id.
To convict the defendant of AFSA as charged in the indictments, the
State had to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant purposely
engaged in sexual penetration by inserting his finger “into the genital opening
of A.A.” when A.A. was less than 13 years old, and that he did so on three
separate occasions. See RSA 632-A:2, I(l). “Sexual penetration” is defined as
“[a]ny intrusion, however slight, of any part of the actor’s body . . . into genital
or anal openings of the victim’s body.” RSA 632-A:1, V(a)(5) (Supp. 2012).
Here, there was overwhelming other evidence of the defendant’s guilt,
including A.A.’s direct, detailed testimony describing each of the three charged
incidents involving the defendant. See State v. Rouleau, 176 N.H. 400, 408
(2024), 2024 N.H. 2, ¶23 (noting in harmless error analysis that State’s case
“was not based on circumstantial evidence; instead, it was based on direct
evidence from the victim’s testimony”). For example, A.A. testified that during
the first assault in the living room, she felt “frozen” when the defendant rubbed
his hand over her shirt and chest and that she felt “pins and needles”
throughout her body as he touched her vagina. She then described feeling like
“something was tearing” when the defendant inserted his fingers into her
vagina. She recalled the defendant’s heavy breathing in her ear and that his
fingers were wet because he had licked them, and that he kissed her on the
forehead at the end of the incident. See State v. Lemieux, 136 N.H. 329, 331-
32 (1992) (concluding trial court’s error was harmless where admission of
opinion testimony that bolstered victim’s credibility was “inconsequential”
when compared to victim’s detailed description of defendant’s sexual assaults).
A.A. provided similarly detailed accounts of the subsequent assaults.
She testified that, during the bathroom assault, the defendant told her that he
had to check her for ticks because “on girls there’s a lot of different places and
crevices that they can hide,” which made her feel “panicked” because of what
had previously occurred. She described how the defendant “ripped” her pants
and underwear down and put his fingers into her vagina again while he
“strok[ed] his penis over the towel” that was wrapped around his waist. She
3