THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0061, State of New Hampshire v. Aung
Thet, the court on December 23, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The
defendant, Aung Thet, appeals his convictions, following a jury trial in the
Superior Court (Howard, J.), on three sets of two alternative counts of
aggravated felonious sexual assault (AFSA). See RSA 632-A:2, I(a), (m) (2016).
He argues that the trial court erred in allowing the victim’s doctor to testify that
she referred the victim to additional services due to the victim’s disclosure of
her “trauma history.” We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. The victim and the
defendant separately emigrated from Myanmar (formerly Burma). After the
victim responded to the defendant’s job posting in a Burmese-language
Facebook group, the defendant hired the victim to roll sushi at a supermarket
deli in exchange for monthly pay and room and board. He also offered to help
her file for asylum. The victim moved into the defendant’s shared apartment
and began working for him at the deli.
On several occasions in early 2020, the defendant forcibly engaged in
sexual intercourse with the victim in the apartment. Thereafter, the victim
learned that she was pregnant. Eventually, she moved out of the defendant’s
apartment and reported his sexual assaults to the police. A paternity test
taken after the victim’s child was born in the fall of 2020 confirmed that the
defendant was the child’s father. After giving birth, the victim learned for the
first time that she could apply for a U visa for immigrant victims of crime.
A grand jury subsequently indicted the defendant on seven counts of
AFSA. At trial, after the victim and the State’s other witnesses testified, the
State called Terra Wilkins, a board-certified family practice physician who had
treated the victim during her pregnancy and delivered her baby. Wilkins
testified that the victim’s pregnancy was “high risk,” due to “several health
conditions . . . as well as some mental health concerns and trauma history.”
She added that due to this “trauma history,” she referred the victim to
additional services. Defense counsel objected on relevance grounds.
The State argued that Wilkins’ testimony about the referrals “set the
foundation” for her testimony regarding the victim’s disclosure that she had
been sexually assaulted. The State asserted that the victim’s disclosure to
Wilkins was relevant, in turn, because the defendant denied assaulting the
victim. After the State referred to the exception to the rule against hearsay for
statements made for medical diagnosis or treatment, see N.H. R. Ev. 803(4),
defense counsel clarified that his objection was to the relevance of Wilkins’
testimony about the referrals. Defense counsel explained that he did not argue
that the victim’s disclosure constituted inadmissible hearsay.
The trial court overruled the defendant’s relevance objection. Wilkins
then further testified that she had referred the victim to counseling and
community resources. Over the defendant’s reasserted objection, Wilkins also
testified that the “trauma experience” the victim had disclosed was “that her
child had been conceived through rape.” After the State rested, the trial court
dismissed one of the AFSA charges. The jury returned guilty verdicts on the
remaining six counts of AFSA. This appeal followed.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred by admitting
Wilkins’ testimony because it was irrelevant to the jury’s assessment of the
victim’s credibility and prejudiced the defendant. “We accord the trial court
considerable deference in determining the admissibility of evidence, and we will
not disturb its decision absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion.” State
v. Dana, 175 N.H. 27, 32 (2022) (quotation omitted). “To demonstrate an
unsustainable exercise of discretion, the defendant must show that the trial
court’s ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his
case.” Id. “We have consistently held that whether evidence is relevant, and
thus admissible for that reason, is within the sound discretion of the trial
court.” State v. VanDerHeyden, 136 N.H. 277, 283 (1992) (quotation omitted).
“Evidence is relevant if: (a) it has any tendency to make a fact more or
less probable than it would be without the evidence; and (b) the fact is of
consequence in determining the action.” N.H. R. Ev. 401. As is relevant to this
case, we have observed that in “a sexual assault case with no eyewitnesses
other than the complainant and the defendant[,] the complainant’s testimony,
and thus her credibility, is crucial.” State v. Kornbrekke, 156 N.H. 821, 825-
26 (2008) (holding that trial court erred in precluding defendant from cross-
examining victim regarding a prior false accusation of sexual assault).
The defendant first contends that Wilkins’ testimony was irrelevant
because credibility determinations are reserved for the jury, and therefore a
witness may not opine on another witness’s credibility. See State v. Racette,
175 N.H. 132, 135 (2022); State v. Lopez, 156 N.H. 416, 423-24 (2007).
“[A]lthough witnesses may give lay opinion testimony on a variety of topics,
they are not permitted to give lay opinion testimony regarding the credibility of
another witness.” Racette, 175 N.H. at 135; see also Lopez, 156 N.H. at 423-24
2
(setting forth “a broad prohibition on questions requiring a witness to comment
upon the credibility of other witnesses”). This prohibition precludes such
testimony because it “is not probative in that it requires a witness to testify to
things outside of her or his knowledge,” Lopez, 156 N.H. at 423, and because it
invades “the province and obligation of the jury alone to determine the
credibility of witnesses,” Racette, 175 N.H. at 135.
“[T]he prohibition on opinion testimony applies both to testimony that
comments on credibility explicitly, as well as testimony that comments on
credibility indirectly.” State v. McDonald, 163 N.H. 115, 123 (2011). Thus,
“testimony regarding a sexual assault complainant’s specific behavior is
inadmissible if its purpose is to prove that abuse occurred or if an expert
testifies that the particular complainant’s behaviors are consistent with those
of a person who has been sexually abused.” State v. Marden, 172 N.H. 258,
263 (2019). This type of testimony “impermissibly bolsters the complainant’s
credibility.” Id.
According to the defendant, Wilkins impermissibly bolstered the victim’s
credibility by conveying her own belief in the victim’s disclosure. He claims
that she conveyed this belief by: (1) testifying that she referred the victim to
trauma services due to the disclosure; and (2) characterizing the alleged sexual
assault as the victim’s “trauma history.”
We first address the defendant’s argument that Wilkins effectively
credited the victim’s disclosure by testifying about her decision to make the
referrals. In contrast to the defendant’s contention, we have repeatedly held
that testimony about a professional action taken in response to a statement
does not indicate any personal belief in that statement. For example, in State
v. Kulas, we considered an attorney’s testimony that upon learning of the
victim’s sexual assault while assisting the victim with a restraining order, the
attorney had asked the police to investigate “a possible rape.” State v. Kulas,
145 N.H. 246, 247-49 (2000). We held that the attorney’s testimony “neither
explicitly nor implicitly offered an opinion as to the victim’s credibility.” Id. at
248. We explained that “[a]t best, the jury could infer that the victim’s attorney
concluded that if the facts were as the victim related, there were grounds to
report the ‘possible rape’ . . . . But that does not imbue her testimony with an
aura of importance, or any sense of enhanced believability.” Id. at 249
(quotation and citation omitted).
Similarly, in State v. Fleetwood, we held that a medical examiner did not
improperly opine on the truth of the defendant’s confession when the examiner
said the confession was the “most compelling factor” supporting his
determination that the defendant’s baby had been smothered to death. State v.
Fleetwood, 149 N.H. 396, 408-09 (2003). We reasoned that examiners often
rely on case histories to reach conclusions on the manner of death, and
“nothing prevented the examiner from testifying that he relied upon her
3