THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0207, Cashlyn Powers DBA Dream Catcher
Works, LLC v. Beauchesne and Associates, LLC, the court on
March 24, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Beauchesne and Associates, LLC, appeals
the order of the Circuit Court (Spath, J.), following a hearing, awarding
damages to the plaintiff, Cashlyn Powers DBA Dream Catcher Works, LLC, on a
small claim for breach of an employment agreement. We construe the
defendant’s brief to argue that the trial court’s findings are contrary to the
evidence and unsupported by the evidence. We affirm.
The plaintiff testified that the defendant agreed to pay her $50 per hour
to work as a business manager for the defendant’s tax preparation business.
The plaintiff testified that the parties later agreed that the defendant could
withhold one half of the plaintiff’s future earnings, to be used as a credit
toward tax services that the defendant agreed to provide to the plaintiff and
members of the plaintiff’s family. The plaintiff testified that the defendant
never provided the tax services and refused to pay her the $4,238 that
remained due for her services. The defendant’s principal testified that she does
not owe the plaintiff any amount because the defendant remains willing to
provide the tax services. The plaintiff testified, however, that the unpaid
earnings were being withheld for tax preparation in the Spring of 2022, and
that the defendant did not prepare her taxes that year. The court found that it
would not be “reasonable or realistic at this juncture” to resolve the dispute by
having the defendant provide tax services to the plaintiff.
The defendant argues that the trial court erred in accepting the plaintiff’s
testimony, and rejecting the defendant’s testimony, as to whether the plaintiff
was entitled to recover the amount of her unpaid earnings. Disputed questions
of fact as to the terms of a contract are for the trial court to resolve. Syncom
Indus. v. Wood, 155 N.H. 73, 82 (2007). We will uphold the court’s findings
unless they are unsupported by the evidence or erroneous as a matter of law.
Id. We defer to a trial court’s judgment on such issues as resolving conflicts in
testimony, measuring the credibility of witnesses, and determining the weight
to be given evidence. In the Matter of Aube & Aube, 158 N.H. 459, 465 (2009).
We will affirm the trial court’s findings if a reasonable person could have made
such findings based upon the evidence presented. Cook v. Sullivan, 149 N.H.
774, 780 (2003). We conclude that the trial court’s findings are reasonable
based upon the evidence presented.
The defendant also argues that the trial court erred by not considering
new evidence presented in her motion for reconsideration. We review a trial
court’s ruling on a motion for reconsideration for an unsustainable exercise of
discretion. Walker v. Walker, 158 N.H. 602, 607 (2009) (quotation omitted).
Even assuming that the new evidence supported the defendant’s position, the
trial court had the discretion not to consider new evidence presented for the
first time in a motion for reconsideration. See Smith v. Shepard, 144 N.H. 262,
265 (1999). We conclude that the trial court did not unsustainably exercise its
discretion by not considering new evidence presented in the defendant’s motion
for reconsideration. See Walker, 158 N.H. at 607.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2