THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0391, Kimberley Laris, as Trustee of the
Hope for a Better Tomorrow Revocable Trust v. Stephen P.
Weglarz, Jr., Trustee of Mary T. Weglarz Revocable Trust u/d/t/
Dated May 28, 2002 & a., the court on August 14, 2026, issued
the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3).
Following a bench trial, the Superior Court (Howard, C.J.) ruled that land
owned by the plaintiff, Kimberley Laris, as Trustee of the Hope for a Better
Tomorrow Revocable Trust, benefits from an easement to access a right-of-way
across land abutting property owned by defendants Stephen P. Weglarz, Jr.
and Mary T. Weglarz, as co-trustees of the Mary T. Weglarz Revocable Trust.
The trial court also awarded attorney’s fees to Laris. The Weglarzes appeal
both rulings, and Laris cross-appeals the trial court’s attorney’s fees ruling as
to the awarded amount. We affirm.
I. Background
The trial court found, or the record otherwise supports, the following
facts. Laris and the Weglarzes both own property in Durham located between
Route 4, also known as Piscataqua Road, and Little Bay. Laris’s property
abuts Route 4 to the north and is located to the north of the Weglarzes’
property, which abuts Cedar Point Road to the south. The parties dispute the
existence and location of, as well as Laris’s right to use, a right-of-way to
access Cedar Point Road and Little Bay. The parties used, and the trial court
incorporated into its order, the following demonstrative exhibit showing a
general, although not entirely accurate, orientation of the current properties.
A. History of Disputed Property
The parties’ properties were once part of a larger parcel formerly owned
by Mary Ackroyd. In the 1940s, Ackroyd subdivided her property and began
conveying various parcels, beginning with those to the south of what is now
Cedar Point Road. Between Cedar Point Road and Little Bay, Ackroyd
conveyed parcels to Joseph and Elizabeth Picard and Edward and Alice Putney.
Ackroyd used her own land as the easterly boundary of the Picard property and
the westerly boundary of the Putney property, thus retaining some portion of
land between the two parcels extending from Cedar Point Road to Little Bay.
Ackroyd next conveyed properties to the north of what is now Cedar
Point Road. She first conveyed to the Picards the lot to the north of their other
property, directly across Cedar Point Road. Ackroyd then conveyed another
parcel to Alfred Pomerleau but again retained some portion of land between
that property and the northern Picard property. The Weglarzes eventually
purchased the former Pomerleau property.
2
Pomerleau conveyed his parcel to Howard Page in 1953. The deed
conveying the property to Page contains an express reference to a north-south
right-of-way. The deed describes the property’s bounds, in relevant part, as
“running Westerly by said Ackroyd land a distance of fifty (50) feet to a right of
way which extends Northerly and Southerly between the land herein conveyed
and the land of Joseph Picard.”
In 1960, Eleanor and Elizabeth Towle (Towle sisters) inherited from
Ackroyd a “[p]arcel of land in Durham, N.H. at Cedar Point, containing eight
acres, more or less.” Given the lack of specificity in this description, the Towle
sisters retained a surveyor to create a plan (Towle Plan) of the property they
inherited. The Towle Plan depicts a “R.O.W.” between the Picard (mistakenly
labeled Parker) and Page properties, although it does not show Cedar Point
Road. Nor does the plan specify who owns the land on which the “R.O.W.” is
located. The Towle Plan, which shows the Towle sisters’ land to the north and
west, is shown in relevant part below.
In 1965, the Towle sisters conveyed their land to Jacob Ciborowski by
warranty deed, which incorporated the Towle Plan by reference. The meaning
and intending clause of the deed describes the property intended to be
conveyed as “all of the premises located on Cedar Point . . . which were
inherited by [the Towle sisters] from the said Mary H. Ackroyd . . . . Subject to
any easements and rights of way outstanding of record.” The metes-and-
bounds description in the deed describes the property as running along the
3