THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0103, The World of Discovery, Inc. v.
Julie Hall, the court on November 25, 2024, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The plaintiff, The World of Discovery, Inc., appeals the order
of the Circuit Court (Kent, R., approved by Chabot, J.), following a hearing,
ordering the defendant, Julie Hall, to pay the plaintiff $993.60 for services
rendered, in addition to $90.00 in court costs. The plaintiff argues that the
trial court erred by not ordering the defendant to pay additional amounts for
cancellation fees, late fees, and collection costs, including attorney’s fees, that
allegedly became due under the parties’ contract. We affirm.
The plaintiff contracted with the defendant to provide day care services
before and after school, and transportation services to and from school, for her
daughter. The trial court found that the plaintiff’s performance became
impossible after March 19, 2020, when the public school that the daughter
attended was shut down by the State due to the COVID pandemic. The court
ruled that the defendant was responsible for the $993.60 balance that was due
as of that date, but not for the amounts that the plaintiff alleged became due
after that date.
The plaintiff argues that the trial court erred as a matter of law by
concluding that the contract did not require the defendant to pay cancellation
fees, late fees, and collection costs, including attorney’s fees, that accrued after
March 19, 2020. The plaintiff does not argue that the trial court, having found
performance after March 19, 2020, to be impossible, erred in concluding that
the defendant was not responsible for amounts that allegedly became due after
that date. Rather, the plaintiff asserts that performance did not become
impossible because the day care center remained open. The plaintiff does not
explain how it could continue to provide the defendant with day care services
“before and after school” or transportation services “to and from school” after
March 19, 2020, when the school was shut down.
As the appealing party, the plaintiff has the burden of demonstrating
reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014). Based upon our
review of the trial court’s order, the plaintiff’s challenges to it, the relevant law,
and the record submitted on appeal, we conclude that the plaintiff has not
demonstrated reversible error. See id.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2