THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0292, State of New Hampshire v. Ian Todd
MacDonald, the court on August 20, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Ian Todd MacDonald, appeals his conviction,
following a bench trial in the Circuit Court (Zaino, J.), on a charge of criminal
contempt for knowingly violating a no-contact provision of a criminal
sentencing order that had been issued following his conviction in an earlier
case for violating a civil stalking protective order. The defendant further
appeals a finding of “true” on a charge of violating the “good conduct” term of
his probation for engaging in the same conduct. The defendant argues that the
evidence was insufficient to establish that he violated the relevant provisions,
and that the trial court erred by stating that the date or time of the offense
were not elements that the State was required to prove. We affirm.
A challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence raises a question of law that
we review de novo. State v. Seibel, 174 N.H. 440, 445 (2021). When
considering a challenge to the sufficiency of evidence to support a conviction,
we objectively review the entire record, construing the evidence, and all
reasonable inferences from it, in the light most favorable to the State, and
determine whether any rational trier of fact could have found guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt. Id. We examine each item of evidence in the context of the
entire case, not in isolation. Id. The trier of fact is entitled to draw reasonable
inferences from the facts proved as well as from facts found as the result of
other inferences so long as they can reasonably be drawn therefrom. See id.
The defendant bears the burden of demonstrating that the evidence was
insufficient to prove guilt. State v. Saintil-Brown, 172 N.H. 110, 117 (2019).
When the evidence as to one or more of the elements is solely circumstantial,
the defendant must establish that the evidence does not exclude all reasonable
conclusions except guilt. Id. The proper analysis is not whether every possible
conclusion consistent with innocence has been excluded, but whether all such
reasonable conclusions based on the evidence have been excluded. Id. When
solely circumstantial evidence is at issue, “the critical question is whether, even
assuming all credibility resolutions in favor of the State, the inferential chain of
circumstances is of sufficient strength that guilt is the sole rational
conclusion.” Seibel, 174 N.H. at 445 (quotation omitted).
“To prove indirect criminal contempt, the State must prove beyond a
reasonable doubt the existence of a valid order, the defendant’s knowledge of
the order, and the defendant’s intentional failure to comply with the order.”
State v. Vincelette, 172 N.H. 350, 355 (2019). To establish a violation of the
good conduct condition of the defendant’s probation, the State must prove by a
preponderance of the evidence either the fact of a criminal conviction for the
acts constituting the violation or the defendant’s commission of the underlying
acts. State v. Kelly, 159 N.H. 390, 391 (2009).
Viewed most favorably to the State, see Seibel, 174 N.H. at 445, the
evidence establishes the following facts. The defendant is a physical therapist
with a clinical office in Manchester. At trial, the State presented evidence that
he had one employee. The victim is the defendant’s former patient, as well as
his former business contact. At some point, their relationship developed into a
friendship, and the victim shared with the defendant her personal email
address. The victim terminated their friendship in early 2022, however, after
she began to see “red flags” and evidence that the defendant’s intent for their
relationship did not match her intent.
Following the termination of the parties’ friendship, the victim filed a civil
stalking petition against the defendant. As part of the stalking case, the trial
court issued a temporary protective order on August 23, 2022. In September,
the defendant violated the protective order by coming within 300 feet of the
victim’s residence, a residence to which she had moved without disclosing its
location to the defendant, leading to his arrest and incarceration. The
defendant pleaded guilty to the crime, resulting in a sentencing order requiring,
among other things, a two-year term of probation with electronic monitoring.
The sentencing order also prohibited the defendant from having any contact
with the victim, “includ[ing] via mail, telephone, fax, electronic
communications, sending or delivering gifts, through a [third] party or any
other method unless specifically authorized by the Court,” and from
“interfering with [the victim] at her residence, school or place of employment.”
Shortly thereafter, the victim reported to the defendant’s probation officer
that her tires had been slashed and that she suspected the defendant was
responsible. The victim explained that there had been prior incidents involving
slashed tires for which she believed the defendant was responsible. The
probation officer determined, however, that at the time when the victim’s tires
were slashed, the defendant’s electronic monitoring data did not show that he
was in the vicinity of her car. The victim continued to maintain contact with
the probation officer from October through November 2022, periodically
requesting that he provide her updates.
Although the sentencing order provided the probation officer with
discretion to terminate the defendant’s electronic monitoring, it required
2
advance notice to the victim, and on November 29, 2022, the probation officer
notified the victim that he intended to terminate the defendant’s electronic
monitoring at the end of December. This notification upset the victim, and in
November and December, she expressed her concerns to the probation officer,
asserting that it was too soon to remove the electronic monitoring, and arguing
why it should continue.
Earlier in 2022, around the time when the victim’s friendship with the
defendant ended, the victim began working remotely for a California-based
company that provides a software service and web platform to property
managers. The plaintiff did not disclose the employment to the defendant. She
had, however, listed it on her publicly available profile on “LinkedIn.” On
December 21, 2022, at approximately 10:11 a.m., someone submitted an
electronic form to the victim’s employer through its website, identifying the
submitting party’s name as the victim’s name, and populating the email
address field with the victim’s personal email address. The victim had not
submitted the form. The submitting party populated the “subject” field of the
form with the word, “lying,” and the “description” field with the words, “How
can I stop being an ugly c*nt b*tch?”
The electronic submission resulted in a support “ticket” that was routed
to a customer support specialist located in Georgia. Although the customer
support specialist did not know the victim and had never met her, he
recognized her name as the name of another employee of the company.
Because he was concerned that the security of the victim’s account may have
been compromised, and out of concern about the abusive and targeted nature
of the language in the ticket, the customer support specialist alerted the victim
about the ticket. Technical information associated with the ticket showed that
it had been submitted from the vicinity of Manchester, New Hampshire, and
revealed the submitting party’s “IP address,” or “internet protocol address” — a
unique code associated with a device that is connected to the internet so that
online information may be routed to that device.
The victim suspected that the defendant had submitted the ticket
because he knew her personal email address, and because she was not aware
of anyone else who had “issues with” her that would provide incentive to
submit such a request using her personal information. Accordingly, she called
the local police that day and reported the incident, providing the responding
officer with the information from the ticket.
When questioned, the defendant admitted to the officer that he knew the
victim’s personal email address. Through publicly available information, the
responding officer was able to identify the internet service provider associated
with the IP address of the party who had submitted the ticket. When the
responding officer prepared his report, however, he inadvertently wrote the date
3