THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0655, State of New Hampshire v. Duncan
C. McInnes, Jr., the court on January 12, 2026, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Duncan C. McInnes, Jr., appeals his
conviction, following a jury trial in Superior Court (Edwards, J.), of stalking.
See RSA 633:3-a (2016). He argues that his conduct did not constitute “acts”
of stalking, and that there was insufficient evidence that the victim was placed
in fear for her personal safety. We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. In 2020, the defendant
and the victim had a brief, intimate relationship, which lasted about three
weeks. After the victim ended the relationship, the defendant left a letter on
her car suggesting that she had sexually assaulted him. The victim brought
the letter to the police. During a police interview, the defendant claimed that
the victim raped him. After the interview, the police concluded that there was
no probable cause to believe that the victim had committed a crime.
In May 2022, nearly two years after the defendant’s relationship with the
victim ended, police were contacted regarding letters that were being mailed to
the victim’s neighbors’ houses. Some of the letters provided the victim’s
address as the return address. The letters were made to appear as if they were
written and sent by the victim, and they purported to be the victim confessing
to raping a man in 2020.
The defendant first argues that sending the letters did not constitute
stalking because they were not “acts.” A person commits the offense of
stalking if he “[p]urposely, knowingly, or recklessly engages in a course of
conduct targeted at a specific person which would cause a reasonable person
to fear for his or her personal safety. . . , and the person is actually placed in
such fear.” RSA 633:3-a, I(a). “‘Course of conduct’ means 2 or more acts over
a period of time, however short, which evidences a continuity of purpose.” RSA
633:3-a, II(a). “A course of conduct may include, but not be limited to . . . [a]ny
act of communication, as defined in RSA 644:4, II.” RSA 633:3-a, II(a)(7). RSA
644:4, II provides that “‘communicates’ means to impart a message by any
method of transmission, including but not limited to telephoning or personally
delivering or sending or having delivered any information or material by written
or printed note or letter, package, mail, courier service or electronic
transmission.”
The defendant concedes that “[a] letter is a communication,” but argues
that his conduct did not constitute “acts” under the stalking statute because
he did not send the letters to the victim. We have held, however, that “[t]he
statute does not require that the act of communication take place between the
defendant and the intended victim,” State v. Gubitosi, 152 N.H. 673, 682
(2005), and that “the acts that constitute a course of conduct . . . are not
limited to acts against the targeted person directly,” Fisher v. Minichiello, 155
N.H. 188, 191 (2007).
In this case, moreover, a number of the letters provided the victim’s
address as the return address. Consequently, undeliverable letters began
arriving at the victim’s home. One letter was addressed to a location that has
no house on the property. Another letter was addressed to the human
resources department at the victim’s place of employment. Seven letters were
returned to the victim’s address in June, one in July, and one in September,
2022. We conclude that the defendant’s letter-sending activities constituted
“acts” for purposes of the stalking statute.
The defendant next argues that the evidence was insufficient to prove
that his conduct placed the victim in fear for her safety. “When considering a
challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, we objectively review the record to
determine whether any rational trier of fact could have found the essential
elements of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt, considering all the evidence
and all reasonable inferences therefrom in the light most favorable to the
State.” State v. Hodges, 176 N.H. 751, 754 (2024).
As a result of the defendant’s actions, the victim feared for her safety.
The victim’s boyfriend testified that the victim began “freaking out” as more
letters arrived. In December 2023, the victim moved to Maine, in part because
of the letters and her fear of the defendant. The victim has taken steps to keep
her address confidential because she does not want the defendant to know
where she lives. At her new address, the victim has had two home security
systems installed. The victim notified her supervisor and manager of these
incidents, as well as the security officers in the building where she works. We
2
conclude that the evidence was sufficient for the jury to conclude that the
defendant’s letters placed the victim in actual fear for her personal safety. See
id.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, and Gould, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3