THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0595, T.D. v. F.D., the court on April 2,
2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The defendant, F.D., appeals a civil stalking final order of
protection issued by the Circuit Court (Cabrera, J.), following an evidentiary
hearing, in favor of the plaintiff, T.D. See RSA 633:3-a, III-a (2016). On
appeal, the defendant challenges the sufficiency of the evidence to support the
trial court’s decision. We affirm.
Any stalking victim “may seek relief by filing a civil petition in the
[circuit] court”; upon proof by a preponderance of the evidence, the court “shall
grant such relief as is necessary to bring about a cessation of stalking.” Id.
“Stalking” is defined to include “[p]urposely, knowingly, or recklessly engag[ing]
in a course of conduct targeted at a specific person which would cause a
reasonable person to fear for his or her personal safety or the safety of a
member of that person’s immediate family, and the person is actually placed in
such fear.” RSA 633:3-a, I(a) (2016).
“‘Course of conduct’ means 2 or more acts over a period of time, however
short, which evidences a continuity of purpose.” RSA 633:3-a, II(a) (2016).
Acts that may constitute a “course of conduct” include, but are not limited to,
“[f]ollowing, approaching, or confronting” the targeted person, “[a]ppearing in
close proximity to, or entering the person’s residence . . . or other place where
the person can be found,” and engaging in “[a]ny act of communication, as
defined in RSA 644:4, II.” RSA 633:3-a, II(a)(2), (3), (7). RSA 644:4, II (Supp.
2024) defines “communicates” for purposes of RSA 644:4, I (Supp. 2024), to
mean, “to impart a message by any method of transmission.” In turn, RSA
644:4, I(b) makes it unlawful to “[m]ake[] repeated communications . . . in
offensively coarse language with a purpose to annoy or alarm another.”
The trial court’s “findings of facts shall be final, but questions of law may
be transferred from the circuit court to the supreme court.” RSA 173-B:3, VI
(2022); see RSA 633:3-a, III-a (providing that, in civil stalking proceedings, “the
procedures and burdens of proof to be applied . . . shall be the same as those
set forth in RSA 173-B”). We review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a
matter of law and will uphold the trial court’s findings and rulings unless they
lack evidentiary support or are tainted by error of law. Despres v. Hampsey,
162 N.H. 398, 401 (2011). We view the evidence in the light most favorable to
the plaintiff, deferring to the trial court’s evaluation of the witnesses’ credibility,
id. at 401, 404, recognizing that the trial court has the benefit of observing the
demeanor of the witnesses first-hand, see State v. Giles, 140 N.H. 714, 718-19
(1996) (“We defer to the [fact finder’s] findings on credibility in part because a
trial transcript provides no indication of a witness’s tone of voice or demeanor,
two useful tools in the assessment of credibility.”).
The parties are neighboring landowners. At the time of the hearing, the
plaintiff was not yet living on her property, but was in the process of renovating
it. On April 24, 2024, when the plaintiff and her minor children were inside
the residence on her property, the defendant “enter[ed the] residence without
permission” and proceeded to engage with the plaintiff in a manner she
characterized as “elevat[ing] into threats and slander and gossip” due to his
frustration over her refusal to sell the property to him. In her sworn civil
stalking petition, the plaintiff described the defendant’s conduct as “verbally
accosting [her] with profane language” and, in the presence of her children,
“assault[ing her] verbally and threaten[ing] her.” Following the encounter, the
plaintiff sought the assistance of local police in order to protect herself and her
family, and she obtained a “no-trespass” order that the police served on the
defendant later that same day.
At some point following the issuance of the no-trespass order, the
defendant engaged in what the plaintiff described as “some sign language,” and
she contacted the police to inquire whether he had violated the no-trespass
order. Although an officer with whom the plaintiff spoke believed that the
defendant had not violated the no-trespass order, the officer did speak with the
defendant to make “him aware of the strictness of this no trespassing order
and that no exceptions would be made.”
Approximately three months after the April 24 incident, on August 2,
2024, the plaintiff returned to the property while a contractor was there to
work on the driveway. The defendant was standing near the driveway in front
of a detached garage when the plaintiff said “hi” to him. The defendant
responded to the greeting in what the plaintiff described as a “violent” outburst
of “such rage and disproportion,” directing “words or threats” at her that were
“deplorable, disgusting, [and] filthy,” and “full of lies and disdain and hatred.”
Although the plaintiff attempted to get away from the defendant, the defendant
continued “yelling” and following her along the driveway to the side of the
garage and to the back of the property, where she approached a construction
worker out of concern for her safety and explained that her “neighbors are not
pleased with the plans that we have.” The incident, according to the plaintiff,
lasted multiple minutes. The plaintiff testified that the defendant’s actions
made her feel threatened and uncomfortable. Likewise, the plaintiff testified
that her children “were concerned and uncomfortable,” and that her younger
child was afraid even to use the property to walk the family’s dog. The plaintiff
2
sought a protective order to protect herself and her family in light of the fact
that they were in the process of moving onto the property.
In granting the protective order, the trial court found that the defendant
purposely, knowingly, or recklessly engaged in a “course of conduct” that
caused the plaintiff reasonably to fear for her safety or the safety of her family.
Specifically, the trial court found that the defendant engaged in stalking when
he (1) entered her residence in April without permission and directed profane
and threatening language toward her, and (2) followed her on August 2, 2024,
“from a fence in front of her barn/garage, all the way behind the structure,
using threatening language.” On appeal, the defendant argues that the
decision is not supported by the evidence because the plaintiff allegedly “failed
to identify with sufficient particularity the nature of the conduct, the language
used, or a ‘continuity of purpose,’” because the evidence allegedly does not
establish that the plaintiff reasonably feared for her safety, and because the
April and August incidents were allegedly “isolated acts” that “did not establish
a pattern of behavior sufficient to constitute a course of conduct.” We disagree.
At the outset, we note that, in their briefs, the parties dispute whether
the defendant violated the no-trespass order when he followed the plaintiff on
August 2. We note further that, although the defendant’s trial counsel
represented on the record that counsel was providing “[f]or the Court’s
reference” a “tax map” showing by a “little square” where the plaintiff’s
structure was, where “other structures” were, and where “[t]he Defendant
lives,” the exhibits provided by the defendant do not include a “tax map.”
Rather, the exhibits consist of two identical “Google Street View” photographs
of the property and an aerial photograph from Google Maps, none of which
depicts any property lines, and the plaintiff’s testimony did not establish the
location of any boundary. Although the trial court’s characterization of the
garage as the plaintiff’s garage might suggest that the defendant violated the
no-trespass order when he followed the plaintiff along the driveway to the side
of the garage, at no point did the plaintiff testify that she has title to the
driveway or land on either side of it. Indeed, the plaintiff characterized the
“driveway” at trial as a “right-of-way” through which she accesses her
residence. Finally, we note that the trial court did not find that the defendant
violated the no-trespass order, and at no point in her testimony did the plaintiff
testify that the defendant crossed a property boundary when he followed her.
Even if we assume, however, that the defendant did not violate the no-
trespass order on August 2, we conclude that the evidence was sufficient, as a
matter of law, to support the trial court’s determination that the defendant
stalked the plaintiff for purposes of RSA 633:3-a, I(a). The evidence
unequivocally establishes that the defendant entered the plaintiff’s residence,
without permission, while she was present with her minor children on April 24.
See RSA 633:3-a, II(a)(3). After entering the plaintiff’s residence without
permission, the defendant proceeded to confront her with threats using
3