THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0642, State of New Hampshire v. Sherry
Connor, the court on April 14, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). The defendant, Sherry Connor, appeals an order of the Superior Court
(Attorri, J.) placing her in preventive detention without bail pending trial
pursuant to RSA 597:2, I(c), III(a) (Supp. 2024) (amended 2024). See RSA 597:6-
e, III (2001). The defendant argues that the trial court erred in finding that the
State proved, by clear and convincing evidence, that her release would endanger
the safety of the public. See RSA 597:2, III(a). We affirm.
Under RSA 597:2, “[t]he trial court has the discretion to decide whether a
defendant is released on personal recognizance, released with conditions the
judge determines, or is detained.” Petition of Second Chance Bail Bonds, 171
N.H. 807, 813 (2019) (quotation omitted). “When considering whether to release
or detain a person, the court shall consider,” among other things, the “[s]afety of
the public or the defendant,” and “may order preventive detention without bail,
or, in the alternative, may order restrictive conditions including but not limited to
electronic monitoring and supervision, only if the court determines by clear and
convincing evidence that release will endanger the safety of that person or the
public.” RSA 597:2, III(a). “In determining whether release will endanger the
safety of that person or the public, the court may consider all relevant factors
presented” to the court by the parties. Id.
“We review the trial court’s decision under our unsustainable exercise of
discretion standard.” State v. Spaulding, 172 N.H. 205, 207-08 (2019); see also
Second Chance Bail Bonds, 171 N.H. at 813 (observing that the trial court is
vested with “broad” and “substantial discretion” in deciding matters related to
bail and recognizances). In determining whether the trial court unsustainably
exercised its discretion, we consider whether the record establishes an objective
basis sufficient to sustain its discretionary judgment. Spaulding, 172 N.H. at
207-08. “To show that the trial court’s decision is not sustainable, a party must
demonstrate that the court’s ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the
prejudice of that party’s case.” Id. at 208 (quotation and brackets omitted).
Here, the defendant was indicted by a grand jury on numerous charges
alleging severe abuse of four children in her care — including one count of
reckless manslaughter, one count of negligent homicide, several counts of first-
or second-degree assault, and several counts of witness tampering. Following a
pre-trial bail hearing, the trial court found that the evidence “clearly and
convincingly establishe[d] that [the d]efendant’s release would present a danger
to others,” noting that “[t]he State . . . proffered evidence of numerous acts of
unusual cruelty by [the d]efendant towards four small children over a period of
several years.” Although the defendant argues that the trial court erred in so
finding because it “relied only on years-old allegations arising out of
circumstances that could not and would not be replicated,” we disagree. Given
the severity and “unusual cruelty” of the defendant’s alleged abuse, and given the
increased risk of further witness tampering by the defendant pending her trial,
we conclude, based upon our review of the record, that the trial court’s finding of
dangerousness is supported by the evidence. See White v. State of N.H., 171
N.H. 326, 330-31 (2018) (observing that we defer to the trial court’s judgment on
such issues as accepting or rejecting, resolving conflicts in, and weighing the
evidence presented).
Additionally, to the extent that the defendant argues that the trial court
erred by ordering that she be preventively detained rather than released with
restrictive bail conditions, we are not persuaded. Whether to order preventive
detention or release with conditions is a discretionary matter for the trial court,
and the statute does not obligate the court to consider less restrictive alternatives
to detention without bail before ordering such detention. See Spaulding, 172
N.H. at 209; Second Chance Bail Bonds, 171 N.H. at 813; RSA 597:2, III(a).
Accordingly, we conclude that the defendant has failed to demonstrate that the
trial court’s ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of her
case, and, therefore, that the trial court did not unsustainably exercise its
discretion when it found by clear and convincing evidence that detention without
bail was warranted in this case. See Spaulding, 172 N.H. at 207-09; Second
Chance Bail Bonds, 171 N.H. at 813; RSA 597:2, III(a).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk