THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0306, State of New Hampshire v. Joseph
James Nugent, III, the court on February 19, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Joseph James Nugent, III, appeals orders of
the Circuit Court (Subers, J.), denying his motion to vacate the administrative
entry of a finding of guilty on a speeding violation based upon his failure to
attend a pretrial conference, see RSA 265:60 (2024); RSA 502-A:19-b, II(b)
(2020), and denying his motion to reconsider the ruling on the motion to
vacate. On appeal, the defendant raises a number of arguments challenging
these rulings, claiming that he was never notified of the pretrial conference,
and that the trial court’s rulings, therefore, violated his State and Federal Due
Process rights. We affirm in part and dismiss the appeal in part.
The record on appeal reflects that the trial court entered its
administrative finding of guilty on the speeding charge and provided notice to
the defendant of the finding and resulting fine on February 29, 2024. The
defendant subsequently moved to vacate the finding on March 29, asserting
that the court failed to provide notice of the pretrial conference, and that its
failure to provide notice was intentional and retaliatory for requesting a hearing
and for prior events. We note that the record on appeal does not reflect that
the defendant supported the motion with an affidavit or acknowledgment that
making a false statement may subject him to criminal penalties. See Dist. Div.
R. 1.8(B) (“The Court will not hear any motion grounded upon facts, unless the
moving party indicates in writing an understanding that making a false
statement in the pleading may subject that party to criminal penalties, or the
facts are apparent from the record or from the papers on file in the case, or are
agreed to and stated in writing signed by the parties or their attorneys . . . .”).
By notice of decision dated April 8, 2024, the trial court denied the
motion to vacate, finding that notice of the February 29 hearing was mailed on
December 26, 2023, and that the mailing was not returned to the court. The
record on appeal supports these findings. Sixteen days later, on April 24, the
defendant filed an untimely motion to reconsider the denial of his motion to
vacate. See Dist. Div. R. 1.8(I) (motion to reconsider must be filed “within 10
days of the date on the written notice of the order or decision”). In the motion,
the defendant repeated some of the factual allegations in his motion to vacate,
and asserted that neither he nor his sister, who he claimed to be the “only
holder of the key to” his post office box, received the hearing