THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0370, In the Matter of Michelle Cicale and
Marc Cicale, the court on July 3, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The respondent, Marc Cicale (husband), appeals the final
decree of the Circuit Court (Christo, J.) in his divorce from the petitioner,
Michelle Cicale (wife). The husband challenges a pretrial order of the Trial
Court (LeFrancois, R., approved by Pendleton, J.), following a hearing on offers
of proof, upholding the enforceability of a postnuptial agreement. He argues
that the trial court erred in: (1) determining, prior to the final divorce hearing,
that the agreement was enforceable; and (2) failing to find that the agreement
was unenforceable because he executed it under duress, and because its terms
are unconscionable. We affirm.
On November 24, 2020, the wife petitioned for divorce. On July 7, 2022,
she moved to enforce the postnuptial agreement because, she alleged, the
husband was not paying the mortgage as required by temporary orders. The
husband objected and requested a hearing, asserting that the agreement was
“unenforceable for a number of reasons.” He did not assert in his written
objection that enforceability should only be decided at the final divorce hearing.
On December 15, 2022, the court held a hearing, which proceeded by offers of
proof, by agreement of the parties. At the hearing, the husband argued, among
other things, that the agreement was not fair, that he signed it under duress,
and that there was no exchange of financial information. The husband also
suggested that the enforceability of the agreement should be decided at the
final hearing.
The parties entered into the agreement in 2010, after they had been
married for more than seven years. Postnuptial agreements are enforceable in
New Hampshire. Estate of Wilber, 165 N.H. 246, 250 (2013). The agreement
essentially provides that, if either party files for divorce, the wife would be
awarded the marital home, and be responsible for paying all expenses related
to the home, and that all other marital assets would presumptively be divided
equally. In its order enforcing the agreement, the trial court noted that, “[a]t
the time of the execution of the agreement, [the] wife was the primary caregiver
for the two minor girls who resided in the marital home with her, while [the]
husband was not in the marital home for periods of time.” The court further
noted that the “wife continues to be the primary caregiver for the two girls
residing in the marital home.” The court found that, “[c]ertainly, parties can
reach agreement that the spouse caring for the minor children is awarded the
marital home while the remaining marital assets are equally divided,” and that
the husband failed to “demonstrate how such a final property settlement is
one-sided.” We will not disturb the trial court’s order unless it is unsupported
by the evidence or plainly erroneous as a matter of law. Id. at 251.
The husband first argues that RSA 458:16-a (Supp. 2023), the property
settlement statute, requires that the enforceability of a postnuptial agreement
must be determined at the final divorce hearing (and not earlier). Even
assuming, without deciding, that the husband preserved this issue for review,
we conclude that his argument has no support in the plain language of the
statute or in our cases interpreting the statute.
In the alternative, the husband argues that, even if RSA 458:16-a does
not require enforceability to be determined at the final hearing, the court
unsustainably exercised its discretion by not revisiting the issue at the final
hearing in this case. To show that the trial court’s decision is not sustainable,
the husband must demonstrate that the court’s ruling was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. In the Matter of Peirano & Larsen,
155 N.H. 738, 750 (2007). At the start of the final hearing, the husband raised
the same issues, in general terms, that he raised at the prior hearing to
support his argument that the agreement was unenforceable. The trial court
declined to revisit the issue after noting that the matter had already been fully
litigated. We conclude that the husband has failed to demonstrate that the
trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion by not revisiting the
enforceability issue at the final hearing. See id.
The husband next argues that the court erred in ruling that the
agreement was enforceable because, he claims, he signed it under duress and
its terms are unconscionable. A postnuptial agreement is presumptively valid.
Estate of Wilber, 165 N.H. at 252. To show that the agreement is
unenforceable, the husband must prove that it was obtained through “fraud,
duress or mistake, or through misrepresentation or nondisclosure of a material
fact,” that the agreement is unconscionable, or that the circumstances have
materially changed since the agreement was executed. See id. Having
considered the husband’s arguments, and the record on appeal, we conclude
that he has failed to overcome the presumptive validity of the agreement.
To the extent that the husband raises additional arguments, we conclude
that they are insufficiently developed, see State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 48
(2003), lack merit, or otherwise do not warrant further discussion, see Vogel v.
2
Vogel, 137 N.H. 321, 322 (1993). The wife’s request for attorney’s fees relating
to the appeal is denied. See Sup. Ct. R. 23.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3