THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0446, Dr. Sikhar Nath Banerjee Trust v.
Tom Conway Tree Services LLC, the court on April 14, 2025,
issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Dr. Sikhar Nath Banerjee Trust, appeals the
order of the Superior Court (Ignatius, J.) denying its motion for a default
judgment against the defendant, Tom Conway Tree Service LLC, and the order
of the Superior Court (Wageling, J.) dismissing its complaint for failing to state
a claim. We affirm.
The plaintiff first argues that the trial court erred in denying its motion
for default judgment. We will uphold a trial court’s default ruling unless the
court unsustainably exercised its discretion or erred as a matter of law. See
Brito v. Ryan, 151 N.H. 635, 637 (2005). To show that the trial court’s decision
is not sustainable, the plaintiff must demonstrate that the court’s ruling was
clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of its case. State v.
Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001).
The record shows that, after the defendant answered the plaintiff’s
original complaint, the plaintiff moved to amend its complaint. When the
defendant failed to answer the amended complaint within 30 days of service,
see Super. Ct. R. 9, the plaintiff moved for a default judgment several days
after the answer was due. Later that day, the defendant objected to the motion
and answered the amended complaint. The general preference in New
Hampshire is to resolve matters on their merits. See Keeton v. Hustler
Magazine, 131 N.H. 6, 20 (1988). We conclude that the plaintiff has failed to
show that the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion in denying the
plaintiff’s motion for default judgment. See id.
The plaintiff next argues that the trial court erred in dismissing its
complaint for failing to state a claim. In reviewing an order dismissing a
complaint, we assume the truth of the facts alleged in the plaintiff’s pleadings
and construe all reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to the
plaintiff. Barufaldi v. City of Dover, 175 N.H. 424, 427 (2022). We review the
allegations to determine whether they are reasonably susceptible of a
construction that would permit recovery. Id. This inquiry involves testing the
facts alleged in the pleadings against the applicable law. Id. The trial court
may also consider documents attached to the plaintiff’s pleadings, documents
sufficiently referred to in the complaint, or documents the authenticity of which
no party has disputed. Id. We will uphold the granting of the motion to
dismiss if the facts pled do not constitute a basis for legal relief. Id.
In this case, the plaintiff alleged that the defendant breached a contract
to remove trees from the plaintiff’s property. In dismissing the complaint, the
trial court ruled that there was no meeting of the minds on the terms of the
contract. “A valid, enforceable contract requires offer, acceptance,
consideration, and a meeting of the minds.” Durgin v. Pillsbury Lake Water
Dist., 153 N.H. 818, 821 (2006). “For a meeting of the minds to occur, the
parties must assent to the same contractual terms. That is, the parties must
have the same understanding of the terms of the contract and must manifest
an intention, supported by adequate consideration, to be bound by the
contract.” Id. (quotation, citation, and brackets omitted).
The complaint alleged that on January 17, 2023, the defendant’s
representative texted the plaintiff with an estimate to remove eight trees from
the plaintiff’s property for $8,500. The text did not state when payment would
be due. On March 19, 2023, the defendant emailed the plaintiff a written
estimate, which provided that “[f]ull payment must be received in advance
before work will start.” On March 27, 2023, the plaintiff’s representative texted
the defendant, “wondering if you were able to get a contract together and what
you were thinking about scheduling.” The defendant re-sent its estimate to the
plaintiff. One month later, having received no response, the defendant’s
representative texted the plaintiff to “circle back” and to see whether the
plaintiff “had received the contract.” The defendant sent the estimate to the
plaintiff a third time on May 14, 2023, asking the plaintiff to confirm receipt.
The following day, the plaintiff’s representative responded that she had agreed
to the terms of the agreement set forth in the defendant’s January 17, 2023
text, which did not require payment in advance. When the defendant refused
to remove the trees without receiving payment in advance, the plaintiff sued for
breach of contract and specific performance.
We conclude that the trial court correctly ruled that there was no
meeting of the minds as to the payment terms. For a meeting of the minds to
occur, the parties must assent to the same contractual terms. Durgin, 153
N.H. at 821. In this case, the defendant required full payment in advance, and
the plaintiff would not agree to those terms.
Because we affirm the trial court’s ruling that there was no contract, we
need not address the plaintiff’s argument that the trial court erred by failing to
2
order specific performance or other relief for breach of contract. See Behrens v.
S.P. Const. Co., Inc., 153 N.H. 498, 505 (2006).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3