THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0236, In the Matter of Hayley Cronin and
Ryan Cronin, the court on January 15, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). The respondent, Ryan Cronin, appeals a decision of the
Circuit Court (Prevett, J.), issued following hearing, that denied his motion for
contempt, granted the petitioner’s motions for contempt, and modified the
parties’ parenting plan. See RSA 461-A:11 (2018). We affirm in part, reverse
in part, and remand.
The parties are divorced and have one child. The parties’ initial
parenting plan granted the petitioner, Hayley Cronin, sole decision-making
authority and primary residential responsibility for the child, with the
respondent having parenting time on alternate weekends, inclusive of Thursday
overnights, beginning at 5:00 p.m. In 2020, the parties agreed to a stipulation
regarding Thursday pick up whereby the respondent would pick up the child
“at a location . . . of his choosing, after work or when [the child] gets out of
school, whichever is later.” In 2021, the respondent moved to obtain joint
decision-making responsibility, and the trial court denied his request based on
a finding that the respondent continued to display an unwillingness to openly
communicate and co-parent with the petitioner.
During the summer of 2023, a dispute arose when the respondent
sought to pick the child up early on a Thursday when the respondent did not
have work and the child did not have school. This disagreement prompted the
respondent to file an ex parte motion seeking a finding of contempt against the
petitioner. The trial court declined to issue ex parte emergency orders and
instead scheduled the matter for a hearing. Thereafter, the petitioner filed a
motion to modify the parenting plan and for appointment of a guardian ad
litem (GAL). The respondent also sought a revised parenting plan, including
joint decision making.
In addition to seeking modification, the petitioner filed a motion for
contempt, arguing the respondent had misused an apparent typographical
error in the parenting plan’s provision regarding summer vacation to make the
petitioner’s summer difficult to schedule. Specifically, the plan provided that
“[e]ach parent is entitled to two (2) nonconsecutive weeks of 14 consecutive
days with the child during the summer.” The petitioner asserted that:
For the past three (3) years, Mr. Cronin has decided that he is
entitled to fourteen (14) individual days with the child that he can
choose at random. Mr. Cronin will then choose his ‘vacation days’
at the beginning or end of his parenting time with [the child] for
most weeks of the summer, which makes it nearly impossible for
Ms. Cronin to plan anything with [the child] and is certainly not
what the intent of that provision in the Parenting Plan was.
The petitioner also sought contempt findings related to the respondent’s failure
to pay his portion of the child’s medical expenses and for refusing to bring the
child to regularly scheduled activities during his parenting time.
Prior to the final hearing, the trial court appointed a GAL. The
respondent refused to sign the GAL agreement or participate in the
investigation. As a result, the petitioner filed a second motion for contempt,
arguing that the respondent was in contempt for failing to work with the GAL
and for not paying his portion of the child’s uninsured orthodontic expenses.
On February 22, 2024, the trial court held a hearing at which the parties
and the GAL testified. Through its March 1, 2024 final order, the trial court
described the respondent as not credible.
Ultimately, the trial court concluded that the petitioner had satisfied her
burden of proof to demonstrate that a modification to the parenting plan was
warranted. The trial court granted modification pursuant to RSA 461-A:11,
I(b), which permits modification in the case of “repeated, intentional, and
unwarranted interference by a parent with the residential responsibilities of the
other parent,” and RSA 461-A:11 I(f), which allows modification where it
constitutes “either a minimal change or no change in the allocation of
parenting time between the parents, and the court determines that such
change would be in the best interests of the child.” The result of the
modification, as to parenting time, was to remove the respondent’s Thursday
overnight, such that he maintained alternate weekends. With regard to
summer vacation, the trial court clarified the prior parenting plan language to
read, “each parent is allotted 2 nonconsecutive weeks of 7 consecutive days for
vacation during the summer.” The petitioner retained sole decision-making
authority.
As to the parties’ motions for contempt, the trial court denied the
respondent’s motion, granted the petitioner’s motions, permitted the petitioner
to seek attorney’s fees, and ordered the respondent to pay $1,250 toward the
child’s uninsured medical expenses. The respondent filed a motion for
reconsideration, which the trial court denied. This appeal followed.
The trial court is afforded wide discretion in determining matters of
parental rights and responsibilities; accordingly, when reviewing such
2
decisions, “our role is limited to determining whether it clearly appears that the
trial court engaged in an unsustainable exercise of discretion.” In the Matter of
Kurowski & Kurowski, 161 N.H. 578, 585 (2011); see also In the Matter of
Ndyaija & Ndyaija, 173 N.H. 127, 140 (2020). “We consider only whether the
record establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the discretionary
judgment made, and we will not disturb the trial court’s determination if it
could reasonably have been made.” Kurowski, 161 N.H. at 585 (quotation
omitted). “The trial court’s discretion necessarily extends to matters such as
assigning weight to evidence and assessing the credibility and demeanor of
witnesses.” Id. “Conflicts in the testimony, questions about the credibility of
witnesses, and the weight assigned to testimony are matters for the trial court
to resolve.” Id. “To the extent an appealing party argues that the trial court
committed error involving questions of law, we review such issues de novo.”
Kurowski, 161 N.H. at 585.
We first address the respondent’s overarching contention that “the trial
court’s Narrative Order expresses a generalized disapproval of the Respondent
to such an extent that it went beyond a credibility assessment and prejudiced
Respondent’s case in a manner disproportionate to what the evidence
supported[.]” We have held that “the trier of fact is in the best position to
measure the persuasiveness and credibility of evidence and is not compelled to
believe even uncontroverted evidence.” DeLucca v. DeLucca, 152 N.H. 100,
102 (2005). We will uphold the trial court’s credibility determinations unless
no rational trier of fact could have reached the same conclusion. State v. Carr,
167 N.H. 264, 275 (2015).
The court has carefully reviewed the transcript of the February 22, 2024
hearing and concludes that sufficient evidence exists to support the trial
court’s determinations that the respondent was evasive and avoidant, and that
certain answers provided by the respondent are capable of being viewed as
unreasonable. Accordingly, the court finds that the record adequately
supports the trial court’s findings regarding the respondent’s credibility.
Although we do not endorse the trial court’s repetitious expression of its view
on the respondent’s credibility, or the type of language used, we conclude that
its findings were predicated upon the respondent’s testimony and the other
evidence presented at trial, as opposed to a generalized disapproval or dislike of
the respondent.
We next address the trial court’s decision to modify the parenting plan
largely in accordance with the petitioner’s proposed plan. On appeal, the
respondent argues that two aspects of the trial court’s modification of the
parenting plan are unsustainable exercises of discretion: (1) the elimination of
his Thursday night parenting time; and (2) the trial court’s failure to adopt his
proposed “week on/week off schedule” during the summer months.
3