THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0690, Corina McLaughlin v. Vermont
Mutual Insurance Company, the court on November 6, 2025,
issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Corina McLaughlin, appeals orders of the
Superior Court (Messer, J.), issued following hearings, granting summary
judgment in favor of the defendant, Vermont Mutual Insurance Company, in
the plaintiff’s action for breach of contract and negligence relative to a
homeowners’ insurance policy issued by the defendant. We affirm.
We review a trial court’s grant of summary judgment de novo. See
Philbrick v. Liberty Mut. Fire Ins. Co., 156 N.H. 389, 390 (2007); Zannini v.
Phenix Mut. Fire Ins. Co., 172 N.H. 730, 733 (2019). When reviewing a trial
court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider the affidavits and other
evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from them, in the light most
favorable to the non-moving party. See Philbrick, 156 N.H. at 390; Zannini,
172 N.H. at 733-34. If our review of that evidence reveals no genuine dispute
of material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of
law, we will affirm the grant of summary judgment. See Philbrick, 156 N.H. at
390; Zannini, 172 N.H. at 734.
In this case, the plaintiff was assigned the rights under the homeowners’
insurance policy by the defendant’s insured, who, in a separate tort action, had
been found jointly and severally liable, along with another, for sexually
assaulting the plaintiff. The plaintiff claims that the defendant breached the
terms of the policy by failing to indemnify or provide a defense to the insured in
the tort action, and also claims that the defendant was negligent in failing to
settle that action for the policy limit. The trial court, however, found that the
policy specifically excludes personal liability coverage for injuries arising out
“sexual molestation,” and, therefore, granted summary judgment in favor of the
defendant. This appeal followed.
On appeal, the plaintiff advances several arguments challenging the trial
court’s decision. As the appealing party, however, the plaintiff has the burden
of demonstrating reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014).
Based upon our review of the trial court’s well-reasoned orders, the plaintiff’s
challenges to them, the relevant law, and the record submitted on appeal, we
conclude that the plaintiff has not demonstrated that there is any genuine
dispute of material fact, nor that she is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.
Accordingly, we affirm the trial court’s decision. See id.; Sup. Ct. R. 25(8);
Philbrick, 156 N.H. at 389-93.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, and Gould, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2