THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0012, State of New Hampshire v. Shawn T.
Ames, the court on June 16, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Shawn T. Ames, was convicted, following a
bench trial in the Circuit Court (Tenney, J.), on a misdemeanor charge of theft
by deception. See RSA 637:4 (Supp. 2024); RSA 637:11, III (2016). On appeal,
the defendant argues that (1) the State improperly failed to produce certain
discovery prior to trial; (2) a term of the defendant’s release improperly
prohibited the defendant from interviewing material witnesses or otherwise
preparing a defense; and (3) the State was improperly allowed to reduce the
charge from a class A misdemeanor to a class B misdemeanor after the
defendant applied for court-appointed counsel. These issues, according to the
defendant, warranted a mistrial. We affirm.
It is the burden of the appealing party, in this case the defendant, to
provide a record that is sufficient to decide the issues raised on appeal, and to
demonstrate that those issues were raised in the trial court. See Bean v. Red
Oak prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004). We assume that relevant portions
of the record not provided by the appealing party support the result reached by
the trial court. See id. These rules are not relaxed for self-represented parties.
See In the Matter of Birmingham & Birmingham, 154 N.H. 51, 56 (2006).
In this case, the only portions of the record provided on appeal consist of
the criminal complaint charging the defendant with class B misdemeanor theft
by deception, and the trial court’s disposition and sentencing form. The
defendant has not provided a transcript of trial. Nor has the defendant
provided any pleadings that the defendant may have filed asserting the issues
that the defendant now raises on appeal, or any written orders by the trial
court ruling on such issues. See In the Matter of Silva & Silva, 171 N.H. 1, 12
(2018) (applying Bean to failure to provide relevant trial court motion or order
thereon). Under these circumstances, we cannot conclude either that the
defendant raised the issues that the defendant is arguing on appeal in the trial
court, or that the trial court erred with respect to any of those issues.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2