THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0647, In the Matter of Andrew
Kapchensky and Carolyn Kapchensky, the court on October 28,
2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The respondent, Carolyn Kapchensky (wife), appeals the
final decree of the Circuit Court (Swegart, J.), following a two-day trial, in her
divorce from the petitioner, Andrew Kapchensky (husband). The wife argues
that the trial court erred by (1) granting the divorce based upon irreconcilable
differences, rather than grounds of adultery; (2) awarding her the parties’
Corvette; and (3) dividing the marital property equally. We affirm.
The wife first argues that the trial court erred in finding that
irreconcilable differences, and not the husband’s adultery, primarily caused the
marital breakdown. Whether the irremediable breakdown of the marriage was
caused by irreconcilable differences or husband’s adultery was a factual
question for the trial court. In the Matter of Mannion & Mannion, 155 N.H. 52,
56 (2007). The trial court was the best position to evaluate the evidence,
measure its persuasiveness, and assess the credibility of witnesses. Id. at 57.
“We will affirm the trial court’s factual findings unless the evidence does not
support them or they are legally erroneous.” Id. at 56.
At the outset, we reject the wife’s assertion that the trial court
“mechanically read the calendar” to conclude that adultery was not the cause
of the marital breakdown. The trial court expressly stated that determining the
primary cause of the marital breakdown “is not a mechanical process governed
by a chronological assessment.” (Emphasis added.) Rather, the court stated,
determining the primary cause of the marital breakdown “is a very fact
sensitive determination” that requires careful consideration of “the state of the
marriage before and after the infidelity.”
The trial court, considering the state of the marriage before and after the
infidelity, found that communications from the wife to the husband “suggested
that the marriage was in trouble” long before the husband’s adultery. The
husband’s nephew testified that, during the marriage, the wife would say
“mean things” to the husband, including “I hate you,” “I don’t want to be with
you anymore,” and “I want a divorce.” These outbursts intensified in the later
years. As the trial court found, and the record shows, before the adultery, the
wife suggested that the parties should contact a realtor to sell the marital
home, and that “a divorce may be on the horizon.” In addition, the husband
testified, and the trial court found, that the parties had not had sexual
intercourse for about ten years. The court noted that the parties did not
“meaningfully dispute their lack of consistent intimacy.” The husband testified
that the marriage was beyond repair by the time he reconnected with his high
school girlfriend. The court found the husband to be a credible witness. We
conclude that the record supports the trial court’s determination that
irreconcilable differences, rather than the husband’s adultery, caused the
irremediable breakdown of the marriage. See In the Matter of Mannion, 155
N.H. at 56.
The wife next argues that the trial court erred in awarding her the
parties’ Corvette, which she asserts is “both worthless to her and depreciating.”
There is evidence in the record that the wife placed a greater value on the
Corvette than the husband. Even accepting the truth of the wife’s assertions,
she has cited no support for her position that awarding the Corvette to her
under these circumstances constitutes reversible error. See In the Matter of
Letendre & Letendre, 149 N.H. 31, 36 (2002) (trial court in its discretion may
award a particular asset in its entirety to one party).
The wife next argues that the asset division is inequitable. We afford
trial courts broad discretion in determining matters of property distribution in
fashioning a final divorce decree. In the Matter of Hampers & Hampers, 154
N.H. 275, 285 (2006). Under RSA 458:16-a, II (2018), an equal division of
property is presumed equitable unless the trial court decides otherwise after
considering one or more of the factors designated in the statute. In the Matter
of Letendre, 149 N.H. at 35. In this case, the trial court determined that an
equal division of property would be equitable. The wife argues that the court
should have given greater weight to the statutory factors that she argues
support an unequal property division in her favor, including: “contribution[s]
made by one party to help . . . develop the career or employability of the other
party”; “[t]he expectation of pension or retirement rights”; “[t]he value of
property acquired prior to the marriage”; and “other factor[s] that the court
deems relevant.” See RSA 458:16-a, II(h), (i), (m), (o).
We reject the wife’s assertion that the trial court “took no account” of
these factors. On the contrary, the trial court specifically found that “none of
the statutory factors that would potentially merit an unequal distribution are
compelling.” Although the wife asserts that she “donated large sums from her
assets and earnings into [the husband’s] business and the house,” the trial
court found that the wife’s contributions were “fairly balanced against [the
husband’s] skill and work contributions to the same efforts.” The trial court
acknowledged that the wife may need to use her retirement funds to acquire
new housing, but it considered this factor in awarding her alimony.
2
Based upon this record, we cannot conclude that the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion in its property division. See In the
Matter of Hampers, 154 N.H. at 285.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Hantz Marconi, Donovan, Countway, and Gould,
JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3