THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0547, John Stanton and Sons
Landscaping, LLC v. Hilary Henry, the court on June 13, 2025,
issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Hilary Henry, appeals a small claim
judgment entered by the Circuit Court (Kent, R., approved by Chabot, J.)
awarding the plaintiff, John Stanton and Sons Landscaping, LLC, $4,126.70
plus interest and costs, and denying the defendant’s counterclaim. The
defendant challenges the sufficiency of the evidence to support the trial court’s
decision, arguing that the trial court erred by considering evidence offered by
the plaintiff and by not considering her evidence. The defendant also suggests
that the case was improperly decided by a “different judge” who had not
presided over the evidentiary hearing. We affirm.
We will uphold the trial court’s findings and rulings unless they lack
evidentiary support or are legally erroneous. Cook v. Sullivan, 149 N.H. 774,
780 (2003). The trial court is free to accept or reject, in whole or in part,
whatever evidence was submitted. See id. We defer to the trial court’s
judgment on matters such as assessing the credibility of the witnesses,
resolving conflicts in testimony, and evaluating the weight of the evidence
presented. See id. Indeed, the trial court is not required to believe even
uncontested evidence. See Town of Newbury v. Landrigan, 165 N.H. 236, 240
(2013). Our standard of review is not whether we would have reached a
different result than the result reached by the trial court, but whether a
reasonable person could have reached the same result that the trial court
reached based upon the same evidence. See Cook, 149 N.H. at 780.
We reject the defendant’s suggestion that the case was improperly
decided by a “different judge” who had not presided over the evidentiary
hearing. The record reflects that both the decision on the merits and the
decision denying the defendant’s motion for reconsideration were recommended
by the same judicial referee and were approved by a circuit court judge. The
plaintiff asserts, and the defendant has not disputed, that the judicial officer
who presided over the evidentiary hearing was in fact the judicial referee who
had recommended both decisions. This is consistent with New Hampshire law.
See RSA 490-F:15 (Supp. 2024); RSA 493-A:1-a, II (Supp. 2024). We note that
the defendant has not provided a transcript of the evidentiary hearing, which
would have identified the presiding judicial officer.
It is the defendant’s burden, as the appealing party, to provide a record
on appeal that is sufficient to decide the issues she is raising, and in the
absence of a transcript of a relevant hearing, we assume that a transcript
would support the result reached by the trial court. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop.
Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004). Here, because the defendant has not
provided a transcript of the evidentiary hearing, we assume that a transcript
would reflect that the judicial officer who presided over the evidentiary hearing
was the judicial referee who recommended the decision on the merits approved
by the circuit court judge. See id. Likewise, we assume that the evidence
supports the decision to award the plaintiff $4,126.70 plus interest and costs
on its claim, and to deny the defendant’s counterclaim, and that in so ruling,
the trial court properly evaluated the weight of the evidence presented and the
credibility of the witnesses. See id.; Cook, 149 N.H. at 780. Upon this record,
we cannot conclude that the trial court’s decision was either lacking in
evidentiary support or legally erroneous. Cook, 149 N.H. at 780.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2