THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0662, Chad Mauldin & a. v. Angelo Fionda
& a., the court on October 28, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiffs, Chad Mauldin and Rachael Mauldin, appeal a
decision of the Superior Court (Temple, J.), following a bench trial on their
claims for fraudulent and negligent misrepresentation against defendants
Angelo Fionda and Bobbie Jean Fionda, finding that the statement on which
the misrepresentation claims were based was not false. The plaintiffs argue
that the evidence compelled findings that the Fiondas engaged in fraudulent
and negligent misrepresentation, and that the trial court erred by not
considering certain allegedly uncontroverted testimony. We affirm.
When reviewing a trial court decision following a bench trial, we will
uphold the trial court’s findings and rulings unless they lack evidentiary
support or are legally erroneous. Trombly v. City Cars, LLC., 177 N.H. 371,
373 (2025), 2025 N.H. 25, ¶7. We do not decide whether we would have ruled
differently than the trial court, but rather, whether a reasonable person could
have rendered the same decision as the trial court based upon the same
evidence. Id. In reviewing the trial court’s decision, we defer to its judgment
on issues such as resolving conflicts in testimony, evaluating the credibility of
witnesses, and determining the weight of the evidence presented. Id. It is
within the province of the trial court to accept or reject, in whole or in part,
whatever evidence was presented, including testimony from an expert. Id.;
Town of Newbury v. Landrigan, 165 N.H. 236, 240 (2013). Indeed, the trial
court is not required to believe even uncontested testimony, regardless of
whether it is from an expert or fact witness. Landrigan, 165 N.H. at 240, 241.
At the outset, we note the limited nature of the misrepresentation claims
pleaded by the plaintiffs and ruled upon by the trial court. In their second
amended complaint, the plaintiffs premised their misrepresentation claims
solely upon a single statement contained within a property disclosure within
the context of a sale of property, in which the Fiondas answered “no” to the
question, “Are you aware of any modifications or repairs made without the
necessary permits?” In ruling in favor of the Fiondas on the misrepresentation
claims, the trial court first determined that the Fiondas’ answer to that
question was not false, finding that they were not aware of any unpermitted
modifications or repairs, and in so finding, crediting the evidence offered by the
Fiondas on that point. The trial court further determined that the plaintiffs
had failed to prove that any repairs or modifications to the property prior to
their purchase of it in fact were made without required permits, finding that
the testimony the plaintiffs offered on that point was not credible. Finally, the
trial court noted that, to the extent the plaintiffs were seeking to recover for
“other representations in the [property disclosure] . . ., or representations made
outside of the [property disclosure], such representations were not adequately
pled or identified in the” relevant counts of the second amended complaint, and
thus, the court did not need to address such claims.
On appeal, the plaintiffs premise their arguments upon certain alleged
false statements in the property disclosure other than the statement that the
Fiondas were unaware of any “modifications or repairs made without the
necessary permits,” as well as upon an alleged false statement in a separate
affidavit executed by the Fiondas as part of the closing. As the trial court
correctly observed, however, the plaintiffs did not identify or plead such
statements as the basis for their fraudulent or negligent misrepresentation
claims in their second amended complaint. “It is well settled that a defendant
is entitled to be informed of the theory on which the plaintiffs are proceeding
and the redress that they claim as a result of the defendant’s actions.”
Morancy v. Morancy, 134 N.H. 493, 497 (1991) (quotation omitted). Within the
context of fraud claims, a plaintiff is required to “specify the essential details of
the fraud,” and may not “merely . . . allege fraud in general terms.” Brzica v.
Trustees of Dartmouth College, 147 N.H. 443, 449 (2002) (quotation omitted).
It is reversible error to base an award of damages upon a theory of liability not
previously pleaded. See Morancy, 134 N.H. at 497-98.
Here, the plaintiffs have not even addressed the trial court’s ruling that
they did not properly plead any misrepresentation claims based upon
statements other than the statement in the property disclosure regarding
awareness of unpermitted modifications or repairs. Accordingly, we decline to
address the plaintiffs’ arguments concerning such alleged misrepresentations.
See id.; see also State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 49 (2003) (stating that this
court will not review issues that are not fully briefed).
Turning to the misrepresentation claims based upon the Fiondas’
statement in the property disclosure that they were unaware of any
unpermitted modifications or repairs, the trial court acted well within its
discretion to credit the evidence offered by the Fiondas and find that they were
unaware of any unpermitted modifications or repairs. See Trombly, 177 N.H.
at 373, 2025 N.H. 25, ¶7. Likewise, the trial court was within its discretion not
to credit, or to place weight upon, the plaintiffs’ evidence that the Fiondas had
made repairs or modifications without obtaining required permits, regardless of
whether such evidence was contested or testified to by an expert witness. See
id.; Landrigan, 165 N.H. at 240, 241. Upon this record, we cannot conclude
2
that the trial court’s findings and rulings were unsupported by the evidence or
legally erroneous. See Trombly, 177 N.H. at 373, 2025 N.H. 25, ¶7.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Hantz Marconi, Donovan, and Countway, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3