THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0268, State of New Hampshire v. Brandon
Levine, the court on February 20, 2025, issued the following
order:
The defendant’s motion for submission of evidence is denied. The record
shows that the cruiser dashboard camera video was not introduced as an exhibit
at trial. On appeal, we consider only evidence and exhibits introduced at trial.
Flaherty v. Dixey, 158 N.H. 385, 387 (2009); see Sup. Ct. R. 13.
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). The defendant, Brandon Levine, appeals his convictions in Circuit
Court (Boyle, J.) for driving with a suspended registration, see RSA 261:178
(2024) and with a suspended license, see RSA 263:64 (2024), arguing that there
was an insufficient basis for the traffic stop. We affirm.
A police officer conducting a traffic stop must have a reasonable suspicion
that the person stopped “has been, is, or is about to be, engaged in criminal
activity.” State v. Richter, 145 N.H. 640, 641 (2000) (quotation omitted). In this
case, the officer testified that he was patrolling on Route 3 in the Town of
Holderness on November 27, 2022, at approximately 3:40 p.m., when he
observed a motor vehicle traveling south “at a high rate of speed.” The officer’s
handheld radar showed that the vehicle was traveling at a rate of 52 miles per
hour. The officer testified that, because the vehicle was traveling over the speed
limit, he ran the registration and reviewed the owner’s motor vehicle operating
history, which showed that the owner’s operating privilege had been suspended,
and that the vehicle registration also was suspended. The officer testified that he
activated his emergency lights and initiated a traffic stop, which occurred at a
gas station.
At trial, the defendant argued that the officer lacked justification for the
stop because the video from his cruiser’s dashboard camera did not show the
defendant’s vehicle while it was speeding. The trial court found that the officer
stopped the defendant not because he was speeding but because he was driving
with a suspended registration and a suspended license. We defer to the trial
court’s factual findings on the events leading up to the stop unless they lack
support in the record or are clearly erroneous. State v. Monegro-Diaz, 175 N.H.
238, 241-42 (2022).
On appeal, the defendant asserts that, “I have [the officer] on video
recording admitting that he was detaining me for my speed and nothing further.”
It is unclear whether the defendant is referring to the video recording from the
cruiser’s dashboard camera or another video recording. Either way, there is
nothing in the appellate record, other than the defendant’s trial testimony, to
suggest that the officer admitted detaining the defendant for speeding and no
other reason. See Flaherty, 158 N.H. at 387 (we consider only evidence
presented to the trial court). Conflicts in the evidence and the credibility of
witnesses are issues for the trial court to resolve. Monegro-Diaz, 175 N.H. at
243-44.
We conclude that the record supports the trial court’s finding that the
police officer stopped the defendant for driving with a suspended registration and
a suspended license. An officer’s knowledge that the registered owner of a vehicle
has a suspended driver’s license may provide reasonable suspicion to initiate a
traffic stop. Richter, 145 N.H. at 641-42. Accordingly, we conclude that there
was justification for the traffic stop.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2