THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case Nos. 2024-0156 and 2024-0157, State of New
Hampshire v. Robert A. Reid, the court on March 3, 2025, issued
the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). Following bench trials in the Circuit Court (Gardner, J.), the
defendant, Robert A. Reid, was found guilty on two complaints that alleged
violations of RSA 466:31 (2018), entitled “Dogs a Menace, a Nuisance or
Vicious.” He filed separate appeals following the trial court’s rulings; we have
consolidated the cases for appellate review. The defendant argues: (1) the State
failed to prove that his dog, Patches, committed the charged acts; (2) the
witnesses gave false and conflicting statements that are “extremely over
exaggerated”; (3) the State failed to provide exculpatory evidence; and (4) the
trial court erred by ordering the defendant’s dog to be forfeited without a
separate hearing. We affirm.
The trial court first held a trial on a May 23, 2023 complaint (May
complaint) which alleged that, on May 16, 2023, the defendant’s dog, Patches,
bit “E.W., with a D.O.B. of 11/15/42, there by causing a puncture wound on
the right hand, right forearm, and right thigh of the victim.”
The State presented the following testimony at the trial held on the May
complaint. A neighbor, who was outside, heard E.W. screaming. As she
headed in the direction of the screaming, she saw the defendant’s dog run past
her. When she reached E.W., she saw that E.W. was bleeding and had wounds
on her hand and arm. Patches was barking and appeared as if he was “going
to attack.” E.W. testified that she was returning to her apartment from visiting
friends in the same complex when a dog charged at her. The dog bit her on the
elbow and hand. She described the dog and confirmed that the dog shown in
State’s Exhibit 1 was the dog that bit her. The neighbor identified the dog
shown in State’s Exhibit 1 as Patches and testified that he belonged to the
defendant.
The trial court then held a separate trial on a complaint that charged the
defendant with a violation of RSA 466:31 on August 2, 2023, after he left
Patches “unsupervised, leaving the owner’s premises, by causing a hazardous
condition to the public, the dog growled, charged . . . at the victim being M.B.”
(August complaint).
The State presented the following evidence at the trial held on the August
complaint. M.B. testified that she was outside on August 2, 2023 with
neighbors when she saw Patches between the buildings where she lived. He
was “barking at all of us and growling.” When she went to see whether he had
returned to his yard, he lunged at her and pinned her up against her house.
M.B. testified that the incident ended when the defendant “yelled at him and
told him to get back there. And then the dog turned and jumped over the
fence.”
The defendant cross-examined the State’s witnesses at each trial; he also
testified at the second trial. Following the close of evidence at the second trial,
the court found the defendant guilty on both complaints. In imposing
sentence, the court stated:
And I will say this, I don’t think that there are any bad dogs out
there. It’s more irresponsible or inexperienced owners. And so in
terms of disposition of dog, I will only do so after you have
exhausted every single ability to place this dog with a family.
There are pit bull rescues that will take dogs like this. And that is
going to be my order, if you are still looking for disposition of the
dog.
When reviewing the defendant’s arguments, we apply the following rules
of appellate review. We review only those issues that the defendant has fully
briefed and we will not review issues that the defendant did not raise before the
trial court. State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 48-49 (2003).
We first address the defendant’s challenge to the sufficiency of the
evidence presented by the State in the May complaint case. The defendant has
the burden to demonstrate that the evidence was insufficient to prove guilt.
State v. Saintil-Brown, 172 N.H. 110, 117 (2019). When considering a
challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, we objectively review the record to
determine whether any rational trier of fact could have found the essential
elements of the offense beyond a reasonable doubt, considering all the evidence
and all reasonable inferences therefrom in the light most favorable to the State.
Id. Because this challenge raises a claim of legal error, our standard of review
is de novo. Id.
To support this claim of legal error, the defendant argues that the State
failed to establish beyond a reasonable doubt the ownership of the dog that
caused E.W.’s injuries and that “the witnesses gave false and conflicting
statements that are extremely over exaggerated.” That the defendant presented
testimony that conflicted with portions of the State’s case did not compel the
trial court to find that the State had failed to meet its burden. Given the trial
court’s ability to observe witness demeanor, we defer to its resolution of
2
conflicts in testimony, the credibility of witnesses, and the weight to be given
evidence. See Brooks v. Allen, 168 N.H. 707, 715 (2016). In this case,
witnesses identified Patches as the dog who bit E.W. and also testified that the
defendant was his owner. Viewed in the light most favorable to the State, the
evidence was sufficient for the trial court to find beyond a reasonable doubt
that Patches injured E.W. on May 16, 2023.
The defendant also argues that the State failed to provide exculpatory
evidence in the May complaint case. Specifically, he contends that the State
failed to provide E.W.’s hospital records “to prove any injuries other than a
superficial nip on E.W.’s right hand.” The State indicated at trial that it had
provided the defendant with all the records given to it by E.W. Moreover, given
his concession that E.W. suffered a bite on her hand, the defendant has failed
to establish that the records constituted favorable material evidence. See State
v. Dewitt, 143 N.H. 24, 33 (1998) (evidence is material only if there is a
reasonable probability that the result of the proceeding would have been
different if the evidence had been disclosed to the defendant).
The defendant also challenges the sufficiency of the evidence with respect
to the August complaint. We have reviewed the record of that trial and
conclude that the State met its burden to establish that the defendant violated
RSA 466:31 by allowing his dog to be at large when it barked and growled at
M.B. and her neighbors, and when it lunged at her and pinned her against her
house.
The defendant also argues that the trial court erred in ordering the
forfeiture of Patches without holding an additional hearing. Despite the
relatively lengthy discussion between the trial court and the parties during the
sentencing portion of the February 20, 2024 proceedings, the defendant did not
request an additional hearing after the court indicated that it would order
forfeiture of the dog if requested. Nor did the law require an additional hearing
in this case. RSA 466:31-a, III (2018) provides in relevant part: “In the case of
a vicious dog, as described by RSA 466:31, II(g), where its behavior presents a
threat to public safety, immediate district court or municipal court proceedings
may be initiated in lieu of civil forfeiture.” RSA 466:31, II(g) describes a vicious
dog: “If, whether alone or in a pack with other dogs, it bites, attacks, or preys
on game animals, domestic animals, fowl or human beings.”
Notably, although the court indicated that it would order forfeiture if the
State filed a motion, it also strongly encouraged the parties to develop a
rehoming plan without trial court involvement. Based on the record before us,
we find no error in the trial court’s ruling.
3