THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0465, Donald McGowan & a. v. Town of
Hampton, the court on April 24, 2026, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The
defendant, the Town of Hampton (Town), appeals an order of the Superior
Court (Klass, J.) reversing the decision of the Town’s Zoning Board of
Adjustment (ZBA). The trial court ruled that the plaintiffs, Donald and Patricia
McGowan, had established a lawful preexisting nonconforming use of their
property as a short-term rental (STR) by having previously received a Certificate
of Rental Occupancy (CRO) from the Town in 2021 that allowed them to lease
their property as an STR. We affirm.
The trial court found, or the record otherwise supports, the following
facts. The plaintiffs, New York residents, purchased a property in Hampton in
2018. The property includes a house as well as a detached structure
comprising a ground-floor garage and second-floor loft (Loft). The property’s
previous resident used the Loft as a music studio.
The plaintiffs began leasing their property as an STR through Airbnb in
May 2019. In April 2021, after neighbors complained to the plaintiffs about
noise by STR guests, Ms. McGowan began intermittently staying short-term in
the Loft to supervise STR guests in the main house.
In 2023, the Town adopted an STR ordinance, which for the first time
specifically regulated STRs by requiring an STR permit for property within a
newly created overlay district and requiring a special exception for property
outside the overlay district. See Hampton Zoning Ordinance (HZO) § 21.2
(2023). The plaintiffs’ property sits outside the overlay district.
In March 2023, the Town sent the plaintiffs a letter revoking their CRO.
The letter advised the plaintiffs that their CRO would “be reissued for Long
Term rental use” when they ceased using the property as an STR. The letter
also noted, however, that under the new ordinance, the plaintiffs could seek a
special exception to lease their property as an STR.
The plaintiffs applied with the Town’s ZBA for a special exception. In a
subsequent letter, they also argued to the ZBA that their short-term leasing of
the property was “a legal non-conforming use . . . such that no Special
Exception relief is required.”
After four hearings, the ZBA issued a notice of decision stating that the
plaintiffs did not establish a lawful prior nonconforming use because the
above-garage Loft was a detached Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) under the
HZO. The ZBA ruled that because the plaintiffs’ prior short-term leasing of
their property had violated HZO § 3-A.4(c), they could not qualify for a
preexisting nonconforming use. See HZO § 3-A.4 (2017) (providing that a
property containing an ADU must be occupied by the owner and may not be
rented for a term of less than six months). The ZBA additionally determined
that the plaintiffs did not qualify for a special exception. The plaintiffs moved
for rehearing, which the ZBA denied.
The plaintiffs appealed the ZBA’s decision to the superior court. See RSA
677:4 (2016). After a hearing, the trial court issued an order reversing the
ZBA’s decision. The trial court determined that the Loft was not an ADU, and,
consequently, the plaintiffs’ STR had not violated HZO § 3-A.4(c). The court
concluded that the plaintiffs had met their burden of showing that their STR
use was a lawful preexisting nonconforming use. The court therefore did not
reach the special exception issue. The Town moved for reconsideration, which
the court denied. This appeal followed.
Judicial review in zoning cases is limited. See Dartmouth Corp. of Alpha
Delta v. Town of Hanover, 169 N.H. 743, 749 (2017). The party seeking to set
aside the ZBA’s decision bears the burden of proof on appeal to the trial court.
Dietz v. Town of Tuftonboro, 171 N.H. 614, 618 (2019). The factual findings of
the ZBA are deemed prima facie lawful and reasonable, and will not be set
aside by the trial court absent errors of law, unless the court is persuaded,
based upon a balance of probabilities, on the evidence before it, that the ZBA’s
decision is unreasonable. Id.; see RSA 677:6 (2016). The trial court’s review is
not to determine whether it agrees with the ZBA’s findings, but to determine
whether there is evidence upon which they could have been reasonably based.
Dietz, 171 N.H. at 618. We will uphold the trial court’s decision unless it is
unsupported by the evidence or legally erroneous. Monadnock Rod and Gun
Club v. Town of Peterborough, 177 N.H. 70, 74 (2024), 2024 N.H. 61, ¶10.
The Town argues that despite its issuance of the CRO, a preexisting
nonconforming use cannot be established “[i]f the use of the [property] was in
violation of the applicable zoning ordinances at the time.” The Town asserts
that the property was in violation of zoning ordinances in two ways: first, there
was an ADU on the property (which triggers additional zoning ordinance
requirements of owner occupancy and minimum rental periods); and second,
the CRO was invalid because the plaintiffs’ CRO application did not disclose
the ADU. See HZO §§ 3-A.4(a) (requiring owner occupancy of either the ADU or
the main dwelling unit as principal place of residence), 3-A.4(c) (prohibiting
2
rental periods of less than six months for either unit), 12.1-.2 (1998) (requiring
inspection and a CRO for residential properties “otherwise occupied for
residential purposes”). In addition, the Town argues that the ZBA properly
denied the plaintiffs’ application for a special exception. We conclude that the
trial court correctly determined that there was a lawful preexisting
nonconforming use and thus we need not address the special exception.
As the trial court noted, properties in Hampton containing an ADU
cannot be rented for terms of less than six months — precluding their use as
STRs. See HZO § 3.A.4(c). Therefore, if, as the Town contends, the plaintiffs’
Loft was an ADU under the HZO, the use of the property violated the applicable
zoning ordinance at the time and accordingly would not qualify as a lawful
preexisting nonconforming use. See Monadnock Rod and Gun Club, 177 N.H.
at 75, 2024 N.H. 61, ¶¶13-15 (holding that a shooting range’s violation of a
zoning ordinance made the range “illegal and therefore ineligible to later qualify
as a lawful nonconforming use”).
Thus, we must first address whether the Loft is an ADU under the HZO.
The interpretation of a zoning ordinance presents a question of law that we
review de novo. Batchelder v. Town of Plymouth Zoning Bd. of Adjustment,
160 N.H. 253, 256 (2010). The traditional rules of statutory interpretation
govern our review. See id. The words and phrases of an ordinance should be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the language. See
id. When the language of an ordinance is plain and unambiguous, we need not
look beyond the ordinance itself. See id. Moreover, we will not guess what the
drafters of the ordinance might have intended, or add words that they did not
see fit to include. See id. at 256-57. We determine the meaning of a zoning
ordinance from its construction as a whole, not by construing isolated words or
phrases. See id. at 257. Finally, we give effect to all words in an ordinance
and presume that the Town’s legislative body did not enact superfluous or
redundant words. See Appeal of Vasquez, 175 N.H. 450, 453 (2022).
HZO sections 1.6 and 3-A.3, as codified at the time of the events in this
case, were both adopted in 2017 and pertain to ADUs. See HZO §§ 1.6, 3-A.3
(2017). HZO section 1.6 defines an ADU as:
A residential living unit that is within or attached to a single-family
dwelling, and that provides independent living facilities for one to
four persons, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking,
and sanitation on the same parcel of land as the principal dwelling
unit it accompanies. A residential living unit located within a
detached structure that predates the enactment of Article III-A,
and that is already detached from the principal dwelling unit shall
also be considered an Accessory Dwelling Unit.1
1 The definition of an ADU in HZO section 1.6 is nearly identical to the statutory definition of an
3