THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0367, Brian Gifford v. Roger Mason & a.,
the court on July 3, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). Defendants Richard Matckie and Four Sanborn Road Realty,
LLC (collectively, the defendants) appeal an order of the Circuit Court (LeDuc,
J.), following a hearing on the merits on a breach of contract claim brought by
the plaintiff, Brian Gifford, and on the defendants’ counterclaims, finding that
neither the plaintiff nor the defendants carried their respective burdens of
proof. The defendants argue that the trial court erred by denying their post-
trial motion for partial reconsideration, and by determining that they failed to
carry their burden of proof as to their counterclaims. We affirm.
We will uphold the trial court’s findings and rulings unless they lack
evidentiary support or are legally erroneous. Cook v. Sullivan, 149 N.H. 774,
780 (2003). We will uphold the trial court’s decision denying the defendants’
motion for reconsideration absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See
Town of Bartlett v. Furlong, 168 N.H. 171, 177 (2015). To establish that the
trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion by denying the motion for
reconsideration, the defendants must demonstrate that the court’s ruling was
clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of their case. See id.
In reviewing the trial court’s findings and rulings, we emphasize that the
trial court, as the finder of fact, is free to accept or reject, in whole or in part,
whatever evidence was submitted. See Cook, 149 N.H. at 780. We defer to the
trial court’s judgment on matters such as assessing the credibility of the
witnesses, resolving conflicts in testimony, and evaluating the weight of the
evidence presented. See id. Indeed, the trial court is not required to believe
even uncontested evidence. See Town of Newbury v. Landrigan, 165 N.H. 236,
240 (2013). It is the burden of the appealing parties, in this case the
defendants, to provide this court with those portions of the trial record,
including relevant exhibits, that are necessary to decide the issues they raise,
and we assume that relevant portions of the trial record not provided on appeal
support the result reached by the trial court. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop.
Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004); In the Matter of Rokowski & Rokowski, 168
N.H. 57, 62 (2015) (applying Bean to appealing party’s failure to provide
exhibits admitted into evidence at evidentiary hearing). Our standard of review
is not whether we would have reached a different result than the result reached
by the trial court, but whether a reasonable person could have reached the
same result that the trial court reached based upon the same evidence. See
Cook, 149 N.H. at 780.
In this case, the defendants challenge the trial court’s factual findings
that the plaintiff did not act in bad faith by litigating his claim and did not
engage in fraudulent conduct or otherwise willfully or knowingly violate RSA
chapter 358-A. We have reviewed the record in this case, including the trial
transcript and the pleadings and trial exhibits included in the defendants’
appendix, and cannot conclude that the trial court’s determination that the
defendants failed to carry their burden of proof was either unsupported by the
evidence or legally erroneous. See Cook, 149 N.H. at 780. We note that the
defendants have not provided in their appendix the plaintiff’s trial exhibits,
which included post-dispute text communications between the plaintiff and
defendant Matckie, and thus, we assume that those exhibits support the trial
court’s findings and rulings. See Rokowski, 168 N.H. at 62; Bean, 151 N.H. at
62. Nor can we conclude that the trial court’s denial of the defendants’ motion
for partial reconsideration was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the
prejudice of their case. See Town of Bartlett, 168 N.H. at 177.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2