THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0414, Cornerstone Capital Strategies, LLC
& a. v. White Mountain Organic Growers’ Association, LLC & a.,
the court on August 27, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendants, White Mountain Organic Growers’
Association, LLC and Catherine E. Brown, and the intervenor, Suzanne M.
Brown, appeal an order of the Superior Court (MacLeod, J.), following an entry
of default and a hearing on damages, that (1) awarded damages to the
plaintiffs, Cornerstone Capital Strategies, LLC and Adams Investments, LLC,
related to the defendants’ failure to pay moneys owed under a loan agreement
and related documents; (2) determined that the redemption value of certain
real property securing the relevant transaction is identical to the damages
awarded; and (3) ruled that the plaintiffs may commence foreclosure
proceedings on the property. On appeal, the defendants and intervenor argue
that their alleged lack of access to certain documents on file in the case
violated the Right To Know law and their State Constitutional right of access to
court records, and that the trial court erred by not staying the case or imposing
sanctions on the plaintiffs for allegedly reporting defendant Catherine E.
Brown’s conduct to the New Hampshire State Police. We affirm.
As the appealing parties, the defendants and intervenor have the burden
to demonstrate reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014).
Based on our review of the trial court’s well-reasoned order, the arguments on
appeal, the relevant law, and the record submitted on appeal, we conclude that
the defendants and intervenor have not demonstrated reversible error, see id.,
and that their arguments neither are sufficiently developed, see State v.
Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 49 (2003), nor otherwise warrant further discussion,
see Vogel v. Vogel, 137 N.H. 321, 322 (1993). In light of this order, the plaintiffs’
requests that we strike the brief of the defendants and intervenor are moot. The
court will address the plaintiffs’ request for fees in accordance with Rule 23.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk