THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0107, Edward Farley v. Jake Kaplan’s of
Portsmouth, Inc. & a., the court on May 14, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Edward Farley, appeals a decision of the
Circuit Court (Walch, J.), following a bench trial, finding that he failed to carry
his burden of proof on his small claim seeking damages against the
defendants, Jake Kaplan’s of Portsmouth, Inc. and Mercedes Benz of
Portsmouth, NH, arising out of service work performed on the plaintiff’s vehicle.
The plaintiff raises a number of arguments, including arguments that the trial
court erred by determining that he failed to carry his burden of proof and by
not accepting evidence submitted for the first time with his motion for
reconsideration. The plaintiff additionally argues that the trial court was
biased against him and should have recused itself. We affirm.
We will uphold the trial court’s findings and rulings unless they lack
evidentiary support or are legally erroneous. Cook v. Sullivan, 149 N.H. 774,
780 (2003). The trial court is free to accept or reject, in whole or in part,
whatever evidence was submitted, including expert testimony. See id. We
defer to the trial court’s judgment on matters such as assessing the credibility
of the witnesses, resolving conflicts in testimony, and evaluating the weight of
the evidence presented. See id. Indeed, the trial court is not required to
believe even uncontested testimony. See Town of Newbury v. Landrigan, 165
N.H. 236, 240 (2013). Our standard of review is not whether we would have
reached a different result than the result reached by the trial court, but
whether a reasonable person could have reached the same result that the trial
court reached based upon the same evidence. See Cook, 149 N.H. at 780.
We have reviewed the transcript and documents provided by the plaintiff
in his appendix, and we conclude that nothing in the record compelled the trial
court to believe the plaintiff or his witness over the testimony of the defendants’
witness on the contested issues of fact. Accordingly, on this record, we cannot
conclude that the trial court’s determination that the plaintiff failed to carry his
burden of proof was either lacking in evidentiary support or erroneous as a
matter of law. See id.
To the extent that the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred by not
accepting new evidence, facts, or testimony provided with his motion for
reconsideration, we note that the trial court has the discretion not to consider
new issues or accept new evidence on reconsideration. Smith v. Shepard, 144
N.H. 262, 265 (1999). On this record, we cannot conclude that the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion by not accepting new evidence, facts, or
testimony offered by the plaintiff in his motion for reconsideration. See id.
(finding that trial court’s decision not to re-open record or consider new issue
on reconsideration was proper exercise of discretion). To the extent the
plaintiff argues that the trial court was biased against him and should have
recused itself, based on our review of the record, the plaintiff has not
established that a reasonable person would have questioned the impartiality of
the trial court. See Sup. Ct. R. 38, Canon 2.11; State v. Bader, 148 N.H. 265,
268 (2002). That the trial court did not credit the plaintiff or his witness, or
accept new evidence on reconsideration, does not establish a claim of judicial
bias. See Bader, 148 N.H. at 271 (noting that adverse judicial rulings alone do
not render a judge biased).
The plaintiff’s remaining arguments either were not raised in the trial
court, see State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 48 (2003), are insufficiently
developed, see id. at 49, or otherwise do not warrant further discussion, see
Vogel v. Vogel, 137 N.H. 321, 322 (1993).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2