THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0276, State of New Hampshire v. Deidre
G. Anderson, the court on May 30, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant appeals her conviction, following a bench trial
in the Circuit Court (Manchester, J.), on a charge of aggravated driving while
intoxicated. See RSA 265-A:3 (2024). On appeal, the defendant challenges the
sufficiency of the evidence to establish that she drove or attempted to drive a
vehicle at the time of the offense. See id. We affirm.
A challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence raises a question of law that
we review de novo. State v. Seibel, 174 N.H. 440, 445 (2021). When
considering a challenge to the sufficiency of evidence to support a conviction,
we objectively review the entire record, construing the evidence, and all
reasonable inferences from it, in the light most favorable to the State, and
determine whether any rational trier of fact could have found guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt. Id. We examine each item of evidence in the context of the
entire case, not in isolation. Id. The trier of fact is entitled to draw reasonable
inferences from the facts proved as well as from facts found as the result of
other inferences so long as they can reasonably be drawn therefrom. See id.
The defendant bears the burden of demonstrating that the evidence was
insufficient to prove guilt. State v. Saintil-Brown, 172 N.H. 110, 117 (2019).
When the evidence as to one or more of the elements is solely circumstantial,
the defendant must establish that the evidence does not exclude all reasonable
conclusions except guilt. Id. The proper analysis is not whether every possible
conclusion consistent with innocence has been excluded, but whether all
reasonable conclusions based on the evidence have been excluded. Id.
Under RSA 265-A:3, “[a] person shall be guilty of aggravated driving
while intoxicated if the person . . . drives or attempts to drive a vehicle upon
any way . . . [w]hile having an alcohol concentration of 0.16 or more.” RSA
265-A:3, III (2024). The term “drive” means “to operate or be in actual physical
control of a motor vehicle.” RSA 259:24 (2024). The defendant does not
dispute that she had an alcohol concentration of 0.16 or more, or that her car
was upon a “way,” at the time of her arrest. Instead, she argues that there was
no evidence that she either “operated” the car or was in “actual physical
control” of it.
By statute, the terms “drive,” “attempt to drive,” and “actual physical
control” exclude “sleeping, resting, or sheltering in place in a vehicle parked in
any place where parking is permitted, provided that the person is not seated at
the controls of the vehicle.” RSA 265-A:1, VI (2024) (emphasis added). “To
have ‘actual physical control’ of a motor vehicle, one must have the capacity
bodily to guide or exercise dominion over the vehicle at the present time.”
State v. Holloran, 140 N.H. 563, 565 (1995) (quoting State v. Willard, 139 N.H.
568, 571 (1995)). “What constitutes ‘actual physical control’ will vary
depending upon the facts of the case, but the primary focus of the inquiry is
whether the person is merely using the vehicle as a stationary shelter or
whether it is reasonable to assume that the person will, while under the
influence, jeopardize the public by exercising some measure of control over the
vehicle.” Holloran, 140 N.H. at 565 (quotation omitted).
In this case, the defendant was found by Nashua police officers in an
inebriated condition and seated in the driver’s seat of a car parked on a road.
The car was equipped with “push-to-start” technology, requiring the depressing
of a “start” button with the brake engaged to start the car, rather than the
turning of a manual key. The defendant’s key fob was in her pocket. After one
of the officers asked the defendant to get out of the car, the defendant leaned
forward toward the steering wheel, grabbed the steering wheel with her left
hand, and with her right hand reached for the push-to-start button. The
defendant’s actions prompted the officer immediately to reach into the car, grab
the defendant’s right arm in order to “gain control over her,” and order her not
to attempt to start the car. Both that officer and a second officer positioned on
the passenger side of the car then ordered the defendant to exit the car. Both
officers testified that they believed she was attempting to start the car.
According to the second officer, the “tone” of the stop changed because the
defendant was “attempting to start the car and could possibly drive away from
us. So we wanted to get her out of the car, so that there was no safety risk.”
On appeal, the defendant argues that the circumstantial evidence did not
exclude a reasonable conclusion that she was merely attempting to turn off the
car’s electrical system, which one of the officers had inadvertently engaged,
rather than to start the engine when she reached for the push-to-start button.
“Because,” she claims, “the only evidence that [she] drove, operated, or was in
actual physical control of the vehicle was her reach for the button, and because
there is no evidence that her intent was other than to turn off the car’s
accessories,” the defendant argues that the evidence was insufficient to
establish her actual physical control of the car. The defendant further argues
that, because there was no evidence that the defendant’s foot was on or
“reposition[ed]” to the brake pedal, and because the car’s electrical system had
been engaged by an officer, the evidence was insufficient to establish that her
operation of the car was imminent. We disagree.
2
We agree with the State that the evidence was not “solely circumstantial,”
but included the officers’ testimony regarding their direct observations of the
defendant, including, critically, her actions in leaning forward, grabbing the
steering wheel with one hand, and simultaneously reaching for the push-to-
start button with the other hand. These body movements, according to the
officers, demonstrated that the defendant was attempting to start the car, not
simply trying to turn off the car’s accessories, and their immediate reactions to
her conduct were consistent with their perceptions. We note that the evidence
also included body camera footage from both testifying officers, which
corroborated their testimony regarding the defendant’s actions in attempting to
start the car. Because the evidence included direct observations by the
witnesses, we reject the defendant’s argument that it was solely circumstantial.
See State v. Kelley, 159 N.H. 449, 454 (2009) (defining direct evidence).
Regardless of whether the defendant’s foot was engaging or
“reposition[ed]” to the brake pedal when she leaned forward, grabbed the
steering wheel, and reached for the push-to-start button, as the trial court
noted, her “feet were near the brake pedal and accelerator, and she could have
easily pressed the brake pedal to start the vehicle” had the officer not
intervened and grabbed her arm. The camera footage introduced at trial is
consistent with the trial court’s observations. Viewing the evidence in the light
most favorable to the State, we conclude that a rational fact finder could have
found, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the defendant would be imminently
operating the car, and was, therefore, in actual physical control of it. See
Seibel, 174 N.H. at 445; Holloran, 140 N.H. at 565.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3