THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0407, State of New Hampshire v.
Christopher C. Crosby, the court on February 25, 2026, issued
the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The
defendant, Christopher C. Crosby, appeals his conviction following a jury trial
in Superior Court (Edwards, J.) of criminal trespass. See RSA 635:2, III (Supp.
2025). He argues that the trial court erred by (1) allowing a police officer to
testify about business records containing location data and (2) failing to grant
his motion for a mistrial. We affirm.
I. Background
The record reflects the following facts. On October 29, 2021, one of the
victims returned to his apartment in Durham with a friend and they found a
stranger inside. The individual eluded them, and they reported the intrusion to
the police.
The defendant was tried for criminal trespass. At trial, a Durham police
officer testified that he obtained a search warrant authorizing him to obtain
business records from Google regarding any “Google subscriber information”
associated with devices within the area of the victims’ apartment at the time of
the trespass. After the officer requested that information from Google, Google’s
custodian of records provided business records, and the officer observed that
those records showed that two Google accounts associated with the defendant
were in use on a device inside the victims’ apartment at the time of the
intrusion.
The officer testified that those business records also contain “phone
numbers that are associated with the account[s].” He called one of the phone
numbers and spoke with the defendant. The officer testified that the defendant
asked him if the call was related to his “past arrests in Durham.” In response,
the defendant moved for a mistrial. The trial court denied the motion, struck
the testimony from the record, and instructed the jury to disregard it. The
defendant was found guilty of criminal trespass. This appeal followed.
II. Analysis
On appeal, the defendant argues that the police officer was unqualified to
testify about the defendant’s location history from Google’s business records.
We review the trial court’s ruling on the admissibility of evidence to determine
whether it was a sustainable exercise of discretion. See State v. DePaula, 170
N.H. 139, 152 (2017); State v. Boulton, 174 N.H. 470, 474 (2021) (explaining
that trial courts have broad discretion to determine the admissibility of
evidence). We will reverse the trial court only if the appealing party can
demonstrate that the ruling was untenable or unreasonable and that the error
prejudiced the party’s case. DePaula, 170 N.H. at 152.
Lay testimony must be confined to personal observations which any lay
person would be capable of making. State v. Cochrane, 153 N.H. 420, 422
(2006). Individuals can present limited lay testimony regarding matters which,
if discussed in detail, would require expert testimony. DePaula, 170 N.H. at
154. For example, a police officer may testify as a lay witness regarding his or
her administration of a field sobriety test measuring rapid eye movement, even
though testimony explaining the underlying medical reasons for the eye
movement would constitute expert testimony. See Cochrane, 153 N.H. at 421-
24. Similarly, an officer may testify as a lay witness regarding his or her use of
a radar gun to measure a vehicle’s speed, even though testimony explaining the
underlying technical mechanisms of how a radar gun works would constitute
expert testimony because those mechanisms are “not common knowledge.” Id.
at 424.
Here, the police officer testified that he created a “longitudinal,
latitudinal . . . box” directly over the area containing the victims’ apartment
“using Google” and that he received a search warrant authorizing him to ask
Google to provide him with any “Google subscriber information” associated with
devices within that area at the time of the trespass. In response, the officer
obtained business records from Google’s custodian of records and his review of
those records showed that two Google accounts were in use on a device located
in the area of the victims’ apartment at the time of the trespass, but Google
had “obfuscated” the identities of the individuals associated with those
accounts. He then received additional business records from Google’s
custodian of records stating that both accounts were associated with the
defendant.
On its face, the officer’s testimony encompasses “elementary concepts”
that “the average juror [could] understand.” DePaula, 170 N.H. at 155.
Indeed, the officer merely described the process by which he requested
business records from Google and his personal observations from his review of
those business records. We conclude that any lay person would be capable of
making those observations, i.e., that Google’s business records say that only
two Google accounts were in use on a device located in the victims’ apartment
2
at the time of the trespass and that both of those accounts were associated
with the defendant. See Cochrane, 153 N.H. at 422 (explaining that lay
testimony must be confined to personal observations which any lay person
would be capable of making).
The defendant argues that pursuant to State v. DePaula, the officer
lacked “sufficient personal knowledge” to provide lay testimony about Google’s
location history or to interpret Google’s business records. DePaula, 170 N.H. at
154-55. Unlike the witnesses in DePaula, however, the officer’s testimony
about Google’s location history was not based upon his personal knowledge on
the subject gained through “specialized training and experience.” Id. at 152-55
(explaining that lay witnesses needed “sufficient personal knowledge” to testify
to collection and storage of cell phone records, ranges of cell towers, and how
cell phones connect to cell towers, and that they gained that knowledge
through “specialized training and experience interpreting cell phone records”).
Instead, the officer merely reviewed Google’s business records and testified that
they represented that two Google accounts associated with the defendant were
in use on a device located within the victims’ apartment at the time of the
trespass. He did not need to have personal knowledge of Google’s location
tracking technology, or have “specialized training and experience,” to read
Google’s business records and make those observations. Id. at 154. Moreover,
given the ubiquity of location tracking technology, the average juror would be
able to understand the elementary concepts underlying the officer’s testimony
without him needing to have specialized training and experience in those
technologies to explain them. See id. at 155.
The defendant asserts that the officer’s lack of knowledge of Google’s
location tracking technology impeded his ability to cross-examine the officer or
to probe the accuracy of Google’s business records. These arguments,
however, go to the weight of the evidence rather than its admissibility. See
Cochrane, 153 N.H. at 420, 424 (explaining that concerns about false positive
readings from a Horizontal Gaze Nystagmus test, and a police officer’s training
and experience in administering that test, go to the weight of the evidence
rather than its admissibility); State v. Wall, 154 N.H. 237, 244 (2006)
(explaining that a party need not prove that business records are accurate
before they are admitted and that objections that a business record may
contain inaccuracies, ambiguities, or omissions go to the weight of the
evidence). Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court sustainably exercised
its discretion.
The defendant further argues that the trial court erred when it denied his
motion for a mistrial after the officer referenced his past arrests in Durham.
The police officer testified that he called a phone number associated with one of
the Google accounts and spoke with the defendant. The officer further testified
that the defendant asked him if the call was related to his “past arrests in
Durham.” The defendant moved for a mistrial. The trial court denied the
3