THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0223, My Way Realty, LLC v. City of
Manchester, the court on April 14, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, My Way Realty, LLC, appeals a decision of the
Superior Court (Delker, J.) affirming a decision of the City of Manchester
Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA or board) denying its application for a special
exception to allow for the installation of a drive-through facility on its property.
The plaintiff argues that the superior court erred in affirming the board’s
(1) finding that the proposal would create undue traffic congestion; (2) denial of
its request to present additional evidence; and (3) denial of its application for a
special exception. We affirm.
Our review in zoning cases is limited. Taylor v. Town of Wakefield, 158
N.H. 35, 38 (2008). Factual findings of the ZBA are deemed prima facie lawful
and reasonable and will not be set aside by the superior court absent errors of
law, unless the court is persuaded by a balance of probabilities on the evidence
before it that the ZBA’s decision is unreasonable. Id.; see RSA 677:6 (2016).
The party seeking to set aside the ZBA’s decision in the superior court bears
the burden of proof. Malachy Glen Assocs. v. Town of Chichester, 155 N.H.
102, 105 (2007). We, in turn, will uphold the superior court’s decision unless
it is not supported by the evidence or is legally erroneous. Id.
A special exception is a use permitted upon certain conditions as set
forth in a zoning ordinance. McKibbin v. City of Lebanon, 149 N.H. 59, 61
(2003). In applying for a special exception, the applicant has the burden of
presenting sufficient evidence to support a favorable finding on each of the
requirements. Id. In this case, the superior court affirmed the ZBA’s decision
that the plaintiff failed to present sufficient evidence to support a finding that
the requested drive-through facility would not create undue traffic congestion,
one of the conditions set forth in the City’s ordinance.
The plaintiff first argues that the superior court erred in ruling that the
ZBA properly rejected its expert’s uncontradicted opinion that the proposed
drive-through facility would not create undue traffic congestion. The plaintiff
asserts that the ZBA improperly relied upon its own opinions and abutter
comments to find that the proposal would create undue traffic congestion.
The ZBA may not simply ignore uncontradicted expert testimony.
Condos East Corp. v. Town of Conway, 132 N.H. 431, 438 (1989). Board
members may, however, rely in part upon their own judgment, experience, and
personal knowledge, provided that the board’s decision is “based on more than
the mere personal opinion of its members.” Continental Paving v. Town of
Litchfield, 158 N.H. 570, 574 (2009) (quotation omitted). In this case, the
record supports the superior court’s ruling that the board did not ignore the
expert’s testimony; rather, it raised concerns regarding the credibility and
methodology of the expert’s presentation.
Specifically, a majority of the board questioned the expert’s use of the
traffic data manual, statements regarding the effects of Covid on traffic, and
conclusion that the addition of a drive-through facility would either reduce the
amount of traffic or result in a “wash.” The ZBA was entitled to question and
reject the methodology and conclusions of the expert’s traffic assessment. See
Trustees of Dartmouth Coll. v. Town of Hanover, 171 N.H. 497, 507 (2018).
Based on this record, we conclude that the plaintiff has failed to show that the
superior court erred in upholding the ZBA’s decision. See Malachy Glen
Assocs., 155 N.H. at 105.
The plaintiff next argues that the superior court erred in upholding the
board’s decision denying its request to present additional evidence, either at a
continued hearing or a rehearing. The plaintiff asserts that the board violated
Part I, Article 1 of the State Constitution by unreasonably failing to provide it
with a full and fair opportunity to respond to the board’s concerns. We have
recognized that, in furtherance of Part I, Article 1 of our State Constitution,
municipalities have an obligation to assist persons seeking approval under
zoning ordinances. Richmond Co., Inc. v. City of Concord, 149 N.H. 312, 314-
15 (2003). A board’s actions in aiding an applicant must be reasonable. Id. at
316.
The plaintiff’s attorney stated at the public hearing, in response to
questions from the board, that the plaintiff had presented all evidence available
to it on the issue of traffic congestion. After the board entered a deliberative
session and started voting on a motion to deny the special exception, the
plaintiff’s attorney offered to “come back with a traffic study.” The board
denied the request and continued with the vote.
The purpose of a deliberative session is to decide the issues before the
board. See Richmond, 149 N.H. at 316. The superior court ruled that the
board’s refusal to allow the plaintiff to provide additional information, after
having entered a deliberative session and started to vote, was not unreasonable
and did not constitute a failure to fulfill its constitutional obligations. Based
on this record, we conclude that the plaintiff has failed to show that the
2
superior court erred in its decision. See Malachy Glen Assocs., 155 N.H. at
105.
The plaintiff also argues that the superior court erred in affirming the
board’s decision to deny its request for a rehearing. “A rehearing is not a
matter of right, and may be granted by the ZBA when in its opinion good
reason supports it.” McDonald v. Town of Effingham Zoning Bd. of
Adjustment, 152 N.H. 171, 174 (2005) (quotation omitted); see RSA 677:2
(2016). The superior court found that the plaintiff offered to present a different
expert from the same engineering firm to speak about the same conclusions,
using the same traffic data manual. Based on this record, we conclude that
the plaintiff has failed to show that the superior court erred in affirming the
board’s decision denying its request for a rehearing.
In light of our decision affirming the superior court’s ruling regarding
traffic congestion, we need not address whether the plaintiff met the other
requirements for a special exception. See McKibbin, 149 N.H. at 61 (plaintiff
must present sufficient evidence to support favorable findings on all
requirements for a special exception).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3