THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0725, Nelson Salazar Orellana & a. v.
Skyview Estates, LLC & a., the court on April 10, 2026, issued
the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Nelson Salazar Orellana, appeals orders of the
Superior Court (Temple, J.) granting summary judgment to the defendants,
Skyview Estates, LLC (Skyview), Elkridge Construction, LLC (Elkridge),
Jonathan Snyder d/b/a Solid Structures (Snyder), and John Gargasz. The
plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in granting summary judgment to the
defendants based on the court’s conclusion that the defendants did not owe the
plaintiff a duty of care. We affirm.
The following facts are derived from the trial court’s summary judgment
orders or are otherwise established by the record. The plaintiff was injured at a
large construction site where 64 single family homes were being built on a
property owned by Skyview. Skyview’s “primary purpose” was to develop the
project, and it accordingly “was responsible for obtaining the required
engineering plans, approvals, land acquisition and infrastructure development
for the project.” (Quotation omitted.) Gargasz is Skyview’s managing member.
Skyview hired Elkridge as the general contractor for the construction
project. There was no written contract between Skyview and Elkridge. Gargasz
is also the managing member of Elkridge. Elkridge hired Tom Ireland to
manage the project. During construction, Gargasz would visit the construction
site once a week, and he met with Ireland each week to discuss the status of
the construction.
Elkridge, through Ireland, hired Snyder as a subcontractor to frame
some of the homes in the development. After Snyder completed the framing for
at least two homes in the development, he agreed to frame the house that was
being built on Lot 54. Snyder was too busy to do the framing himself, however,
so he asked another framer, Gary Stewart, to complete the framing on Lot 54.
Stewart agreed, but he too was unable to perform the framing on Lot 54, so he
asked the plaintiff’s employer, JSH Construction (JSH), to do the work. JSH’s
owner, Jose Hernandez, agreed on the condition that Stewart allow JSH to use
Stewart’s telehandler1 to complete the framing, and Stewart agreed.2
JSH began its work on Lot 54, where Hernandez was the plaintiff’s on-
site supervisor. The day of the plaintiff’s injury, Hernandez was operating
Stewart’s telehandler to raise a pre-constructed wall into place. Hernandez
directed the plaintiff to stand underneath the wall while it was raised by the
telehandler and use a nail gun to secure the wall into place. The plaintiff
objected because he was concerned about his safety, but Hernandez told him
to proceed as instructed. While the plaintiff was standing underneath the wall
as it was suspended in the air by the telehandler, the wall fell and landed on
the plaintiff. The plaintiff was paralyzed as a result.
The plaintiff brought negligence claims against the defendants. The
defendants moved for summary judgment, each arguing that they owed no
duty of care to the plaintiff. Following hearings on the motions, the trial court
granted each defendant’s motion. The trial court denied the plaintiff’s motions
for reconsideration and this appeal followed.
On appeal, the plaintiff asserts that the trial court erred in granting
summary judgment to the defendants after ruling that the defendants owed
him no duty of care. We address the plaintiff’s arguments pertaining to each
defendant in turn.
When reviewing a trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider
the affidavits and other evidence, and inferences properly drawn from them, in
the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Sabinson v. Trustees of
Dartmouth College, 160 N.H. 452, 455 (2010). If this review does not reveal
any genuine issues of material fact, i.e., facts that would affect the outcome of
the litigation, and if the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law,
we will affirm. Id. We review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts
de novo. Id.
To recover for negligence, a plaintiff must demonstrate that the
defendant owed a duty to the plaintiff, that the defendant breached that duty,
and that the breach proximately caused injury to the plaintiff. Grady v. Jones
Lang LaSalle Constr. Co., 171 N.H. 203, 207 (2018). Absent a duty, there is no
negligence. Id. When charged with determining whether a duty exists in a
particular case, we necessarily encounter the broader, more fundamental
question of whether the plaintiff’s interests are entitled to legal protection
against the defendant’s conduct. Id. When making this determination, we
1 “A telehandler is a large, telescopic forklift.” Eaton v. J. H. Findorff & Son, Inc., 1 F.4th 508,
510 n.1 (7th Cir. 2021).
2 The plaintiff also filed a claim against Stewart that was settled prior to this appeal.
2
consider whether the societal importance of protecting the plaintiff’s interests
outweighs the importance of immunizing the defendant from extended liability.
Id. Whether a duty exists in a particular case is a question of law. Id.
All persons have a duty to exercise reasonable care to not subject others
to an unreasonable risk of harm. Id. The existence of a duty does not arise
solely from the relationship between the parties, but also from the need for
protection against reasonably foreseeable harm. Id. Thus, in some cases, a
party’s actions give rise to a duty. Id. Parties owe a duty to those third parties
foreseeably endangered by their conduct with respect to those risks whose
likelihood and magnitude make the conduct unreasonably dangerous. Id.
We first address the plaintiff’s argument that the trial court erred in
granting summary judgment to Elkridge, the general contractor. He contends
that Elkridge owed him a duty “to maintain reasonable conditions of safety on
its construction site.” We disagree.
Generally speaking, general contractors have no duty to provide training,
equipment, or oversight to a subcontractor’s employees. See id. at 209. When,
however, a general contractor through its own acts creates a non-obvious
dangerous condition on the premises from which harm may foreseeably result,
it has a duty to other workers, including a subcontractor’s employees, “to
maintain reasonable conditions of safety” on the premises. Id.; see Butler v.
King, 99 N.H. 150, 152 (1954).
Here, the trial court found that Elkridge did not owe the plaintiff a duty
of care to prevent his injury because there was no evidence that Elkridge
created a non-obvious dangerous condition on the property that led to the
plaintiff’s injury. See Grady, 171 N.H. at 209. The plaintiff does not argue on
appeal that Elkridge created a dangerous condition on the property. He avers,
however, that the trial court should have also analyzed “whether or how
Elkridge maintained safe conditions on the site or its knowledge of the unsafe
conditions thereon.” In support of this assertion, he points to Butler, where we
stated that the general contractor defendants “had a duty to maintain
reasonable conditions of safety” at the construction site. Butler, 99 N.H. at
150, 152. He suggests that Butler, and our subsequent discussion of its
holding in Grady, demonstrate that the creation of a dangerous condition is not
the only way that a general contractor may be liable for a subcontractor’s
employee’s injury.
We explained in Grady, however, that “the [general contractor]
defendants’ duty in Butler arose from their creation of a dangerous condition
on the premises” through their construction activities, “not from [their]
supervisory role.” Grady, 171 N.H. at 209-10. In contrast, as the trial court
here determined, the plaintiff’s injury was “caused by his own employer’s
3