THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0073, State of New Hampshire v. Dale E.
Holloway, Jr., the court on June 17, 2026, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The
defendant, Dale E. Holloway, Jr., appeals his convictions, following a jury trial
in Superior Court (Temple, J.), on one count of attempted murder, see RSA
629:1 (2016); RSA 630:1-a, I (2016), one count of being a felon in possession of
a dangerous weapon, see RSA 159:3 (2014); see also RSA 159:3 (2023)
(language unchanged), two counts of first degree assault, see RSA 631:1, I
(2016), one count of second degree assault, see RSA 631:2, I(b) (2016), and one
count of simple assault, see RSA 631:2-a (2016). The defendant argues that
the trial court erred by: (1) denying his motion for a change of venue; (2) failing
to order a competency evaluation; (3) excluding his testimony about his prior
convictions; (4) failing to instruct the jury on the definition of “felony”; (5)
concluding there was sufficient evidence to support the felon in possession
conviction; (6) sentencing him in absentia; and (7) imposing an extended term
of imprisonment. We affirm.
I. Background
The jury could have found the following facts, or they are supported by
the record. In October 2019, there was a wedding at a church in Pelham.
Following the wedding, the church had a memorial service scheduled. The
memorial service was for the defendant’s stepfather, who allegedly had been
murdered by the groom’s son.
Near the end of the wedding ceremony, the defendant entered the church
and sat in a pew. He then walked towards the altar, pulled a gun out of his
pocket, and aimed it at the bishop who was officiating the wedding. The
defendant shot the bishop in his upper chest. The defendant fired another
shot, which hit the bride’s arm. He tried to fire again, but the gun jammed.
The defendant hit the groom over the head with the gun. A wedding guest
wrestled the gun out of the defendant’s hands, and the gun fell to the floor.
This wedding guest and an employee of the church brought the defendant to
the ground. The groom grabbed the defendant and held onto his legs. Several
wedding guests joined in holding the defendant down until police arrived and
arrested him.
A grand jury later indicted the defendant on two counts of attempted
murder, one count of being a felon in possession of a firearm, and alternative
charges of first and second degree assault. The defendant was charged by
complaint with simple assault. In the time leading up to trial, the defendant
vacillated between having appointed counsel and representing himself. During
his trial, the defendant represented himself, with standby counsel present.
In the four years between the defendant’s arrest and the start of trial, the
defendant, both while represented by counsel and while representing himself,
filed several motions and participated in numerous status hearings. The filings
relevant to this appeal include: (1) the defendant’s objection to the State’s
notice of intent to seek an extended term of imprisonment based upon the
defendant’s prior criminal convictions; (2) the defendant’s motion for a change
of venue; and (3) the defendant’s motion to dismiss due to the court’s failure to
investigate his competency.
The defendant pleaded not guilty by reason of insanity. The trial court
split the trial into three phases: first, the jury would consider the defendant’s
guilt on each of the charges; second, if the jury found during the first phase
that the defendant possessed a firearm, it would then consider whether the
defendant had previously been convicted of a felony; and third, the jury would
determine whether the defendant was insane when he committed the criminal
acts. After the State rested its case during the guilt phase, the court denied
the defendant’s motion to dismiss the charges. The jury found the defendant
guilty on six of the seven charges.
The trial then proceeded to the second phase. Having already found that
the defendant possessed a firearm, to convict the defendant for being a felon in
possession, the jury had to determine whether the defendant had previously
been convicted of a felony. The jury answered in the affirmative.
The trial then moved to the third phase. The jury was asked to
determine whether the defendant was insane at the time he committed the
criminal acts. The jury concluded that he was not. The court denied the
defendant’s motion to set the verdicts aside.
Seventy-two days before the sentencing hearing, the defendant filed a
motion to continue the sentencing hearing, arguing that the New Hampshire
Department of Corrections was interfering with his access to legal work and his
ability to prepare for sentencing. The trial court denied the motion. On the
day of the sentencing hearing, the defendant was absent from the courtroom.
Based upon reports from the sheriff’s department and the Department of
Corrections that the defendant refused transport and expressed a desire to be
sentenced in absentia, the court granted the State’s motion to sentence the
defendant in absentia. After determining that the extended term sentences
proposed by the State were “appropriate, proper, and [had] legal authority,” the
2
court sentenced the defendant on his attempted murder, first degree assault,
felon in possession, and simple assault convictions. This appeal followed.
II. Preservation
The State argues that the defendant failed to preserve any of his
arguments on appeal. The defendant concedes that his jury instruction
argument is not preserved, but otherwise contends that he preserved each
issue on appeal. “Generally, we do not consider issues raised on appeal that
were not presented to the trial court.” State v. Batista-Salva, 171 N.H. 818,
822 (2019). “This preservation requirement, expressed in both our case law
and Supreme Court Rule 16(3)(b), reflects the general policy that trial forums
should have an opportunity to rule on issues and to correct errors before they
are presented to the appellate court.” Id. “The defendant, as the appealing
party, bears the burden of demonstrating that he specifically raised the
arguments articulated in his appellate brief before the trial court.” Id.
To the extent the defendant’s arguments are not preserved, he raises
them as plain error. “The plain error rule allows us to exercise our discretion
to correct errors not raised before the trial court.” Id. at 824. “The rule is used
sparingly, its use limited to those circumstances in which a miscarriage of
justice would otherwise result.” Id. “For us to find plain error: (1) there must
be error; (2) the error must be plain; and (3) the error must affect substantial
rights.” Id. “If all three of these conditions are met, we may then exercise our
discretion to correct a forfeited error only if the error meets a fourth criterion:
the error must seriously affect the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of
judicial proceedings.” Id. “The defendant bears the burden of demonstrating
plain error.” Id. We will address the preservation of each of the defendant’s
arguments in turn.
III. Motion for Change of Venue
A. Background
The record establishes the following facts. In September 2021, the
defendant filed a motion for a change of venue and requested a hearing. He
contended that “a fair and impartial trial cannot be had in the Hillsborough
County Superior Court,” and that “the case has been excessively televised and
broadcasted.” (Bolding, capitalization, and underlining omitted.) The State
objected on October 10. The defendant submitted a reply that was dated
October 16, but the court did not receive it until October 22. Without a
hearing and before receiving the defendant’s reply, the trial court denied the
defendant’s motion on October 21. The court reasoned that the defendant had
“not alleged a level of adverse, prejudicial and inflammatory publicity that
justifies a change in venue,” and that he “only focused on the quantity of the
publicity,” rather than the adverse nature of it.
3