THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0345, Jeffrey F. Stiegler v. Grafton
County Commissioners, the court on March 28, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Jeffrey F. Stiegler, the former High Sheriff of
Grafton County (sheriff), appeals the order of the Superior Court (Leonard, J.),
dismissing his complaint for declaratory and injunctive relief against the
defendants, the Grafton County Commissioners (commissioners), arguing that
dismissal was improper because he alleged sufficient grounds for the relief
requested. We affirm.
In reviewing an order granting a motion to dismiss, we assume the truth
of the facts alleged in the plaintiff’s pleadings and construe all reasonable
inferences in the light most favorable to the plaintiff. Boucher v. Town of
Moultonborough, 176 N.H. 271, 273 (2023). The standard of review is whether
the plaintiff’s allegations are reasonably susceptible of a construction that
would permit recovery. Id. This threshold inquiry involves testing the facts
alleged in the pleadings against the applicable law. Id. We will uphold the
granting of the motion if the pleaded facts do not constitute a basis for legal
relief. Id. at 274.
The plaintiff’s complaint details numerous grievances regarding actions
of the commissioners and the Grafton County human resources director in the
management of the sheriff’s department. We have held that a county sheriff
“has exclusive authority to control the provision of law enforcement services
within his department and the terms and conditions of employment of deputy
sheriffs.” Linehan v. Rockingham County Comm’rs, 151 N.H. 276, 280 (2004)
(quotation omitted). However, “[n]on-deputy positions within the Sheriff’s
Department, such as clerks, dispatchers and other support employees, would
come under county-wide administrative personnel policies and procedures
governing general terms and conditions of their employment.” Id. (quotation
omitted). Nevertheless, “a policy, procedure or action instituted by the
commissioners may not directly interfere with the sheriff and his deputies’
performance of their law enforcement duties.” Id. at 282.
The plaintiff sought a ruling that the defendants’ actions unlawfully
interfered with his authority to conduct law enforcement activities and manage
his deputies. He also sought an order prohibiting the defendants from
engaging in such behaviors in the future. We conclude that the trial court
correctly ruled that the plaintiff’s grievances arise from the defendants’ lawful
management of non-deputy positions in the sheriff’s department, and that he
has failed to allege facts showing that the defendants’ policies, procedures, or
actions have interfered with his authority to conduct law enforcement activities
or manage his deputies. Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court correctly
ruled that the plaintiff failed to state a claim for declaratory or injunctive relief.
See Boucher, 176 N.H. at 273.
The defendants’ request for attorney’s fees related to this appeal is
denied. See Sup. Ct. R. 23.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett and Donovan, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2