THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Personnel Appeals Board
Case No. 2024-0511
Citation: Appeal of Cass, 2025 N.H. 51
APPEAL OF CLAUDIA CASS
(New Hampshire Personnel Appeals Board)
Argued: September 16, 2025
Opinion Issued: December 3, 2025
Milner & Krupski, PLLC, of Concord (John S. Krupski on the brief and
orally), for the petitioner.
John M. Formella, attorney general, and Anthony J. Galdieri, solicitor
general (Mary A. Triick, senior assistant attorney general, on the brief and
orally), for the New Hampshire Department of Corrections.
MACDONALD, C.J.
[¶1] The petitioner, Claudia Cass, appeals a decision of the New
Hampshire Personnel Appeals Board (PAB) upholding a decision of the New
Hampshire Department of Corrections (DOC) to terminate her employment as a
corrections officer. The petitioner argues that the PAB: (1) failed to consider
whether her termination violated certain statutes; and (2) made logically
inconsistent or unsupported findings in its order. We vacate and remand.
I. Background
[¶2] The record supports the following facts. The petitioner was hired by
the DOC as a corrections officer in 2006. In 2022, the DOC had low staffing
levels. On December 16 to December 17, 2022, the petitioner was working a
shift (the December shift) at the New Hampshire State Prison for Men in
Concord (the prison), and she believed that the staffing levels were at a “‘critical
minimum.’”
[¶3] The petitioner emailed the prison warden on December 20, reporting
that she believed the staffing levels at the prison had consistently been below
the minimum required by policy. She told the warden that “policy dictates
when we are below minimum, we are in lockdown,” and that:
Residents adjust better to change when they know it is coming. I
recommend they are informed that there will be a change in the
chow and medication schedule before the weekend. Going forward
I will not be releasing them when we cannot meet the critical
minimum staffing. It is not safe, it violates policy, and it is
irresponsible.
[¶4] The warden initiated an investigation into the petitioner’s actions,
including the petitioner’s intent to follow certain procedures if a low staffing
situation arose. As part of the investigation, the petitioner met with two DOC
officers to discuss the contents of her email. The petitioner told the officers at
that meeting that, if the staffing levels were the same on the upcoming
weekend as they were during the December shift, “she would not be opening
the residents’ doors and would lockdown the unit.” The officers explained to
the petitioner that, as a corrections officer, she was not authorized to make
unilateral decisions to lock down units and that higher levels of leadership
needed to make those decisions. The officers then asked the petitioner what
she planned to do if given a direct order to send residents to get medication or
food, and she said that she would not follow such an order if she believed it to
be unsafe or a violation of policy. The petitioner was suspended with pay
pending the outcome of the investigation, and her employment was later
terminated.
[¶5] The petitioner appealed the termination decision to the PAB. The
petitioner argued, among other things, that her termination was unlawful and
unreasonable, and in violation of RSA chapter 275-E (2023), New Hampshire’s
Whistleblowers’ Protection Act, and RSA chapter 98-E (2023), which protects
public employees’ rights to freedom of speech and expression. The PAB upheld
the petitioner’s termination.
[¶6] The PAB concluded that it lacked jurisdiction to consider issues
raised under RSA chapter 275-E and RSA chapter 98-E, and that the petitioner
2
failed to prove that her termination was “unjust, unfair, or contrary to law.”
The PAB found that the petitioner did not fail to obey an oral order, nor did she
attempt, aid, or conspire to commit an offense in violation of the DOC’s rules. It
also found, however, that the petitioner violated numerous DOC policies and
procedures and administrative rules. See N.H. Admin. R., Per 1003.08. The
PAB explained that the petitioner violated these policies and rules because she:
(1) failed to follow proper prison procedures and notify the shift commander of
her safety concerns during the December shift; and (2) demonstrated an
unwillingness to follow standard prison procedures in the future if she
determined that the staffing level was dangerously low. The petitioner
unsuccessfully moved for reconsideration. This appeal followed.
II. Analysis
[¶7] Our review of the PAB’s decision is governed by RSA 541:13 (2021).
See Appeal of N.H. Div. of State Police, 175 N.H. 229, 234 (2022). The
petitioner, as the appealing party, has the burden to show that the PAB’s
decision “is clearly unreasonable or unlawful.” RSA 541:13. The PAB’s
findings of fact “shall be deemed to be prima facie lawful and reasonable.” Id.
We will not vacate or set aside the PAB’s decision except for errors of law,
unless we are satisfied, by a clear preponderance of the evidence, that its order
is unjust or unreasonable. See N.H. Div. of State Police, 175 N.H. at 234.
However, we review the PAB’s interpretations of statutes and administrative
rules de novo. Id. When interpreting both statutes and administrative rules,
we ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used, looking at the
rule or statutory scheme as a whole. Id.
[¶8] The petitioner argues that the PAB erred because it failed to consider
whether her termination violated RSA chapter 275-E and/or RSA chapter 98-E.
The DOC counters that the PAB did not fail to consider the legality of the
petitioner’s termination, but “simply declined to make any specific, enforceable
finding under RSA 275-E and RSA 98-E:2” or to “formally adjudicate claims
[under] RSA 275-E and RSA 98-E.” We agree with the petitioner.
[¶9] The PAB concluded that, although the petitioner raised issues under
those statutes, it “is beyond the jurisdiction of this Board to consider and make
any such determinations.” At the time the PAB rendered its decision, RSA 21-
I:58 (2020) provided that any full-time non-probationary employee could appeal
termination decisions to the PAB, and:
If the [PAB] finds that the action complained of was taken by the
appointing authority for any reason related to politics, religion,
age, sex, gender identity, race, color, ethnic background, marital
status, or disabling condition, or on account of the person’s sexual
orientation, or was taken in violation of a statute or of rules
adopted by the director, the employee shall be reinstated to the
3
employee’s former position or a position of like seniority, status,
and pay.
(Emphasis added.) Under the plain language of the statute, the PAB “shall”
reinstate an employee if it finds that the action complained of was “in violation
of a statute.” Id. Therefore, the PAB has statutory authority to make a finding
as to whether the DOC’s personnel action violated RSA chapter 275-E and/or
RSA chapter 98-E.
[¶10] The DOC nonetheless asserted at oral argument that — although
the PAB’s order is “confusing on its face” — the PAB did consider whether the
petitioner’s termination was in violation of those statutes, and that it was
simply saying in its order that it did not have jurisdiction to adjudicate civil
actions. The DOC points to the PAB’s order denying the petitioner’s motion for
reconsideration to support this position.
[¶11] The interpretation of an agency’s order is a question of law, which
we review de novo. See Appeal of Langenfeld, 160 N.H. 85, 89 (2010). In
construing an agency’s order, we look to the plain meaning of the words used.
See id. We construe subsidiary clauses so as not to conflict with the primary
purpose of the agency’s decree. See id. As a general matter, an agency’s order
is to be construed with reference to the issues it was meant to decide. See id.
[¶12] After the PAB issued its order, the petitioner filed a motion for
reconsideration, arguing in part that the PAB erred by failing to consider
whether her termination was in violation of RSA chapter 275-E and RSA
chapter 98-E. The DOC objected, arguing that while the PAB “can certainly
consider all the relevant underlying factual claims when determining if [the
petitioner’s] termination was unlawful or unjust,” the PAB “lacks jurisdiction to
formally adjudicate claims under RSA 275-E and RSA 98-E” and the petitioner
must file a civil suit to make such determinations. The PAB adopted this
reasoning in its order denying the petitioner’s motion for reconsideration.
[¶13] The flaw with the DOC’s and the PAB’s reasoning is that the
petitioner never filed a civil suit with the PAB or asked the PAB to “formally
adjudicate claims” under those statutes; instead, she asked the PAB to
consider whether her termination violated those statutes because any such
violation would require the PAB to reinstate her employment. See RSA 21-I:58.
Neither of the PAB’s orders addressed the petitioner’s arguments on that point.
Thus, contrary to its conclusion that it lacked jurisdiction to make such
determinations, the PAB had authority and was therefore required to consider
whether the personnel action on appeal violated those statutes for the limited
purpose of determining whether to reinstate an employee. See id.; cf. Appeal of
Booker, 139 N.H. 337, 343 (1995) (reversing a decision of the PAB because it
erroneously concluded that an employee’s actions were unprotected under RSA
98-E:1). Because the PAB incorrectly concluded that it lacked jurisdiction to
4
consider whether the petitioner’s termination violated RSA chapter 275-E or
RSA chapter 98-E, it erred as a matter of law. Accordingly, we vacate its order
and remand for the PAB to consider whether the petitioner’s termination was in
violation of either or both of those statutes.
[¶14] The petitioner also argues that the PAB’s findings regarding her
policy and rule violations were inconsistent or unsupported by the record. The
PAB found that the petitioner violated numerous DOC policies and procedures
and administrative rules. See N.H. Admin. R., Per 1003.08. Our standard of
review of a board’s decision presupposes that the board has made findings that
provide an adequate record of its reasoning sufficient for a reviewing court to
render meaningful review. Appeal of Panaggio, 172 N.H. 13, 18 (2019); see
RSA 541-A:35 (2021). However, it is unclear from the PAB’s order which facts
it relied upon in support of each of its determinations. See Appeal of Walker,
144 N.H. 181, 184 (1999) (explaining that “we are unable to intelligently review
[a board’s] decision when it does not provide an adequate basis for its
conclusions,” and remanding for the board to make “appropriate factual
findings” because we could not “discern from the board’s order the facts upon
which it relied [to support its] determination”). Rather than explaining what
conduct gave rise to each policy violation and how the petitioner’s conduct
violated those policies, the PAB’s order, without any analysis, provides only a
narrative summary of the petitioner’s conduct during the December shift and
the investigation and then lists numerous policies, procedures, and rules that
it found were violated. Thus, “we are left to speculate” as to both which facts
the PAB relied upon in support of each policy and rule violation and its
reasoning as to how the petitioner violated each of those policies and rules.
Panaggio, 172 N.H. at 19. Accordingly, we conclude that the PAB has failed to
sufficiently explain its reasoning, and we vacate its findings and remand for the
PAB to reconsider and clarify its order. See Petition of Support Enforcement
Officers, 147 N.H. 1, 10 (2001) (vacating PAB’s decision when it “failed to
provide [this court] with an adequate basis upon which to review its decision,”
and “therefore failed to satisfy the requirements of RSA 541-A:35”).
[¶15] In sum, we conclude that the PAB erred as a matter of law in
applying RSA 21-I:58. We also conclude that the PAB’s findings were
insufficiently explained. Accordingly, we vacate the PAB’s order and remand
for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. We have considered the
parties’ remaining arguments and conclude that they do not warrant further
discussion. See Vogel v. Vogel, 137 N.H. 321, 322 (1993); Sup. Ct. R. 25(8).
Vacated and remanded.
DONOVAN, COUNTWAY, and GOULD, JJ., concurred.
5