THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0333, State of New Hampshire v. Jamie J.
Judkins, the court on September 25, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Jamie J. Judkins, appeals his conviction,
following a jury trial in Superior Court (MacLeod, J.), for driving after being
certified a habitual offender. See RSA 262:23, I (2024). The defendant argues
that the trial court erred by admitting, over his hearsay objection, testimony
that he had not requested a hearing to decertify him as a habitual offender.
See RSA 262:24 (2024), N.H. Admin. R., Saf-C 1017.06, 1017.07. The
defendant further argues that the trial court erred by denying his request to
instruct the jury on the lesser-included offense of driving after revocation or
suspension. See RSA 263:64 (2024) (amended 2024). We affirm.
We first address whether the trial court erred by admitting testimony
that the defendant had not requested a decertification hearing. “Hearsay” is “a
statement that: (1) the declarant does not make while testifying at the current
trial or hearing; and (2) a party offers in evidence to prove the truth of the
matter asserted in the statement.” N.H. R. Ev. 801(c). A “statement” is “a
person’s oral assertion, written assertion, or nonverbal conduct, if the person
intended it as an assertion.” N.H. R. Ev. 801(a). “Hearsay” is generally not
admissible absent a statute or court rule to the contrary. N.H. R. Ev. 802; see
State v. Dana, 175 N.H. 27, 32 (2022). “We accord the trial court considerable
deference in determining the admissibility of evidence, and we will not disturb
its decision absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion.” Dana, 175 N.H. at
32 (quotation omitted). To establish an unsustainable exercise of discretion,
the defendant must show that the ruling was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Id.
In this case, the chief hearings examiner for the New Hampshire
Department of Safety Bureau of Hearings, who is a custodian of motor vehicle
records for the department, see RSA 260:14, II(b) (2024), testified that he
certified the defendant as a habitual offender following a hearing in 2018,
resulting in the revocation of the defendant’s license, see RSA 262:19, I, III,
that he read the certification order aloud to the defendant and gave him a copy
of it at the hearing, and that he discussed the “decertification” process with the
defendant at the hearing. “Decertification” is the process by which a driver
whose license has been revoked pursuant to a habitual offender certification
order may seek restoration of the driver’s license after the revocation period
specified in the certification order has expired. See RSA 262:19, III, :24; N.H.
Admin. R., Saf-C 1017.06, 1017.07. It requires the certified habitual offender
to request a decertification hearing in writing, following which the hearings
examiner may either grant or deny decertification. The certification order in
this case specifically ordered the defendant “NOT to drive a motor vehicle on
the ways of this state until such time as you have been decertified following a
Hearing, the Director of Motor Vehicles has restored your license/operating
privileges in writing, and you hold a valid license.” All decertification hearings
are recorded and saved by the Bureau of Hearings.
Subject to the defendant’s hearsay objection, the witness testified that he
“check[ed] the records to see if [the defendant] had ever requested a
decertification hearing.” The trial court overruled the objection, observing, in
part, that testimony that the witness checked “the records” and did not find a
request for a decertification hearing therein would not constitute testimony
concerning an out-of-court “statement.” In response to the question whether
the defendant “had asked for a decertification hearing,” the witness then
testified, “[t]o my knowledge no request has been made.”
We conclude that the trial court did not unsustainably exercise its
discretion. The witness’s testimony established that he is, by statute, a
custodian of motor vehicle records, that decertification requires a driver to
request a decertification hearing in writing, and that all decertification hearings
are recorded and saved. Testimony that the witness reviewed “the records” to
determine if the defendant had submitted a written request for a decertification
hearing, and that, to the witness’s knowledge, the defendant did not request
such a hearing, does not constitute testimony concerning an out-of-court “oral
assertion,” “written assertion,” or “nonverbal conduct . . . intended . . . as an
assertion.” N.H. R. Ev. 801(a), (c). Accordingly, we agree with the State that,
as a matter of law, the testimony was not “hearsay.”
We next address whether the trial court erred by denying the defendant’s
request for a lesser-included-offense instruction. “A defendant is entitled to
have the jury consider a lesser-included offense when ‘the lesser offense is
embraced within the legal definition of the greater offense’ and ‘the evidence
adduced at trial provides a rational basis for a finding of guilt on the lesser
offense rather than the greater offense.’” State v. Gauntt, 154 N.H. 204, 206
(2006) (brackets and ellipsis omitted) (quoting State v. Watkins, 148 N.H. 760,
765 (2002)). Driving after suspension or revocation is embraced within the
legal definition of driving after certification as a habitual offender, and thus,
the issue in this case is whether the evidence could provide a rational basis for
convicting the defendant of driving after suspension or revocation rather than
driving after certification as a habitual offender. Gauntt, 154 N.H. at 206-07.
2
Conviction on a charge of driving after certification as a habitual offender
requires proof “(1) that an habitual offender order barring the defendant from
driving a motor vehicle was in force; (2) that the defendant drove a motor
vehicle on the ways of this State while that order remained in effect; and (3)
that the defendant did so with knowledge of his status as an habitual offender.”
Id. at 207 (quotation omitted). Conviction on a misdemeanor charge of
operating after suspension or revocation requires proof “(1) that the defendant’s
license to drive had been suspended or revoked; (2) that the defendant drove a
motor vehicle after such suspension; and (3) that the defendant did so with
knowledge of revocation or suspension of his license to drive.” Watkins, 148
N.H. at 766 (quotation omitted). Here, the defendant argues that the evidence
provided a rational basis to find that the defendant did not drive with
knowledge of his status as a habitual offender, likening the case to Gauntt.
In Gauntt, the defendant testified at trial that (1) although he was aware
that his license was suspended, he thought that his habitual offender status
had been “wiped out” due to his prior incarceration for driving after being
certified a habitual offender; (2) a division of motor vehicles employee advised
him on how to reinstate his suspended license, but did not mention his
habitual offender status; and (3) he had memory problems, had little
recollection of his certification hearing, and did not understand that his
habitual offender status would continue until removed in writing by the
department of safety. Gauntt, 154 N.H. at 205-06. Based on this testimony,
we held that there was a rational basis for the jury to have found that the
defendant did not subjectively know that he was still certified a habitual
offender at the time of his arrest for driving while certified a habitual offender,
and thus, that the trial court erred by denying his request for a lesser-
included-offense instruction. Id. at 207-08. In so holding, we distinguished
Watkins on the basis that the defendant in Watkins offered no evidence or
testimony regarding his state of mind. See id. at 207.
In Watkins, the defendant likewise argued that he was entitled to a
lesser-included-offense instruction because he had challenged the State’s proof
that he knew of his habitual offender status. See Watkins, 148 N.H. at 766. In
rejecting this argument, we emphasized that the sole license revocation of
which there was any evidence at trial was the one imposed as a result of the
defendant’s certification as a habitual offender. See id. We further observed
that “[t]he only evidence that formed a basis for the defendant’s knowledge of
the revocation was that he was served with notice of his certification hearing,
attended the hearing, and was served with a copy of the certification order
indicating that his license was revoked.” Id. Under these circumstances, we
reasoned that “the only evidence upon which the jury could rationally find that
the defendant knew his license had been revoked also supported the finding
that the defendant knew of his status as a habitual offender,” and did not
3