THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0644, Lise Mahoney & a. v. Samantha L.
Anderson & a., the court on November 7, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendants, Samantha L. McHugh (formerly Anderson)
and Beau McHugh, appeal a final decree of the Superior Court (Kennedy, J.)
declaring that the common boundary between their land and land owned by
the plaintiffs, Lise Mahoney and Peter Mahoney, is accurately depicted in plats
the defendants and their predecessors in title had recorded at the registry of
deeds, and quieting the parties’ titles accordingly. On appeal, the defendants
raise a number of arguments challenging the trial court’s decision, in granting
the plaintiffs’ motion for reconsideration, not to require the plaintiffs to file a
corrected copy of a plat they had recorded that erroneously depicted a utility
pole as being located on the boundary, but instead to require the recording of a
certified copy of the final decree, which expressly declared that the plaintiffs’
plat erroneously depicted the location of the utility pole. We affirm.
The superior court’s authority to quiet title or remove a cloud on title is
equitable. See HSBC Bank USA v. MacMillan, 160 N.H. 375, 377 (2010); Dowd
v. Gagnon, 104 N.H. 360, 362 (1962). The trial court “has broad and flexible
equitable powers which allow it to shape and adjust the precise relief to the
requirements of the particular situation.” Benoit v. Cerasaro, 169 N.H. 10, 20
(2016) (quotation omitted).
We review the trial court’s decision to grant an equitable remedy for an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. Id. at 19. Likewise, we review the trial
court’s decision on a motion for reconsideration for an unsustainable exercise
of discretion. See Town of Bartlett v. Furlong, 168 N.H. 171, 177 (2015). In so
doing, we examine whether the record establishes an objective basis that is
sufficient to sustain the trial court’s discretionary judgments. See id.; Benoit,
169 N.H. at 20. To establish an unsustainable exercise of discretion, the party
challenging the trial court’s decision has the burden to demonstrate that the
ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of that party’s
case. See Benoit, 169 N.H. at 20; Furlong, 168 N.H. at 177.
The record in this case establishes that, following a years-long dispute
over the location of their common boundary, see Mahoney v. Anderson, No.
2021-0271 (non-precedential order), 2022 WL 10268157 (N.H. Oct. 18, 2022),
the parties agreed that (1) two plats recorded at the registry of deeds, one by
the defendants’ predecessors-in-title referred to by the parties as the “RSL
Plat,” and one by the defendants referred to by the parties as the “PLS Plat,”
accurately depicted the location of the boundary; and (2) a plat recorded by the
plaintiffs referred to by the parties as the “Franklin Plat” erroneously depicted a
utility pole as being located on that boundary. Additionally, the plaintiffs
represented that they had “no objection to recording a corrected copy of the
Franklin Plat . . . provided [that their] surveyor is amenable to preparing such a
plat.” Thereafter, the trial court entered a decree that (1) declared the location
of the common boundary to be accurately depicted in the RSL Plat and PLS
Plat; (2) declared that the Franklin Plat “erroneously depicts a utility pole on
the Common Boundary”; (3) quieted the parties’ respective titles consistent
with the common boundary depicted in the RSL Plat and PLS Plat; and (4)
required the plaintiffs to file a corrected plat that included a notation stating
that it “corrects and supersedes [the Franklin Plat], which erroneously depicted
a utility pole on the common boundary between” the respective lots.
The plaintiffs timely moved for reconsideration, submitting evidence that,
immediately after the trial court issued the decree, they met with their surveyor
who was unwilling to prepare a corrected plat. As a result, the plaintiffs were
unable at that time to file a corrected plat. They argued, however, that a
corrected plat was not required to quiet the parties’ titles because, once
recorded, the trial court’s decree would “forever control the construction of the
Franklin Plat.” In granting the motion, the trial court issued a new decree that
was identical to the earlier decree except that it: (1) included language
expressly vacating the earlier decree; (2) did not include the language requiring
the plaintiffs to file a corrected plat; and (3) required a certified copy of the
decree to be recorded at the registry of deeds pursuant to RSA 477:3-a (2024).
As the appealing parties, the defendants have the burden of
demonstrating reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014).
Based on our review of the trial court’s orders, the defendants’ arguments, the
relevant law, and the record submitted on appeal, we conclude that the
defendants have not demonstrated that the trial court’s decision to vacate the
earlier decree and to issue the new decree was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of their case. See id.; Benoit, 169 N.H. at 20;
Furlong, 168 N.H. at 177. The recording of a final decree expressly declaring
that the common boundary is accurately depicted in the RSL Plat and PLS Plat,
and that the Franklin Plat erroneously depicts a utility pole on that boundary,
will have the same effect as the recording of the contemplated corrected plat
and remove any cloud on the defendants’ title created by the erroneous plat.
See RSA 477:3-a (requiring the recording of “every court order or other
instrument which affects title to any interest in real estate,” and providing that,
once recorded, such court orders or instruments shall be effective as against
bona fide purchasers for value).
2
We have considered the defendants’ remaining arguments and have
concluded that they do not warrant further discussion. See Vogel v. Vogel, 137
N.H. 321, 322 (1993). The request in the plaintiffs’ brief for an award of
attorney’s fees incurred in defending this appeal is denied without prejudice to
filing a Rule 23 motion for an award of attorney’s fees that establishes the
amount and reasonableness of any attorney’s fees sought.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, and Gould, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3