THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0043, State of New Hampshire v. Jennifer
A. Middlemiss, the court on September 12, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). The defendant, Jennifer Middlemiss, appeals her conviction, following a
bench trial in Circuit Court (Mace, J.), on one misdemeanor count of violation of
a protective order, see RSA 173-B:9 (2022). She argues that the trial court erred
by admitting the underlying protective order as evidence, contending that the
trial court’s decision violated the rules of evidence as to judicial notice,
authentication, and hearsay. See N.H. R. Ev. 201, 801-803, 901-902. We affirm.
We review a trial court’s decision on the admissibility of evidence and the
taking of judicial notice under our unsustainable exercise of discretion standard.
State v. Letarte, 169 N.H. 455, 461 (2016); State v. Gagnon, 155 N.H. 418, 419
(2007). “In applying our unsustainable exercise of discretion standard of review,
we determine only whether the record establishes an objective basis sufficient to
sustain the discretionary judgment made.” Letarte, 169 N.H. at 461 (quotation
omitted). “Our task is not to determine whether we would have found differently,
but is only to determine whether a reasonable person could have reached the
same decision as the trial court on the basis of the evidence before it.” Id.
(quotations omitted). “For the defendant to prevail under this standard, [she]
must demonstrate that the trial court’s decision was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of [her] case.” Id. (quotation omitted).
In this case, we need not decide whether the trial court erred by taking
judicial notice of the underlying protective order because, even if we were to
assume that the trial court so erred, we agree with the State that the order was
nevertheless properly admitted into evidence as it was adequately authenticated
and did not constitute hearsay. First, with respect to authentication, we note
that the victim testified to the effect that the document proffered by the State was
the protective order that he had previously sought and received from the circuit
court. As the trial court noted, the document itself bears the signatures of two
known judicial officers, as well as other indicia of reliability. Moreover, the
defendant does not actually dispute the existence of the protective order.
Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court sustainably exercised its discretion
in finding that the underlying protective order was adequately authenticated. See
N.H. R. Ev. 901(a), (b)(1), (4), (7); State v. Stangle, 166 N.H. 407, 409-10 (2014)
(observing that the bar for authentication of evidence is not particularly high).
Second, with respect to hearsay, the record demonstrates that the State
did not seek to admit the protective order to prove the truth of the facts
supporting its issuance asserted therein; indeed, the narrative portion of the
order containing such facts was not admitted. Rather, the State sought to admit
the protective order to establish that it was the order the victim received from the
trial court, and that the terms of the order prohibited the defendant from
contacting the victim. Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court did not err in
admitting the order over the defendant’s hearsay objection, because the order is
not hearsay. See N.H. R. Ev. 801; State v. Beede, 156 N.H. 102, 105-06 (2007)
(observing that out-of-court statements that are offered as evidence of legally
operative verbal conduct are not hearsay); United States v. Boulware, 384 F.3d
794, 806 (9th Cir. 2004) (“A prior judgment is not hearsay . . . to the extent that
it is offered as legally operative verbal conduct that determined the rights and
duties of the parties.”).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2