THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0717, Appeal of New Hampshire
Department of Administrative Services, the court on March 18,
2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The
New Hampshire Department of Administrative Services (DAS) appeals an order
of the Personnel Appeals Board (PAB) that overturned the employee’s
termination and reinstated him with back pay and benefits, less mitigating
income. See RSA 273-D:3, VI (Supp. 2025); RSA 21-I:58, I (repealed 2024). On
appeal, DAS argues that RSA 273-D:3, V unconstitutionally delegates authority
to the PAB to reinstate an employee whenever the PAB deems reinstatement
“just.”1 DAS also asserts that the PAB erred by: (1) reinstating the employee,
despite declining to overturn DAS’s conclusion that he committed sexual
harassment; and (2) reversing termination without specifying an appropriate
method of alternative discipline. We affirm.
The following facts were found by the PAB or are otherwise derived from
the record. The employee, who had worked for the State for approximately
nineteen years, was a maintenance mechanic in the same building where the
complainant worked as a lab scientist. The complainant alleged that the
employee physically touched her on two occasions. On one occasion, he put
his hands on her shoulders, pressed his torso against hers, and whispered in
her ear. On another, he placed his hand on her lower back and guided her into
an elevator. The complainant also stated that the employee commonly used
“pet names” to refer to her and other female employees. The employee
admitted his use of “terms of endearment” but denied both instances of
intentional physical touching.
DAS’s investigation found that the employee had violated: (1) the State’s
Sexual Harassment Policy, by twice “engag[ing] in inappropriate touching”; and
(2) the State’s Respect and Civility in the Workplace Policy, by addressing
female employees with pet names. DAS terminated the employee, who
appealed the decision to the PAB. See RSA 273-D:3, II (Supp. 2025); RSA 21-
I:58, I (repealed 2024). Following a hearing in which the employee, the
1 At the time of the proceedings before the PAB, the language now in RSA 273-D:3, V (Supp. 2025)
was located at RSA 21-I:58, I (repealed 2024). The substance of this provision remains
unchanged.
complainant’s supervisor, and other witnesses testified, the PAB unanimously
voted to reverse the employee’s termination. In a subsequent written order, the
PAB found “that this would be a case where progressive discipline would make
a difference in employee behavior” and “that the [employee’s] termination for
his behavior was unjust and unwarranted.” The PAB therefore granted the
employee’s appeal and reinstated his employment with back pay and benefits,
less mitigating income. See RSA 273-D:3, V. DAS moved for a rehearing,
which the PAB denied. This appeal followed.
We first address DAS’s claim that RSA 273-D:3, V is an unconstitutional
delegation of legislative authority. The constitutionality of a statute is a
question of law, which we review de novo. Polonsky v. Town of Bedford, 173
N.H. 226, 230 (2020). In reviewing a legislative act, “we presume it to be
constitutional and will not declare it invalid except upon inescapable grounds.”
Id. at 231. Thus, we resolve any doubts in favor of the statute’s
constitutionality and uphold the statute “unless a clear and substantial conflict
exists between it and the constitution.” Id. “The party challenging a statute’s
constitutionality bears the burden of proof.” Id. We interpret a statute’s
language according to its plain and ordinary meaning, construing all parts of
the statute together to effectuate its overall purpose. State v. Levier, 177 N.H.
___, ___ (2026), 2026 N.H. 7, ¶11.
RSA 273-D:3, V provides, in relevant part: “In all cases, the [PAB] may
reinstate an employee or otherwise change or modify any order of the
appointing authority, or make such order as it may deem just.” DAS contends
that the portion of this statutory language permitting the PAB to issue any
order it deems “just” provides an insufficiently defined standard to guide the
PAB, thereby violating the separation of powers article of the New Hampshire
Constitution. See Appeal of Blizzard, 163 N.H. 326, 331-32 (2012).
Part I, Article 37 of the State Constitution sets forth the separation of
powers for the three branches. We have construed that provision as requiring
that “the General Court may not create and delegate duties to an
administrative agency if its commands are in such broad terms as to leave the
agency with unguided and unrestricted discretion in the assigned field of its
activity.” Id. “[A]lthough some delegation of lawmaking authority is necessary,
. . . the scope of delegations to administrative agencies should be limited to
permitting the agency to fill in the details in order to effectuate the legislative
purpose.” Guillou v. State, 127 N.H. 579, 582 (1986). Thus, “[t]o avoid the
charge of unlawfully delegated legislative power, a statute must lay down basic
standards and a reasonably definite policy for the administration of the law.”
Appeal of Blizzard, 163 N.H. at 332. When evaluating whether a statute
impermissibly delegates legislative power, we construe the statute “to
incorporate, by implication, the standards and policies” in surrounding
statutory provisions. Id. We consider whether the statute includes “express or
2
implied qualifications” to guide the agency and whether it limits “the potential
for arbitrary and unprincipled decisions.” Guillou, 127 N.H. at 581.
In Appeal of New Hampshire Division of State Police, we interpreted a
predecessor statute containing the same statutory language that is at issue in
this case. Appeal of N.H. Div. of State Police, 171 N.H. 262, 267 (2018)
(interpreting RSA 21-I:58, I (2012) (repealed 2024)). We explained that this
language “vest[s the PAB] with discretion to determine whether to grant relief
and how to craft that relief.” Id. In addition, it “does not require the PAB to
impose discipline for every violation of the administrative rules or standards of
professional conduct.” Id. at 270. DAS asserts that our discussion in Appeal
of New Hampshire Division of State Police illustrates that RSA 273-D:3, V
leaves the PAB “entirely without direction.”
Contrary to DAS’s contention, however, the term “just” conveys a specific
meaning: “[l]egally right; lawful; equitable.” Black’s Law Dictionary 1030 (12th
ed. 2024); cf. Black’s Law Dictionary 1856 (12th ed. 2024) (defining “unjust” as
“[c]ontrary to justice; not fair or reasonable”). In support of its argument, DAS
points to the statutory delegation we struck down as unconstitutionally broad
in Guillou. Guillou, 127 N.H. at 581. That provision permitted an agency
official to suspend or revoke a driver’s license “for any cause which he may
deem sufficient.” Id. at 580. We agree with the employee that unlike the
language at issue in Guillou — which lacked “any express or implied
qualifications” to guide the agency, id. at 581 — the term “just” “imposes well-
known legal principles of fairness and equity” that confine the PAB’s discretion.
We note that other New Hampshire statutes delegating authority also use the
term “just” to demarcate standards. See, e.g., RSA 4:40-a (2020) (authorizing
Governor and Executive Council to convey land underlying a body of water for
“just” consideration); RSA 374:2 (2009) (requiring that service charges levied by
a public utility “be just and reasonable”).2
Further, RSA 273-D:3, V sits within the broader framework of RSA 273-
D:3 (Supp. 2025), which governs appeals of employment decisions before the
PAB. The statutory scheme provides the PAB with additional guidance when
determining whether a disciplinary order is “just.” For example, RSA 273-D:3,
III tasks the PAB with determining whether, in an appeal from a termination or
other disciplinary action, sufficient proof demonstrates that:
(a) The disciplinary action was unlawful;
(b) The appointing authority violated the rules of the division of
personnel by imposing the disciplinary action under appeal;
(c) The disciplinary action was unwarranted by the alleged conduct
2 Indeed, the very statutory scheme governing DAS’s appeal to this court restricts us from setting
aside all decisions of administrative tribunals unless they are clearly “unjust or unreasonable.”
RSA 541:13 (2021).
3