THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0706, Jose D. Marquez v. Miraco, Inc., the
court on May 29, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Jose D. Marquez, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Will, J.) (1) dismissing his third lawsuit against the defendant,
Miraco, Inc., on grounds that his claims are barred by res judicata and are
time-barred, and that he has failed to state a claim upon which relief may be
granted, and (2) granting the defendant an award of attorney’s fees. As the
appealing party, the plaintiff has the burden to establish reversible error. Gallo
v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014). Based upon our review of the trial court’s
well-reasoned order, the plaintiff’s arguments, the relevant law, and the record
submitted on appeal, we conclude that the plaintiff has not demonstrated
reversible error, and we affirm the trial court’s order. See id.
All pending motions filed by the plaintiff, including his multiple pleadings
seeking mandamus relief, are denied. In light of this order, the defendant’s
motion requesting that we require the plaintiff to obtain permission prior to
filing pleadings is moot to the extent it requests such relief in this appeal. To
the extent the defendant’s motion requests that we require the plaintiff to
obtain permission prior to filing pleadings in matters other than this appeal,
the motion is denied without prejudice to seeking such relief in the other
appeals. To the extent the defendant’s motion seeks clarification that it does
not have to “respond to any further filings submitted by” the plaintiff, the
motion is denied. See Sup. Ct. R. 21(3) (stating that an objection to a motion
relating to substance may be filed within 10 days of the motion).
Finally, the defendant’s request in its brief for an award of attorney’s fees
is denied without prejudice to filing a properly supported motion, in accordance
with Supreme Court Rule 23, for reasonable costs and attorney’s fees incurred
in defending the appeal.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk