THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0334, Jason Rule v. Del R. Gilbert & Son
Block Co., Inc. & a., the court on August 21, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Jason Rule, appeals the order of Superior
Court (Kissinger, J.), following a jury verdict in favor of the defendants, Del R.
Gilbert & Son Block Co., Inc., and Christopher McIntyre, denying his motion
for additur or a new trial. The plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in
denying his motion because the jury’s verdict was contrary to the weight of the
evidence. We affirm.
The plaintiff sued the defendants for personal injury arising from their
negligent operation of a motor vehicle causing an accident on November 17,
2016. Prior to trial, the defendants admitted fault. “A stipulation of fault or
liability in a motor vehicle liability case concedes merely the duty and breach
elements [of negligence] (including causation of the accident).” Wright v. Dunn,
134 N.H. 669, 672 (1991). Accordingly, the trial court properly instructed the
jury that the issues for its determination were “one, what damages, if any, were
caused or substantially caused by [the] [d]efendants,” and “two, the amount of
compensation, if any, the [p]laintiff is entitled to recover for these damages.”
“Absent a finding of damages and their legal causation from the accident, the
verdict may properly be expressed as one ‘for the defendant.’” Id. After
considering the evidence, the jury returned a verdict for the defendant, finding
that the plaintiff failed to prove that he sustained compensable damages
resulting from the accident. The plaintiff argues that the jury’s verdict was
contrary to the weight of the evidence.
The plaintiff’s damage claim was limited to pain and suffering. He did
not introduce bills for medical treatment or evidence of lost income. The
defendants argue that the verdict was proper because the jury was free to
reject the plaintiff’s testimony regarding subjective complaints of pain. See
Morrill v. Tilney, 128 N.H. 773, 778 (1986) (“The jury was free to accept or
reject [the] testimony, in whole or in part.”). The plaintiff “does not disagree
that the jury was free to credit or discredit” testimony that was “based solely on
[his] subjective feelings of pain.” He argues, however, that the office visit notes
from Dr. Martin, who did not testify at trial, contain objective evidence of pain
that the jury could not disregard.
Six days after the accident, Martin noted “tenderness” in the plaintiff’s
thoracic and lumbar spine area, and three weeks after the accident, Martin
noted “bilateral paravertebral hypertonicity of the lumbar spine and lower
thoracic spine.” Evidence was also introduced at trial that the plaintiff was
experiencing back pain prior to the accident. Based upon this evidence, we
conclude that the jury was not compelled to find that Martin’s notes
constituted objective evidence of pain caused by the accident for which the
plaintiff was entitled to compensation.
The plaintiff argues that, at a minimum, he was entitled to compensation
for having been placed in a cervical collar and transported to the hospital
following the accident. He argues that the jury must have misinterpreted the
evidence or misunderstood the jury instructions. As the trial court properly
instructed the jury, it was for the jury to determine whether the plaintiff met
his burden to prove compensable damages. See Robert E. Tardiff, Inc. v. Twin
Oaks Realty Trust, 130 N.H. 673, 679 (1988) (noting that “one who claims
damages has the burden of proof”). We conclude that the jury was not
compelled to find on this evidence that the plaintiff sustained compensable
damages.
The plaintiff also argues that defense counsel’s opening statement
constituted an admission of causation or damages. In his opening statement,
defense counsel noted that the plaintiff had “some discomfort after the
accident,” and that the defendants were “prepared to pay” some amount of
compensation. However, it is clear from defense counsel’s cross-examination of
the plaintiff that the defendants were challenging both causation and damages.
See Archambault v. Adams, 118 N.H. 634, 637 (1978) (plaintiff’s claim that
defense counsel conceded issue must be viewed in context of entire trial). We
conclude that, in the context of the entire trial, counsel’s opening statement did
not constitute an admission of causation or damages. See id.
“A jury’s verdict may only be set aside if it is conclusively against the
weight of the evidence, or if it is the result of mistake, partiality, or corruption.”
New Hampshire Ball Bearings, Inc. v. Jackson, 158 N.H. 421, 436 (2009).
“‘Conclusively against the weight of the evidence’ means that the verdict was
one no reasonable jury could return.” Id. We conclude that the jury’s verdict
was not conclusively against the weight of the evidence, and that the trial court
did not err in denying the plaintiff’s motion for additur or a new trial. See id.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2