THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0601, Cassidy Stone & a. v. Jonathan
Sapienza, the court on September 15, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiffs, Cassidy Stone and Dylan Stone, appeal an
order of the Superior Court (Attorri, J.), following a bench trial, denying their
claim for breach of contract against the defendant, Jonathan Sapienza, and
granting the defendant’s counterclaim. The plaintiffs argue that: (1) the
counterclaim was not properly pleaded; (2) the evidence did not support
judgment for the defendant on his counterclaim; and (3) they were entitled to
damages for the defendant’s alleged anticipatory breach. We affirm.
The plaintiffs first argue that the defendant was not entitled to recover on
his counterclaim because it was improperly pleaded. “New Hampshire is a
notice pleading jurisdiction, and, as such, we take a liberal approach to the
technical requirements of pleadings.” Toy v. City of Rochester, 172 N.H. 443,
448 (2019). “A complaint need not do more than state the general character of
the action and put both court and counsel on notice of the nature of the
controversy.” Id. (quotation omitted).
The defendant, who was self-represented, stated in his answer that
“Plaintiffs wrote Sapienza a bad check for $30,000 which later bounced.
I would like to counter sue for that amount plus, all fees associated with this.”
The trial court found that “[t]his was sufficient to assert the counterclaim and
put Plaintiffs on notice.” The court also noted that the “[p]laintiffs did not raise
their current objection to the counterclaim at any point before it was decided
by the Court, even though they were plainly aware that the counterclaim was
being raised.” See Loeffler v. Bernier, 173 N.H. 180, 188 (2020) (“It is in the
interests of judicial economy to require a party to raise all possible objections
at the earliest possible time.” (quotation omitted)). We agree with the trial court
that the defendant’s counterclaim was sufficiently pleaded and put the
plaintiffs on notice of the claim. See Toy, 172 N.H. at 448.
The plaintiffs next argue that the evidence did not support judgment for
the defendant on his counterclaim. We will uphold the trial court’s findings
and rulings unless they lack evidentiary support or constitute a clear error of
law. McNeal v. Lebel, 157 N.H. 458, 461 (2008). The trial court found, and the
record shows, that in February 2022, the plaintiffs contracted with the
defendant to add a garage and in-law apartment to their home. Under the
contract, the plaintiffs agreed to pay the defendant $65,000 at the start of the
job, $32,750 when the addition was “weather tight,” and $31,250 upon
completion.
On July 21, 2022, with windows, siding, and roofing installed, the
defendant requested the second scheduled payment of $32,750, plus amounts
due for additional work expanding the rear deck. Plaintiff Cassidy Stone gave
the defendant a check for $36,000, but mistakenly wrote “thirty-six,” rather
than “thirty-six thousand” in the script line. The defendant deposited the
check, and it was credited to his account in the amount of $36,000. The
plaintiffs’ credit union later noticed the discrepancy between the numerals and
the script. Cassidy Stone told the defendant that there was a problem with the
check and that she would reissue it.
On September 28, 2022, the parties mutually agreed to terminate the
contract, before the project was complete. At Stone’s request, the defendant
sent her an email releasing her from any further payment obligations. The
court found that, at the time, the defendant reasonably believed that he had
been paid the $36,000 because it had been credited to his account, and he had
used the money to pay his subcontractors. However, the plaintiffs’ credit union
reversed all but $36 of the credit to the defendant’s account, and Stone never
reissued the check.
The plaintiffs asserted that when the defendant released them from any
further payment obligations, the release included the $36,000 payment
obligation. The trial court found that “neither party could reasonably have
believed that the dishonored amount of the July 21 check was a part of the
‘further payments’ that were being waived.” The court found that the plaintiffs
“were obligated to pay that amount to [the defendant] under the parties’
contract; they agreed to pay it; and they believed they had in fact paid it, until
some two months later when the discrepancy was noticed.” We conclude that
the record supports the trial court’s findings and rulings on the defendant’s
counterclaim. See McNeal, 157 N.H. at 461.
The plaintiffs next argue that the trial court erred in finding that they
failed to prove their claim for damages arising from what they allege was an
anticipatory breach of contract by the defendant. “An anticipatory breach of a
contract occurs when a promising party repudiates his obligations either
through words or by voluntarily disabling himself from performing them before
the time for performance.” LeTarte v. West Side Dev. Group, 151 N.H. 291, 294
(2004). Whether a party has breached a contract is a question for the trier of
fact to determine from the facts and circumstances of the case. Fitz v.
Coutinho, 136 N.H. 721, 725 (1993).
2
The record shows that the parties’ construction contract included an
“estimated completion date” of October 31, 2022. Although the plaintiffs
became concerned that the defendant could not finish the project by that date,
the trial court found that the defendant could have completed the work on
time. The court found “no evidence that [the defendant] was ever in breach of
the contract.” Rather, the court found, the parties terminated the contract by
mutual agreement. The trial court ruled that, “since the parties mutually
agreed to terminate their contract, [the defendant] cannot be held liable for any
amounts that the [plaintiffs] later expended to complete the project.” We
conclude that the record supports the court’s findings and rulings. See
Copeland Process Corp. v. Nalews, Inc., 113 N.H. 612, 616-17 (1973) (parties’
agreement to cancel contract included understanding that defendant would not
be liable for cost of completion).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3