THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0327, In the Matter of Laurie Bondaz and
Jean-Pierre Bondaz, the court on November 21, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The petitioner, Laurie Bondaz (the wife), appeals from a final
divorce decree issued by the Circuit Court (Garner, J.). The wife argues that
the trial court ordered insufficient alimony and child support to be paid by the
respondent, Jean-Pierre Bondaz (the husband), and erred in dividing the
marital property. We affirm.
The trial court found, or the record otherwise supports, the following
facts. The parties met in 1990 and married in 1993. They have three children;
one of the children is still a minor and will turn 18 in 2027.
The husband works as a commercial airline pilot. Prior to having
children, the wife obtained her master’s degree and subsequently worked for a
publishing company. She also has her pilot’s license, but has never piloted
commercially. When the parties’ first child was born in 2003, they agreed that
the wife would stay home to care for the children, which she did for the next
sixteen years. The wife returned to work in 2019 as a paraprofessional and, as
of early 2024, she worked as an administrative assistant at a school.
The parties filed a joint petition for divorce in 2020. They continued to
live together until they sold the marital home in October 2022 and equally
divided the proceeds. The trial court held a hearing in May 2023, after which it
entered temporary orders on alimony and child support.
The trial court held a two-day final hearing in November 2023 and issued
final orders. To calculate alimony, the trial court attributed $22,313 in
monthly income to the husband and $2,220 in monthly income to the wife. It
then awarded alimony to the wife in the amount of $2,769 per month until
June 2024, when the parties’ second child graduated from high school and
child support was reduced, then $3,268 per month until June 2031, when the
husband will turn 65, and then $1,500 per month until 2036. The trial court
reasoned that the wife would be financially dependent on the husband “for at
least a few years,” though after that she “may be expected to regain full time
employment at an income consistent with her education and experience.” It
also found that, as a result of the property distribution, both parties will
possess significant retirement assets and each will be able to maintain “a
comfortable standard of living” with those assets. In addition to alimony, the
trial court awarded full guidelines child support to the wife in the amount of
$4,026 per month until June 2024, and then $2,942 per month until the
youngest child no longer qualifies as a minor. The trial court also ordered an
equal division of the parties’ property.
Both parties filed motions to reconsider or clarify along with
corresponding objections. In her pleadings, the wife challenged the trial court’s
child support and alimony awards, as well as its division of the parties’ assets.
The trial court declined to amend its alimony and child support orders but
adjusted the property distribution slightly to account for certain assets it had
inadvertently overlooked. This appeal followed.
The trial court has broad discretion in fashioning a final decree of
divorce. In the Matter of Spenard & Spenard, 167 N.H. 1, 3 (2014). Its
discretion necessarily encompasses decisions concerning child support,
alimony, and property distribution. Id. We will not overturn the trial court’s
rulings absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion, id., and we will uphold
its factual findings unless they are unsupported by the evidence, see In the
Matter of Routhier & Routhier, 175 N.H. 6, 15 (2022). Under this standard, we
review only whether the record establishes an objective basis sufficient to
sustain the discretionary judgment made, and we will not disturb the trial
court’s determination if it could reasonably have been made. In the Matter of
Braunstein & Braunstein, 173 N.H. 38, 47 (2020).
We first address the wife’s arguments regarding the alimony award. RSA
458:19-a (Supp. 2024) governs term alimony. Paragraph II provides that “[t]he
amount of a term alimony order shall be the lesser of the payee’s reasonable
need, or a formula based on 23 percent of the difference between the parties’
gross incomes at the time the order is created, unless the court finds that
justice requires an adjustment.” RSA 458:19-a, II(a). Alimony determinations
are based primarily upon the parties’ income and need. Routhier, 175 N.H. at
15.
The wife argues that the trial court improperly calculated the amount of
alimony awarded from June 2027 through June 2031 when it failed to increase
her alimony award after child support terminates in 2027, following the third
child’s graduation from high school. She argues that the trial court properly
applied the statutory formula — 23 percent of the difference between the
parties’ incomes, adjusted for child support — to increase alimony upon the
termination of child support for the parties’ second child, and that its failure to
apply the statutory formula following the third child’s graduation without
providing its reasoning for doing so was an unsustainable exercise of
discretion. We disagree.
2
In calculating the alimony award, the trial court considered the wife’s
qualifications and her prospects of achieving more gainful employment in the
future. The trial court found that the wife has a pilot’s license and a master’s
degree and has worked for a publishing company, as a paraprofessional,
administrative assistant, and French teacher. The trial court described the
wife as “undoubtedly a well organized and competent person whose experience
and level of education might well enable her to achieve a greater level of
income” than she earns as a school administrative assistant. Although the
trial court determined that the wife has justifiably limited her efforts to secure
more lucrative employment in order to care for the children, it also found that
this need is diminishing as the children get older. The trial court thus
concluded that she may be expected to regain full-time employment “at an
income consistent with her education and experience” in a matter of years.
These findings are supported by the record.
Additionally, the trial court found that, in light of the property division,
both parties will be able to maintain a comfortable standard of living post-
divorce. Each party received roughly $400,000 from the sale of the marital
home, and the record shows that the parties’ other assets, amounting to
“significant value,” were split equally. Furthermore, in fashioning the alimony
award, the trial court considered that the wife will receive child support until
2027.
In declining to adjust the alimony award following the third child’s
graduation, it appears that the trial court concluded that, by 2027, the wife’s
“reasonable need” would be less than the amount under the statutory formula.
RSA 458:19-a, II(a). Based on the record before it, the trial court could
reasonably conclude that the wife’s share of the property division — combined
with her likely increase in earnings — will lessen her need for alimony by 2027,
thus obviating the need to apply the statutory formula. See id. Although the
trial court did not explicitly state that the wife’s reasonable need would be less
than the formula alimony amount starting in 2027, the statute does not
require such an express finding. See RSA 458:19-a, II, VI; In the Matter of
Valerie Bois and Alan Bois, No. 2024-0252 (non-precedential order at 2-3),
2025 WL 2237314 (N.H. Aug. 6, 2025) (affirming alimony award less than
statutory formula amount where “it appear[ed] that the court determined that
Wife’s reasonable need was less than the formula alimony amount”). Based
upon our review of the record, we conclude that there was sufficient evidence
to support the trial court’s conclusion that an increase in alimony was not
warranted. See In the Matter of Peirano & Larsen, 155 N.H. 738, 745-47
(2007).
The wife also argues that the trial court improperly calculated the
amount of the alimony award from 2031 to 2036. We agree with the husband
that this issue was not properly preserved, as the wife has failed to
demonstrate that she raised this issue before the trial court. We therefore
3