THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0577, D.D. v. B.B., the court on February
18, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, B.B., appeals an order of the Circuit Court
(LeDuc, J.), following a hearing, extending a civil stalking final order of
protection for a period of twelve months. See RSA 633:3-a, III-c (2016). We
construe the defendant’s brief to be challenging the sufficiency of the evidence
to support the trial court’s finding of good cause. See id. We affirm.
The trial court has discretion to extend a civil stalking final order of
protection, initially for one year and thereafter for periods of up to five years, if
it finds “good cause” for the requested extension. RSA 633:3-a, III-c; see
MacPherson v. Weiner, 158 N.H. 6, 9 (2008). In ruling on a motion to extend a
protective order, the trial court is required to “review the [protective] order, and
each renewal thereof and . . . [to] grant such relief as may be necessary to
provide for the safety and well-being of the plaintiff.” RSA 633:3-a, III-c.
“[W]hether ‘good cause’ exists directly relates to the safety and well-being of the
plaintiff.” MacPherson, 158 N.H. at 10. “Good cause” to extend a protective
order is present if “the trial court determines that the circumstances are such
that, without a protective order, the plaintiff’s safety and well-being would be in
jeopardy.” Id. When applying this standard, the trial court is required to
assess whether the current conditions are such that there is still concern for
the plaintiff’s safety and well-being, reviewing the circumstances of the original
stalking and any violation of the protective order and considering any present
and reasonable fear by the plaintiff. Id.
“The trial court is in the best position to view the current circumstances,
as well as the defendant’s prior acts, and determine whether an extension is
necessary for the safety and well-being of the plaintiff.” Id. at 11. We will
uphold the trial court’s findings and rulings unless they lack evidentiary
support or are tainted by error of law, id. at 10, mindful that it is for the trial
court to accept or reject, in whole or in part, whatever evidence was presented,
and that our role is not to determine whether we would have ruled differently,
but whether a reasonable person could have reached the same decision as the
trial court based upon the same evidence, Cook v. Sullivan, 149 N.H. 774, 780
(2003); see also MacPherson, 158 N.H. at 10. We view the evidence in the light
most favorable to the plaintiff. Despres v. Hampsey, 162 N.H. 398, 401 (2011).
It is the defendant’s burden, as the appealing party, to provide a record
on appeal that is sufficient to decide the issues the defendant is raising, and
absent a transcript, we assume that the evidence was sufficient to support the
trial court’s decision and review its order only for errors of law appearing on the
face of the order. Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004);
Atwood v. Owens, 142 N.H. 396, 396-97 (1997). In this case, the defendant
has not provided a transcript of the evidentiary hearing on the plaintiff’s
request to extend the protective order. Accordingly, we assume that the
evidence was sufficient to support the trial court’s finding that good cause
exists to extend the protective order for twelve months, and because there are
no errors of law on the face of the trial court’s order, we affirm its decision.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2