THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2024-0581, Brok-Alan Woodward-Griffith v.
Triangle Credit Union, the court on August 25, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Brok-Alan Woodward-Griffith, appeals an order
of the Superior Court (Klass, J.) denying an ex parte motion to enjoin a
foreclosure sale of certain mortgaged property by the defendant, Triangle Credit
Union. On appeal, the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred as a matter of
law by denying the motion, and that in so ruling, it violated the Code of
Judicial Conduct, see Sup. Ct. R. 38. We affirm.
“The issuance of injunctions, either temporary or permanent, has long
been considered an extraordinary remedy.” Pike v. Deutsche Bank Nat’l Trust
Co., 168 N.H. 40, 45 (2015) (quotation omitted). “An injunction should not
issue unless there is an immediate danger of irreparable harm to the party
seeking injunctive relief, there is no adequate remedy at law, and the party
seeking an injunction is likely to succeed on the merits.” Id. (quotation and
brackets omitted). The trial court has discretion to grant an injunction after
considering the facts and established principles of equity. Id. We will uphold
the trial court’s ruling on a request for injunctive relief absent an error of law,
unsustainable exercise of discretion, or clearly erroneous findings of fact. Id.
At the outset, we summarize the procedural history of the case, and we
note the limited nature of the issues that are properly before us in this appeal.
The record reflects that on April 14, 2024, the plaintiff initially filed an ex parte
motion to enjoin a foreclosure sale, then scheduled to occur on May 30, 2024,
claiming that the defendant was not negotiating in good faith to bring the
relevant loan out of default status, and that the defendant “has a longstanding
and close business relationship with” a third party that was “using deceptive,
coercive tactics to preclude Plaintiff from working.” The trial court denied the
request for ex parte relief, but otherwise scheduled the matter for a hearing on
the merits. Following a hearing on the merits, the trial court issued a final
order denying the requested injunctive relief on May 7, 2024.
Thereafter, on May 24, 2024, the plaintiff filed a second ex parte motion
seeking to enjoin the foreclosure sale, claiming, among other things, that the
trial court had not provided the plaintiff an opportunity to present offers of
proof in response to the defendant’s “misleading statements” at the earlier
hearing. The trial court denied the motion, without a hearing, on May 28,
2024, noting that it had afforded the plaintiff “ample time to provide the Court
with all evidence in support of his request for injunctive relief during the
[earlier] hearing,” and that “upon careful review of this motion, . . . nothing
herein changes its analysis as articulated in” its May 7, 2024 final order.
On May 29, 2024, the plaintiff filed a motion to consolidate the case with
a separate lawsuit involving the third party identified in the April 14, 2024
initial ex parte motion to enjoin foreclosure that was allegedly “using deceptive,
coercive tactics to preclude Plaintiff from working.” The trial court denied the
motion to consolidate on June 3, 2024, noting that it had already denied both
of the plaintiff’s motions to enjoin the foreclosure sale, and thus, that “the
issues in this case have been disposed of by the Court.” The trial court further
noted that “[e]ven if this case was active, the issues raised [in both cases] do
not warrant consolidation.” The plaintiff did not timely appeal any of the
orders issued in the case to that point, and according to the defendant, the
clerk closed the case on June 27, 2024.
On October 21, 2024, the plaintiff filed a third ex parte motion to enjoin
foreclosure, asserting that the defendant had “attempted” to foreclose in June
2024, that the “foreclosure was not fruitful,” that the defendant had refused to
negotiate with the plaintiff in good faith, that the defendant had scheduled
another foreclosure sale for October 22, and that the defendant was conspiring
with one or more third parties to deprive him of his property. The trial court
denied the motion, without a hearing, on the same day, reasoning that the
plaintiff had alleged no facts that would justify enjoining the foreclosure sale,
and that he had repeated “the same general arguments that he has already
raised and that have already been addressed by the Court in its prior orders.”
The plaintiff filed the present appeal on October 21, 2024. In accepting
the appeal, we dismissed those issues purporting to challenge the May 7, 2024
final order denying the plaintiff’s initial motion for injunctive relief and the May
28, 2024 order denying the second motion for ex parte injunctive relief on the
basis that the appeal was untimely as to those issues. As to the remaining
issues, we accepted the appeal only insofar as they pertained to the October
21, 2024 decision denying the third ex parte motion to enjoin foreclosure.
In his brief, the plaintiff again appears to challenge the trial court’s May
7 and May 28, 2024 decisions, including its alleged failures to consider
evidence presented at the May 2, 2024 hearing on the merits of his initial
motion for injunctive relief or to allow him to make offers of proof at that
hearing. To the extent the plaintiff is attempting to challenge the May 7 and
May 28, 2024 decisions, the appeal is not timely, and we decline to address the
arguments. To the extent he is challenging the October 21 denial of his third
ex parte motion for injunctive relief based upon evidence submitted at the
2
earlier May 2 hearing and the allegations in the motion, we cannot conclude
that the trial court erred as a matter of law, unsustainably exercised its
discretion, or made clearly erroneous findings of fact. See id.
Finally, to the extent the plaintiff argues that the trial court violated the
Code of Judicial Conduct by not assisting him as a self-represented litigant, we
note that self-represented parties are generally bound by the same procedural
rules that govern parties represented by counsel. See In the Matter of
Birmingham & Birmingham, 154 N.H. 51, 56-57 (2006). Although a judge
“may make reasonable efforts, consistent with the law and court rules, to
facilitate the ability of all litigants, including self-represented litigants, to be
fairly heard,” Sup. Ct. R. 38, Canon 2, Rule 2.2(B), the judge remains duty-
bound to “uphold and apply the law, and [to] perform all duties of judicial office
fairly and impartially,” Sup. Ct. R. 38, Canon 2, Rule 2.2(A). The plaintiff has
identified no instance in this case in which the trial court violated its
obligations under the Code of Judicial Conduct.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3