THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0152, In the Matter of Denise
Christiansen and Kevin Christiansen, the court on January 27,
2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The respondent, Kevin Christiansen (husband), appeals the
final decree of the Circuit Court (Garner and Keating, JJ.), following a hearing,
in his divorce from the petitioner, Denise Christiansen (wife). The husband
argues that the trial court erred by: (1) awarding the marital home to the wife,
and by failing to consider the value of certain property in its division of the
marital estate; (2) failing to award him term alimony; and (3) determining the
value of the marital home. We affirm.
The husband first argues that the trial court erred by awarding the
marital home to the wife, and by failing to consider the value of certain
property in its division of the marital estate. We accord trial courts broad
discretion in determining matters of property division in a final divorce decree.
In the Matter of Heinrich & Heinrich, 164 N.H. 357, 363 (2012). We review the
trial court’s division of the parties’ assets under our unsustainable exercise of
discretion standard. Id. If the court’s findings can reasonably be made on the
evidence presented, they will stand. Id.
Pursuant to RSA 458:16-a, I (2018), “all tangible and intangible property
and assets, real or personal, belonging to either or both parties, whether title to
the property is held in the name of either or both parties,” is subject to
equitable distribution. See Heinrich, 164 N.H. at 359. Under RSA 458:16-a, II
(2018), an equal division of property is presumed equitable unless the trial
court decides otherwise after considering one or more of the factors designated
in the statute. In the Matter of Letendre & Letendre, 149 N.H. 31, 35 (2002).
The husband argues that the trial court erred in awarding the marital
home to the wife because it failed to consider certain statutory factors. He
argues that the court should have awarded the marital home to him because
the wife has greater financial resources, and because he was primarily
responsible for maintaining the land and conducting farming-related activities
on the property. The trial court noted, however, that the wife was primarily
responsible for managing the expenses of the home. The court also noted that
“[t]he mortgage, maintenance, and utilities expenses for the residence total
more than $3,000 per month, a sum which is beyond [the husband’s] ability to
pay.” The court acknowledged that, “[e]ach party has a reasonable claim to an
award of the marital residence,” but concluded that, “[o]n balance,” the wife “is
more likely to be able to manage the financial needs of the residence.” The
court also noted that “the children have always lived at the residence,” and that
“the disruption to the children would be minimized if they were able to plan on
living at the residence.” Based upon this record, we cannot conclude that the
trial court erred in awarding the marital home to the wife.
The husband also argues that the trial court failed to consider the value
of certain property, including the wife’s jewelry, in dividing the marital estate.
The wife testified that she owns a “wedding set,” but that she did not know its
value. Although the wife did not itemize her jewelry, she testified that the total
value of her personal property was $10,000, which she listed on her asset
spreadsheet as “furniture and appliances.” The court’s property division lists
“furniture” as having a value of $10,000.
The husband argues that the court erred in crediting the wife’s
testimony, including her testimony that the value of his tools was $10,000. In
addition, he argues that the wife traded in a motor vehicle owned by the parties
for $4,000 to $5,000 less than its value, and that the court failed to consider
livestock losses allegedly attributable to the wife. He also argues that he has a
greater need for the parties’ timeshare, which he concedes has “no significant
market value.” The wife described the tools as filling “three bays stocked from
bottom to top.” The husband admitted that $10,000 was probably an accurate
estimate of the tools’ replacement value. The wife testified that she negotiated
a trade-in value for the motor vehicle that was $3,000 more than what the
dealer originally offered. The wife disputed the husband’s assertion that she
was responsible for any decline in the value of the livestock. She testified that
she and the children use the timeshare “in the winter all the time for
swimming.”
The trial court resolved the parties’ disputes regarding their personal
property based upon their testimony and the other evidence presented. We
defer to a trial court’s judgment on such issues as resolving conflicts in
testimony, measuring the credibility of witnesses, and determining the weight
to be given evidence. In the Matter of Aube & Aube, 158 N.H. 459, 465 (2009).
Based upon this record, we cannot conclude that the trial court erred dividing
the marital estate. See Heinrich, 164 N.H. at 363.
The husband next argues that the trial court erred in failing to award
him term alimony. Trial courts have broad discretion in awarding alimony. In
the Matter of Henry & Henry, 163 N.H. 174, 182 (2012). Accordingly, we
review the trial court’s alimony award under our unsustainable exercise of
discretion standard. Id. If there is sufficient evidence to support the trial
court’s factual findings, we will uphold them. In the Matter of Dube & Dube,
2
163 N.H. 575, 581 (2012). The trial court may order term alimony only if it
finds that the party from whom alimony is sought is able to meet his or her
own reasonable needs, while meeting the reasonable needs of the party seeking
alimony. See RSA 458:19-a, I (Supp. 2024).
In this case, the trial court found that, although the husband
demonstrated a need for alimony, the wife lacked the ability to pay. After
deducting certain discretionary expenses claimed by the wife, the court found
that her reasonable expenses exceeded her income by approximately $400 per
month. The husband points out that, on cross-examination, the wife was not
able to identify the source of certain deposits into her bank account. However,
the trial court was not compelled to find that she had additional sources of
income. We cannot conclude that the trial court erred in denying the
husband’s request for alimony based upon its finding that the wife lacked the
ability to pay. See Dube, 163 N.H. at 581.
The husband next argues that the trial court erred in determining the
value of the marital home by crediting the appraisal from the wife’s expert over
that of his expert. The valuation of a marital asset is a question of fact within
the trial court’s discretion. In the Matter of Cottrell & El-Sherif, 163 N.H. 747,
749 (2012). We will not disturb the trial court’s findings absent an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. Id.
The trial court found the appraisal conducted by the wife’s expert to be
more reliable. In particular, the court found that the wife’s expert “testified
credibly about his rigorous analysis of the subject property and the selection
and consideration of comparable properties that were sold in the relevant time
period.” As the court noted, the wife’s expert observed that the marital home
“needs substantial work to make up for deferred maintenance, including
significant water damage to structural components, attic mold resulting from a
poorly engineered drier vent, and replacement of the main home’s roof.” The
court found that the husband’s expert did not fully account for the deferred
maintenance.
The husband argues that the trial court should not have accepted the
appraisal from the wife’s expert because the expert did not consider a more
recent sale of the most comparable property. However, as the trial court noted,
the wife’s expert “explained that he did not consider the July 2023 sale to be as
reliable a comparison because the property had been completely renovated
before the 2023 sale, was generally in superior condition to the subject
property, and is used as an investment property.”
The husband also argues that the trial court erred in accepting the
appraisal from the wife’s expert because it was based upon the assumption
that the conditions relating to value were the same on April 13, 2023, the
3