THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0605, Lefebvre's Towing, LLC v. Catherine
Henry, the court on August 17, 2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). The defendant, Catherine Henry, appeals a decision of the Circuit Court
(Steckowych, J.), following a small claim hearing on the merits, awarding the
plaintiff, Lefebvre’s Towing, LLC, judgment of $4,090 for towing and storage costs
relative to a vehicle towed from an automobile dealership after a dispute arose
between the dealership and the defendant over payment for certain repairs to the
vehicle. See RSA 262:40-a, I(a), IV (2024). The defendant argues that (1) the
towing of her vehicle violated certain statutory requirements; (2) the towing was
not properly authorized by the “owner or person in lawful possession of [the]
private property” on which the vehicle was parked without permission for
purposes of RSA 262:40-a, I; (3) the trial court improperly excluded evidence that
the defendant sought to introduce; and (4) certain of the trial court’s factual
findings were erroneous. We affirm.
We will uphold the trial court’s findings and rulings unless they lack
evidentiary support or are legally erroneous. Vincent v. MacLean, 166 N.H. 132,
134 (2014). We defer to the trial court’s judgment on such issues as resolving
conflicts in testimony, evaluating the credibility of the witnesses, and determining
the weight of the evidence presented. Id. The trial court may accept or reject, in
whole or in part, the testimony of any witness, and is not required to believe even
uncontested evidence. See In the Matter of Aube & Aube, 158 N.H. 458, 466
(2009).
It is the burden of the appealing party, here, the defendant, to provide a
record on appeal that is sufficient to decide the issues raised. Bean v. Red Oak
Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004). We assume that relevant portions of the
trial court record not provided on appeal support the result reached by the trial
court. See id. This rule applies to relevant trial exhibits, see In the Matter of
Rokowski & Rokowski, 168 N.H. 57, 62 (2015) (applying Bean to appealing
party’s failure to provide exhibits admitted into evidence at evidentiary hearing),
and is not relaxed for self-represented parties, see In the Matter of Birmingham &
Birmingham, 154 N.H. 51, 56 (2006) (stating that self-represented parties are
bound by the same procedural rules that govern parties represented by counsel).
We first address the defendant’s arguments that the towing of her vehicle
violated certain statutory requirements, that the towing was not properly
authorized by the owner or person in lawful possession of the private property on
which the relevant vehicle was parked, and that certain other findings of the trial
court were legally erroneous. The statute provides, in relevant part:
The owner or person in lawful possession of any private
property . . . on which a vehicle is parked without permission or is
apparently abandoned may:
(a) Cause the removal of the vehicle in a reasonable manner
provided he or she gives notice of such removal to a peace officer as
soon as reasonably possible . . . .
RSA 262:40-a, I. When a vehicle is removed from private property under this
provision, its registered owner is entitled to notice of the removal. Appeal of
Tradz, LLC, 175 N.H. 98, 102 (2022).
With respect to notice of the removal, RSA 262:34 (2024) provides:
Whenever an authorized official or the owner or person in
lawful possession of private property directs the removal and storage
of a vehicle as permitted in this subdivision, he or she shall, if he or
she knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records of the
division the name and address of record of the registered owner of
the vehicle, attempt to give or have given by the most practicable
means, notice of the fact of such removal and the place to which said
vehicle has been removed. If the authorized official does not know
and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner, or for any other
reason is unable to give notice to the owner as provided in this
section, such notice shall be filed with the director [of the division of
motor vehicles] within 30 days of the removal, which notice shall be
placed on file and results of owner and lienholder information shall
be mailed to the custodian of the vehicle, by said director and open
to public inspection.
The costs of removal, including reasonable towing and storage costs, are
generally the responsibility of the last registered owner of the vehicle. RSA
262:40-a, IV.
Contrary to the defendant’s arguments, there was evidence from which the
trial court reasonably could have determined that (1) the dealership was the
“owner or person in lawful possession of [the] private property . . . on which [the
defendant’s] vehicle [was] parked without permission or [was] apparently
abandoned”; (2) the dealership caused the vehicle’s removal by engaging the
plaintiff towing company after the defendant left the car on the dealership’s lot for
several months without permission; (3) the defendant was the last registered
owner of the vehicle at issue; (4) a “peace officer” was properly notified of the
2
towing when notice of the towing was provided to the Manchester Police
Department; (5) the Division of Motor Vehicles was properly notified within 30
days of the towing based on uncertainty as to the defendant’s address; and (6)
notice of the towing was served on and received by the defendant within eight
days of when the Division of Motor Vehicles provided the plaintiff with
information regarding her address. We note that the defendant has not provided
the 17 exhibits that the plaintiff submitted at trial. Accordingly, we assume that
the trial exhibits would further support the trial court’s findings and rulings. See
Rokowski, 168 N.H. at 62; Bean, 151 N.H. at 250. On this record, the trial
court’s findings and rulings are neither lacking in evidentiary support nor legally
erroneous. Vincent, 166 N.H. at 134.
We next address whether the trial court improperly excluded evidence that
the defendant sought to introduce. The technical rules of evidence do not apply
in a small claim proceeding. RSA 503:7 (2010). Instead, the trial court may
admit any evidence it finds material and proper. Id. We review the trial court’s
evidentiary rulings for an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See In the Matter
of Hampers & Hampers, 154 N.H. 275, 280 (2006). To establish that the trial
court unsustainably exercised its discretion, the defendant must demonstrate
that its rulings were clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of her
case. See id.
Contrary to the defendant’s argument, the record on appeal does not
reflect that the trial court excluded any exhibit that she sought to admit at trial.
Even if it had, however, on this record, we would conclude that a decision not to
admit the documents at issue would not have been an unsustainable exercise of
discretion. See id.; RSA 503:7.
The defendant’s remaining arguments are either insufficiently developed or
otherwise do not warrant further discussion. See State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H.
47, 49 (2003); Vogel v. Vogel, 137 N.H. 321, 322 (1993).
Affirmed.
Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3