THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0083, Silvio Pupino & a. v. Rosemary
Santos & a., the court on August 25, 2025, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Rosemary Santos, appeals the order of the
Circuit Court (Pendleton, J.), following a small claims hearing, awarding the
plaintiffs, Silvio Pupino and Roberta Brondolo, $10,000 in damages, plus costs
and interest. We construe the defendant’s brief to argue that the trial court’s
damage award is contrary to the weight of the evidence and that the court
erred in denying her motion to reconsider. We affirm.
On November 6, 2024, the court held a small claims hearing. The
plaintiffs appeared for the hearing, and the defendant did not appear. The
court noted that it had previously defaulted the defendant for failing to appear
at the hearing, which had been scheduled for April 4, 2024. The court later
granted her motion to vacate the default and then scheduled the November 6
hearing. The notice for the November 6 hearing advised the defendant that if
she failed to appear, she could be defaulted, and the court could proceed to
determine damages. When the defendant failed to appear for the November 6
hearing, the court defaulted her and allowed the plaintiffs to present their
damage claim.
The court found that the plaintiffs proved damages in excess of the
statutory limit and awarded the plaintiffs $10,000 plus costs and interest. See
RSA 503:1, I (Supp. 2024) (small claim damages limited to $10,000, exclusive
of costs and interest).
The defendant moved to reconsider, stating that she “absent[-]mindedly
got the dates with [her] Dr.’s office mixed up with [her] court date.” The trial
court denied the motion, noting that the defendant had failed to appear for two
scheduled hearings, and that she had offered no reasonable explanation for her
failure to appear at the November 6 hearing.
The defendant first argues that the trial court’s damage award is
contrary to the weight of the evidence. She also claims that she did not receive
copies of the plaintiffs’ exhibits ten days prior to the hearing, as ordered. It is
the burden of the appealing party, here the defendant, to provide this court
with a record sufficient to decide her issues on appeal, and to demonstrate that
she raised her issues in the trial court. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151
N.H. 248, 250 (2004); see also In the Matter of Birmingham & Birmingham,
154 N.H. 51, 56 (2006) (self-represented litigants are bound by the same
procedural rules that govern parties represented by counsel). Absent a
transcript of the November 6 hearing, we must assume that the weight of the
evidence supported the trial court’s damage award. See Atwood v. Owens, 142
N.H. 396, 396 (1997). Moreover, the record fails to show that the defendant
raised her issue regarding the plaintiffs’ exhibits in the trial court.
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred in denying her
motion to reconsider. We will uphold the trial court’s order on a motion to
reconsider absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. In the Matter of
Geraghty & Geraghty, 169 N.H. 404, 419 (2016). The defendant’s unverified
motion did not explain, among other things, when she learned of the alleged
scheduling error, what steps she took to timely notify the court and the
plaintiffs of this issue, and what defenses she would raise on the merits.
Moreover, as the trial court stated, this was the second time the defendant had
failed to appear for the scheduled hearing. Based upon this record, we cannot
conclude that the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion in denying
the defendant’s motion for reconsideration. See id.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2