THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0021, Velocity Investments, LLC v. Brodie
Kio, the court on June 18, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Brodie Kio, appeals (1) an order of the Circuit
Court (Spath, J.) entering default judgment in favor of the plaintiff, Velocity
Investments, LLC, for the defendant’s failure to attend the pre-trial hearing in
this small claim case, see Dist. Div. R. 4.4(b), and (2) a separate order (Chabot,
J.) denying the defendant’s motion to vacate the default. The defendant claims
that the trial court failed to apply certain federal laws and consider evidence
submitted in connection with the motion to vacate. We affirm.
By rule, a party’s failure to attend the pre-trial hearing in a small claim
matter “shall result in a judgment in favor of the other party.” Dist. Div. R.
4.4(b). “A default judgment shall not be stricken except upon a finding of good
cause by the court.” Id. A default ordinarily results in the admission of all
well-pleaded allegations of fact, requiring the trial court to assess damages
upon proper proof. See Cole v. Hobson, 143 N.H. 14, 16 (1998); cf. Douglas v.
Douglas, 143 N.H. 419, 426 (1999) (discussing decrees pro confesso in equity
proceedings). We will not disturb a decision denying a request to vacate a
default unless the trial court erred as a matter of law or unsustainably
exercised its discretion. Brito v. Ryan, 151 N.H. 635, 637 (2005).
In this case, the defendant does not dispute the debt owed to the
plaintiff, and did not offer any defense to the plaintiff’s claim or explain why the
defendant failed to attend the pre-trial hearing in the motion to vacate the
default. Instead, the defendant’s sole argument in support of the motion to
vacate was that the defendant’s only income is from sources protected from
periodic payment orders. The plaintiff objected, asserting that the defendant’s
present financial circumstances did not constitute a basis to “reopen the case
or reconsider the judgment,” and it requested that the court schedule a
periodic payment hearing. See RSA 524:6-a (2021). The trial court denied the
motion, agreeing with the plaintiff that the judgment was valid and that the
plaintiff was entitled to seek payment on it. The trial court directed the clerk to
schedule a periodic payment hearing at which both parties shall appear, and
directed the defendant to submit an affidavit of assets and liabilities in
connection with the hearing. We note that the record on appeal does not
reflect whether the trial court has held a periodic payment hearing or issued a
periodic payment order.
On this record, we cannot conclude that the trial court either erred as a
matter of law or unsustainably exercised its discretion by denying the motion
to vacate. See Brito, 151 N.H. at 637; cf. State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296
(2001) (explaining unsustainable exercise of discretion standard). In support of
the motion, the defendant offered no defense to the merits of the plaintiff’s
claim or any other factor that would constitute good cause to strike the default.
Instead, the motion concerned only whether the defendant has income from
which the judgment may be satisfied, an argument that is relevant only to the
plaintiff’s future efforts to collect on its judgment, and that is not relevant to
whether the default should be stricken, whether it should have been entered in
the first instance, or whether the plaintiff is entitled to judgment on the
default.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2