THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0108, State of New Hampshire v. James D.
Reed, II, the court on February 9, 2026, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). The defendant, James D. Reed, II, appeals his conviction, following a
jury trial in Superior Court (Kennedy, J.), on one misdemeanor count of resisting
arrest or detention, see RSA 642:2 (2016). On appeal, he argues that the
Superior Court (Honigberg, J.) erred in granting the State’s motion in limine to
exclude, on relevance grounds, a document detailing the arresting police
department’s practices and procedures relative to high risk traffic stops (Policy).
See N.H. R. Ev. 401. We affirm.
“We review a trial court’s decision on the admissibility of evidence under
our unsustainable exercise of discretion standard.” State v. Letarte, 169 N.H.
455, 461 (2016). “In applying our unsustainable exercise of discretion standard
of review, we determine only whether the record establishes an objective basis
sufficient to sustain the discretionary judgment made.” Id. (quotation omitted).
“Our task is not to determine whether we would have found differently, but is
only to determine whether a reasonable person could have reached the same
decision as the trial court on the basis of the evidence before it.” Id. (quotations
omitted). “For the defendant to prevail under this standard, he must
demonstrate that the trial court’s decision was clearly untenable or unreasonable
to the prejudice of his case.” Id. (quotation omitted).
A person is guilty of the offense of resisting arrest or detention when the
person “knowingly or purposely physically interferes with a person recognized to
be a law enforcement official, including a probation or parole officer, seeking to
effect an arrest or detention of the person or another regardless of whether there
is a legal basis for the arrest.” RSA 642:2. Here, the defendant was charged with
acting “knowingly.” Pursuant to RSA 626:2, II(b), “[a] person acts knowingly with
respect to conduct or to a circumstance that is a material element of an offense
when he is aware that his conduct is of such nature or that such circumstances
exist.” RSA 626:2, II(b) (2016). The mental state “knowingly” applies to each
material element of the resisting arrest offense, and may be proven by
circumstantial evidence. See RSA 626:2, I; State v. Reid, 134 N.H. 418, 422
(1991). Thus, to be convicted, the defendant must have: (1) knowingly; (2)
physically interfered; (3) with a person recognized to be a law enforcement official;
(4) while that person was seeking to effect an arrest or detention of the defendant.
State v. Rogers, 177 N.H. 47, 51-52 (2024), 2024 N.H. 57, ¶13.
We have previously explained that the term “detain” means “to hold or
keep in or as if in custody,” “to keep back,” and to “stop or delay.” State v.
Lindsey, 158 N.H. 703, 706 (2009) (quotations omitted). We have also explained
that the phrase “seeking to effect an arrest or detention” includes “the entire
course of events during which law enforcement officers seek to secure and
maintain physical control of an individual, attendant to accomplishing the
intended law enforcement duty.” Id. (quotation omitted). “Whether a defendant’s
resistive conduct occurred while law enforcement was ‘seeking to effect an arrest
or detention’ must be assessed on a case-by-case basis, objectively viewing the
continuum of events as a whole.” Id. at 707.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in granting the
State’s motion in limine to exclude the Policy on relevance grounds. He argues
that, during the events leading up to his arrest, he did not “know” he was being
detained because the uniformed police officers did not expressly inform him of
that fact, and did not otherwise follow the procedures set forth in the Policy.
Thus, he argues that the Policy is relevant because “[e]vidence of the policy or its
contents could have demonstrated and lent credibility to the heart of [his] defense
— that he was confused about whether he was being arrested or detained, as
opposed to just being ordered out of the car.” We disagree.
“Evidence is relevant if: (a) it has any tendency to make a fact more or less
probable than it would be without the evidence; and (b) the fact is of consequence
in determining the action.” N.H. R. Ev. 401. Here, the Policy is of no
consequence with respect to establishing the defendant’s subjective state of
mind. In this case, evidence in the record demonstrates, among other things,
that the vehicle carrying the defendant was stopped by a uniformed police officer
with his pistol drawn, that the officer ordered the driver and the defendant to exit
the vehicle with their hands up, that only the driver complied, that an additional
uniformed officer arrived and ordered the defendant out of the vehicle, that the
defendant then verbally and physically resisted repeated orders to exit the
vehicle, and that, ultimately, it required three officers to forcibly remove the
defendant from the vehicle and place him under arrest. On these facts, neither
the existence of the Policy, nor the officers’ adherence to it, has any tendency to
make it more or less probable that the defendant subjectively understood that he
was being detained. Moreover, although the defendant does not challenge the
sufficiency of the evidence, we note that the record amply supports the jury’s
finding that he knowingly resisted detention.
2
Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court sustainably exercised its
discretion in finding that the Policy was irrelevant and granting the State’s
motion in limine to exclude it. See N.H. R. Ev. 401; Letarte, 169 N.H. at 461.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, and Gould, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3