THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0018, George D. Spears, Jr. v. Industrial
Calibration and Service Co., Inc. & a., the court on November 19,
2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, George D. Spears, Jr., appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Temple, J.) granting summary judgment in favor of the
defendants, Industrial Calibration and Service Co., Inc. (company) and James
Spears, on his claims of breach of partnership, breach of contract, fraud,
unjust enrichment, quantum meruit, and violations of the consumer protection
act arising out of the failure to grant him an ownership interest in the company
at the time of its 1994 formation. The plaintiff argues that, in granting
summary judgment, the trial court erred by determining that the formation of
the corporation precluded a claim for breach of partnership, and by relying
upon his responses to certain requests for admissions of facts. We affirm.
We review the trial court’s ruling on summary judgment by considering
the summary judgment record in the light most favorable to the non-moving
party. New Hampshire Health Care Assoc. v. Governor, 161 N.H. 378, 384
(2011). We will affirm if the record does not reveal any genuine issues of
material fact, that is, facts that would affect the outcome of the case, and if the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Id.
As the appealing party, the plaintiff has the burden of demonstrating
reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014). Based upon our
review of the trial court’s well-reasoned order, the plaintiff’s arguments, the
relevant law, and the summary judgment record viewed in the light most
favorable to the plaintiff, we conclude that the plaintiff has not demonstrated a
genuine issue of material fact, or that the defendants are not entitled to
judgment as a matter of law. See id.; New Hampshire Health Care Assoc., 161
N.H. at 384.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk