THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0562, Cody M. Belanger v. Trivantus, Inc.,
the court on July 15, 2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Cody M. Belanger, appeals the order of the
Superior Court (Ruoff, J.), denying his motion to strike a “default judgment”
that the trial court allegedly entered in favor of the defendant, Trivantus, Inc.,
when it granted the defendant’s motion to enforce a settlement agreement after
the plaintiff failed to attend a hearing on the motion to enforce. We affirm.
We will not disturb the trial court’s decision unless the court
unsustainably exercised its discretion or erred as a matter of law. In the
Matter of Birmingham & Birmingham, 154 N.H. 51, 55 (2006) The plaintiff
appeals the trial court’s order denying his “motion to strike default for hearing
held on August 6, 2025.” In his motion, the plaintiff states that he had
“submitted a Motion to Continue, believing that said motion pertained to the
August 6th hearing.” The trial court’s order on the motion to strike states,
“Upon review of the pleadings submitted, the Motion is denied.” The court also
stated that it “agrees with [the Defendant].” The plaintiff did not provide this
court with a copy of the motion to continue referenced in his motion to strike
or copies of any other relevant pleadings.
It is the appealing party’s burden to demonstrate error and to provide
this court with a record, including the relevant trial court pleadings, sufficient
to decide his issues on appeal. Coyle v. Battles, 147 N.H. 98, 100 (2001);
Estate of Day v. Hanover Ins. Co. 162 N.H. 415, 422 (2011); see also In the
Matter of Birmingham, 154 N.H. at 56 (self-represented litigants are bound by
the same procedural rules that govern parties represented by counsel). Based
upon the limited record provided for our review, we conclude that the plaintiff
has failed to demonstrate that the trial court unsustainably exercised its
discretion or erred as a matter of law. See In the Matter of Birmingham, 154
N.H. at 55.
In light of our decision, we need not address the plaintiff’s argument that
his complaint stated a viable cause of action. See Antosz v. Allain, 163 N.H.
298, 302 (2012) (declining to address parties’ other arguments where holding
on one issue is dispositive).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, and Gould, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2