THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0372, State of New Hampshire v. Keisha
Hobbs, the court on April 7, 2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Keisha Hobbs, appeals her conviction,
following a jury trial in Superior Court (Ogden, J.), on a charge of driving after
being certified a habitual offender. See RSA 262:23, I (2024). The defendant
argues that the Trial Court (Kennedy, J.) erred by denying her pretrial motion
to suppress evidence obtained as a result of her motor vehicle stop which, she
asserts, violated Part I, Article 19 of the New Hampshire Constitution and the
Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments to the Federal Constitution. We affirm.
We first consider the defendant’s argument under the State Constitution
and rely on federal law only to aid in our analysis. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226,
231-33 (1983). Part I, Article 19 protects all people from unreasonable
searches and seizures. See State v. O’Brien, 175 N.H. 697, 701 (2023). A
warrantless seizure is per se unreasonable unless it falls within a recognized
exception to the warrant requirement. State v. Monegro-Diaz, 175 N.H. 238,
242 (2022). An investigatory traffic stop, while a seizure for purposes of Part I,
Article 19, comprises one such exception. Id.
A lawful investigatory stop must rest on reasonable suspicion, meaning
specific, articulable facts taken together with all rational inferences the facts
support, that the person stopped has been, is, or is about to be engaged in
criminal activity. Id. A “reasonable suspicion” is more than just a hunch,
meaning that the articulated facts must pertain to a specific investigative
concern and not simply to a general sense that the person stopped is probably
a bad person who may have committed a crime. Id. The officer’s suspicion
must have a particularized and objective basis to warrant the intrusion into the
person’s privacy rights. Id. Importantly, however, reasonable suspicion to stop
a person is a less rigorous standard than the probable cause required to justify
a person’s arrest. State v. Richter, 145 N.H. 640, 641 (2000).
In evaluating the sufficiency of an officer’s suspicion to justify an
investigatory stop, we do not consider the articulable facts in isolation but
consider them in light of all the surrounding circumstances, mindful that a
trained officer may make inferences and draw conclusions from conduct that
may seem unremarkable to the untrained observer. Monegro-Diaz, 175 N.H. at
242; Sage, 170 N.H. at 611. An officer need not rule out all innocent
explanations for his or her observations before conducting an investigatory
stop. See State v. Sage, 170 N.H. 605, 610-11 (2018). When reviewing a trial
court order on a motion to suppress, we accept the trial court’s factual findings
unless they lack support in the record or are clearly erroneous, and we review
its legal conclusions de novo. See Monegro-Diaz, 175 N.H. at 241-42.
From the evidence introduced at the hearing on the motion to suppress
the trial court could have found that at 1:52 a.m. on June 1, 2023, two police
officers arrived at a convenience store in North Hampton. The officers parked
next to the only other vehicle in the parking lot and saw one occupant seated in
the front passenger seat. One officer went into the store where he observed
only one other customer, a woman (the defendant). The other officer remained
in the cruiser and queried a police database for the license plate number of the
vehicle.1 The second officer’s query revealed that the vehicle was registered to
two people, a man and a woman, and, also, that the woman had been
adjudicated a habitual offender. See RSA 262:23, I.
When the first officer returned to the cruiser, the defendant remained
inside the store, the female passenger remained in the vehicle’s passenger seat,
and no one else had entered the vehicle. The officers relocated to a parking lot
across the road from the convenience store, where the first officer reviewed a
DMV photograph of the female registered owner of the vehicle and recognized
her (the defendant) as the woman he had just encountered in the convenience
store. Sometime “[v]ery close to 2 a.m.,” the officers having seen the vehicle
leave the convenience store parking lot, effected the stop. The defendant was
driving.
In the absence of information to the contrary, an officer may reasonably
infer that a vehicle’s driver is its registered owner. See Richter, 145 N.H. at
641-42. Having seen the female registered owner inside the convenience store,
having seen the only other vehicle occupant in the passenger seat, and given
the short period of time between their departure from the convenience store
parking lot and their observation of the vehicle’s departure, the officers could
reasonably infer that the defendant was driving. As for the possibility that the
passenger could have moved to the driver’s seat during that short period, our
decisional law makes clear that the reasonable suspicion analysis does not
require law enforcement officers to negate every possible innocent inference
from the specific articulable facts before they effect an investigative stop. See
Sage, 170 N.H. at 610-11.
1 We note that merely conducting a computer search of a motor vehicle’s license plate number,
without suspicion of any criminal conduct, is not a “search” within the meaning of Part I,
Article 19. Monegro-Diaz, 175 N.H. at 242-43; Richter, 145 N.H. at 640-41.
2
Viewing all of the facts together, the officers could reasonably have
inferred that the defendant, and not the person occupying the passenger seat
or some unidentified third party, was the driver. That permissible inference, in
turn, established reasonable suspicion that the defendant was violating RSA
262:23, I. See Richter, 145 N.H. at 641-42. The officers, therefore, initiated a
lawful traffic stop for purposes of Part I, Article 19. See Richter, 145 N.H. at
641-42.
The Federal Constitution offers the defendant no greater protection than
the State Constitution under these circumstances. See Monegro-Diaz, 175
N.H. at 242; Kansas v. Glover, 589 U.S. 376, 380-81 (2020). Accordingly, we
reach the same result under the Federal Constitution.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3