THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0333, Brice Erickson v. Farres Alkhayer,
the court on March 5, 2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Farres Alkhayer (tenant), appeals an order of
the Circuit Court (Lyons, R., approved by Manchester, J.), following a final
hearing on the merits, awarding the plaintiff, Brice Erickson (landlord), $1,000,
for the tenant’s willful violation of a temporary order allowing the landlord
access to the tenant’s premises to investigate a water leakage issue, see RSA
540-A:3, IV, V, V-b(a), V-d(b), :4, VIII, IX(a) (2021), and addressing certain other
matters that had arisen during the course of the case. The tenant argues that
the trial court erred by: (1) not addressing certain pending motions at the final
hearing; (2) allegedly allowing the introduction of, and relying upon, hearsay
evidence; (3) allegedly declining to consider the tenant’s counterclaim for
damages; and (4) granting the landlord limited access to the tenant’s premises
pursuant to RSA 540-A:3, V in order to show the property to potential
purchasers of the building containing the leased premises. We affirm.
At the outset, we note several principles of appellate review that generally
apply to our review of all appeals, regardless of whether the appealing party is
represented by counsel. See, e.g., In the Matter of Birmingham & Birmingham,
154 N.H. 51, 56-57 (2006) (observing that self-represented parties in New
Hampshire are bound by the same procedural rules that govern parties
represented by counsel). First, “[i]t is a long-standing rule that parties may not
have judicial review of matters not raised in the forum of trial.” Bean v. Red
Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004). Indeed, we have noted that
“[i]ssues must be raised at the earliest possible time, because trial forums
should have a full opportunity to come to sound conclusions and to correct
claimed errors in the first instance.” O’Hearne v. McClammer, 163 N.H. 430,
438 (2012) (quotation omitted). Evidentiary objections generally must be raised
at the time the evidence is admitted or excluded, not raised for the first time in
a post-trial motion. See Broderick v. Watts, 136 N.H. 153, 168-69 (1992).
Second, it is the burden of the appealing party, here the tenant, to
provide a record that is sufficient both to decide the issues raised on appeal
and to demonstrate that those issues were raised in the trial court. Bean,151
N.H. at 250. If the appealing party fails to provide a portion of the trial record
that is necessary to decide an issue, such as a transcript of an evidentiary
hearing, we will assume that the portion of the trial record excluded on appeal
supports the result reached by the trial court. See id.
Third, it is the burden of the appealing party to support the issues raised
on appeal with fully developed legal argument. See State v. Blackmer, 149
N.H. 47, 49 (2003). “[I]n the realm of appellate review, a mere laundry list of
complaints regarding adverse rulings by the trial court, without developed legal
argument, is insufficient to warrant judicial review.” Id. (quotation omitted).
And fourth, the appealing party bears the burden on appeal of
demonstrating reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014).
“Where it appears that an error did not affect the outcome below, or where the
court can see from the entire record that no injury has been done, the
judgment will not be disturbed.” Kessler v. Gleich, 156 N.H. 488, 494 (2007)
(quotation omitted). With each of these principles in mind, we address the
arguments raised by the tenant in this appeal.
The tenant first argues that the trial court erred by not addressing
certain pending motions at the final hearing. In its final order, the trial court
observed that the motions at issue were filed less than ten days prior to the
hearing, depriving the opposing party of a “due process opportunity to address
the motions.” See Dist. Div. R. 1.8(D). The trial court further found that the
final order effectively rendered the motions at issue moot. On these grounds,
the trial court declined to address the motions.
On appeal, the tenant argues that each of the motions was timely, and
that by not ruling on the motions, the trial court deprived him of due process
under the State and Federal Constitutions and unsustainably exercised its
discretion. He contends that the trial court should have either continued the
hearing in order to allow an opportunity to respond, “[a]ddress[ed] the motions
but allow[ed] the opposing party additional time to respond,” or “[e]xplicitly
rul[ed] on each motion with reasoned analysis rather than rendering them
moot without consideration.” According to the tenant, the trial court’s refusal
to rule on the motions was prejudicial because, he asserts, he alleged that the
landlord had lied to the court and sought a show cause order. We disagree.
The tenant has not provided a transcript of the final hearing. In the
absence of a transcript, it is impossible to ascertain the nature of the motions
on which the tenant sought a ruling at the final hearing, and we must assume
that a transcript would support the trial court’s decision not to address the
motions. See Bean, 151 N.H. at 250. Moreover, other than asserting that the
motions concerned his claim that the landlord lied and a request to “show
cause,” the tenant has failed to describe the motions with any specificity or to
explain why they were not rendered moot by the final order. See Gallo, 166
N.H. at 740; Blackmer, 149 N.H. at 49. Finally, we note that no part of the
2
record reflects that the tenant ever argued in the trial court that it should
continue the hearing to allow a response to the motions, or that he otherwise
requested that the trial court address the motions while still allowing the
landlord an opportunity to respond. See Bean, 151 N.H. at 250. We conclude
that the tenant has neither demonstrated reversible error nor fully developed
his arguments why the trial court erred by declining to address the motions.1
See Gallo, 166 N.H. at 740; Blackmer, 149 N.H. at 49.
We next address whether the trial court erred by allegedly allowing the
introduction of, and relying upon, hearsay evidence. The tenant argues that
the trial court improperly relied upon hearsay evidence in finding that he
willfully violated the temporary order, that in so doing, it violated his right of
confrontation under the State and Federal Constitutions, and that, because the
trial court relied upon inadmissible hearsay, the evidence was legally
insufficient to support the award of $1,000 to the landlord. We disagree.
As noted above, the tenant has not provided a transcript of the final
hearing. Accordingly, the tenant has failed to demonstrate that he objected to
the introduction of the alleged hearsay evidence at trial. See Bean, 151 N.H. at
250. Although the tenant asserted in his motion to reconsider that the trial
court had improperly relied upon hearsay, the tenant may not preserve a
challenge to the introduction or consideration of hearsay testimony by raising
the argument for the first time in a post-trial motion for reconsideration. See
Broderick, 136 N.H. at 168-69. Moreover, in the absence of a transcript, we
must assume both that a transcript would support the trial court’s decision to
allow the purported hearsay, and that the evidence was sufficient to support
the trial court’s decision. See Bean, 151 N.H. at 250.
We next address whether the trial court erred by allegedly declining to
consider the tenant’s counterclaim. In its order, the trial court noted that at
trial, the plaintiff, that is, the landlord, “sought to address the issue of
monetary damages for recovering the [tenant’s] towed motor vehicle from the
property.” The trial court determined that the relief sought was outside its
jurisdiction under RSA chapter 540-A because it did not involve a violation of
1 We note that, after the landlord had filed his responsive brief in this appeal, the tenant filed
an untimely appendix, see Sup. Ct. R. 13(3) (providing that an appendix “shall be filed on or
before the date established for filing the party’s brief”), that contained various trial court
motions, including motions filed by both parties less than ten days before the final hearing.
Because the appendix was not timely filed, it is not properly before us. Even if we were to
consider the appendix, however, and were to assume that the motions within it are the same
motions referred to by the trial court in its final order, we would still conclude that the tenant
has failed to establish reversible error or to fully develop his arguments why the trial court
erred by declining to address the motions. See Gallo, 166 N.H. at 740; Blackmer, 149 N.H. at
49.
3