THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0224, Esruandy Salcedo Ozoria v. Dubai
Night Club and Grill, LLC & a., the court on May 13, 2026, issued
the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). In this small claim case, see RSA ch. 503 (2010 & Supp.
2025), the defendants, Dubai Night Club and Grill, LLC and Alex Rodriguez,
appeal orders of the Circuit Court (Bernazzani, J.) denying their motion to
continue the hearing on the merits, and entering a default judgment for the
plaintiff, Esruandy Salcedo Ozoria. They argue that the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion in denying their motion. We vacate and
remand.
On July 23, 2024, the court defaulted the defendants for failing to timely
answer the complaint, and on August 14, 2024, after the defendants filed a late
answer and motion to strike, the court struck the default and scheduled the
case for a February 5, 2025 hearing on the merits. On January 30, 2025, the
court then granted the defendants’ motion to continue the hearing and
rescheduled the hearing for March 20, 2025. On March 19, 2025, the day
before the hearing, an attorney filed an appearance on behalf of the
defendants, along with a motion to continue the hearing, representing that he
had just been retained by the defendants and was unable to attend the hearing
due to a scheduling conflict in the Superior Court. See Dist. Div. R. 1.8-B(A)
(providing generally that “where an attorney or party has a conflict in date and
time, the case first scheduled shall not be subject to a continuance because of
the subsequently scheduled matter”).
When neither the defendants nor their attorney appeared at the hearing
the following day, the court denied their motion to continue and entered a
default judgment against the defendants in the amount of $10,000 plus costs
and interest. See Dist. Div. R. 4.6 (providing that “[i]f the defendant fails to
appear, a judgment shall be issued in favor of the plaintiff”).
The decision to grant or deny a motion to continue is within the trial
court’s sound discretion. In the Matter of Kempton & Kempton, 167 N.H. 785,
793 (2015). We will not overturn the court’s decision unless the defendants
demonstrate that it is clearly unreasonable to the prejudice of their case. Id.
“As good cause appears and as justice may require, the court may waive the
application of any rule, except where precluded by law.” Dist. Div. R. 1.1.
In defaulting the defendants, the trial court stated:
Defendant’s disregard of the Court’s time, Plaintiff’s time, Plaintiff’s
witnesses’ time, as well as the interpreter’s time (which costs the
Court money) is unacceptable. The Defendant was given many
chances to come to the Court and defend his position. The Court
accommodated all of Defendant’s requests despite the prejudice it
caused Plaintiff each time. Given this latest motion by the
Defendant, this Court finds that Defendant has been willfully
delaying the process to everyone’s detriment. The Defendant’s
failure to appear at the hearing (even without his attorney) shows
the lack of respect he has for the Court and for the Plaintiff.
On reconsideration, the trial court went further, stating that, “[e]ven if
Defendant had attended the hearing, it was the Court’s intent to deny the
Motion to Continue.” The trial court additionally faulted the defendants for not
“engag[ing] . . . an attorney [who] was available to attend the scheduled
hearing.”
In its reconsideration order, the court also acknowledged that there had
been an “unfortunate” miscommunication regarding the defendants’ need to
appear for the hearing, but ruled that “this does not change the facts of this
case.” The defendants allege that the miscommunication resulted from a
language barrier, rather than from any intent to delay the proceedings.
We recognize the trial court’s concern that the defendants had already
been defaulted once before and had received a prior continuance. The trial
court was also understandably exasperated that the defendants’ counsel did
not appear for the hearing despite the lack of an order granting the motion to
continue. However, given that the defendants’ chosen counsel had a prior
scheduling conflict, the “unfortunate” miscommunication regarding the
defendants’ need to appear for the hearing, and the importance we have
assigned to deciding cases on their merits, see, e.g., Douglas v. Douglas, 143
N.H. 419, 425 (1999), we conclude that, under the circumstances of this case,
the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion in denying the motion to
continue. Accordingly, we vacate the default judgment and remand for a
hearing on the merits.
2
In light of our decision, we need not address the defendants’ remaining
argument. See Antosz v. Allain, 163 N.H. 298, 302 (2012) (declining to address
parties’ other arguments where holding on one issue is dispositive).
Vacated and remanded.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3