THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0421, Farres Alkhayer v. City of Nashua &
a., the court on April 22, 2026, issued the following order:
No objection having been received, the plaintiff’s motion for leave to
supplement and replace his brief is granted.
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Farres Alkhayer, appeals the order of the
Circuit Court (Major, J.) dismissing his petition for a writ of replevin. See RSA
ch. 536-A (2021). We construe the plaintiff’s brief to argue that: (1) it was a
violation of his right to due process under the federal and State constitutions
for defendant City of Nashua (city) to tow his vehicle without providing him
with a pre-deprivation hearing; (2) the city was required in the replevin action
to prove that the plaintiff violated parking regulations resulting in unpaid
tickets and subjecting his vehicle to being towed; and (3) the city’s post-
deprivation process was insufficient.
A city ordinance provides that a vehicle will be towed if the owner has
incurred more than a threshold amount in non-moving fines. Nashua, N.H.,
Rev. Ordinances ch. 320, art. XV, § 320-89. In this case, the trial court found
that, at the time the plaintiff’s vehicle was towed, the plaintiff “had amassed
well over $200 in unpaid parking tickets,” which was more than the threshold
amount. The court found that the plaintiff failed to pay the fines he owed and
“failed to take advantage of the timely post-towing appeal process that was
available to him.” Applying our recent decision in Appeal of Doe, the trial court
ruled that, under these facts and circumstances, the plaintiff was not entitled
to a pre-deprivation hearing before the city towed his vehicle. See Appeal of
Doe (Bd. of Med.), 177 N.H. 274, 280-81 (2025), 2025 N.H. 13, ¶¶13-15 (setting
forth standard to determine whether due process requires a pre-deprivation
hearing).
As the appealing party, the plaintiff has the burden of demonstrating
reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014). Based upon our
review of the trial court’s well-reasoned order, the plaintiff’s challenges to it, the
relevant law, and the record submitted on appeal, we conclude that the plaintiff
has not demonstrated reversible error. See id.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2