THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0256, Jessica Woodman v. Derry &
Webster, LLC & a., the court on April 8, 2026, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). Defendant Vatche Manoukian (landlord) appeals the order of
the Circuit Court (Lyons, R., approved by Manchester, J.), awarding statutory
damages to the plaintiff, Jessica Woodman (tenant), for the landlord’s violation
of RSA 540-A:3, V-a (2021). The landlord argues that the trial court erred in:
(1) awarding statutory damages under RSA 540-A:4, IX(a) (2021) and (2) failing
to rule on his oral motion to dismiss the tenant’s actual damage claim. We
vacate the statutory damage award and remand for the trial court to address
the tenant’s claim for actual damages.
On September 16, 2024, the tenant filed an RSA 540-A:4, II (2021)
petition alleging that the residence she leased from the landlord was infested
with mice, rats, ants, and crickets. The same day, the court issued a
temporary order requiring the landlord to investigate the tenant’s report and
take reasonable measures to remediate any infestation. On October 10, 2024,
the court held a hearing on the tenant’s petition, after which it issued an order
finding that the landlord had violated RSA 540-A:3, V-a for willfully failing to
investigate the tenant’s report of infestation and failing to take reasonable
remediation measures.1 The court did not award actual or statutory damages,
but stated that it would consider awarding damages if the tenant “files a
specific damages amount with supporting documentation.” The tenant filed an
affidavit of damages with supporting documentation claiming $9,544.72 in
damages.
On January 15, 2025, the court held an evidentiary hearing on damages.
At the hearing, the tenant, who was self-represented, testified that, as a result
of the landlord’s failure to remediate the infestation, she purchased a new
mattress and carpets, among other things. However, the tenant neglected to
1 Although the tenant argues that the record is incomplete because the landlord did not
provide a copy of the order in his appendix, the landlord attached the order to his notice of
appeal. To the extent necessary, we waive the requirements of Rule 13. The tenant also
argues that the record is incomplete because the landlord did not provide inspection reports
introduced at the hearing to support the claim of infestation. We find the record sufficient
because the landlord’s appeal is limited to the issue of damages.
bring copies of her affidavit or supporting documentation to the hearing, and
she could not recall the specific amounts she spent.
The landlord, who was also self-represented at the hearing, moved to
dismiss the tenant’s damage claim for lack of proof. The court took the matter
under advisement, noting that, “[t]here’s a statute that lays out that there’s a
mandatory minimum amount of damage,” and that the court “will deal with
that.” Pursuant to RSA 540-A:4, IX(a), the court awarded the tenant damages
of $1,000 per day starting on September 18, 2024, the date on which the
landlord was served with the temporary order, until October, 11, 2024, the
date of the court’s order after the hearing on the petition, a total of 23 days,
resulting in an award of $23,000 in statutory damages.
The landlord first argues that the trial court erred in awarding statutory
damages under RSA 540-A:4, IX(a). In a landlord-tenant appeal under RSA
chapter 540-A, “[t]he findings of facts shall be final but questions of law may be
transferred to the supreme court in the same manner as from the superior
court.” RSA 540-A:4, V (2021). RSA 540-A:3, V-a provides that: “No landlord
shall willfully fail to investigate a tenant’s report of an infestation of insects,
including bed bugs, or rodents in the tenant’s rented or leased premises, within
7 days of receiving notice of such alleged infestation from the tenant or a
municipal health or housing code authority, or fail to take reasonable
measures to remediate an infestation.”
RSA 540-A:4, IX(a) provides that: “Any landlord or tenant who violates
RSA 540-A:2 or any provision of RSA 540-A:3 shall be subject to the civil
remedies set forth in RSA 358-A:10 for the initial violation, including costs and
reasonable attorney’s fees incurred in the proceedings. Each day that a
violation continues after issuance of a temporary order shall constitute a
separate violation.” The landlord argues that the trial court erred in awarding
statutory damages because RSA 540-A:4, IX contains a specific exemption for
violations of RSA 540-A:3, V-a. We agree. RSA 540-A:4, IX(d) specifically
provides that: “The provisions of subparagraph (a) shall not apply to any
violation of 540-A:3, V-a.”
The tenant argues that the statutory damage award should nevertheless
be upheld because the record supports a finding that the landlord violated RSA
540-A:2 (2021), which prohibits a landlord from “willfully violat[ing] a tenant's
right to quiet enjoyment of [her] tenancy.” She also asserts that there were
“multiple violations affecting habitability, well beyond rodent infestations.”
However, the court made no finding that the landlord violated RSA 540-A:2 or
any provisions of RSA 540-A:3 other than RSA 540-A:3, V-a. Accordingly, we
vacate the trial court’s statutory damage award.
2
The landlord next argues that the trial court erred in not ruling on his
oral motion to dismiss the tenant’s actual damage claim. As previously noted,
the tenant complied with the trial court’s order to file an affidavit of damages
with supporting documentation. In its order on damages, the court noted that,
when there is a violation of RSA chapter 540-A, the court “must impose either
the actual damages or the statutory minimum damage amount.” In light of our
decision vacating the trial court’s statutory damage award, we remand for the
trial court to address the tenant’s claim for actual damages and for other
proceedings consistent with this order.
Vacated and remanded.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3