THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0296, Laurie Ortolano v. Melbourne
Moran, Jr. & a., the court on March 6, 2026, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Laurie Ortolano, appeals orders of the Superior
Court (Colburn, J.) dismissing certain defamation claims against defendant
Melbourne Moran, Jr.,1 and granting summary judgment with respect to her
remaining defamation claims. The plaintiff argues that the trial court erred by
dismissing her defamation per se claims, by finding that certain allegedly
defamatory statements were true, by determining that certain allegedly
defamatory statements constituted nonactionable opinion, and by ruling that
she is a limited-purpose public figure. We affirm.
In reviewing the trial court’s dismissal orders, we consider whether the
allegations in the plaintiff’s pleadings are reasonably susceptible of a
construction that would permit recovery. See Richards v. Union Leader Corp.,
176 N.H. 789, 796 (2024), 2024 N.H. 49, ¶9. We assume the truth of any well-
pleaded factual allegations in the plaintiff’s pleadings and construe all
reasonable inferences from those facts in the light most favorable to the
plaintiff. See id. We do not, however, assume the truth of statements in the
plaintiff’s pleadings that are merely conclusions of law. See Automated
Transactions v. Am. Bankers Ass’n, 172 N.H. 528, 532 (2019); ERG, Inc. v.
Barnes, 137 N.H. 186, 190 (1993) (“The court will not, however, assume the
truth or accuracy of any allegations which are not well-pleaded, including the
statement of conclusions of fact and principles of law.”). We will uphold the
trial court’s decision if the well-pleaded facts do not constitute a basis for relief.
See Richards, 176 N.H. at 796, 2024 N.H. 49, ¶9.
We review the trial court’s ruling on summary judgment by considering
the affidavits and other evidence in the summary judgment record, and all
inferences properly drawn from them, in the light most favorable to the non-
moving party. Hynes v. N.H. Democratic Party, 175 N.H. 781, 793 (2023). We
will affirm the summary judgment ruling if the record does not reveal any
1 The trial court also dismissed the plaintiff’s claims against defendant Wanderlust Therapeutic
Services, LLC, a company of which defendant Melbourne Moran, Jr. is the principal. On
appeal, the plaintiff does not challenge the dismissal of her claims against Wanderlust
Therapeutic Services. Accordingly, all references to “the defendant” in this order pertain to
defendant Melbourne Moran, Jr.
genuine issues of material fact, that is, a fact that would affect the outcome of
the case, and if the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.
Id.; Thomas v. Telegraph Publ’g Co., 155 N.H. 314, 321 (2007).
For a cause of action sounding in defamation to survive a motion to
dismiss, the plaintiff is required to have alleged facts that would show that the
defendant failed to exercise reasonable care in publishing false and defamatory
statements of fact about the plaintiff to a third party. Richards, 176 N.H. at
797, 2024 N.H. 49, ¶12. Accordingly, to constitute actionable defamation, the
statement must be one of “fact.” Id. “Conversely, a statement of opinion is not
actionable unless it may reasonably be understood to imply the existence of
defamatory facts as the basis for the opinion.” Id. “[S]tatements of ‘imaginative
expression’ or ‘rhetorical hyperbole’ are not actionable because they cannot
reasonably be interpreted as factual assertions.” Id. Similarly, expressive or
vague statements that cannot be objectively verified fall within the category of
protected opinion, no matter how pejorative or unflattering the statement may
be. Id. at 798, 2024 N.H. 49, ¶ 13. Statements that are claimed to constitute
actionable defamation must be read within the context of the publication taken
as a whole. Id. at 797, 2024 N.H. 49, ¶12. Whether a statement constitutes or
implies an actionable statement of fact is a question of law. Id.
“Defamation per se” occurs when a “defamatory publication charge[s] the
plaintiff with a crime or with activities which would tend to injure [the plaintiff]
in [the plaintiff’s] trade or business.” MacDonald v. Jacobs, 171 N.H. 668, 674
(2019) (quotation omitted). When “one falsely and without a privilege to do so
publishes spoken words which impute to another conduct constituting a
criminal offense chargeable by indictment or information . . . and of such a
kind as to be characterized as morally reprehensible,” the speaker may be
liable for defamation per se. Jones v. Walsh, 107 N.H. 379, 380 (1966). The
test for defamation per se is “whether the words used taken in the sense in
which they are reasonably understood under the circumstances by persons
familiar with the language used are capable of the defamatory construction of
accusing the plaintiff with a criminal offense of the type . . . described.” Id.
Proof of defamation per se obviates the need for the plaintiff to establish
specific damages, allowing the plaintiff to “recover as general damages all
damages which would normally result from such a defamation, such as harm
to [the plaintiff’s] reputation.” MacDonald, 171 N.H. at 674 (quotation omitted).
The circumstances giving rise to the present dispute began when the
defendant, a licensed social worker and member of the Board of Alderman for
the City of Nashua, referred to “silver spoon millionaires” at a public meeting —
a comment that the plaintiff, a Nashua resident who was in attendance and
frequently attends local government meetings and hearings, understood to be
referring to her. On the following evening, October 12, 2022, the plaintiff
attended a public meeting chaired by the defendant at which she referred to
the defendant’s comment from the night before and stated that he can afford to
2
send his children to a specifically-named private Catholic school, that she gives
“a great deal of money” to the church affiliated with that school, that the
defendant had recently paid $3,400 to allow his children to be “principal for the
day” at a fundraiser for the school, that he had “made a judgment that was
horrendous,” and that he is “a very poor example to [his] own children.”
On the following morning, the plaintiff sent the defendant an email
containing the subject line, “Fair Game,” in which she stated that (1) the
defendant “seem[ed] to believe that [his] children are immune from discussion
in the chamber”; (2) when she had run for public office, her own children “were
fair game for citizens to question” relative to her education choices; (3) when
she was the defendant’s age, she could not have afforded to send her children
to private school or spend $3,400 at a school fundraiser; and (4) she now
“donate[s] significantly to [the church affiliated with the children’s school] in
support of [the] school and renovation projects.” Later that same morning, the
defendant’s wife sent the principal of the children’s school an email stating that
(1) her children had been “targeted” at a public meeting due to the defendant’s
role as a public official; (2) the plaintiff had followed up her comments at the
meeting with an email to the defendant; (3) she was concerned that the person
who had “attack[ed] [her] children is a parishioner of,” and had “expressed
being a substantial donor to,” the church; (4) she perceived the statements
concerning donations to the church, made both at the public meeting and in
the follow-up email, to be “a veiled threat that [the plaintiff] would interfere
with the education and safety of [her] children . . . given [the plaintiff’s]
influence over the church”; (5) the plaintiff’s “attack focused on us winning the
principal for the day auction and our decision to educate our children in the
catholic faith”; and (6) she wanted “to ensure [her] children’s education [would]
continue without interference.”
At a hearing held that evening, October 13, 2022, the defendant made
several statements in response to the plaintiff’s comments from the October 12
meeting and in her follow-up email that she claims to be defamatory. The
defendant first characterized the plaintiff’s comments as an “attack” on his
children. According to the plaintiff’s complaint, the defendant then stated,
. . . I have no qualms about people coming in here attacking me.
But you took my kids into it, and as a child protective worker,
when someone does oppositional research on a child, that sends
out predatory vibes like crazy. The person also mentioned that she
was a donor to my kids’ school, not just once here in public but
followed up in an email to tell me that. Was that a veiled threat?
Is she going to have some influence over my children’s school? Is
she going to want a special tour while my kids are in class? Is she
going to give them a “what-for” because of what their dad does?
3