THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0750, S.N. v. N.N., the court on June 3,
2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, N.N., appeals the order of the Circuit Court
(Steckowych, J.), following a hearing, extending a domestic violence protective
order for the protection of the plaintiff, S.N. See RSA 173-B:5, VI (2022). The
defendant argues that the trial court erred in finding “good cause” for the
extension. We vacate and remand.
The plaintiff petitioned for a domestic violence protective order on June
17, 2024, following an incident arising from the defendant’s request for a
wellness check at the plaintiff’s residence several days earlier relating to their
teenaged son. At the hearing on the petition, the parties disputed the facts
relating to the incident, but there was no dispute that the incident involved no
physical violence. However, in her amended petition and at the hearing, the
plaintiff alleged that the defendant had physically abused her during their
marriage, which ended twelve years earlier. The plaintiff did not testify that the
defendant had been physically abusive to her after the divorce, but she was
concerned that he could again become physically abusive. Following a hearing,
the court issued a one-year protective order, finding that the defendant had
“abused” the plaintiff, as defined in RSA 173-B:1 (2022), “as related in
plaintiff’s petition and verified in sworn testimony,” and that his conduct
constituted a present credible threat to the plaintiff’s safety because he
“continued to act aggressively towards the plaintiff causing her to fear that he
will resume his history of physical violence against her.”
On September 4, 2025, the plaintiff sought an extension of the protective
order, alleging:
The abuse has been consistent for over a decade. The [protective
order] is the only thing that has stopped the abuse. Without it, I
will return to living in fear for my safety and my life. I respectfully
ask the court to extend this [protective order] to ensure my
continued protection.
Following the hearing, the court extended the protective order for one year.
The defendant argues that the evidence was insufficient to support a
finding that there was “good cause” to extend the protective order. See
MacPherson v. Weiner, 158 N.H. 6, 10 (2008) (defining “good cause” in the
context of stalking order extension). As an initial matter, we conclude that the
defendant has preserved this issue for review. Although, as the plaintiff notes,
the question presented section of the defendant’s brief did not include a
specific reference to the record showing where this issue was raised in the trial
court, see Sup. Ct. R. 16(3)(b), the remaining sections of the brief contain
sufficient citations to the record to establish that the issue was raised in the
trial court.
“For a showing of ‘good cause’ the trial court must . . . assess whether
the current conditions are such that there is still a concern for the safety and
well-being of the plaintiff.” MacPherson, 158 N.H. at 10. In its assessment, the
trial court must review the circumstances giving rise to the original protective
order and any violation of the order. See id. “The trial court should also take
into account any present and reasonable fear by the plaintiff.” Id. “Where the
trial court determines that the circumstances are such that, without a
protective order, the plaintiff’s safety and well-being would be in jeopardy,
‘good cause’ warrants an extension.” Id.
The trial court’s order summarizes the parties’ testimony and their
respective positions; however, it does not cite the legal standard for granting an
extension, and it makes no express findings as to the grounds for the
extension. The court’s order merely concludes that, “[a]fter hearing the parties,
and assessing the credibility and demeanor of each witness, the court finds
that the plaintiff has met her burden of proof.” Accordingly, we remand for the
trial court to make specific findings of fact and to state its reasons expressly as
to whether the plaintiff has established good cause for the extension.
Vacated and remanded.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2