THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0404, Farres Alkhayer v. Brice Erickson,
the court on April 8, 2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Farres Alkhayer (tenant) appeals a decision of
the Circuit Court (Major, J.), following a final hearing on the merits, dismissing
his claim for damages pursuant to RSA 540-A:4 (Supp. 2025) against the
defendant, Brice Erickson (landlord). In dismissing the case, the trial court
determined that the tenant had not proved that the landlord engaged in
prohibited practices under RSA chapter 540-A, finding the tenant “significantly
less credible” than the landlord based upon their testimony at the hearing. The
trial court additionally observed that “many of the issues raised by the [tenant]
have been addressed in prior litigation,” see, e.g., Erickson v. Alkhayer, No.
2025-0333 (N.H. March 5, 2026) (nonprecedential order), and thus, the court
determined that those claims were barred by res judicata. The tenant argues
that the trial court erred by denying his request for a continuance and
proceeding with trial in the absence of responses that were not yet due to his
discovery requests. We affirm.
RSA 540-A:4, VI generally requires the trial court to “hold a hearing
within 30 days of the filing of a petition under [RSA 540-A:4, II] or within 10
days of service of process upon the defendant, whichever occurs later.” In this
case, the plaintiff filed his petition on March 25, 2025, and the trial court
initially scheduled the matter for a final hearing to occur on April 21, 2025.
The tenant also filed a motion seeking a continuance of the final hearing date
in order to accommodate a collection of discovery requests. The tenant did not
seek to shorten the time within which the landlord was to provide his
responses. The Trial Court (Spony, J.) granted the request for a continuance
on March 26, 2025, and consistent with RSA 540-A:4, VI, directed the clerk to
reschedule the final hearing within 30 days. On March 27, the court issued a
notice of hearing, scheduling the final hearing for April 25, 2025.
The tenant did not effect service of either the petition or the discovery
requests until March 31, 2025. On April 16, fewer than ten days prior to the
April 25 final hearing, the tenant filed a second motion to continue, requesting
that the final hearing be scheduled for May 5 to accommodate discovery
responses. By notice of decision dated April 24, 2025, the day before the final
hearing, the Trial Court (Spony, J.) granted the continuance. Later, the
landlord filed an emergency objection to the April 16 motion for a continuance,
asserting that the tenant had not served him with the motion, and that the
landlord would be out of the country from April 29 through May 9. The
landlord requested that the court reinstate the previously scheduled hearing.
The Trial Court (Spony, J.) granted the landlord’s request, effectively vacating
the second continuance.
At the April 25 final hearing, the tenant objected to proceeding without
discovery responses. The trial court denied any “request for discovery at this
point,” observing that, based upon the allegations in the petition, the tenant
did not “need discovery to prove [his] case . . . . The [allegations] either
happened or [they] didn’t. And you have proof of it or not.” The tenant
proceeded to testify on his own behalf and to examine the landlord consistent
with the topics set forth in his discovery requests. On appeal, the tenant
argues that the trial court erred by denying his request for a continuance, by
proceeding with trial, and by making credibility determinations in the absence
of the discovery responses. He asserts that proceeding in this manner deprived
him of due process and fundamental fairness. We disagree.
The trial court has broad discretion to manage the proceedings before it,
including decisions concerning discovery and requests for continuances.
Achille v. Achille, 167 N.H. 706, 713 (2015); Blagbrough Family Realty Trust v.
A & T Forest Prods., 155 N.H. 29, 40 (2007). To establish an unsustainable
exercise of discretion, the tenant must demonstrate that the trial court’s ruling
was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Blagbrough
Family Realty Trust, 155 N.H. at 40. The appealing party, here the tenant, has
the burden on appeal to demonstrate reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166
N.H. 737, 740 (2014).
Based upon our review of the trial court’s decision, the tenant’s
arguments, the relevant law (including the requirement of RSA 540-A:4, VI for
a hearing within 30 days), and the record submitted on appeal, including the
petition, the discovery requests, and the transcript, we conclude that the
tenant has not established that the trial court’s denial of his request for a
continuance was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his
case. See id.; Blagbrough Family Realty Trust, 155 N.H. at 40. Nor has he
established that the trial court violated his rights to due process or
fundamental fairness. See Gallo, 166 N.H. at 740.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2