THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0106, E.O. v. R.T., the court on July 18,
2025, issued the following order:
The defendant’s “motion to clarify/justify” this court’s June 12, 2025
denial of his prior motion for relief is denied.
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, R.T., appeals an order of the Circuit Court
(Chabot, J.), following a hearing, granting a request by the plaintiff, E.O., to
extend a domestic violence final order of protection for five years. See RSA
173-B:5, VI (2022). The defendant raises numerous issues on appeal.
We affirm.
We construe the defendant’s brief to argue that the record does not
support the trial court’s finding that there was “good cause” to extend the
protective order. See id.; MacPherson v. Weiner, 158 N.H. 6, 10 (2008)
(defining “good cause” in the context of stalking order extension). “For a
showing of ‘good cause’ the trial court must . . . assess whether the current
conditions are such that there is still a concern for the safety and well-being of
the plaintiff.” Id. In its assessment, the trial court must review the
circumstances giving rise to the original protective order and any violation of
the order. See id. “The trial court should also take into account any present
and reasonable fear by the plaintiff.” Id. “Where the trial court determines
that the circumstances are such that, without a protective order, the plaintiff’s
safety and well-being would be in jeopardy, ‘good cause’ warrants an
extension.” Id.
The trial court noted that the defendant remains “consumed” with the
plaintiff, and that he “persisted during the [extension] hearing in trying to
relitigate matters which have been fully and fairly litigated.”
The plaintiff testified, “I’m still very scared. I still look over my shoulder.
I’m still worried he’s going to show up at my house. I still lock my doors, keep
pepper spray on me.” The plaintiff testified that she believes that if the
protective order were not extended, the defendant would “directly contact me
and show up at my house again and maybe even more.” The plaintiff testified
that the protective order “is the only thing that’s stopping him from contacting
me” because “he doesn’t see his behavior as wrong.” The trial court found that
the “Plaintiff continues to fear for her personal safety, given Defendant’s
historical lack of regard for any boundaries she has attempted to establish and
the detrimental impact that his incessant and unwavering conduct . . . is
having on her.” The court also found that the “Defendant’s ongoing conduct is
just as, if not more so, unpredictable and erratic,” as it had been earlier in the
proceedings, which “perpetuat[es] Plaintiff’s concern for her safety.”
“The trial court is in the best position to view the current circumstances,
as well as the defendant’s prior acts, and determine whether an extension is
necessary for the safety and well-being of the plaintiff.” MacPherson, 158 N.H.
at 11. Based upon this record, we conclude that the trial court could have
reasonably found good cause to extend the protective order. See id. at 10-11.
To the extent that the defendant argues that the trial court was biased
against him, he has not shown that a reasonable person would have
questioned the court’s impartiality. See Sup. Ct. R. 38, Canon 2.11; State v.
Bader, 148 N.H. 265, 271 (2002) (noting that adverse judicial rulings alone do
not render a judge biased).
We decline to address the defendant’s remaining issues because they are
inadequately briefed, see State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 49 (2003), not
preserved, see Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250-51 (2004), or
beyond the scope of this appeal.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2