THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0126, State of New Hampshire v. David
Joseph Spinney, the court on April 8, 2026, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, David Joseph Spinney, appeals sentences
imposed by the Circuit Court (Stephen, J.), following his conviction on charges
of domestic violence based upon his waiver of the presentation of evidence or a
defense in order to pursue a de novo jury trial in superior court, see RSA
631:2-b (Supp. 2025); N.H. R. Crim. P. 21(a)(1), and following his later
withdrawal of the de novo superior court appeal and remand to the circuit
court, see N.H. R. Crim. P. 21(a)(2). The defendant argues that the trial court
erred by imposing sentences that were “excessive.” We affirm.
The trial court has broad discretion to sentence a convicted defendant
within the parameters of RSA 651:2 (Supp. 2025) in order to achieve the goals
of criminal sentencing, and in so exercising its discretion, to determine the
evidence to be considered in sentencing. See State v. Fitzgerald, 174 N.H. 722,
728 (2022); State v. Castine, 172 N.H. 562, 567 (2019); State v. Towle, 167
N.H. 315, 327 (2015). We generally review the trial court’s sentencing
decisions for an unsustainable exercise of discretion, upholding the trial
court’s decision unless the defendant demonstrates that it was clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Fitzgerald, 174 N.H. at
728; Castine, 172 N.H. at 567. We view the evidence in the light most
favorable to the State, upholding the trial court’s findings unless they are
unsupported by the evidence. State v. Timmons, 145 N.H. 149, 151 (2000).
The legislature has made it a class A misdemeanor for a defendant to
“[p]urposely or knowingly cause[] . . . unprivileged physical contact against
another by use of physical force” when the defendant “is currently or was
formerly involved in a romantic relationship” with the victim. RSA 631:2-b,
I(a), II, III(b). For a person convicted of a class A misdemeanor, the legislature
has granted trial courts discretion to impose a term of incarceration of up to
one year. RSA 651:2, I, II(c).
Viewed most favorably to the State, see Timmons, 145 N.H. at 151, the
evidence establishes that the defendant and victim had been in a relationship,
characterized by the victim’s mother as “abusive,” for approximately four years
at the time of the charged assaults. According to the State’s offer of proof, the
victim has self-esteem and self-confidence issues. She had attempted many
times over the course of the relationship to terminate it, and had been
encouraged by friends to do so. However, each time she tried to end the
relationship, she was unsuccessful as a result of the defendant’s manipulation
of her and her fear. As the victim herself explained at the sentencing hearing,
she had been “living with stress and anxiety” over the relationship for years,
and “[e]ach time [she] tried [to end it], [the defendant] would call [her]
incessantly, keep [her] up for hours, make [her] feel guilty, show up in the area
and try to guilt [her] into seeing him and eventually would wear [her] down.”
According to the victim, the defendant “refused, each time, to accept that [the
relationship] was over[,] . . . greatly affect[ing her] mental and physical health.”
The victim was not the first woman whom the defendant had harassed.
The State introduced evidence, without objection, that the defendant had been
convicted in two separate domestic relations cases in the Massachusetts
Superior Court on charges of criminal harassment, criminal stalking, and
malicious destruction of property, including both felony and misdemeanor-level
convictions, for conduct occurring in the 2016-time frame. The State described
the conduct leading to the Massachusetts convictions as “phishing women,” in
which the defendant would use a “dating app” to arrange dates with women
who did not know him, present himself at the encounters not as the person
who arranged the date but as “someone else who then comes and hits on this
woman who’s been stood up on this date and then harasses those women for
significant amounts of time after the fact.” As a result of the Massachusetts
criminal conduct, the defendant was incarcerated a total of 881 days and was
required to take an anger management class.
The charges in this case arose as a result of the victim’s attempt to end
the parties’ relationship on November 18, 2023. On that day, when the
defendant was coming to the victim’s apartment, the victim “rush[ed] down to
the door [of the apartment building so as not to] . . . let him into the building,
to give him back . . . some of his belongings[, and] to say, that’s it, we’re done.”
In response, the defendant came into the building, grabbed the victim’s arm,
began physically dragging her up a staircase, and when she actively pulled
away, let go of her arm, got behind her, and physically pushed her up the
staircase. The assaults lasted approximately 30 seconds, were captured on
security video that the trial court viewed, and caused the victim significant
fear. The defendant then refused to leave for three hours while the victim
attempted to end the relationship, refusing to leave even after an employee of
the apartment complex and a friend of the victim arrived two hours after the
incident had begun and intervened on her behalf. At the time of the assaults,
the defendant “was on orders and conditions of bail” in one of the
Massachusetts cases, and “was two weeks away from resolving [that] case.”
2
The defendant was charged with two counts of knowingly causing
unprivileged physical contact with the victim, one asserting that he violated
RSA 631:2-b, I(a) when he “grabbed the victim’s right arm and pulled her
toward” the staircase, and the other alleging that he violated the statute when
he “pushed her using both hands” up the staircase. The State requested that
the trial court impose a 12-month stand-committed term of incarceration, plus
a consecutive 12-month term deferred for a period of five years, probation, and
an order requiring the defendant to participate in a batterer’s intervention
program. In response, the defendant requested a fully deferred sentence,
probation, and that he be required to engage in a batterer’s intervention
program. The defendant emphasized that (1) the actual assaults had lasted
only 30 seconds; (2) the conduct resulting in the Massachusetts cases had
occurred several years before the conduct in this case; (3) he had taken
responsibility and served time for the Massachusetts conduct; (4) he is on
probation in Massachusetts and had reported the New Hampshire charges to
his probation officer; (5) he had taken an anger management class; and (6) he
had not contacted the victim since the 2023 incident.
The trial court ultimately imposed (1) a 12-month House of Correction
sentence on one of the charges with seven months to be served stand
committed and the remaining five months deferred for a period of three years
on the condition of good behavior; (2) a consecutive 12-month House of
Correction sentence on the other charge deferred for three years; (3) two years
of probation; (4) completion of a batterer’s intervention evaluation; (5) a no-
contact order with respect to the victim, her friend, and her mother; and (6)
$50 fines for each offense. The trial court explained that, although it agreed
with the defendant that stand-committed time of 12 months was not
warranted, it would not view his conduct as simply “the fleeting moments of
the video.” Rather, it viewed the defendant’s conduct in the totality of the
circumstances, including: (1) the defendant’s awareness that the victim
suffered from anxiety; (2) the lasting effect that the assaults would have on the
victim; (3) the fact that the defendant had been convicted of felony-level
harassment against other women in Massachusetts; and (4) the fact that the
defendant had not learned from the Massachusetts convictions or anger
management counseling. The trial court further explained that, with credit for
good time, the defendant could be released in approximately six months.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court unsustainably
exercised its discretion by “impos[ing] sentences that were disproportional to
the conduct of conviction and did not strike a reasonable balance among the
competing [sentencing] goals of . . . punishment, deterrence, and
rehabilitation.” He minimizes the assaults, claiming that his prior record did
not justify seven months of stand-committed time and seventeen months of
deferred time “for a push and pull that occurred within a 30-second period
during an emotionally charged breakup,” that the court “placed too much
3