THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0144, 922 Associates, LLC v. Barry Neville
& a., the court on July 20, 2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendants, Barry Neville and Kimberly Neville, appeal
an order of the Superior Court (Honigberg. J.), following a two-day bench trial,
ruling that the plaintiff, 922 Associates, LLC, acquired easement rights to a
disputed area on their property. They argue that: (1) the trial court lacked
subject matter jurisdiction to adjudicate this matter; and (2) the evidence did
not support the court’s ruling. We affirm.
The defendants first argue that the trial court lacked subject matter
jurisdiction over this action because the plaintiff allegedly failed to name a
necessary party. “Subject matter jurisdiction is jurisdiction over the nature of
the case and the type of relief sought[,] the extent to which a court can rule on
the conduct of persons or the status of things.” Gordon v. Town of Rye, 162
N.H. 144, 149 (2011) (quotation omitted). The defendants argue that RSA
498:5-a (2010) required the plaintiffs to name KBNEVILLE, LLC, a limited
liability company that was administratively dissolved by the New Hampshire
Secretary of State on September 1, 2009, as a party to this action. We need
not address the factual issues raised by the defendants because we conclude
that this alleged procedural defect raises an issue of compliance with RSA
498:5-a, not subject matter jurisdiction. See Porter v. Coco, 154 N.H. 353,
357-58 (2006) (necessary party not named as party to RSA 498:5-a action is
not bound by judgment).
The defendants next argue that the court erred in ruling that the plaintiff
acquired easement rights to an area on their property. “An easement is a
nonpossessory interest in real property that can be created by written
conveyance, prescription or implication.” Lynn v. Wentworth By The Sea
Master Ass’n, 169 N.H. 77, 83 (2016) (quotation omitted). In ruling on the
plaintiff’s claim, the court considered the declaration of easement rights
recorded on May 21, 2004, the recorded lot line adjustment plan, and the deed
transferring ownership of the day care property from the defendants to the
plaintiff which, the court found, “unambiguously granted the [plaintiff’s]
property easement rights to the disputed area, a portion of which lies within
the [defendants’] property.” Based upon our review of the record, we conclude
that the evidence supports the trial court’s ruling that the plaintiff acquired
easement rights to the disputed area on the defendants’ property. See id. at 86
(noting that the construction of a deed is to be determined by ascertaining the
parties’ intention based on all the competent evidence).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2