THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0662, In the Matter of Jeremiah Smith
and Adrienne Beloin, the court on August 17, 2026, issued the
following order:
On February 2, 2026, the court issued an order stating that the
petitioner, Jeremiah Smith, would not be permitted to file a brief or
memorandum of law. The petitioner did not move to reconsider the February 2
order, but on February 9, filed a brief. Because this filing was in violation of
this court’s order, the petitioner’s brief is stricken. The court has reviewed the
written arguments of the respondent, Adrienne Beloin, and the record
submitted on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this
order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The respondent appeals an order of the Circuit
Court (Courtney, J.), following a final hearing on the merits, ruling on several
post-divorce motions, including the respondent’s motions to modify the parties’
parenting plan, for contempt, for ex parte relief, and for attorney’s fees. We
affirm.
On appeal, the respondent challenges the evidentiary basis of a number
of the trial court’s findings and rulings pertaining to its modification of the
parenting plan. The respondent argues that certain findings are unsupported
by competent evidence or are inconsistent with the weight of the credible
evidence, that the court ignored evidence, that the court erroneously assessed
the parties’ credibility as to certain points, and that the court’s refusal to
impose certain restrictions on the respondent’s parenting time is inconsistent
with the court’s findings. The respondent additionally challenges: (1) the trial
court’s denial of her motion for an award of attorney’s fees, claiming that RSA
458-A:33 (2018), a provision of the Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction and
Enforcement Act, compelled the award; (2) the trial court’s modification of child
support, claiming that the court unlawfully “forgave” a “vested” arrearage by
finding that she had failed to prove the amount that the petitioner had failed to
pay, that the court erroneously failed to impute income to the petitioner, and
that the court erroneously calculated the petitioner’s child support obligation
by failing to account for one of the parties’ children; and (3) the trial court’s
denial of her request to make the petitioner responsible for all transportation
and related costs associated with his exercise of parenting time, instead placing
responsibility for transportation and related costs upon the “party beginning
parenting time.” Finally, the respondent argues that the trial court erred by
not addressing her proposed financial order, by allegedly disregarding post-
final hearing factual allegations she asserted in an objection to certain motions,
by denying her request to order the petitioner to undergo a medical evaluation,
and by declining to find the petitioner in contempt.
The trial court has broad discretion in determining parenting rights and
responsibilities, reviewing and modifying child support, determining whether a
party is in contempt of a prior order, awarding a party attorney’s fees, and
managing the proceedings before it. See In the Matter of Ndyaija & Ndyaija,
173 N.H. 127, 138, 140, 145, 147 (2020); In the Matter of Conner & Conner,
156 N.H. 250, 252 (2007). Our review of such issues is generally limited to
determining whether the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion,
meaning that we review only whether the record establishes an objective basis
sufficient to sustain the trial court’s discretionary judgments. We will not
disturb the court’s determinations if they reasonably could have been made.
See id.; In the Matter of Borelli & Borelli, 175 N.H. 253, 256-57 (2022). To
establish an unsustainable exercise of discretion, the respondent must
demonstrate that the trial court’s ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable
to the prejudice of her case. Conner, 156 N.H. at 252.
The trial court’s factual findings are binding on us if they are supported
by the evidence and are not legally erroneous. In the Matter of Rourke &
Rourke, 176 N.H. 464, 469 (2024), 2024 N.H. 9, ¶14. In finding facts, the trial
court is free to accept or reject, in whole or in part, the testimony of any
witness, and is not required to believe even uncontested evidence. In the
Matter of Aube & Aube, 158 N.H. 459, 466 (2009). We defer to the trial court’s
judgment in resolving conflicts in testimony, evaluating the credibility of
witnesses, and determining the weight of the evidence presented. Id. at 465.
It is the burden of the appealing party, here the respondent, to provide a
record that is sufficient to decide the issues she is raising. See Bean v. Red
Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004). In the absence of a transcript of a
final hearing, we assume that the evidence was sufficient to support the trial
court’s findings and rulings. See id. It is likewise the appealing party’s burden
to establish reversible error. See Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014).
These rules are not relaxed for self-represented parties. See In the Matter of
Birmingham & Birmingham, 154 N.H. 51, 56 (2006) (stating that self-
represented parties are bound by the same procedural rules that govern parties
represented by counsel).
In this case, the respondent has not provided a transcript of the final
hearing. Accordingly, we assume that the evidence was sufficient to support
the trial court’s findings and rulings that the respondent challenges. See Bean,
151 N.H. at 250. Based upon our review of the trial court’s well-reasoned
order, the respondent’s arguments, the relevant law, and the portions of the
record that the respondent has provided, we conclude that the respondent has
not demonstrated that any of the trial court’s findings or rulings that she is
2
challenging was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of her
case.1 See Gallo, 166 N.H. at 740; Conner, 156 N.H. at 252.
Affirmed.
Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
1 Although the trial court, in modifying child support, erroneously checked a box on the child
support guidelines worksheet identifying the total number of children as one, the court
ultimately determined that the petitioner’s income was less than the self-support reserve and
that he was not voluntarily underemployed. Thus, the court awarded only a minimum support
order of $50 per month, a statutory amount that does not depend upon the number of
children. See RSA 458-C:2, V, :3, IV(a) (2018). Accordingly, the error in checking the box for
one child rather than two was not reversible error. See Ndyaija, 173 N.H. at 144 (to constitute
reversible error, the error must prejudice the party claiming it).
3