THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0211, Kirsten D. Bourbeau v. Tung
Nguyen, the court on January 12, 2026, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Kirsten D. Bourbeau, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Smith, J.) dismissing her claims for damages allegedly
resulting from a surgical procedure performed by the defendant, Tung Nguyen,
based upon the plaintiff’s failure to timely disclose an expert witness to offer
opinion testimony in support of her claims. We affirm.
By statute, in any action seeking an award of damages against a medical
care provider for a “medical injury,” the plaintiff has:
the burden of proving by affirmative evidence which must include
expert testimony of a competent witness or witnesses:
(a) The standard of reasonable professional practice in the
medical care provider’s profession or specialty thereof, if any, at
the time the medical care in question was rendered; and
(b) That the medical care provider failed to act in accordance
with such standard; and
(c) That as a proximate result thereof, the injured person
suffered injuries which would not otherwise have occurred.
RSA 507-E:2, I (2010) (emphasis added); see Smith v. H.C.A. Health Servs. of
N.H., 159 N.H. 158, 161 (2009). Similarly, when a plaintiff “claims that a
medical care provider failed to supply adequate information to obtain the
informed consent of the injured person,” the plaintiff has:
the burden of proving by affirmative evidence, which must include
expert testimony of a competent witness or witnesses, that the
treatment, procedure or surgery was performed in other than an
emergency situation and that the medical care provider did not
supply that type of information regarding the treatment, procedure
or surgery as should reasonably have been given to a patient in the
position of the injured person . . . by other competent medical care
providers with similar training and experience at the time of the
treatment, procedure or surgery.
RSA 507-E:2, II(a) (2010) (emphasis added). The term “medical injury” means:
any adverse, untoward or undesired consequences arising out of
or sustained in the course of professional services rendered by a
medical care provider, whether resulting from negligence, error, or
omission in the performance of such services; from rendition of
such services without informed consent or in breach of warranty or
in violation of contract; from failure to diagnose; from premature
abandonment of a patient or of a course of treatment; from failure
properly to maintain equipment or appliances necessary to the
rendition of such services; or otherwise arising out of or sustained
in the course of such services.
RSA 507-E:1, III (2010).
A litigant is entitled to timely disclosure of an adversary’s expert
witnesses in discovery. See J & M Lumber & Constr. Co. v. Smyjunas, 161
N.H. 714, 723 (2011); see also RSA 516:29-b (2021); Super. Ct. R. 27. When a
party fails to comply with a discovery order governing the disclosure of expert
opinion testimony required to carry that party’s burden of proof, the trial court
has discretion to dismiss the case. See Estate of Sicotte v. Lubin & Meyer, 157
N.H. 670, 673-76 (2008). We review the trial court’s decision to dismiss a case
for failure to comply with a discovery order governing the disclosure of expert
testimony for an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See id. at 670, 676. To
establish an unsustainable exercise of discretion, the appealing party must
show that the trial court’s ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the
prejudice of her case. Smyjunas, 161 N.H. at 723.
In this case, the plaintiff filed suit asserting that the defendant should
have performed a different surgery on her and did not obtain her informed
consent to the surgery he performed, causing permanent injuries or
disabilities. The parties did not waive the expert disclosure requirements of
RSA 516:29-b, and the trial court issued a case structuring order requiring the
plaintiff to disclose expert witnesses and reports to the defendant by July 1,
2024. The plaintiff subsequently obtained, without objection, multiple
extensions of the expert disclosure deadline, and on September 27, 2024,
shortly before the extended expert disclosure deadline of September 30, 2024,
the plaintiff notified the defendant that she had been unable to obtain an
expert witness, and would be proceeding to trial without an expert.
The defendant moved to dismiss, arguing that expert testimony was
required for the plaintiff to carry her burden of proof. The plaintiff objected,
arguing that expert testimony was not required to prove her claims, but that, in
any event, she provided an expert disclosure on October 11. On December 12,
2024, the trial court issued an order rejecting the plaintiff’s argument that
2
expert testimony was not required to prove her claims, ruling that the plaintiff’s
expert disclosure was insufficient as a matter of law, and granting the plaintiff
a final extension of thirty days to provide an expert disclosure “consistent with
. . . RSA 507-E:2 and . . . RSA 516:29-b, II.” We note that the record on appeal
does not include the October 11 expert disclosure found by the trial court to be
deficient. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004) (stating
that appealing party bears burden to provide a record on appeal that is
sufficient to decide the issues raised).
On January 9, 2025, the plaintiff provided the defendant with an email
purporting to be an expert disclosure, stating that she had issued a subpoena
to a physician to provide “expert testimony pertaining to informed consent.”
On January 10, an attorney representing the disclosed physician wrote a letter
to the plaintiff stating that the physician “does not intend to serve as your
expert witness in this case,” and that, if called as a witness, the physician
would “limit his testimony to the specific treatment that he provided to you”
and would “not opine on any of the care that was provided to you by other
medical providers.” Thereafter, the defendant renewed his motion to dismiss.
In her objection, the plaintiff again asserted that expert testimony was not
required to prove her claims, and that, although her expert would testify
regarding “his procedure for ensuring informed consent to his patients prior to
a planned surgery,” he would not offer opinion testimony regarding whether
she had provided informed consent prior to the surgery performed by the
defendant. The trial court granted the motion, and this appeal followed.
On appeal, the plaintiff again argues that, notwithstanding the explicit
requirements of RSA 507:2, I and II(a), expert opinion testimony is not required
to prove her claims, and she requests that we “allow [her] case to be reinstated
without the need of an expert witness.” She further suggests that not allowing
her claims to proceed without an expert witness deprives her of various
constitutional rights, including the right to due process.
As the appealing party, the plaintiff has the burden of demonstrating
reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014). Based upon our
review of the trial court’s well-reasoned orders, the plaintiff’s arguments, the
relevant law, and the record submitted on appeal, we conclude that the plaintiff
has not demonstrated that the trial court’s decision to dismiss her claims for
failure to timely disclose an expert witness who would offer opinion testimony
in support of her claims was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice
of her case. See id.; Smyjunas, 161 N.H. at 723. To the extent the plaintiff
argues that requiring her to provide expert testimony in accordance with RSA
3