THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0089, In the Matter of Rebecca Fuller and
William Fuller, the court on December 9, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The respondent, William Fuller (husband), appeals the final
decree of the Circuit Court (Lemire, J.), following a hearing, in his divorce from
the petitioner, Rebecca Fuller (wife). The husband argues that the trial court
erred in: (1) denying his request for a continuance; (2) denying his request to
allow his former counsel to cross-examine the wife; (3) allowing the guardian ad
litem (GAL) to offer lay testimony about his mental health condition;
(4) ordering him to pay child support; (5) purportedly preventing him from
testifying regarding an alleged domestic violence incident; and (6) finding that
an alleged loan from his mother was not a marital debt. We affirm.
The husband first argues that the trial court erred in denying his request
for a continuance of the final hearing. “The decision to grant or deny a motion
for a continuance is within the sound discretion of the trial court.” In the
Matter of Kempton & Kempton, 167 N.H. 785, 793 (2015). We will not overturn
the court’s decision absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Id. The
husband, who was self-represented, alleged that he needed the continuance to
obtain counsel. However, his prior counsel withdrew more than three months
before the start of the final hearing. The trial court was not required to accept
the husband’s explanations for appearing without counsel at the final hearing
or his claimed difficulties in representing himself. Based upon this record, we
conclude that the husband has failed to show that the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion in denying his request for a continuance.
See In the Matter of Kempton, 167 N.H. at 793. To the extent that the
husband seeks to raise a state constitutional claim regarding this issue, he has
failed to demonstrate that he preserved a state constitutional claim for review.
See State v. Dellorfano, 128 N.H. 628, 632 (1986); see also In the Matter of
Birmingham & Birmingham, 154 N.H. 51, 56 (2006) (self-represented litigants
are bound by the same procedural rules that govern parties represented by
counsel).
The husband also argues that the trial court erred in denying his request
to allow his former counsel to appear for the limited purpose of cross-
examining the wife. The trial court has broad discretion in managing the
proceedings before it. In the Matter of Conner & Conner, 156 N.H. 250, 252
(2007). We review a trial court’s rulings in this area under an unsustainable
exercise of discretion standard. Id. The husband made his request on the
third day of a four-day trial, the day after the wife had completed her testimony
and the husband had decided not to cross-examine her himself. The defendant
represented that his prior counsel would be available to cross-examine the
wife, but only on “certain dates,” which he did not identify. Under these
circumstances, we conclude that the husband has failed to show that the trial
court unsustainably exercised its discretion in denying his request to allow a
limited appearance by his former counsel for this purpose. See In the Matter of
Conner, 156 N.H. at 252. To the extent that the husband seeks to raise a
constitutional claim regarding this issue, which he raised for the first time in
his motion for reconsideration of the court’s final decree, we conclude that the
trial court sustainably exercised its discretion in not addressing the claim. See
Mortgage Specialists v. Davey, 153 N.H. 764, 786 (2006) (we will uphold trial
court’s decision not to address an issue first raised on reconsideration absent
unsustainable exercise of discretion).
The husband next argues that the trial court erred in allowing the GAL to
offer lay testimony about his mental health condition. We review a trial court’s
decision on the admissibility of evidence under the unsustainable exercise of
discretion standard. In the Matter of Hampers & Hampers, 154 N.H. 275, 280
(2006). The husband argues that the GAL “offered medical conclusions about
diagnosis, causation, and treatment efficacy—subjects squarely within the
domain of expert testimony under Rule 702.” In divorce proceedings, the trial
court is not bound by the rules of evidence. Gosselin v. Gosselin, 136 N.H.
350, 353 (1992); N.H. R. Ev. 1101(d)(3). The GAL was asked if she had learned
about the husband’s mental health status as a result of her investigation.
After testifying regarding what she had learned, the trial court responded to the
husband’s objection by stating that he would be allowed to “follow up with the
guardian ad litem” when it was his “turn to ask her questions.” The husband’s
sole objection to the GAL’s testimony was that it lacked foundation. After the
wife’s counsel laid a foundation, however, the husband did not object to the
GAL’s testimony that he now challenges on appeal. He therefore failed to
preserve this issue for appeal. Based upon our review of the record, we cannot
conclude that the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion in allowing
the GAL’s testimony. See In the Matter of Hampers, 154 N.H. at 280.
The husband next argues that the trial court erred in ordering him to pay
child support, asserting that the court’s child support award is unsupported by
the evidence and contrary to the statutory guidelines. Trial courts have broad
discretion to review and modify child support awards. In the Matter of Ndyaija
& Ndyaija, 173 N.H. 127, 140 (2020). We will not disturb the trial court’s child
support order absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion or an error of law.
Id. On September 2, 2022, the court ordered the husband to pay child support
based upon his most recent tax return, which showed that he had been
earning $96,000 annually, and its finding that he was voluntarily unemployed.
2
In December 2023, the parties stipulated that the husband would not be
required to pay child support. However, the stipulation also provided
that,“[t]he parties shall either agree to the types of prospective, variable
expenses to which they will each contribute or the issue will be presented to
the Court for resolution at Final Hearing.”
The wife sought child support at the final hearing because the parties
had been unable to agree on the sharing of variable expenses, and the husband
had not paid any amount toward the children’s expenses. The court found that
the husband remained voluntarily unemployed and ordered him to pay
guideline-level child support based upon the same imputed income figure. The
husband argues that the court’s findings are insufficient to support a finding
that he remains voluntarily unemployed. We disagree. The court found that
the husband “is only 44 years old, is employable, and can and should be
working.” The court found that the husband, “though not presently working,
has not presented evidence to support a finding that he is medically and/or
mentally incapable of being gainfully employed on a full-time basis.” We
conclude that the husband has failed to show that the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion in ordering him to pay child support.
See In the Matter of Ndyaija, 173 N.H. at 140.
The husband next argues that the trial court erred when, purportedly,
the court prevented him from testifying regarding his alleged strangulation of
the wife. The record does not support the husband’s argument. After a
colloquy with the court regarding this incident, the court invited the husband
“to tell me from your point of view what happened.” We reject the husband’s
assertion that the trial court’s ruling demonstrated bias against him. See Sup.
Ct. R. 38, Canon 2.11; State v. Bader, 148 N.H. 265, 268 (2002) (test is
whether a reasonable person would have questioned the trial court’s
impartiality).
Finally, the husband argues that the trial court erred in finding that an
alleged $75,000 loan from his mother was not a marital debt. A moral
obligation for repayment cannot properly be characterized as a debt chargeable
to the marital estate. In the Matter of Silva & Silva, 171 N.H. 1, 10 (2018).
Factors relevant to determining whether a loan from a parent constitutes
marital debt include whether there was documentation of the alleged loan
identifying the borrowers and the terms of the loan. See id. In this case, the
trial court found “no evidence . . . upon which a finding may be made that [the
3