THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0045, M.M. v. D.C., the court on May 16,
2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, D.C., appeals a decision of the Circuit Court
(Chabot, J.), following a hearing, granting a domestic violence final order of
protection in favor of the plaintiff, M.M. See RSA 173-B:5, I (2022). We
construe the defendant’s brief to argue that the trial court erred by finding
“abuse,” and by allegedly violating the defendant’s right of access to the courts.
We construe the defendant’s brief to further challenge decisions in separate
trial court proceedings involving the parties. We affirm.
To obtain relief under RSA chapter 173-B, a plaintiff is required to prove,
by a preponderance of the evidence, that the defendant engaged in “abuse.”
S.C. v. G.C., 175 N.H. 158, 163 (2022). A finding of “abuse” requires proof that
the defendant, a family or household member or a current or former sexual or
intimate partner of the plaintiff, committed or attempted to commit one or more
statutorily enumerated crimes and that such conduct constituted “a credible
present threat to the [plaintiff’s] safety.” RSA 173-B:1, I (2022); see S.C., 175
N.H. at 163. On appeal, the trial court’s findings of fact are final, and we
engage in de novo review of questions of law raised by the appealing party.
RSA 173-B:3, VI (2022); S.C., 175 N.H. at 162.
We review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a matter of law and will
uphold the trial court’s findings and rulings unless they lack evidentiary
support or are tainted by error of law. S.C., 175 N.H. at 162. We view the
evidence in the light most favorable to the prevailing party, here, the plaintiff,
deferring to the trial court’s judgment in evaluating the credibility of the
witnesses and the weight of the evidence presented. Id. at 162-63.
It is the burden of the appealing party, here the defendant, to provide so
much of the record as is required to decide the issues raised, and to establish
that the appealing party raised those issues in the trial court. See Bean v. Red
Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004). “If the [appealing] party intends
to argue in the supreme court that a finding or conclusion is unsupported by
the evidence or is contrary to the evidence, the [appealing] party shall include
in the record a transcript of all evidence relevant to such finding or
conclusion.” Sup. Ct. R. 15(3). Absent a transcript of an evidentiary hearing,
we assume the evidence was sufficient to support the trial court’s decision.
See Bean, 151 N.H. at 250.
In this case, the defendant has not provided a transcript of the hearing
held on the domestic violence petition. Accordingly, we assume that the
evidence was sufficient to support the trial court’s finding that the defendant
engaged in “abuse.” See id. Nor does the record reflect that the defendant
argued in the trial court, either at the hearing or by motion for reconsideration,
that the court had violated the defendant’s right of access to the courts. See
id.; Fam. Div. R. 1.26(F) (“To preserve issues for an appeal to the Supreme
Court, an appellant must have given the Court the opportunity to consider
such issues; thus, to the extent that the Court, in its decision, addresses
matters not previously raised in the case, a party must identify any alleged
errors concerning those matters in a motion under this rule to preserve such
issues for appeal.”). Moreover, any such argument in the defendant’s brief is
not adequately developed. See State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 49 (2003).
Finally, to the extent that the defendant is attempting to challenge trial court
decisions in other cases, the defendant’s remedy is to appeal those decisions,
not to collaterally attack them in this case.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2