THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
1st Circuit Court-Colebrook Family Division
Case No. 2025-0594
Citation: In re H.H.; In re B.H., 2026 N.H. 29
IN RE H.H.; IN RE B.H.
Submitted: March 26, 2026
Opinion Issued: July 28, 2026
The Young Law Firm, of Conway (Robert Young on the brief), for the
respondent.
John M. Formella, attorney general, and Anthony J. Galdieri, solicitor
general (Mary A. Triick, senior assistant attorney general, on the memorandum
of law), for the New Hampshire Division for Children, Youth and Families.
WILL, J.
[¶1] The Circuit Court (Subers, J.) terminated the parental rights of the
respondent, father of H.H. and B.H. (Father), finding that he failed to correct
conditions of child neglect within twelve months. See RSA 170-C:5, III (2022).
Father appeals the circuit court order and argues that: (1) he corrected the
conditions that led to the finding of neglect; (2) the petitioner, the New
Hampshire Division for Children, Youth and Families (DCYF), failed to make
reasonable efforts toward reunification; and (3) termination was not in the
children’s best interest. We affirm.
I. Background
[¶2] The trial court found, or the record otherwise supports, the following
facts. In June 2023, DCYF received a report expressing concern that the
children’s legal guardians, their paternal great-grandparents, neglected the
children. The reporter alleged that the great-grandmother physically and
verbally abused the children. The reporter alleged that Father lived in the
home and cared for the children, despite federal probation requirements that
he remain separated from them pending completion of drug treatment and
parenting classes.
[¶3] A child protective services worker’s (CPSW) visit to the home
corroborated the report. The CPSW observed a handprint mark on a child’s
back. She also observed Father’s quarters in the basement, cluttered with jugs
of urine, empty alcoholic beverage bottles, and an empty suboxone container,
among other detritus.
[¶4] DCYF initiated abuse and neglect proceedings pursuant to RSA
chapter 169-C (2022 & Supp. 2025). The court granted DCYF’s request for an
ex parte order for “emergency out of home placement,” and DCYF removed the
children from the home. At the adjudicatory hearing, Father acknowledged
that the guardians struck the children. On that basis, in addition to the
condition of his living space, the court found Father responsible for neglect.
[¶5] A dispositional hearing followed, at which the court articulated
several objectives Father must meet in order to correct the conditions of
neglect. These included: (1) reengaging with substance use treatment; (2)
maintaining sobriety; (3) creating a safe, stable, and nurturing home; (4)
learning and implementing appropriate parenting skills; (5) addressing his
probation requirements; (6) demonstrating that he would choose safe and
appropriate caregivers for his children; and (7) acting protectively over the
children by putting their needs above his own. DCYF referred Father to several
programs to assist him in achieving these objectives.
[¶6] At the three-month review hearing, Father demonstrated substantial
compliance. His consistent visits demonstrated an increasing bond with his
children. He communicated regularly with DCYF, engaged in ongoing
programming and counseling, and had at least made efforts to find appropriate
housing. At both the six- and nine-month review hearings, Father continued to
demonstrate similar substantial compliance. Throughout, however, Father did
not obtain adequate housing, though he continued to try to meet that goal and
reported on his efforts at each hearing.
[¶7] The court held a permanency hearing in October 2024. Father
remained in substantial compliance except as to the housing objective, though
he had made progress. He reported that he purchased a mobile home and had
2
moved it to a rented property in rural Vermont. He told DCYF that the water
and septic were “operational” and that a generator would provide electricity,
but the CPSW testified that Father “had a lot of work to do” on the property,
including getting an address from the town, burying the water line to prevent it
from freezing, installing a permanent solution for septic and water, and
hooking up electricity. While DCYF considered the home adequate, the CPSW
emphasized that Father needed to provide DCYF with an address so DCYF
could begin the process delineated in the Interstate Compact on the Placement
of Children (ICPC). See RSA ch. 170-A (2022 & Supp. 2025); In re Alexis O.,
157 N.H. 781, 785 (2008) (“The ICPC governs the relations between states
when decisions are made as to where to place a dependent child.” (quotation
and ellipses omitted)).1
[¶8] Father’s failure to secure safe and appropriate housing — his only
unmet objective — foreclosed reunification. Given his substantial compliance
with the other objectives, however, DCYF requested, and the court granted, a
one-time 90-day extension for Father to demonstrate his ability to provide
appropriate housing. See RSA 169-C:24-b, IV (2022). The court emphasized
that, by the end of the 90-day extension period, Father would need to: (1) verify
that emergency services would respond to his home address; (2) properly
winterize the home; and (3) cooperate with an ICPC home study. In order to
complete the latter condition within the 90-day period, the court authorized
DCYF to commence an Interstate Compact Priority Placement and Social Study
and expedite the process with Vermont.
[¶9] During the 90-day extension period, Father regressed from
substantial compliance to partial compliance. Father canceled or declined
multiple visits with the children, consumed marijuana and alcohol, and faced
criminal charges after he consumed alcohol and then caused a car accident.
Father also delayed the ICPC process by failing to promptly complete the
necessary paperwork.
[¶10] Father’s regression led DCYF, late in the 90-day extension period,
to shift its position from supporting reunification to supporting termination of
Father’s parental rights. As a result, on or about January 28, 2025, DCYF
informed Vermont child welfare authorities that it no longer required the ICPC
1 Father has not sufficiently developed an argument that the ICPC does not apply in this case, so
we do not address the issue. See State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 49 (2003) (stating that we do
not address arguments that “were not sufficiently developed for appellate review”). The ICPC sets
forth conditions for placement of children from one state into another. See RSA 170-A:1, Art. III
(2022). The process begins when the compact administrator in the “sending state” recommends a
placement and provides the “receiving state” with information concerning the proposed placement.
Alexis O., 157 N.H. at 785. Then, the ICPC compact administrator in the “receiving state”
determines whether, in his or her opinion, the placement is appropriate. Id. “In essence, the
ICPC requires that its procedures be followed in order to obtain the receiving state’s permission for
placement before the child is sent to the receiving state . . . .” Id. at 785-86 (quotation omitted).
3
study. DCYF did not secure court permission before withdrawing its request
for the study.
[¶11] On February 18, 2025, the court held the second permanency
hearing, which led to several findings that foreclosed reunification. First, the
court found that Father “dropped to partial compliance” during the extension
period. Second, the court concluded that Father did not prove that
reunification would not endanger the children. Third, the court found that
reunification would not serve the children’s best interests. The court directed
DCYF to commence parental rights termination proceedings.
[¶12] DCYF petitioned to terminate Father’s parental rights and, on July
8 and August 11, 2025, the trial court conducted a termination of parental
rights (TPR) hearing on DCYF’s petition. The court found that despite DCYF’s
reasonable efforts, Father failed to correct the conditions that led to the finding
of neglect within twelve months. The court further found that termination of
Father’s parental rights would serve the children’s best interests, as it would
clear the way for their foster parents to adopt them.
II. Analysis
[¶13] Through RSA chapter 170-C, the legislature has set forth specific
types of conduct that can result in termination of parental rights, as well as
procedural mechanisms to govern that process. See RSA ch. 170-C (2022 &
Supp. 2025). DCYF may file a petition to terminate parental rights and bears
the burden to prove a statutory basis for termination beyond a reasonable
doubt. See In re K.O., 177 N.H. 558, 564 (2025), 2025 N.H. 39, ¶15; RSA 170-
C:10 (2022).
[¶14] DCYF advanced RSA 170-C:5, III as the basis to terminate Father’s
parental rights. RSA 170-C:5 requires DCYF to first demonstrate that the trial
court made a finding of child neglect or abuse under RSA chapter 169-C. In re
C.O., 171 N.H. 748, 756 (2019). DCYF must then demonstrate that Father
failed to correct the conditions of abuse and neglect within twelve months of
the finding. Id. DCYF must also demonstrate that it made reasonable efforts
under the direction of the court to rectify or correct the conditions. Id.
[¶15] This latter condition requires DCYF to have provided “accessible,
available, and appropriate” services to the parent, keeping in mind that
“DCYF’s role in neglect cases is not to assume the full weight of the parent’s
responsibilities, but to provide the parent assistance to deal with and correct
problems.” In re S.A., 174 N.H. 298, 300 (2021). We have recognized that
DCYF’s staffing and financial limitations factor into the determination of
whether the agency has satisfied the statute’s “reasonable efforts” standard.
Id. Reasonable efforts means doing everything reasonable, not everything
possible. Id.
4
[¶16] Even if DCYF meets the three statutory conditions, a court may not
grant DCYF’s petition without also finding that parental rights termination
serves the child’s best interests. See K.O., 177 N.H. at 565, 2025 N.H. 39, ¶17.
[¶17] When reviewing a termination decision, “we will not disturb the
circuit court’s finding unless it is unsupported by the evidence or plainly
erroneous as a matter of law.” Id. at 565, 2025 N.H. 39, ¶18. This standard of
review recognizes that the trial court stands in the best position to assess and
weigh the evidence before it. Id. “[O]ur task is not to determine whether we
would have found differently, but whether a reasonable person could have
reached the same conclusions as the trial judge based upon the evidence
presented.” Id.
[¶18] Father does not dispute that the court in the RSA chapter 169-C
proceedings made a finding of neglect. See C.O., 171 N.H. at 756. Father does
dispute, however, the trial court’s conclusion that he “failed to correct the
conditions of . . . neglect within 12 months of the finding.” Id.
[¶19] The trial court based this conclusion, in part, on Father’s behavior
during the 90-day extension period, including his failure to comply with the
dispositional order. See K.O., 177 N.H. at 564-65, 2025 N.H. 39, ¶15 (a
parent’s compliance with dispositional orders in the underlying child neglect
case is a “non-dispositive factor that the trial court may consider when
determining whether the parent has corrected the neglect conditions”). As a
legal matter, the court acted within its statutory authority in requiring Father’s
ongoing compliance with the dispositional order. RSA 169-C:24-b, IV provides
that, at a permanency hearing, the court “may grant one extension of time that
shall not exceed 90 days, and hold a subsequent permanency hearing,” upon
satisfaction of certain conditions. RSA 169-C:24-b, IV. First, the court must
find the parent to be in “substantial compliance with the outstanding
dispositional orders.” Id. Second, the parent must establish, in part, that:
“The parent is diligently working toward reunification, which is expected to
occur within 90 days.” Id. Third, the parent must establish that: “It is
probable the parent will be able to demonstrate, after the extension and at a
subsequent permanency hearing held pursuant to RSA 169-C:24-b, I(b), that
the parent has met the 3 requirements of RSA 169-C:23.” Id. Nothing in the
language of RSA 169-C:24-b expressly states that the dispositional order
remains in effect during the 90-day extension period. A narrow focus on this
specific provision, therefore, could allow for an argument that the court acted
ultra vires in considering Father’s overall compliance at the second
permanency hearing, rather than solely those requirements with which he was
out of compliance at the first permanency hearing.
[¶20] But we construe statutes as a whole. See In re J.H., 176 N.H. 238,
242 (2023) (“We construe all parts of a statute together to effectuate its overall
purpose and avoid an absurd or unjust result.”). RSA 169-C:24-b
5
contemplates a second, full permanency hearing. See RSA 169-C:24-b, I(b), IV.
The statute does not limit the considerations during a second permanency
hearing to just the areas of noncompliance, but rather turns to RSA 169-C:23,
which broadly conditions reunification on, among other things, whether a
parent demonstrates “compliance with the outstanding dispositional court
order.” RSA 169-C:23, I (2022); see RSA 169-C:24-b, IV(b). Reading the
statute as a whole, RSA 169-C:24-b, IV(b), through its invocation of RSA 169-
C:23, makes clear that the court must consider compliance with the entire
dispositional order during a second permanency hearing following the 90-day
extension period, not solely those areas of noncompliance identified at the first
permanency hearing.
[¶21] Rather than alter the reunification standards, the 90-day extension
period simply extends the period of time to demonstrate compliance. The trial
court, therefore, did not commit legal error by finding that Father’s behavior
during the 90-day extension demonstrated his failure to correct the conditions
of neglect within 12 months (plus the 90-day extension period).
[¶22] The factual record supports the trial court’s conclusion. First, the
record contains evidence that Father failed to maintain sobriety. The CPSW
assigned to this case testified that Father had recently completed federal
probation, which required him to stay sober. After his probation concluded,
however, screens showed that Father consumed marijuana and alcohol.
During a visit to his home, the CPSW discovered liquor bottles in Father’s
freezer.
[¶23] Father’s substance use, moreover, endangered others. After
dropping the children off from a visit in early January 2025, Father caused a
single-car accident and law enforcement charged him with leaving the scene of
an accident. Father self-reported that he consumed alcohol prior to the
accident. He did not report the accident to DCYF for four days.
[¶24] Second, DCYF introduced evidence that Father failed to prioritize
his children’s needs above his own by canceling visits with the children and not
communicating with DCYF and the foster family. DCYF initially paused visits
due to safety issues with Father’s property and, later, Father cancelled a visit
due to his frozen waterline. The CPSW testified that, in response to DCYF
follow-up, Father’s “lack of information and communication prompted a
continuation in the pause in visits.”
[¶25] During the 90-day extension period, Father “reduced his
engagement with DCYF and the foster family.” He declined their offer to spend
Christmas with the children at the foster family’s home. The CPSW testified
that the foster mother sent messages to Father between December 2024 and
March 2025 about the children’s appointments and their health, but Father
did not respond to those messages. The CPSW also testified that, according to
6
the foster mother, when one of the children fell ill, Father neither attended
appointments nor inquired into the child’s well-being.
[¶26] The guardian ad litem (GAL) — who had worked with the family
from the beginning of the proceedings in June 2023 — testified that in January
2025, the case “fell off the rails completely.” In her subsequent report for the
second permanency hearing, the GAL noted a “drastic shift” in Father’s
demeanor during the 90-day extension period, which “rang alarm bells.”
(Quotation omitted.) At the TPR hearing, the GAL testified about safety
concerns for the children. She explained that after unsupervised visits with
Father, the children would mention that they had seen their mother or
grandparents, even though Father did not have authority to arrange those
visits. The foster parent reported to the GAL that the children would return
from these unsupervised visits without having bathed or changed their clothes.
As quoted in the trial court order, the GAL emphasized in her final report for
the TPR that Father’s “sporadic follow-through, avoidance of phone contact
with caseworkers, and delays in essential tasks such as submitting lease
documents, returning calls to ICPC officers, and responding to visitation
violations raise substantial concerns.” She reported that Father’s “behaviors
suggest passive abandonment — a failure to act within the children’s
timeframes despite knowing what is required.”
[¶27] This evidence supports not only that Father failed to comply with
the dispositional order during the 90-day extension period, but also the trial
court’s finding that Father “cannot demonstrate that the children will not be
endangered in the manner adjudicated on the initial petitions, if returned to
the home.” We accordingly cannot conclude that the trial court’s finding that
Father “failed to correct the conditions of . . . neglect within 12 months of the
finding,” C.O., 171 N.H. at 756, is “unsupported by the evidence or plainly
erroneous as a matter of law,” K.O., 177 N.H. at 565, 2025 N.H. 39, ¶18.
[¶28] Against all of this evidence, Father contends that DCYF violated a
court order by unilaterally and prematurely canceling the ICPC home study.
Father argues that had DCYF facilitated the ICPC process, he would have
solved the housing problem and come into full compliance with the
dispositional objectives; and, had DCYF sought judicial approval before
canceling the ICPC process, he would have had the opportunity to contest it.
Father’s argument assumes substantial compliance with the dispositional
order.
[¶29] Even if DCYF needed a court order to abandon the ICPC process,
the trial court’s failure to consider DCYF’s conduct at most establishes
harmless error. See In re G.W., 177 N.H. 676, 684-85 (2025), 2025 N.H. 53,
¶27 (concluding that even if we assumed trial court erred by failing to suppress
evidence, any such error was harmless). “Where it appears that an error did
not affect the outcome below, or where the court can see from the entire record
7
that no injury has been done, the judgment will not be disturbed.” Id. at 685,
2025 N.H. 53, ¶27 (quotation omitted). Put another way, even if we assume
that Father would have cleared the housing hurdle had DCYF not canceled the
ICPC home study, DCYF introduced a volume of evidence, described above,
demonstrating Father’s lack of compliance with several of the other
dispositional objectives, the constellation of which supports the trial court’s
determination independent of the housing issue. Father cannot demonstrate
that the failure to consider DCYF’s unilateral cancellation of the ICPC process
affected the outcome because “a reasonable person could have reached the
same conclusions as the trial judge based upon the evidence presented.” K.O.,
177 N.H. at 565, 2025 N.H. 39, ¶18.
[¶30] The trial court’s finding that Father did not prioritize the ICPC
process also finds support in the record and does not affect our conclusion that
any alleged error is harmless. The CPSW reported that when she visited
Father’s home on January 5, 2025 — 72 days after the court ordered the
expedited ICPC process — Father had not yet taken all the necessary steps to
complete the ICPC process, largely due to his own unexplained delay. She
explained that Father “did not prioritize completing the paperwork in a timely
manner, delaying the ICPC process.” The record reflects evidence, in short,
that Father delayed the ICPC process independent of DCYF canceling it.
[¶31] Nor does DCYF’s cancellation of the ICPC home study demonstrate
a lack of reasonable efforts to assist Father in correcting the conditions of
neglect. Father does not dispute that DCYF made reasonable efforts to assist
him during the first 12 months by providing case management, supervised
parenting time, parenting education, a family housing referral, drug and
alcohol screens, and referrals to unification programs. The trial court admitted
evidence that during the 90-day extension period DCYF continued these efforts:
DCYF coordinated parenting time with the children, visited Father’s home to
conduct a home study, monitored screening for alcohol and drugs, and
provided Father with case management that included monthly meetings and
action plans. DCYF also maintained contact with Father “through frequent
phone calls and texts” and reminded Father to complete the steps required for
the ICPC study. From that evidence, the trial court could conclude that DCYF
“put forth reasonable efforts” and provided Father with “assistance to deal with
and correct problems.” S.A., 174 N.H. at 300.
[¶32] With specific respect to the ICPC study, DCYF — not Father —
asked for a 90-day extension to allow Father to complete the ICPC process and
attain reunification. Promptly upon judicial authorization, in October 2024,
DCYF began preparing the ICPC request but had to wait for Father to provide
an address. DCYF then assisted Father with resolving an error with his
address. Once Father provided the correct address, DCYF completed and
submitted the ICPC request. On multiple occasions, DCYF reminded and
encouraged Father to reach out to Vermont authorities about the ICPC. Given
8
Father’s failure to follow through and the timing of the withdrawal, we cannot
conclude that DCYF failed to make reasonable efforts. See id.
[¶33] Finally, the record contains sufficient evidence to support the trial
court’s finding that termination of Father’s parental rights serves the best
interests of the children. The “best interest” element considers the welfare of
the child over the interests of the parent. K.O., 177 N.H. at 565, 2025 N.H. 39,
¶17.
[¶34] The record reflects that the children have been in the care of a
guardian or in DCYF custody for a significant portion of their lives. The
children have been in out-of-home care since June 1, 2023. The CPSW noted
that “DCYF has had several prior assessments and reports of concern
regarding [the children] during their short lives.” The GAL reported that when
first placed in out-of-home care, the children were “a challenge to the pretty
experienced foster [parents].” Over time, however, the children have come to
thrive in their pre-adoptive foster home. At the time of the TPR hearing, the
children had been in this pre-adoptive foster home for approximately a year
and a half, during which time the CPSW and GAL reported that the children
demonstrated behavioral improvements. DCYF described the foster home as
“safe, secure, [and] loving.” The GAL recommended that the court terminate
reunification efforts and “[p]roceed with adoption planning through the foster
family, who are willing and able to adopt” because the children’s need for
permanency outweighs further attempts at parental rehabilitation. See In re
C.M., 166 N.H. 764, 775 (2014) (recognizing that children need and deserve
permanent living arrangements). The trial court’s conclusion that terminating
Father’s parental rights serves the children’s best interest finds support in the
record. See K.O., 177 N.H. at 568-69, 2025 N.H. 39, ¶26-27 (holding that trial
court did not err in finding that termination of mother’s parental rights was in
child’s best interest where the evidence demonstrated that child had hardly
been in mother’s care, did not have a strong bond with mother, lived in a pre-
adoptive foster home for over a year, and had bonded with foster parents).
Affirmed.
MACDONALD, C.J., and DONOVAN, COUNTWAY, and GOULD, JJ.,
concurred.
9