THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0067, Brixmor GA Seacoast Shopping
Center LLC v. NH1 Motorplex LLC & a., the court on March 19,
2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendants, NH1 Motorplex, LLC (NH1) and Dan and
Pamela Jennison (the Jennisons), appeal an order of the Superior Court (Will,
J.) awarding damages to the plaintiff, Brixmor GA Seacoast Shopping Center,
LLC, for breach of a commercial lease agreement. The defendants argue that
the trial court erred by determining that the plaintiff is entitled to recover
“landlord work” and “tenant allowance” costs. We affirm.
The following facts appear in the trial court’s orders or are otherwise
supported by the record. In December 2016, the parties entered into a ten-
year lease agreement by which NH1 leased commercial premises in Seabrook
(premises) from the plaintiff for the purpose of operating a go-karting business.
The lease was secured by the Jennisons’ personal guaranty. During the
COVID-19 pandemic, NH1 temporarily closed its business for three months
and later reopened with limited hours. In May 2021, following unsuccessful
negotiations between the parties over the termination of the lease agreement,
NH1 stopped paying rent and vacated the premises.
The plaintiff sued the defendants for breach of contract. In response, the
defendants asserted numerous defenses and a counterclaim against the
plaintiff. The plaintiff thereafter moved for summary judgment on the
defendants’ liability and affirmative defenses. The trial court granted the
plaintiff’s motion but deferred ruling on damages.
Following a subsequent hearing, the trial court issued an order finding
the defendants liable for approximately $2.1 million in damages for breach of
the lease agreement and guaranty. The trial court observed that although the
plaintiff was unable to find a tenant to relet the entire premises, it nonetheless
mitigated its damages by leasing the premises to two successor tenants, which
required the plaintiff to divide the premises into two separate spaces and make
additional alterations. The court ultimately determined that the plaintiff could
recover “landlord work” and “tenant allowance” as damages despite the
absence of those express terms in the lease agreement because they
constituted costs to relet the premises. Accordingly, after considering the
approximately $3 million in damages under the original lease agreement,
together with reletting costs, rent from the successor tenants, damages after
mitigation, and the amount not recovered under the successor tenants’ leases,
the court calculated a damages sum of $2,107,985.10. The defendants
unsuccessfully moved for reconsideration, and this appeal followed.
The issue on appeal is whether the trial court erred by determining that
“landlord work” and “tenant allowance” are recoverable damages under the
lease agreement as part of the “costs of alterations” incurred by the plaintiff.
Following a damages hearing, “[w]e will uphold the trial court’s findings and
rulings unless they lack evidentiary support or are legally erroneous.” N.H.
Fish & Game Dep’t v. Bacon, 167 N.H. 591, 596 (2015). “Our standard of
review is not whether we would rule differently than the trial court, but
whether a reasonable person could have reached the same decision as the trial
court based upon the same evidence.” Id. “Thus, we defer to the trial court’s
judgment on such issues as resolving conflicts in the testimony, measuring the
credibility of witnesses, and determining the weight to be given evidence.” Id.
We review the trial court’s legal rulings and its application of law to fact de
novo. See Bursey v. CFX Bank, 145 N.H. 126, 129 (2000).1
“The interpretation of a lease is ultimately a question of law.” Tulley v.
Sheldon, 159 N.H. 269, 272 (2009). “We review the trial court’s interpretation
of a lease de novo.” Id. “A lease is a form of contract that is construed in
accordance with the standard rules of contract interpretation.” Id. “When
interpreting a written agreement, we give the language used by the parties its
reasonable meaning, considering the circumstances and the context in which
the agreement was negotiated, and reading the document as a whole.”
McDonough v. McDonough, 169 N.H. 537, 541 (2016). “We give an agreement
the meaning intended by the parties when they wrote it.” Id. “Absent
ambiguity, however, the parties’ intent will be determined from the plain
meaning of the language used in the contract.” Id.
Section 21.02 of the lease agreement, entitled “Landlord’s Remedies,”
provides:
If an Event of Default occurs . . . Landlord may:
(a) . . . make such alterations and repairs as may be
necessary in order to relet the Demised Premises . . . . Upon
reletting, rentals received by Landlord from such reletting shall be
applied first to the payment of any indebtedness other than
Minimum Annual Rent due hereunder from Tenant; second to the
1 The defendants raise their arguments under the plain error rule. The plain error rule allows us
to consider errors not brought to the attention of the trial court. Cloutier v. City of Berlin, 154
N.H. 13, 25 (2006). Here, there is no dispute that the defendants’ arguments are preserved for
appellate review. Our plain error rule is therefore inapplicable.
2
payment of any costs and expenses of such reletting, including
brokerage fees, reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs of alterations
and repairs; third to the payment of the most current Minimum
Annual Rent owed at the time; and the residual, if any, shall be
held by Landlord and applied in payment of future Minimum
Annual Rent as the same may become due and payable hereunder
from Tenant. If such rentals received from such reletting are less
than that to be paid by Tenant, Tenant shall be liable for the
deficiency to Landlord. . . .
(b) . . . [E]lect to terminate the Lease. Should Landlord
elect to terminate the Lease then, in addition to any other remedies
Landlord may have available to it, Landlord may recover from
Tenant all damages incurred by reason of such breach.
The trial court construed the setoff language in Section 21.02(a) as
allowing the landlord to recover the deficiency between: (1) rent owed by the
breaching tenant plus “costs and expenses of such reletting”; and (2) rents
received from successor tenants. The parties do not argue that the costs and
expenses of reletting are not recoverable under Section 21.02(a), nor do they
dispute that the costs and expenses of reletting include “costs of alterations
and repairs.”
Rather, they maintain that by interpreting the term “costs of alterations”
in the lease agreement as including “landlord work” and “tenant allowance,”
the trial court interpreted the agreement subjectively and in a manner contrary
to “the clear and unambiguous language of Section 21.02.” The plaintiff
responds that the trial court properly construed the phrase “costs of alterations
and repairs” as including both categories of expenses. We agree with the
plaintiff.
Section 21.02(b) of the lease agreement broadly allows for the landlord’s
recovery of “all damages incurred by reason of such breach.” (Emphasis
added.) In addition, Section 21.02(a) provides that, following a breach by the
tenant, the tenant shall be liable to the landlord for any deficiency between
“rentals received from such reletting” and the rent “to be paid by Tenant.”
Noting that the lease agreement does not define “costs of alterations,” the trial
court defined the word “alteration” according to its dictionary definition: “[a]
substantial change to real estate, esp. to a structure, usu. not involving an
addition to or removal of the exterior dimensions of a building’s structural
parts.” Black’s Law Dictionary 97 (12th ed. 2024). Thus, consistent with our
principles of contract interpretation, the trial court interpreted the lease
agreement according to the plain meaning of the words used when it relied
upon the dictionary definition of the word “alteration.” See McDonough, 169
N.H. at 541; Pope v. Lee, 152 N.H. 296, 301-02 (2005) (discerning plain
meaning of contract term according to its dictionary definition).
3