THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0134, Robert E. Thomsen, III v. New
Hampshire Department of Corrections, the court on November
21, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Robert E. Thomsen, III, appeals orders of the
Superior Court (Honigberg, J.) dismissing his complaint against the defendant,
the New Hampshire Department of Corrections (department), and denying his
post-dismissal motion to amend his complaint. We affirm.
In October 2024, the plaintiff brought suit in this case, alleging the
following facts: (1) “[a]fter requesting protective custody and was refused by
staff I was assaulted suffered torn rotator cuff and broken nose no medical
attention for mos [sic] shoulder and nose still damage this was 08/2019”; (2)
“[t]ested positive for Covid [in] 2021 was housed in SHU no medical attention or
hygiene I was there 13 days”; (3) “[b]efore the policy and procedures were
changed staff opened my legal mail at northern correctional facility for men
violating my rights”; and (4) “I’m seeing pain and suffering punitive damage.”
The complaint contained no other factual allegations. In dismissing the case,
the trial court reasoned that (1) the complaint failed to allege sufficient facts to
state a claim for relief; (2) to the extent the plaintiff was attempting to assert
federal constitutional claims under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 (2018), the department
was not a proper party; and (3) the claim seeking compensation for injuries
arising out of an August 2019 incident was time-barred. The trial court gave
the plaintiff thirty days to file an amended complaint in order to cure the
deficiencies identified by the trial court.
Thereafter, the plaintiff moved to amend his complaint, asserting that he
had objected to the motion to dismiss and that the department had not timely
responded to the complaint for purposes of Superior Court Rule 9(a). The
motion did not otherwise identify any factual allegations with which the
plaintiff sought to amend the complaint. The trial court denied the motion,
and this appeal followed.
In reviewing the trial court’s dismissal order, we consider whether the
allegations in the complaint are reasonably susceptible of a construction that
would permit recovery. See Szewczyk v. Continental Paving, 176 N.H. 148, 151
(2023). We assume the truth of the well-pleaded factual allegations and
construe all reasonable inferences from those facts in the light most favorable
to the plaintiff. See id. We do not, however, assume the truth of statements in
the complaint that are conclusions of law. See id.; ERG, Inc. v. Barnes, 137
N.H. 186, 190 (1993) (“The court will not, however, assume the truth or
accuracy of any allegations which are not well-pleaded, including the statement
of conclusions of fact and principles of law.”). We will uphold the trial court’s
decision if the facts pleaded do not constitute a basis for relief. See Szewczyk,
176 N.H. at 151. Although the trial court, in dismissing a complaint for failure
to state a claim, should ordinarily grant the plaintiff leave to amend the
complaint to correct any perceived deficiencies, see ERG, Inc., 137 N.H. at 189,
the trial court may properly deny a motion to amend a complaint that fails to
cure defects identified by the trial court in granting a motion to dismiss, see
Ortolano v. City of Nashua, 177 N.H. ___, ___ (2025), 2025 N.H. 23, ¶ 13.
As the appealing party, the plaintiff has the burden of demonstrating
reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014). Based upon our
review of the trial court’s order, the plaintiff’s arguments, the relevant law, and
the record submitted on appeal, the plaintiff has not demonstrated that the
well-pleaded facts in his complaint, together with all reasonable inferences
from those facts, constitute a basis for relief. See id.; Szewczyk, 176 N.H. at
151. Nor has the plaintiff established that the trial court unsustainably
exercised its discretion by denying the motion to amend. See Gallo, 166 N.H.
at 740; Ortolano, 177 N.H. at ___, 2025 N.H. 23, ¶ 13. Accordingly, we affirm
the dismissal of the complaint and denial of the plaintiff’s motion to amend. In
light of this order, the plaintiff’s motion to expedite the appeal is moot.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, and Gould, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2