THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0041, In the Matter of Lici Deng-Vish and
Frank Vish, the court on February 24, 2026, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The petitioner, Lici Deng-Vish (Wife), appeals a final decree
of divorce issued by the Circuit Court (Rauseo, J.). On appeal, Wife challenges
the trial court’s order that she pay child support to the respondent, Frank Vish
(Husband). We affirm.
I. Background
The following facts were found by the trial court or are supported by the
record. The parties were married in 2004. They have two minor children.
Throughout the marriage, Wife was the primary wage earner. She holds a
master’s degree in industrial engineering. Husband holds a bachelor’s degree
in mechanical engineering technology. Husband was last employed in 2018.
In 2021, Wife quit her job as an industrial engineer. She later returned to work
as a real estate agent. The parties separated in January 2024. In July 2024,
the parties submitted a parenting plan in which they agreed to share parenting
equally.
Following a hearing in October 2024, the trial court issued a final order
on the petition for divorce, and approved the parenting plan submitted by the
parties. Regarding child support, the court found that both Wife and Husband
“are voluntarily underemployed/unemployed.” Accordingly, the court exercised
its discretion to “consider as gross income the difference between the amount a
parent is earning and the amount a parent has earned.” See RSA 458-C:2,
IV(a) (Supp. 2024).
To determine Husband’s gross income, the court considered what
Husband earned as a “quality engineer” in 2016, as that position was
“consistent with his education and the vast majority of his work experience.”
The court “attribute[d] yearly income to [Husband] at $47,810.00 or $3,998.17
per month, which was his income as a quality engineer.” The court attributed
yearly income to Wife of $83,927.00, which was her 2020 income “the last year
she worked almost full time at approximately 30 hours per week,” which
converted to “monthly income of $6,941.42.” The court found “guidelines child
support to be appropriate,” and ordered Wife to pay monthly child support in
the amount of $1,457.00.
The trial court noted that Wife “proposes that she not pay guidelines
child support as the eldest son . . . is not exercising the parenting time the
parties agreed to in the Parenting Plan.” The court stated, however, that the
parties had submitted an agreed-upon parenting plan in July 2024 and
represented to the court “that parenting issues were resolved.” Based on that
representation, the court declined to allow Wife to discuss issues regarding
parenting at the hearing, explaining that Husband “is entitled to enforce the
Parenting Plan” and if Husband “continues to fail to exercise his parenting
time, then the Court would entertain a Motion to Modify the Parenting Plan
and Child Support.” Until such time, the court found “guidelines child support
to be in the children’s best interest.” Wife unsuccessfully moved for
reconsideration. This appeal followed.
II. Analysis
On appeal, Wife argues that the trial court erred in ordering her to pay
child support and in calculating the amount of child support she should pay.
Specifically, she asserts that the court’s order is based on an incorrect
interpretation of the parties’ parenting plan and that the trial court erred in
calculating Husband’s imputed income.
The trial court has broad discretion in fashioning a final divorce decree.
In the Matter of Braunstein & Braunstein, 173 N.H. 38, 46 (2020). The trial
court’s discretion necessarily encompasses decisions concerning property
distribution, child support, and parenting rights and responsibilities. Id. We
will not overturn the trial court’s rulings on such matters absent an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. Id. at 47. This standard of review means
that we review only whether the record establishes an objective basis sufficient
to sustain the discretionary judgment made, and we will not disturb the trial
court’s determination if it could reasonably have been made. Id. We defer to
the trial court’s judgment in matters of conflicting testimony and evaluating the
credibility of witnesses. Id. As the trier of fact, the trial court could accept or
reject, in whole or in part, the testimony of any witness or party, and was not
required to believe even uncontroverted evidence. Id. If the trial court’s
findings could reasonably have been made on the evidence presented at trial,
they will stand. Id.
Wife first argues that in ordering and calculating the amount of child
support, the trial court erroneously interpreted the parties’ parenting plan “as
essentially creating a shared arrangement” when in fact Husband has “zero
ordered parenting time” for their eldest son. She asserts that because the
court’s decision to award child support and its calculation of the amount of
2
child support were based upon this erroneous interpretation, we must reverse.
We disagree.
In interpreting the meaning of a divorce decree, we review the decree de
novo. In the Matter of Georgakilas & Georgakilas, 157 N.H. 662, 664 (2008).
We consider the intent of the parties as expressed in the language of their
agreed-upon parenting plan. See id.
The parties’ agreed-upon parenting plan, adopted by the trial court in its
final order, provides:
The children shall have parenting time with their mother, Lici
Deng, from Monday after school (or 3pm if no school) to
Wednesday drop off at school (or 3pm if no school). The children
shall have parenting time with their father, Frank Vish, from
Wednesday after school (or 3pm if no school) to Friday drop off at
school . . . (or 3pm if no school).
The parties shall alternate weekends from Friday after school (or
3pm if no school) to Monday drop off at school (or 3pm if no
school).
The parties acknowledge and agree that [the eldest son] is not
required to follow this parenting schedule due to his age and
maturity, and that he shall arrange any parenting time he has with
his father directly with both parents.
We agree with Wife that the language above supports that “the intent of the
parenting plan was to allow [the eldest son] and his father to see each other
based upon a mutual agreement, and not a compelled schedule.” However,
Wife testified at the final hearing that the parties “have a final parenting plan
that is agreed upon by [Wife and Husband] for 50-50” parenting time. The fact
that the eldest son is not required to follow the parenting schedule does not
extinguish Husband’s right under the plan to equal parenting time with him.
Rather, it affects only when Husband spends that time with his son.
Accordingly, the trial court did not err when it determined that Husband “is
entitled to enforce the Parenting Plan.”
Wife next argues that the trial court erred when it imputed income to
Husband by dividing his 2016 income by twelve months when he “only worked
six months in 2016.” Wife states that Husband’s “total 2016 income should
have been divided by 6 months instead of 12.”
To calculate child support, the trial court must first determine each
parent’s “present income.” In the Matter of Crowe & Crowe, 148 N.H. 218, 222
(2002). It is up to the trial court to decide “what income figures should be used
3