THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0156, W.C. v. J.W., the court on July 17,
2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). The defendant appeals an order of the Circuit Court (Swegart, J.),
issued following a hearing, granting a civil stalking final order of protection in
favor of the plaintiff. See RSA 633:3-a (Supp. 2024). On appeal, the defendant
primarily argues that the evidence was insufficient to support a finding that he
stalked the plaintiff. We affirm.
In an appeal from an order on a civil stalking petition, we review sufficiency
of the evidence claims as a matter of law, and uphold the findings and rulings of
the trial court unless they are lacking in evidentiary support or are erroneous as
a matter of law. Fisher v. Minichiello, 155 N.H. 188, 190 (2007). We accord
considerable weight to the trial court’s judgments on the credibility of witnesses
and the weight to be given testimony, and view the evidence in the light most
favorable to the prevailing party; here, the plaintiff. See id.
A person commits the offense of stalking if, among other things, that
person “[p]urposely, knowingly, or recklessly engages in a course of conduct
targeted at a specific person which would cause a reasonable person to fear for
his or her personal safety or the safety of a member of that person’s immediate
family, and the person is actually placed in such fear.” RSA 633:3-a, I(a).
“Course of conduct” is defined as two or more acts over a period of time, however
short, which evidences a continuity of purpose. RSA 633:3-a, II(a). A course of
conduct may include, among other things, “[t]hreatening the safety of the
targeted person or an immediate family member,” “[f]ollowing, approaching, or
confronting that person, or a member of that person’s immediate family,”
“[a]ppearing in close proximity to, or entering the person’s residence, place of
employment, school, or other place where the person can be found, or the
residence, place of employment or school of a member of that person’s immediate
family,” or “[a]ny act of communication.” RSA 633:3-a, II(a)(1)-(3), (7). However,
a course of conduct does not include constitutionally protected activity, nor
conduct that was necessary to accomplish a legitimate purpose independent of
making contact with the targeted person. RSA 633:3-a, II(a). The plaintiff bears
the burden to prove “stalking” by a preponderance of the evidence. RSA 633:3-a,
III-a; Fisher, 155 N.H. at 190.
In this case, the trial court found that the plaintiff had carried his burden
to prove that the defendant, his coworker, had stalked him. The court found that
the defendant had, “on multiple instances, made comments and physical contact
with the plaintiff at work after being told that such contact and communication
was unwanted,” and that “[t]he frequent nature of the defendant’s conduct placed
the plaintiff in fear.” These findings are amply supported by evidence in the
record, which demonstrates, among other things, that the defendant verbally
harassed and physically assaulted the plaintiff on numerous occasions, often in a
sexualized manner, including by “rubb[ing]” the plaintiff’s buttocks and
shoulders, calling him “sweetheart,” asking him “what [he] charge[s],” and
laughing at the plaintiff when he repeatedly told the defendant to stop and to
leave him alone. The evidence supports the conclusion that the plaintiff is
reasonably afraid of what the defendant might do to him or his family.
Although the defendant emphasizes different facts and conflicting
evidence, and offers alternative explanations and interpretations of the evidence,
we must be mindful that “[i]t was within the trial court’s discretion to resolve
conflicts in the testimony, measure the credibility of witnesses, and determine
the weight to be given evidence.” Despres v. Hampsey, 162 N.H. 398, 404 (2011)
(quotation omitted). Accordingly, based upon our review of the record, we
conclude that the evidence, viewed in the light most favorable to the plaintiff,
amply supports the trial court’s findings. See id.; Fisher, 155 N.H. at 190. We
also conclude that, contrary to the defendant’s assertions, the trial court’s
written findings are legally sufficient. See Despres, 162 N.H. at 402.
Lastly, we note that the defendant’s remaining arguments either are not
preserved, see State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 48 (2003), are not adequately
developed for our review, see id. at 49, or — as is the case with the defendant’s
argument that his abusive conduct was somehow necessary to accomplish a
legitimate purpose or otherwise constituted constitutionally protected activity
because it occurred during work — do not warrant further discussion, see Vogel
v. Vogel, 137 N.H. 321, 322 (1993). See also In the Matter of Birmingham &
Birmingham, 154 N.H. 51, 56-57 (2006) (noting that such rules are not relaxed
for self-represented parties).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2