THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0188, Leonard J. LaPadula, III v. Mary
Maloney, the court on January 12, 2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments1 and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R.
20(3). The plaintiff, Leonard J. LaPadula, III, appeals an order of the Superior Court
(Kissinger, J.), granting a motion filed by the defendant, an attorney for New
Hampshire Employment Security, to dismiss on grounds that the complaint fails to
state a claim upon which relief may be granted, and that the defendant is entitled to
immunity. We affirm.
In reviewing the dismissal order, we consider whether the allegations in the
plaintiff’s pleadings are reasonably susceptible of a construction that would permit
recovery. See Szewczyk v. Continental Paving, 176 N.H. 148, 151 (2023). We
assume the truth of the well-pleaded factual allegations in the plaintiff’s pleadings
and construe all reasonable inferences from those facts in the light most favorable
to the plaintiff. See id. We do not, however, assume the truth of allegations that
“are not well-pleaded, including the statement of conclusions of fact and principles
of law.” ERG, Inc. v. Barnes, 137 N.H. 186, 190 (1993). We will uphold the trial
court’s decision if the facts pleaded do not constitute a basis for relief. See
Szewczyk, 176 N.H. at 151.
As the appealing party, the plaintiff has the burden of demonstrating
reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014). Based on our review of
the trial court’s order, the plaintiff’s arguments, the relevant law, and the record
submitted on appeal, including the well-pleaded factual allegations construed most
favorably to the plaintiff, we conclude that the plaintiff has failed to demonstrate
that the trial court erred by dismissing the complaint. See id.; Szewczyk, 176 N.H.
at 151; see also Sup. Ct. R. 25(8).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, and Gould, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
1 The plaintiff’s motion to strike certain statements in the defendant’s memorandum of law is denied.
We note that in his reply brief, the plaintiff repeats the arguments he makes in his motion to strike,
and that we have considered the arguments in both the motion to strike and reply brief.