THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0397, V.P. v. N.S., the court on December
22, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, N.S., appeals the order of the Circuit Court
(Forrest, J.), following a hearing, granting a domestic violence final order of
protection to the plaintiff, V.P. See RSA 173-B:5 (2022). The defendant argues
that the trial court erred in issuing a protective order because: (1) RSA 173-
B:1, I(e) (2022) requires a finding of destruction of property, not merely damage
to property; (2) the court allegedly based its credible present threat finding
upon its assessment of his mental state, and not the underlying conduct; and
(3) the evidence was insufficient to support the issuance of a protective order.
We affirm.
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred in finding that he
committed an act of “abuse” because RSA 173-B:1, I(e) requires a finding of
destruction of property, not merely damage to property, and that the evidence
was insufficient to support such a finding. To be granted a domestic violence
final order of protection, the plaintiff must establish, by a preponderance of
evidence, that the defendant engaged in “abuse.” RSA 173-B:5, I. “Abuse”
means the commission or attempted commission of one or more enumerated
crimes by a family or household member or a current or former sexual or
intimate partner when such conduct “constitute[s] a credible present threat” to
the plaintiff’s safety. RSA 173-B:1, I (2022); see S.C. v. G.C., 175 N.H. 158,
163 (2022). The enumerated crimes that may constitute abuse include
“[d]estruction of property as defined in RSA 634:1 and RSA 634:2.” See RSA
173-B:1, I(e).
The trial court’s “findings of facts shall be final, but questions of law may
be transferred from the circuit court to the supreme court.” RSA 173-B:3, VI
(2022). We review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a matter of law,
upholding the trial court’s findings and rulings unless they lack evidentiary
support or are tainted by legal error. S.C., 175 N.H. at 162. We defer to the
trial court’s judgments as to the credibility of the witnesses and the weight of
their testimony. Id. at 162-63. We view the evidence in the light most
favorable to the prevailing party, here, the plaintiff. Id. at 163.
The plaintiff testified that the defendant’s ex-girlfriend told the defendant
that she saw the plaintiff with another man, which led the defendant to believe
that the plaintiff was “cheating” on him. The plaintiff testified that the
defendant accused her of “sleeping with [her] ex,” and broke her car radio. At
the parties’ residence, the defendant “was throwing [her] things outside and
trying to destroy them.” She testified that when she arrived home, she found
“a lot of my stuff thrown all over the yard” and “a bunch of my items
destroyed.” She testified that the defendant “punched” the bedroom television,
“[d]umped coconut oil all over the bed into my mattress,” “[b]roke pictures,”
“[l]eft glass everywhere,” and “[j]ust dumped my jewelry box.”
The plaintiff testified that she was in her locked vehicle when the
defendant “came up to my car and started yelling at me” and “punched my
car.” She testified that the defendant’s father “had to bear hug him and rip
him off of my car, which is what ripped the door handle off of my car.” She
testified that the defendant “tried to slash my tires,” but that his father stopped
him.
The plaintiff testified that she received a text message from the defendant
stating, “I’m saying goodbye. You can come see me at my grave. Thanks for
cheating on me and bringing me to do this.” The plaintiff testified that she filed
her petition for a protective order because the defendant’s “episodes of being
manic and impulsive and paranoid were continuously accelerating,” and “now
he’s destroying my personal property in the house.” The defendant admitted
that he had been “very angry and irritable,” and that the door handle came off
the vehicle.
Based upon this evidence, the court found the defendant committed an
act of domestic violence by “[d]estruction of property as defined in RSA 634:1
and RSA 634:2.” The court specifically found that the defendant “damaged
plaintiff’s vehicle and other property of the plaintiff.” RSA 634:2 provides that
a person commits criminal mischief if the person, without a right to do so,
“purposely or recklessly damages property of another.” RSA 634:2, I. Because
RSA 634:2, I, provides the predicate for destruction of property under RSA 173-
B:1, I(e), damage to property is sufficient to support a finding of abuse.
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred in finding that his
conduct constituted a credible present threat to the plaintiff’s safety because,
he asserts, the court based its finding not upon his conduct, but upon its
assessment of his psychological state. We disagree. The court found that the
“defendant’s conduct constitutes a present credible threat to the plaintiff’s
safety . . . because of [his] severe anger and distress” and his “irrational” belief
that the plaintiff has been unfaithful. (Emphasis added; capitalization
omitted.)
Finally, the defendant argues that the evidence was insufficient to
support a finding of abuse because, he asserts, his father caused the door
handle to break off the vehicle when he “bear-hugged” him, and the handle
2
came off in the defendant’s hand. The defendant argues that because he “was
not even the author of the property damage,” this conduct cannot constitute a
credible present threat to the plaintiff’s safety. He also argues that the broken
television set and spilled coconut oil on the mattress provide insufficient
evidence of a qualifying act of abuse or conduct that would constitute a
credible present threat to the plaintiff’s safety. To the contrary, we conclude
that the evidence, viewed most favorably to the plaintiff, was sufficient to
support the trial court’s finding that the defendant committed an act of “abuse”
by destruction of property, and that such conduct constitutes a credible
present threat to the plaintiff’s safety.1 See S.C., 175 N.H. at 162-63.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, and Gould, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
1 To the extent that the defendant claims that the only evidence supporting a finding that the
plaintiff feared for her safety was testimony concerning which the trial court sustained his
objection, we conclude that the record does not support his argument.
3