THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0044, Natalia Markelova v. Daniil Del
Gaudio, the court on July 17, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3).1 The defendant, Daniil Del Gaudio, appeals an order of the Circuit
Court (Manchester, J.) entering judgment in favor of the plaintiff, Natalia
Markelova, in a small claims action to recover certain unpaid debts from the
defendant. We affirm.
On appeal, the defendant advances numerous arguments challenging the
trial court’s credibility determinations, factual findings, evidentiary rulings, and
alleged constitutional violations. However, “[i]t is the burden of the appealing
party . . . to provide this court with a record sufficient to decide [their] issues on
appeal, as well as to demonstrate that [they] raised [the] issues before the trial
court.” Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004). Here, the
defendant has failed to provide a transcript of the hearing before the trial court.
As a result, he has failed to demonstrate that his arguments are preserved for
appellate review. In addition, absent a transcript of the hearing, “we must
assume that the evidence was sufficient to support the result reached by the trial
court.” Id. We also note that, without developed legal argument, the defendant’s
various passing references to constitutional rights throughout his brief do not
warrant appellate review. See State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 49 (2003). Such
rules are not relaxed for self-represented parties. See In the Matter of
Birmingham & Birmingham, 154 N.H. 51, 56-57 (2006).
Lastly, to the extent that the defendant contends that the trial judge was
biased, or that she otherwise should have disqualified herself, we
disagree. Based upon our review of the record, we cannot conclude that a
1 Accordingly, insofar as the defendant has moved for this court to decide this appeal without
oral argument, his motion is granted to that extent.
reasonable person would have questioned the trial judge’s impartiality. See Sup.
Ct. R. 38, Canon 2.11; State v. Bader, 148 N.H. 265, 270-71 (2002) (observing,
among other things, that adverse rulings alone do not render a judge biased).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2