THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0473, In the Matter of Adam Gage and
Jenna Gage, the court on July 21, 2026, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The respondent, Jenna Gage (mother) appeals, and the
petitioner, Adam Gage (father) cross-appeals, the final divorce decree of the
Circuit Court (Mace, J.). The mother argues that the trial court erred by not
ordering the father to pay child support, and by finding that special
circumstances exist warranting a departure from the child support guidelines.
The father argues that the court erred by not requiring the mother to
reimburse him for alleged child support overpayments. We affirm.
The mother first argues that the trial court erred by declining to order
the father to pay child support of at least $50 per month, the statutory
minimum support obligation. See RSA 458-C:2, V, :3, IV (2018). We will not
disturb the trial court’s findings and rulings regarding child support absent an
unsustainable exercise of discretion or an error of law. In the Matter of Laura
& Scott, 161 N.H. 333, 335 (2010). Under the child support guidelines, if the
obligor parent’s gross income is less than the “self-support reserve,” and the
court has determined that the obligor is not voluntarily unemployed or
underemployed, the court shall order the child support obligation in the
amount of a minimum support order. RSA 458-C:3, IV(a). In this case,
however, the court found that special circumstances exist warranting a
departure from the guidelines. The court declined to order either party to pay
child support to the other.
Although there is a rebuttable presumption that the guidelines provide
the correct amount of child support, the court may deviate from the guidelines
when it finds that special circumstances exist. In the Matter of Hoyt & Hoyt,
171 N.H. 373, 379 (2018). “In cases where the parties will each be financially
responsible for 50 percent of all eligible child care costs, 50 percent of all
uninsured medical expenses for the children, and 50 percent of any agreed-
upon extracurricular activities in which the children may participate[,] and the
parties . . . [h]ave substantially similar incomes and an approximately equal
parenting schedule, there is a rebuttable presumption that a $0 child support
obligation is appropriate.” RSA 458-C:5, I(h)(1)(A) (Supp. 2025).
The court found that the special circumstances described in RSA 458-
C:5, I(h)(1)(A) exist in this case. The court found that the parties have
substantially similar incomes and an approximately equal parenting schedule.
The court credited the father’s testimony regarding his landscaping business
income, which he stated on his child support guidelines worksheet to be
$6,347.83 monthly, describing it as “much closer to the proverbial mark” than
what the mother claimed he was earning. The mother argues that the court’s
findings are merely conclusory and insufficient to satisfy RSA 458-C:5, I (Supp.
2025), which requires the court to make written findings regarding the
application of special circumstances. We conclude that the court’s findings are
sufficient to satisfy the requirements of RSA 458-C:5, I.
The mother also argues that the trial court erred by not ordering the
father to pay one half of the child’s health and dental insurance premiums.
The court ordered the father to pay 50 percent of the child’s uninsured medical
expenses. Based upon this record, we cannot conclude that the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion in declining to order him to also pay one
half of the child’s health and dental insurance premiums. See In the Matter of
Laura & Scott, 161 N.H. at 335.
In his cross-appeal, the father argues that the trial court erred in not
requiring the mother to reimburse him for alleged child support overpayments.
The father’s argument is based upon his erroneous assertion that the trial
court’s final decree modified child support retroactively. Although the trial
court had the discretion to modify child support retroactively to the date the
mother received notice of his motion to modify the temporary child support
order, see, e.g., In the Matter of Birmingham & Birmingham, 154 N.H. 51, 57-
58 (2006), the court expressly declined to do so in this case. As the mother
correctly notes, the father’s motion to modify child support was conditioned
upon his request for substantially increased parenting time, which the court
denied. We conclude that the record supports the trial court’s discretionary
decision not to modify child support retroactively. See In the Matter of Laura &
Scott, 161 N.H. at 335. Accordingly, we find no error.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2