THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0322, In the Matter of John Anderson and
Carol Anderson, the court on April 9, 2026, issued the following
order:
The respondent’s objection and motion to strike the petitioner’s amended
memorandum of law correcting certain scrivener’s and grammatical errors is
denied. The petitioner’s motion for an award of attorney’s fees and costs incurred
in responding to the objection and motion to strike is likewise denied.
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). The respondent, Carol Anderson (wife), appeals a final decree of the
Circuit Court (Lombardi, J.), issued following a hearing, in her divorce from the
petitioner, John Anderson (husband). On appeal, she challenges the trial court’s
equitable division of the marital estate. See RSA 458:16-a (Supp. 2025). We
affirm in part, vacate in part, and remand.
“The trial court is afforded broad discretion in determining matters of
property distribution when fashioning a final divorce decree.” In the Matter of
Geraghty & Geraghty, 169 N.H. 404, 417 (2016) (quotation omitted). “We will not
overturn a trial court’s decision on these matters absent an unsustainable
exercise of discretion or an error of law.” Id. (quotation omitted). “This standard
of review means that we review only whether the record establishes an objective
basis sufficient to sustain the discretionary judgment made, and we will not
disturb the trial court’s determination if it could reasonably have been made.” In
the Matter of Braunstein & Braunstein, 173 N.H. 38, 47 (2020). “We will not
substitute our judgment for that of the trial court[;] [n]or will we reweigh the
equities.” Id. (citation omitted).
“In a divorce proceeding, marital property is not to be divided by some
mechanical formula but in a manner deemed just based upon the evidence
presented and the equities of the case.” Geraghty, 169 N.H. at 417 (quotation
omitted). Under RSA 458:16–a, II, an equal division of property is presumed
equitable unless the trial court decides otherwise after considering one or more of
the factors designated in the statute. Id. The court need not consider all of the
statutory factors or give them equal weight; however, the court must specify
written reasons for the division of property which it orders. Id.; RSA 458:16-a, II,
IV.
We first address the wife’s argument that the trial court unsustainably
exercised its discretion in ordering the sale of the marital home, which is the
parties’ primary asset, and the division of the proceeds equally between them.
Specifically, the wife contends that, in so ordering, the trial court erred by failing
to consider and properly weigh certain statutory factors set forth in RSA 458:16-
a, II. We disagree.
The trial court carefully considered the parties’ difficult financial
circumstances, as well as their history and living arrangements, and determined,
“[a]fter considering the relevant factors enumerated in RSA 458:16-a, II, . . . that
an equal distribution of the parties’ property is equitable.” Although the wife
requested additional time to pursue a home equity loan with her son in order to
buy out the husband’s interest in the home, the court noted that the wife
acknowledged that she does not qualify for a new mortgage or home equity loan
on her own, that she would need additional time to build up her employment
history, and that, even with her son as a co-signer, she still might not qualify due
to her short employment history. Accordingly, the court ordered the marital
home to be sold and the proceeds divided equally between the parties.
These findings are supported by evidence in the record. Although the trial
court did not specifically cite each statutory factor set forth in RSA 458:16-a, II, a
review of the hearing transcript and the court’s detailed narrative order amply
demonstrates that the court considered all of the relevant statutory factors in
reaching its decision. In any event, it is well-established that the court need not
consider all of the enumerated factors or give them equal weight. See, e.g.,
Geraghty, 169 N.H. at 417. Although the wife emphasizes different evidence and
offers alternative explanations and interpretations of the evidence, we note that
“[i]t is within the province of the trial court to accept or reject, in whole or in part,
whatever evidence was presented,” and “we defer to the trial court’s judgment on
such issues as resolving conflicts in the testimony, measuring the credibility of
witnesses, and determining the weight to be given evidence.” Cook v. Sullivan,
149 N.H. 774, 780 (2003); see also Geraghty, 169 N.H. at 416.
Nor are we persuaded that RSA 458:16-a, V precluded the sale of the
marital home. See RSA 458:16-a, V (“The court shall not require a party to sell a
piece of marital property if one party is able to fully and fairly compensate the
other party for his or her interest in it and the sale is not required for an
equitable division of property between the parties.”). On these facts, the trial
court reasonably could have found that the wife was not able to fully and fairly
compensate the husband for his interest in the property. Accordingly, we
conclude that the trial court did not unsustainably exercise its discretion in
ordering the sale of the marital home and the equal division of the proceeds. See
RSA 458:16-a, II; Geraghty, 169 N.H. at 417; Braunstein, 173 N.H. at 47.
2
Next, we address the wife’s argument that, in awarding the parties’ vehicle
to her, the trial court erred in deducting $7,289, the full value of that vehicle,
from her share of the marital home proceeds in order to compensate the husband
for his share of the vehicle. In light of the trial court’s determination that an
equal distribution of the parties’ property is equitable, the trial court erred in its
division of the vehicle. By awarding the vehicle to the wife, the court effectively
transferred the husband’s equal share in the vehicle to the wife. To make the
husband whole, the court should have deducted half the value of the vehicle from
the wife’s share of the marital home proceeds, not the full value. Accordingly, we
vacate this aspect of the trial court’s final decree, and remand for the trial court
to modify its equitable division concerning the vehicle.
The wife’s remaining arguments either are not adequately developed for our
review, see State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 49 (2003), are not accompanied by a
record sufficient to decide the issue on appeal, see Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt.,
151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004), or otherwise fail to demonstrate reversible error, see
Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014). See In the Matter of Birmingham &
Birmingham, 154 N.H. 51, 56 (2006) (observing that self-represented litigants are
bound by the same procedural rules that govern parties represented by counsel).
Affirmed in part; vacated in
part; and remanded.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3