THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0013, New England Glory, LLC v. Cutts
Mansion Condominium Association, the court on October 9,
2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, New England Glory, LLC, appeals orders of the
Superior Court (St. Hilaire and Kennedy, JJ.) granting summary judgment to
the defendant, Cutts Mansion Condominium Association, on the plaintiff’s
claims for declaratory and injunctive relief regarding certain basement space in
a condominium, and awarding the defendant attorney’s fees under RSA 356-
B:15 (2022). The plaintiff argues that the trial court erred by determining that
(1) the relevant portion of the basement was part of the condominium and
constituted “common area” when the condominium was created, and (2) an
amendment to the condominium declaration purporting to create a unit out of
the basement space was invalid. The plaintiff further argues that the trial
court erred by not determining that a revocation of the amendment that had
purported to create the basement unit and a later amendment to the
declaration were invalid. Finally, the plaintiff argues that the defendant was
not entitled to attorney’s fees under RSA 356-B:15. We affirm.
A party is entitled to summary judgment “if the pleadings, depositions,
answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits
filed, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.” RSA 491:8-a, III
(2010). When reviewing trial court rulings on cross-motions for summary
judgment, “we consider the evidence in the light most favorable to each party in
its capacity as the nonmoving party and, if no genuine issue of material fact
exists, we determine whether the moving party is entitled to judgment as a
matter of law.” Taylor Community v. City of Laconia, 177 N.H. ___, ___ (2025),
2025 N.H. 38, ¶7. We review the trial court’s application of law to the facts de
novo. Id. Finally, we review an award attorney’s fees to the prevailing party in
an action brought under RSA 356-B:15, see RSA 356-B:15, II, for an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. See Grenier v. Barclay Square
Commercial Condo. Owners’ Assoc., 150 N.H. 111, 115 (2003).
As the appealing party, the plaintiff has the burden of demonstrating
reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014). Based upon our
review of the trial court’s well-reasoned orders, the plaintiff’s arguments
challenging those orders, the relevant law, and the record provided on appeal,
we conclude that the plaintiff has not demonstrated reversible error. See id.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, and Gould, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2