THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0579, C.A. v. D.N., and Case No. 2025-
0580, D.W. v. D.N., the court on April 28, 2026, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve each case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, D.N., appeals two civil stalking final orders of
protection entered against him by the Circuit Court (Lombardi, J.) for the
protection of the plaintiffs, C.A. and D.W., following a hearing that was held in
both cases. See RSA 633:3-a (Supp. 2025). The defendant argues that the
trial court erred in denying his motion to continue the hearing and that the
evidence was insufficient to prove that he committed the offenses of stalking.
We affirm.
The following facts are supported by the record. The plaintiffs, who are a
couple, live together, and the defendant is their neighbor. The plaintiffs each
filed a civil stalking petition against the defendant alleging that he had “caused
[them] to fear for [their] safety.” Specifically, they alleged that, over the course
of several days, the defendant placed trash under the windshield wiper of
D.W.’s vehicle, threw a bag of blueberries on the ground near D.W. and cursed
at D.W., taunted D.W. by thumping his chest and challenging D.W. to a fight
before calling D.W. a “coward.” They also alleged that the defendant placed
tape over the plaintiffs’ doorbell camera, placed a container full of cigarette
butts on the plaintiffs’ porch, verbally assaulted the plaintiffs for approximately
fifteen minutes, spat in D.W.’s direction, and threatened to “slap [C.A.] in her
f**king mouth.” C.A.’s petition further alleged that prior to these incidents, the
defendant on multiple occasions had yelled at and threatened her while she
was walking her dog.
On July 15, 2025, the trial court issued a temporary order of protection
for C.A. and scheduled a final hearing for approximately one month later. At
the hearing, the trial court considered both C.A.’s and D.W.’s petitions against
the defendant. C.A. and D.W. were represented by counsel, and the defendant
was self-represented. The trial court heard testimony from C.A., D.W., and the
defendant and also reviewed video of some of the events giving rise to the
petitions.
Following the hearing, the trial court issued final stalking orders of
protection against the defendant for both C.A. and D.W. In C.A.’s final
protection order, the court found that the defendant had committed stalking
against C.A. by placing trash on D.W.’s windshield, throwing blueberries
toward the plaintiffs, yelling at C.A. while she was walking her dog, verbally
assaulting both C.A. and D.W., and threatening to hit C.A. The court further
noted that the defendant’s “ongoing course of conduct has caused [C.A.]
emotional distress.” In D.W.’s final protection order, the court found that the
defendant had committed stalking against D.W. by placing trash on D.W.’s
windshield, throwing blueberries toward the plaintiffs, placing a jar of cigarette
butts on the plaintiffs’ porch, and verbally assaulting both C.A. and D.W. The
court further noted that, during this last incident, the defendant “aggressively
approached [D.W.] while yelling at him and spit on the ground in [D.W.’s]
direction” and the defendant “continued to yell at [D.W.] and aggressively
approach him as if trying to instigate a fight.” The defendant appealed both
orders.
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred in denying his
motion to continue the final hearing. “The decision to grant or deny a motion
for a continuance is within the sound discretion of the trial court.” In the
Matter of Kempton & Kempton, 167 N.H. 785, 793 (2015). We will not overturn
the court’s decision absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Id.
The record shows that the trial court initially scheduled a final hearing
for August 12. At the defendant’s request and over C.A.’s objection, the trial
court continued the hearing to August 27. On August 26, the trial court
received the defendant’s request for another continuance of a “minimum” of
two months so that he could retain counsel. The following day, the parties
appeared at the hearing, where the defendant reiterated that he “need[ed] legal
representation” in order “to protect [his] interest” in these cases and a related
criminal matter. Counsel for the plaintiffs objected, stating that the defendant
had caused C.A. distress and that C.A. wanted a final order of protection. The
trial court denied the motion, noting that the defendant “had a chance to seek
legal counsel” and that the hearing had been “continued once already.” It
further noted that, unlike C.A., there was no temporary order in place relating
to D.W., and D.W. therefore “probably would like to have” the hearing go
forward, which plaintiffs’ counsel confirmed was correct.
Based upon these facts, we conclude that the defendant has failed to
show that the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion in denying his
second request to continue the final hearing. See id. The initial stalking
petition was filed on July 15, over a month before the final hearing, and, as the
trial court noted, the defendant had an opportunity to retain counsel. The trial
court also noted that the defendant had already been granted one continuance.
We cannot conclude it was clearly unreasonable for the trial court to decline
granting the defendant’s second request to continue the hearing. See id.
The defendant suggests that there “would have been absolutely no
prejudice” to the plaintiffs resulting from a continuance because C.A.’s
2
temporary protection order would have remained in effect. We note that there
was no temporary order pertaining to D.W, however, and even if there had
been, the decision to grant or deny the defendant’s request was within the trial
court’s discretion. See id. We further disagree with the defendant that the fact
that the plaintiffs were represented by counsel — combined with the complexity
of the issues at the hearing — necessitated the assistance of counsel. Cf.
Sheedy v. Merrimack Cty. Super. Ct., 128 N.H. 51, 56 (1986) (upholding trial
court’s exercise of discretion in refusing to appoint counsel for petitioner who
“failed to convince us that the issues in this [civil] contempt proceeding are
sufficiently complex or that he is so incapable of speaking for himself” that
appointed counsel was necessary). To the extent that the defendant seeks to
raise a constitutional claim regarding this issue, he has failed to demonstrate
that he raised this issue in the trial court, and it is therefore not preserved.
See State v. Winstead, 150 N.H. 244, 246 (2003); see also In the Matter of
Birmingham & Birmingham, 154 N.H. 51, 56 (2006) (stating self-represented
litigants are bound by the same procedural rules that govern parties
represented by counsel).
The defendant next argues that the evidence was insufficient to prove
that he stalked the plaintiffs. We review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a
matter of law, upholding the trial court’s findings and rulings unless they lack
evidentiary support or are tainted by legal error. S.C. v. G.C., 175 N.H. 158,
162 (2022). We defer to the trial court’s judgments as to the credibility of the
witnesses and the weight of their testimony. Id. at 162-63. We view the
evidence in the light most favorable to the prevailing party — here, the
plaintiffs. Id. at 163.
A person commits the offense of stalking if he or she “[p]urposely,
knowingly, or recklessly engages in a course of conduct targeted at a specific
person which would cause a reasonable person to fear for his or her personal
safety . . . and the person is actually placed in such fear.” RSA 633:3-a, I(a). A
“[c]ourse of conduct” is defined as “2 or more acts over a period of time,
however short, which evidences a continuity of purpose,” and may include
“[t]hreatening the safety of the targeted person,” “[f]ollowing, approaching, or
confronting that person,” “[a]ppearing in close proximity to, or entering the
person’s residence,” and “[p]lacing an object on the person’s property.” RSA
633:3-a, II(a)(1)-(3), (5).
Here, C.A. testified that the defendant picked up a piece of trash and
placed it on the windshield of D.W.’s vehicle. Two days later, the defendant
threw a bag of blueberries at the plaintiffs. Later that day, the defendant
blocked the roadway with his vehicle and prevented the plaintiffs from leaving
their residence. The defendant then “taunted” the plaintiffs by exiting his
vehicle, “postur[ing],” and calling them “coward[s]” before moving his vehicle
out of their way. The following day, the defendant placed tape over the
plaintiffs’ security camera, rendering it inoperable for a period of time. C.A.
3