THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0099, In the Matter of Jean Paul LaTour
and Jennifer LaTour, the court on January 12, 2026, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The respondent, Jennifer LaTour (wife), appeals the final
decree of the Circuit Court (Walch, J.), following a hearing, in her divorce from
the petitioner, Jean Paul LaTour (husband). The wife argues that the trial
court erred in: (1) dividing the marital estate; (2) awarding alimony; and
(3) allegedly enforcing the parties’ postnuptial agreement. We affirm.
The wife first argues that the trial court’s property division was
inequitable. We accord trial courts broad discretion in determining matters of
property division in a final divorce decree. In the Matter of Heinrich &
Heinrich, 164 N.H. 357, 363 (2012). We review the trial court’s division of the
parties’ assets under our unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. Id. If
the court’s findings can reasonably be made on the evidence presented, they
will stand. Id. Pursuant to RSA 458:16-a, I (2018), “all tangible and intangible
property and assets, real or personal, belonging to either or both parties,
whether title to the property is held in the name of either or both parties,” is
subject to equitable distribution. See Heinrich, 164 N.H. at 359.
The wife argues that the trial court, in dividing the marital estate
unequally, considered improper factors and disregarded her non-economic
contributions to the marriage. Under RSA 458:16-a, II (2018), an equal
division of property is presumed equitable unless the trial court decides
otherwise after considering one or more of the factors designated in the statute.
In the Matter of Letendre & Letendre, 149 N.H. 31, 35 (2002). The court need
not consider all the enumerated factors or give them equal weight. Heinrich,
164 N.H. at 364. In this case, the trial court considered the statutorily
enumerated factors and determined that an equal division of the equity in the
marital home, and an unequal division of retirement plans and financial assets
favoring the husband, was equitable. We conclude that the record supports
the trial court’s determination. See id. at 363.
In particular, the wife argues that the trial court erred by dividing the
husband’s primary retirement account equally as of the date the parties
entered into their postnuptial agreement, and awarding the gains in the
account’s value after that date to the husband. The record shows that the
parties no longer lived together after 2010. In 2012, the husband filed a
petition for divorce, and the wife filed a cross-petition for divorce. In November
2014, they entered a postnuptial agreement and withdrew their divorce
petitions. The court found that the parties’ primary reasons for entering their
postnuptial agreement, and not divorcing, were to allow the wife to continue to
reside in the marital home, and to allow her to receive health insurance from
the husband. The parties continued to live separately for 15 years. During
that time, as the court found, “the parties were married in name only.” Under
these circumstances, we cannot conclude that the trial court unsustainably
exercised its discretion by dividing the husband’s primary retirement account
equally as of the date the parties entered into their postnuptial agreement, and
awarding the gains in the account’s value after that date to the husband. See
In the Matter of Nyhan and Nyhan, 147 N.H. 768, 771 (2002) (“[T]rial courts
are free to exercise their sound discretion in establishing an appropriate
valuation date for the equitable distribution of marital assets.”). We find no
support in the record for the wife’s broad assertion that the trial court failed to
“identify, properly value, and distribute all financial assets.”
We next address the wife’s argument that the court erred in its alimony
award. The wife argues that the trial court, in determining its alimony award,
mischaracterized mortgage payments the husband made during the parties’
separation as “support” payments. She also argues that the trial court failed to
consider her non-economic contributions to the marriage. Trial courts have
broad discretion in awarding alimony. In the Matter of Henry & Henry, 163
N.H. 174, 182 (2012). Accordingly, we review the trial court’s alimony award
under our unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. Id. If there is
sufficient evidence to support the trial court’s factual findings, we will uphold
them. In the Matter of Dube & Dube, 163 N.H. 575, 581 (2012).
The trial court ordered the husband to pay a lump sum alimony award of
$230,000 from his share of the equity in the marital home, which equates to
term alimony of more than $2,000 per month for nine years, until the wife
reaches age 65. The court determined that such an award was equitable
“regardless of whether the support paid to the wife was ‘temporary alimony’ or
something else.” The wife argues that the court erred by not awarding her term
alimony for the maximum duration permitted under the statute, 50 percent of
the length of the marriage. See RSA 458:19-a, III (Supp. 2024). However, as
the trial court noted, the wife’s argument ignores the fact that the parties have
been married “in name only” for 15 years, half the length of the marriage. See
id. (“If justice requires, the court may use a different beginning or ending date
in measuring the length of the marriage.”).
The wife also argues that she cannot refinance the marital home
without an award of term alimony. However, as the court noted, the wife
testified that she believes that she can qualify for refinancing because she has
2
“a good credit score, assets, and a good relationship with the credit union.”
Moreover, the wife testified that she believes she has a co-signer, if needed, to
refinance the home. We reject the wife’s argument that the trial court failed to
consider her disability and other personal considerations. The trial court
specifically referenced the wife’s disability in its alimony award. We conclude
that the record supports the trial court’s alimony award. See In the Matter of
Dube, 163 N.H. at 581.
The wife also argues that the trial court erred by allegedly enforcing
certain provisions of the postnuptial agreement and not others, without first
determining whether the agreement was valid. The trial court found that
neither party sought enforcement of the agreement, and we do not construe its
order to enforce any provisions of the agreement. Rather, as the trial court
stated, it considered the agreement only as evidence of the parties’ intent to
remain married “in name only.”
We conclude that the wife’s remaining arguments are inadequately
developed, see State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 49 (2003), and warrant no
further discussion, see Vogel v. Vogel, 137 N.H. 321, 322 (1993).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Countway, and Gould, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3