THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0507, Alma Ruth Beckwith v. Kimberly
McCormick, the court on June 5, 2026, issued the following
order:
The defendant’s motions for late entry of her brief and to allow a non-
conforming brief are granted. The court has reviewed the written arguments
and the record submitted on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by
way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Kimberly McCormick,
appeals an order of the Superior Court (Attorri, J.) denying a motion to reopen
a closed case brought by the plaintiff, Alma Ruth Beckwith. We affirm.
The sole relief requested by the defendant in the July 17, 2025 motion
was “[t]o reopen the case.” The factual statement supporting the motion, in its
entirety, stated: “I received $2,999.00 and would like to see who pays for the
attorney fees listed on the SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT AND GENERAL
MUTUAL RELEASE. The Plaintiff is in contempt/breach of Superior Court and
the Reg. of Deeds.” The trial court denied the motion without prejudice,
explaining that the motion did not “clearly state that there presently exists any
dispute between the parties; nor, if a dispute does exist, is it understandably
explained.” The defendant moved to reconsider, referencing a November 3,
2020 email and motions from 2020 that, the defendant asserted, contained
errors and statements concerning unfulfilled obligations, and claiming that the
plaintiff had not complied with court orders. The trial court denied the motion
to reconsider “for the reasons stated in the original order” on the motion to
reopen. On appeal, the defendant argues that “it[’]s blatantly obvious the
[defendant’s] rights were continuously ignored by the judicial system,” that the
defendant “unfairly and unjustly lost” a property in the matter, that the trial
court erred by granting a writ of possession in the matter and allegedly
“refusing to review evidence of mishandling by all parties,” and that the
defendant was deprived of homestead and Fifth Amendment rights.
Whether to reopen a case after it has been closed falls within the trial
court’s sound discretion, and we review the court’s decision not to reopen a
case for an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See Brackett v. Prince, 113
N.H. 302, 303 (1973); Ricker v. Mathews, 94 N.H. 313, 316 (1947). Likewise,
the trial court’s contempt power is discretionary, and the proper inquiry is not
whether we would have found the plaintiff in contempt, but whether the trial
court unsustainably exercised its discretion by declining to do so. See Holt v.
Keer, 167 N.H. 232, 239 (2015). To establish an unsustainable exercise of
discretion, the defendant must demonstrate that the trial court’s ruling was
clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of the defendant’s case. Id.
Based upon our review of the defendant’s motions to reopen the case and for
reconsideration, and the trial court’s rulings on those motions, the defendant
has failed to establish that the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion
by declining to reopen the case or to find the plaintiff in contempt of any court
order. The other arguments the defendant has raised are not sufficiently
developed for our review, and we decline to address them. See State v.
Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 49 (2003).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Gould, and Will, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2