THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0133, In the Matter of Tara Dickison and
Thomas Sileo, the court on July 17, 2026, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The
respondent, Thomas Sileo (Husband), appeals an order of the Circuit Court
(Joseph, J.) granting a motion for contempt filed by the petitioner, Tara
Dickison (Wife), and denying Husband’s motion to modify his alimony
obligation. We affirm.
The trial court found the following facts. The parties divorced in 2016.
At the time of the divorce, they had been married for twenty-two years and had
three children, the youngest of whom were fourteen-year-old twins. Wife had
not worked outside the home for approximately eighteen years. At the time of
the divorce, Husband was a financial advisor whose reported annual income in
2016 was $340,000. Pursuant to a stipulated decree, Husband was to pay
Wife $5,000 per month in child support and $9,000 per month in alimony. The
stipulation stated that Husband’s obligation to pay alimony “shall terminate
upon the life of [Husband].” The parties signed the stipulation in February
2016 and re-initialed it when they appeared at court in April 2016.
Shortly after the twins graduated from high school, Wife began residing
with another man, whom she married in January 2021. Husband continued to
pay the full alimony obligation to Wife until December 2022 when Husband
notified Wife that he had sent her a check for $8,000. He stated that he was
experiencing financial difficulties and suggested “dropping alimony to $5,000
until [he] got caught up.” Wife did not agree to the reduction, stating that she
could not “accept the cut at this point.” Husband responded, “you can take me
to court. But I’m always going to protect my business.” Thereafter, Husband
unilaterally further reduced his monthly payments.
In April 2023 Husband moved to modify his $9,000-per-month alimony
obligation. In May 2023 Wife moved for a finding of contempt against Husband
for his reduction in alimony payments. Following a hearing, the trial court
denied Husband’s petition to modify after finding that he had not demonstrated
a substantial and unforeseeable change in circumstances that warranted
modifying the divorce decree. The trial court also found Husband in contempt
and awarded Wife her attorney’s fees in connection with her motion to find him
in contempt. This appeal followed.
Husband argues that the trial court erred when it: (1) concluded that
Wife’s remarriage was not a substantial change in circumstances warranting
modification of alimony; (2) failed to shift the burden of proof to Wife to
establish “extraordinary circumstances or a special situation making it clearly
and definitely inequitable for the alimony to cease;” and (3) held Husband in
contempt for alimony arrearage.
We consider first Husband’s argument that the trial court erred when it
denied his motion to modify alimony. We will not overturn the trial court’s
denial of a request to modify alimony absent an unsustainable exercise of
discretion. In the Matter of Canaway & Canaway, 161 N.H. 286, 289 (2010).
To establish that the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion,
Husband must show that the trial court’s decision was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. See State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295,
296 (2001).
“[T]he party requesting an alimony modification must show that a
substantial change in circumstances has arisen since the initial award, making
the current alimony amount either improper or unfair.” In the Matter of
Doherty & Doherty, 168 N.H. 694, 701 (2016). “The trial court must inquire
into the changed circumstances of both parties and must take into account all
of the circumstances of the parties, including the terms of the stipulation.” Id.
(quotation and citations omitted). While the court must inquire into the
changed circumstances of both parties, the burden of proof rests with the party
seeking modification. Canaway, 161 N.H. at 290-91. “Changes to a party’s
condition that are . . . foreseeable at the time of the decree cannot rise to the
level of a substantial change in circumstances sufficient to warrant a
modification of an alimony award.” Laflamme v. Laflamme, 144 N.H. 524, 528-
29 (1999).
On appeal, Husband does not argue that the trial court’s ruling that he
did not demonstrate a substantial and unforeseeable change in circumstances
was an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Rather, Husband asserts that the
trial court erred as a matter of law when it concluded that Wife’s remarriage
was not a per se substantial change in circumstances warranting modification
of alimony and failed to shift the burden of proof to Wife to establish
“extraordinary circumstances or a special situation making it clearly and
definitely inequitable for the alimony to cease.” Husband cites Eaton v. Eaton,
90 N.H. 4 (1939), for the proposition that an alimony recipient’s remarriage is a
substantial change in circumstances as a matter of law, entitling the obligor to
terminate alimony unless the recipient proves “extraordinary circumstances or
a special situation making it clearly and definitely inequitable for the alimony
to cease.” Eaton, 90 N.H. at 7. While we agree with Husband that this
2
presents a question of law, we decline to address it because we conclude that
the issue was not preserved.
It is a long-standing rule that parties may not have judicial review of
matters not raised in the forum of trial. Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151
N.H. 248, 250 (2004). It is the burden of the appealing party, here, Husband,
to demonstrate that he raised before the trial court the issues he has presented
on appeal. Id.; see also Sup. Ct. R. 16(3)(b) (“After each statement of a question
presented, counsel shall make specific reference to the volume and page of the
transcript where the issue was raised and where an objection was made, or to
the pleading which raised the issue.”). “Where a party fails to demonstrate that
it raised an issue before the trial court, the issue is not preserved for our
review.” Blagbrough Family Realty Trust v. A & T Forest Prods., 155 N.H. 29,
35 (2007).
The final order issued by the trial court set forth the following regarding
the legal standard:
Alimony law applicable at the time of the parties’ divorce provides
that in order to obtain a modification of support, the moving party
must demonstrate that a substantial change in circumstances has
arisen since the initial award, making the current support amount
either improper or unfair. The New Hampshire Supreme Court has
held that changes to a party’s condition that are both anticipated
and foreseeable at the time of the decree cannot rise to the level of
a substantial change in circumstances sufficient to warrant
modification of an alimony award. Both parties’ counsel concede
that the foregoing legal standard is applicable here despite the
amendment to the alimony statute following this divorce. The
party seeking modification has the burden of proof.
(citations and quotations omitted). The trial court then applied this legal
standard and determined that Husband had not demonstrated a substantial
and unforeseeable change of circumstances warranting modification of the
2016 divorce decree.
Husband’s brief cites to his motion to modify and his motion to
reconsider the final order to demonstrate that he raised the effects of Wife’s
remarriage in the trial court. See Sup. Ct. R. 16(3)(b). In his motion to modify,
however, Husband set forth the same legal standard the trial court applied in
its final order. Furthermore, in neither motion did Husband assert that Wife’s
remarriage constituted a per se substantial change of circumstances or that
proof of remarriage shifts the burden to Wife to establish “exceptional
circumstances” to justify the continuation of alimony. Nor did either motion
cite Eaton or any other case that would support either of the two legal
arguments regarding modification that Husband now makes on appeal.
3