THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
Case No. 2025-0056
Citation: Peregrine Interests LLC v. Todd, 2025 N.H. 54
PEREGRINE INTERESTS LLC & a.
v.
JESSICA TODD
Argued: November 12, 2025
Opinion Issued: December 23, 2025
McLane Middleton, Professional Association, of Manchester (Scott H.
Harris and Jesse J. O’Neill on the brief and Scott H. Harris orally), for the
plaintiffs.
Pierce Atwood LLP, of Portsmouth (Michele E. Kenney on the brief and
orally), for the defendant.
GOULD, J.
[¶1] The plaintiffs, Peregrine Interests LLC (Peregrine) and Jessica Todd
LLC (the company), appeal orders of the Superior Court (Ruoff, J.) dismissing
their claims against the defendant, Jessica Todd, for breach of fiduciary duty,
breach of contract, and declaratory judgment. We affirm.
[¶2] The following facts are taken from the plaintiffs’ complaint and
accompanying documentation and are assumed to be true for the purposes of
this appeal. See Boucher v. Town of Moultonborough, 176 N.H. 271, 272
(2023). In 2012, Peregrine and Todd sought to establish a “high end hair
salon” located in Portsmouth. They formed the company that year and, in
2016, amended and restated the company’s operating agreement “to identify
how they would structure their combined efforts.” In exchange for shares, each
made certain contributions to the company. Peregrine contributed financial
support. Specifically, “Peregrine’s majority owner [H. Daniel Hughes II]
utilize[ed] his parent company to supply capital, marketing, financial, and
administrative expertise, and all ‘back-office’ support.” Todd, who was an
established hair stylist and “the public face of the eponymous business,”
provided “day-to-day management and active participation in the business.”
The 2016 amended and restated limited liability company agreement (the
operating agreement) identifies Todd and Peregrine as the members of the
company and Todd and Hughes as its managers.
[¶3] As part of Peregrine’s financial support, the company obtained a line
of credit from Diversified Group LLC (Diversified), of which Hughes is the
president/CEO. The operating agreement provided that until Diversified,
Peregrine, and Hughes had been repaid the total amount they had invested in
the company, Todd would vote, as member and manager, as directed by
Hughes.
[¶4] The operating agreement provided that no member could transfer all
or part of that member’s interest in the company without the approval of a
majority of disinterested members. It further required that “for so long as
[Todd] is a Member, she shall devote 100% of her business time to providing
services to and as manager of the Company.” It also prohibited both members
from competing with the company during their memberships. It did not,
however, as the trial court found, “mention [member] withdrawal in any form,
either voluntary or involuntary.”
[¶5] In 2022, Todd broached the idea of buying out Peregrine’s interest in
the company with Hughes. When the parties failed to reach a deal, Todd gave
notice of her withdrawal from the business. Peregrine and the company then
brought this action seeking damages for breach of fiduciary duty and breach of
the operating agreement and a declaration that “if Todd works in the [salon]
business she must dedicate 100% of her working time to the [company].”
[¶6] Todd filed a motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim, which the
trial court granted in part and denied in part. The court determined that “the
crux of the parties’ arguments rests on whether Todd validly withdrew as a
member of the [company] under the terms of the parties’ operating agreement.”
Finding that Todd had validly withdrawn, the court concluded that the
plaintiffs’ fiduciary duty, contract, and declaratory judgment claims premised
2
upon her continued membership failed. It further ruled that “[t]o the extent
[the plaintiffs’] claim alleges conduct that occurred before [the effective date of
Todd’s withdrawal], however, the breach of contract claim stands.” The
plaintiffs moved for reconsideration, which the court denied.
[¶7] Thereafter, Todd brought counterclaims against the plaintiffs and a
third-party complaint against Hughes and his spouse. The plaintiffs then
withdrew any remaining portion of their breach of contract claim so that their
claims could be severed from Todd’s counterclaims and the dismissal orders
could be treated as final decisions on the merits as to all of the plaintiffs’
claims, making them appealable pursuant to Superior Court Rule 46(c)(1). The
parties jointly requested a ruling under Rule 46(c)(1), which the trial court
granted. This appeal followed.
[¶8] “In reviewing an order granting a motion to dismiss, we assume the
truth of the facts as alleged in the plaintiff[s’] pleadings and construe all
reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to the plaintiff[s].” Boucher,
176 N.H. at 273. “The standard of review in considering a motion to dismiss is
whether the plaintiff[s’] allegations are reasonably susceptible of a construction
that would permit recovery.” Id. “This threshold inquiry involves testing the
facts alleged in the pleadings against the applicable law.” Id. “The trial court
may also consider documents attached to the plaintiff[s’] pleadings; documents,
the authenticity of which is not disputed by the parties; official public records;
and documents sufficiently referred to in the complaint.” Id. at 273-74. “We
will uphold the granting of the motion to dismiss if the facts pled do not
constitute a basis for legal relief.” Id. at 274.
[¶9] Resolving the issues in this appeal requires us to construe both RSA
chapter 304-C, the New Hampshire Limited Liability Company Act (the Act),
and the company’s operating agreement. “We review the trial court’s statutory
interpretation de novo.” Id. In interpreting the Act, “[w]e first look to the
language of the statute itself, and, if possible, construe that language according
to its plain and ordinary meaning.” Id. “We give effect to every word of a
statute whenever possible and will not consider what the legislature might have
said or add language that the legislature did not see fit to include.” Id. “We
also construe all parts of a statute together to effectuate its overall purpose and
avoid an absurd or unjust result.” Id. “However, we do not construe statutes
in isolation; instead, we attempt to construe them in harmony with the overall
statutory scheme.” Id.
[¶10] “Because the operating agreement is a form of contract, we will
apply the general rules of contract interpretation.” McDonough v. McDonough,
169 N.H. 537, 541 (2016) (quotation omitted). “When interpreting a written
agreement, we give the language used by the parties its reasonable meaning,
considering the circumstances and the context in which the agreement was
negotiated, and reading the document as a whole.” Id. (quotation omitted).
3
“We give an agreement the meaning intended by the parties when they wrote
it.” Id. (quotation omitted). “Absent ambiguity, however, the parties’ intent will
be determined from the plain meaning of the language used in the contract.”
Id. (quotation omitted). “The interpretation of a contract, including whether a
contract term is ambiguous, is ultimately a question of law for this court to
decide.” Id. (quotation omitted). “Accordingly, we review a trial court’s
interpretation of a contract de novo.” Id. (quotation omitted).
[¶11] We turn first to the operating agreement. It provides, in relevant
part:
[N]o Member may directly or indirectly Transfer all or any portion
of its, her, or his Interest or any rights therein, except upon
approval by a majority of disinterested Members (any such
approved transferee, a “Permitted Transferee”). Any Transfer made
in violation of this Agreement shall be null and void.
[¶12] “Transfer” is defined to mean “any transfer, sale, assignment,
pledge, hypothecation, gift, creation of a security interest in or lien on,
placement in trust (voting or otherwise), assignment or any other encumbrance
or disposition of, directly or indirectly, and whether or not voluntarily, of any
Interest or portion thereof.” “Interest” is defined to mean “a Member’s limited
liability company interest in the Company, which includes such Member’s
Capital Account, Shares and other rights and obligations under this Agreement
and the Act.”1 Finally, the operating agreement provides “that the rights,
duties and liabilities of the Members shall be as provided in the Act, except as
otherwise provided in this Agreement.”
[¶13] The plaintiffs argue that the trial court erred in interpreting the
operating agreement. They contend that Todd’s withdrawal from the company
was a “transfer,” as defined by the operating agreement, which required
Peregrine’s approval. They then argue that, because Todd’s unapproved
transfer was void under the operating agreement, she “remained bound to the
terms of the Operating Agreement.” Accordingly, the plaintiffs argue, this
lawsuit, “predicated on Todd’s violation of the Operating Agreement, articulated
a legally viable cause of action” and was erroneously dismissed.
[¶14] Todd disputes that a withdrawal falls within the operating
agreement’s definition of “transfer.” She contends that because the operating
agreement is silent as to member withdrawals, there is nothing “otherwise
1 We note that while the operating agreement defines “Interest” to mean a member’s “limited
liability company interest,” it purports to further define “Interest”/“limited liability company
interest” to include more than is contained in the Act’s definition of “limited liability company
interest.” See RSA 304-C:12 (2025). The plaintiffs do not contend that this distinction is
pertinent to the resolution of this appeal, however, and we therefore do not consider it further.
4
provided” in the agreement about that subject and, therefore, the Act’s
provisions regarding withdrawals apply. Under those provisions, she argues,
withdrawal does not transfer any portion of a member’s interest in an LLC but
rather “terminates certain membership rights.” (Bolding omitted.)
[¶15] The Act provides that “[u]nless the operating agreement provides
otherwise, a member may withdraw from a limited liability company at any
time by giving 30 days’ written notice to the other members, or such other
notice as is provided for in writing in the operating agreement.” RSA 304-
C:103, I (2025). A member’s voluntary withdrawal from a limited liability
company causes the member to “be dissociated.” RSA 304-C:100 (2025).
Subject to provisions not relevant here, the Act defines “the dissociation of a
member . . . [to] mean the termination of all of the member’s membership
rights except: I. The member’s limited liability company interest; and II. The
rights identified in RSA 304-C:99.”2 RSA 304-C:98 (2025). “‘Membership
rights’ means the totality of the member’s rights as a member under this act,
including both economic rights, such as the member’s limited liability company
interest, and non-economic rights, such as the member’s voting rights, if any.”
RSA 304-C:15 (2025). “‘Limited liability company interest’ means the right of a
member to receive allocations of the profits or losses of a limited liability
company and to receive distributions of the limited liability company’s cash
and other assets.” RSA 304-C:12. Thus, under the plain language of the Act,
Todd’s limited liability company interest was retained and all other
membership rights were terminated. As Todd argues, “[n]either a termination
nor a retention [is] a ‘transfer.’”
[¶16] The plaintiffs nevertheless assert that the operating agreement
“defined transfers as including not only terms consistent with the common,
bilateral meaning of the word—such as ‘sale,’ ‘assignment,’ and ‘gift’—but also”
what they characterize as “the unilateral catch-all, ‘any other encumbrance or
disposition.’” They then argue that by withdrawing from the company Todd
“disposed of her non-economic membership interest rights.” We are not
persuaded. First, the operating agreement’s transfer prohibition applies to a
member’s “Interest” which is defined as “a Member’s limited liability company
interest in the Company.” As noted, because Todd withdrew from the
company, she has retained, not transferred, that interest. To the extent the
transfer prohibition applies to rights beyond the limited liability company
interest, we do not agree that “disposed of” includes termination by action of
law.
[¶17] The phrase “any other encumbrance or disposition” must also be
read in the context of the language preceding it. In contract interpretation, the
rule of ejusdem generis “applies when there is an enumeration or listing of
2 The company’s operating agreement expressly waives the provisions of RSA 304-C:99 (Certain
Effects of Dissociation).
5
specific things, followed by more general words relating to the same subject
matter, in which case the general words are interpreted as meaning things of
the same kind as the specific matters to which the parties refer.” 11 Richard A.
Lord, Williston on Contracts § 32:10, at 745-46 (4th ed. 2012). Here, all of the
preceding articulations of the meaning of “transfer” involve the conveyance of,
or encumbrance on, a member’s interest to, or for the benefit of, another.
Thus, we interpret “any other . . . disposition” to be “of the same kind as,” id.,
and no broader than, the terms that precede it and conclude that it refers to a
disposition to another. Cf. Parkhurst v. Gibson (Parkhurst), 133 N.H. 57, 62,
63 (1990) (declining to read “[t]he general clause ‘all other marital rights’” in
introductory paragraph of the parties’ antenuptial agreement to include
“property settlement and alimony awards granted upon divorce” where “[t]he
five paragraphs setting forth the parties’ agreements are particular and
specific, and concern only inheritance rights and inter vivos transfers of
assets”). This interpretation of “transfer” as bilateral finds further support in
the language of the operating agreement’s transfer restriction itself, which
requires approval for a transfer and then identifies “any such approved
transferee, a ‘Permitted Transferee.’”3 Accordingly, Todd’s withdrawal was not
a “transfer” of her interest.
[¶18] The plaintiffs next contend that they have a viable claim for
recovery under RSA 304-C:103, II, which provides:
If the member has the power to withdraw but the withdrawal is a
breach of the operating agreement, or the withdrawal occurs in
connection with otherwise wrongful conduct of the member, the
limited liability company may recover from the withdrawing
member damages for breach of the operating agreement or as a
result of the wrongful conduct, which may include the reasonable
costs of obtaining replacement of any services the withdrawn
member was obligated to provide to the limited liability company.
RSA 304-C:103, II (2025). They argue that “Todd’s determination to withdraw
as a means of circumventing her fiduciary duty to her partner, Peregrine,
constitutes the ‘wrongful conduct’ referenced” in this provision. Todd responds
that the plaintiffs have not alleged that she “engaged in wrongful conduct
separate and apart from her withdrawal” and argues that “it cannot be
‘wrongful’ for [her] to have exercised a statutory right of withdrawal that is not
prohibited by the Operating Agreement” even if she had “the intent to thereafter
compete with the [company].” We agree because the plaintiffs’ argument is
3 To the extent the plaintiffs contend that Todd’s withdrawal effected a bilateral transfer of her
50% voting interest in the company to Peregrine because Peregrine held 100% of the voting rights
after Todd’s withdrawal, we are not persuaded. Peregrine’s voting interest increased to 100% on
Todd’s withdrawal by virtue of Peregrine’s being the only voting member remaining after Todd’s
voting rights were terminated by operation of law.
6
predicated upon the faulty premise that Todd’s withdrawal was a breach of the
operating agreement. The plaintiffs, moreover, cite no provision of the Act or of
the operating agreement that prohibits a former member from competing with
the company. Thus, we cannot conclude that Todd’s intent to engage in legal
activity was “otherwise wrongful conduct.” Id.
[¶19] For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the trial court’s dismissal of
the plaintiffs’ claims.
Affirmed.
MACDONALD, C.J., and DONOVAN and COUNTWAY, JJ., concurred.
7