THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0039, Oliver Weiss v. Desteny Dube, the
court on July 17, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). Oliver Weiss (Landlord) appeals an order of the Circuit Court (Boyle, R.,
approved by Paine, J.), issued following a hearing, that concluded that Desteny
Dube (Tenant) was not responsible for paying rent for the month of September
2024 because she moved out of the apartment on September 1, 2024. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. On October 21, 2021, the parties
entered into a lease agreement. The lease did not have a set term, but rather,
provided that the rental shall be on a “month to month basis.” Pursuant to the
lease, Tenant was to give Landlord 30-days’ notice prior to moving out. If Tenant
failed to give the required notice, the lease authorized Landlord to “deduct an
amount equal to 4 (four) weeks rent” from the security deposit.
Landlord and Tenant both assert that the lease had “expired” prior to the
events giving rise to the underlying eviction action. Although the record does not
establish when the parties believe the lease expired, or the basis for this mutual
understanding, the record demonstrates that on June 15, 2024, Landlord
presented Tenant with a notice of increase in rent. Following Landlord’s
communication of the rent increase, Tenant failed to pay rent for July.
Thereafter, Landlord initiated eviction proceedings.
On August 13, 2024, the trial court held a hearing at which Tenant
presented a violation of fitness for habitability defense premised on alleged
unsafe electrical wiring in the unit. The trial court credited Tenant’s defense and
continued the action to allow Tenant’s separate RSA chapter 540-A action, which
was filed in a different court, to proceed, and to allow Landlord time to address
Tenant’s contentions regarding habitability. The trial court’s order indicated that
it would further address the habitability allegations at a hearing scheduled
within 30 days. Despite ruling in Tenant’s favor, the trial court expressly found
that “the Demand for Rent and the Eviction Notice were filed in accordance with
RSA 540.” Following the August 13, 2024 hearing, Landlord moved for
reconsideration, arguing that Tenant’s habitability defense was meritless, and
that Tenant’s notice to Landlord of the allegedly faulty wiring did not precede
Tenant’s rent arrearage, as required by RSA 540:13-a (2021).
The trial court held a second hearing on or about September 23, 2024,
following which it granted Landlord’s motion for reconsideration and ordered
Tenant to pay the July and August 2024 rent. The trial court expressly found
that Tenant was not responsible for September 2024 rent, because Tenant
“moved out 1 Sept 2024 thus does not owe rent for September 2024.” Landlord
sought reconsideration, arguing that despite vacating the unit, Tenant owed rent
for September because she failed to give the 30-days’ notice of her intent to move
as required by the lease. Following an additional hearing on December 16, 2024,
the trial court established a payment plan by which Tenant would pay Landlord
the amount she owed on the July and August rent, implicitly denying the motion
for reconsideration.
On appeal, Landlord argues that the trial court erred by not requiring
Tenant to pay September 2024 rent based upon Tenant’s failure to provide 30
days’ notice of her departure as required by the lease. Specifically, Landlord
contends that “[t]here is no precedent for the court interjecting itself into a rental
agreement, signed by both Parties releasing a tenant of any responsibilities of a
legally binding contract[.]” We disagree with Landlord’s contention that the trial
court interfered with the parties’ agreement.
RSA 540:2 (2021) (amended 2024), provides that the “lessor or owner of
restricted property may terminate any tenancy by giving to the tenant or
occupant a notice in writing to quit the premises . . . [for] [n]eglect or refusal to
pay rent due and in arrears, upon demand.” RSA 540:2, II,(a) (emphasis added).
Here, by initiating the eviction proceeding and notifying Tenant of the obligation
to vacate the unit, Landlord plainly noticed his intent to terminate the tenancy.
Although neither party has submitted copies of the notice of eviction or related
material, we assume that those documents support the trial court’s express
finding that Landlord provided notice of the eviction in accordance with RSA
chapter 540. See Silverstein v. Town of Alexandria, 150 N.H. 679, 681 (2004) (“In
the absence of a sufficient record of the proceedings below, we assume the
evidence supports the trial court’s findings . . . .”). Accordingly, we conclude that
the 30-day notice provision in the parties’ expired lease, to the extent that it
remained enforceable, was superseded by Landlord’s eviction notice, which
unambiguously conveyed Landlord’s intent to terminate the landlord-tenant
relationship and provided a date certain by which Tenant must vacate. See RSA
540:2, II,(a); cf. LaPonsie v. Kumorek, 122 N.H. 1021, 1022 (1982) (finding 30-
day move-out notice provision in lease inapplicable where tenant moved out “at
the expiration of the tenancy” where lease provided for a set term). Indeed, in the
midst of active eviction proceedings, it is anomalous that Landlord would
2
demand Tenant to provide 30-days’ notice of her intent to move. We therefore
affirm.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3