THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0037, K.B. v. C.M., the court on May 16,
2025, issued the following order:
The plaintiff’s motion to file a response to the defendant’s reply brief is
denied. See Sup. Ct. R. 16(7). Accordingly, we have not considered the
plaintiff’s “supplemental response,” and the defendant’s motion to strike the
plaintiff’s “supplemental response” is, therefore, moot. See In re Guardianship
of R.A., 155 N.H. 98, 100-01 (2007).
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, C.M., appeals the order of the Circuit Court
(Christie, J.), following a hearing, entering a civil stalking final order of
protection against him for the protection of the plaintiff, K.B. See RSA 633:3-a
(2016). The defendant argues that: (1) the trial court’s findings are
impermissibly vague and do not clearly specify two or more distinct acts as
required by RSA 633:3-a; (2) the evidence was insufficient to prove that he
committed the offense of stalking; and (3) the trial court allegedly failed to
review all his evidence, and that it relied upon unnoticed allegations. We
affirm.
A person commits the offense of stalking if he “[p]urposely, knowingly, or
recklessly engages in a course of conduct targeted at a specific person which
would cause a reasonable person to fear for his or her personal safety. . . , and
the person is actually placed in such fear.” RSA 633:3-a, I(a). A course of
conduct “means 2 or more acts over a period of time, however short, which
evidences a continuity of purpose.” RSA 633:3-a, II(a).
The plaintiff testified that the parties had been in a relationship, that the
defendant had been violent, and that the plaintiff “just wanted to . . . cut ties
with him.” The plaintiff testified that the last time the parties lived together,
the defendant “put his fist up” and “threatened” the plaintiff, stating that the
plaintiff was “lucky” not to be hit by him. The plaintiff testified that a
protective order was necessary because, after the break-up, the defendant
continued sending the plaintiff unwanted texts and emails, and that he taped a
letter to the plaintiff’s mailbox.
The defendant testified that his communications with the plaintiff have
been non-threatening and are solely for the purpose of collecting a debt. The
plaintiff testified that the defendant already “got his payment,” and that it is
unclear “what else he wants.” The plaintiff testified that the defendant has also
contacted the plaintiff’s grandparents, who “have nothing to do with this.”
In finding that the defendant committed the offense of stalking, the trial
court found that, “[a]fter the parties[’] recent break-up, [the] [d]efendant has
been demanding a refund of monies owed to [the] [p]laintiff including sending
several emails from several different email[ ] [addresses], sending demand
letters to [K.B.’s] family and taping letters to [K.B.’s] door and mailbox.”
The defendant first argues that the trial court’s findings are
impermissibly vague and do not clearly specify two or more distinct acts as
required by RSA 633:3-a. When issuing a civil stalking order, the trial court
must make findings on the record that the defendant engaged in two or more
specific acts over a period of time, however short, which evidences a continuity
of purpose. Despres v. Hampsey, 162 N.H. 398, 402 (2011). However, the trial
court is not required to provide “any more specificity than what the statute
itself requires.” Id. We conclude that the trial court’s findings meet the
statutory requirement.
The defendant next argues that the evidence was insufficient to prove
that he was stalking the plaintiff, given his legitimate debt collection purpose.
The defendant has the burden to show that his conduct was necessary to
accomplish a legitimate purpose. Miller v. Blackden, 154 N.H. 448, 453 (2006).
Although the defendant testified that his communications were “solely for the
purpose of resolving a financial dispute,” the plaintiff testified that the
purported financial dispute is merely an “excuse to talk to [the plaintiff]” and to
get his “foot in the door,” following a pattern that has developed over the past
few years. It is the trial court’s role to resolve conflicts in the testimony,
measure the credibility of witnesses, and determine the weight to be given
evidence. Despres, 162 N.H. at 404. The trial court was not required to accept
the defendant’s testimony that his communications were solely for debt
collection purposes.
The defendant next argues that the evidence was insufficient to support
its finding that a reasonable person would fear for his or her personal safety.
He asserts that the trial court improperly relied on vague allegations of past
harm that were not clearly noticed in the petition. We review sufficiency of the
evidence claims as a matter of law and uphold the trial court’s findings and
rulings unless they are lacking in evidentiary support or erroneous as a matter
of law. Miller, 154 N.H. at 455. The trial court must generally limit its findings
to the factual allegations contained in the stalking petition. South v. McCabe,
156 N.H. 797, 799 (2008).
The plaintiff testified that the defendant has been violent, resulting in a
concussion in 2021. The plaintiff’s petition provides specific incidents of
2
domestic violence. The trial court found that the plaintiff has told the
defendant that the plaintiff “wants to cut all ties,” but that “the [d]efendant has
persisted.” The court found that, “[g]iven the parties’ history, a reasonable
person would fear for his/her safety.” We conclude that the plaintiff’s petition
provided adequate notice of the allegations against the defendant, see id., and
that the evidence was sufficient to support the trial court’s finding that his
conduct would have caused a reasonable person to fear for his or her personal
safety, see Miller, 154 N.H. at 455.
Finally, the defendant argues that the trial court allegedly failed to review
all his evidence, which denied him a fair hearing. The defendant sought to
admit certain exhibits, which he described as being “similar to” the plaintiff’s
exhibits, but with “more details of the payment arrangement structures.” The
court agreed to “peruse the documents,” but advised the parties that it would
place greater weight on their testimony. We defer to the trial court to
determine the weight to be given to the evidence. Despres, 162 N.H. at 404.
Based upon this record, we cannot conclude that the trial court failed to review
the defendant’s evidence, erred in its weighing of the evidence, see id., or
denied the defendant a fair hearing.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3