THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0230, James R. McCann v. Brittany Bower
& a., the court on August 14, 2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The
defendants, Brittany Bower and Douglas Bower (the Bowers), appeal orders
from the Superior Court (Schulman and Frizzell, JJ.) denying their motion for
summary judgment, ruling that the property owned by the plaintiff, James R.
McCann, benefits from an easement right to park on the Bowers’ lot, and
enjoining the Bowers from interfering with this right.1 We affirm.
I. Background
From the summary judgment and trial records, the trial court found the
following facts. The parties own abutting properties in Allenstown. The
Bowers own and reside at 29 Ferry Street (Lot 43). McCann owns 27 Ferry
Street (Lot 44), and rents the residence there to several tenants. Lot 44
tenants can park on the east side of the building, but McCann contends that
Lot 44 tenants can also park to the west of the building, on the Bowers’ lot, by
virtue of a parking easement.
At one point in time, Patricia Hill owned a single parcel of land that she
divided into the lots at issue. Initially, Lots 41, 43, and 44 housed residential
buildings arranged in a “U” shape with Lot 42 in the middle of the “U.” Lot 42
served as a driveway and common parking area for the other three lots.
In 1999, Hill secured planning board approval for a lot line adjustment
plan (the Plan) that eliminated Lot 42 and divided it among the surrounding
lots 41, 43, and 44. The Plan aggregated the majority of Lot 42, including the
parking area at issue in this appeal, into Lot 43. According to the Plan: “The
parking area between the 3 buildings is to be common parking for all of the
parcels shown on this plan. Lots 41, 43 & 44 are to have deeded access to this
common parking area.” The Plan depicts that parking area on Lot 43 in the
location of the former Lot 42.
1 Although the Bowers appeal the order of the Superior Court (Schulman, J.) denying summary
judgment and raise issues in their notice of appeal pertaining to that order, the Bowers did not
brief those issues. Accordingly, those issues are deemed waived, see State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H.
47, 49 (2003), and the arguments before us on appeal challenge only the order of the Superior
Court (Frizzell, J.) on the final merits.
Hill then conveyed Lots 43 and 44 to herself by quitclaim deed. The deed
to Hill for Lot 43 provides “[t]his conveyance is made subject to the rights and
easements to common use for parking of vehicles on the [Lot 42] area” as
reserved for Lots 41 and 44. The deed to Hill for Lot 44 includes “the right and
easement to allow the full time residents, owners or occupants” of Lot 44 “to
station or park up to 2 motor vehicles” on the former Lot 42 (the “2-vehicle
easement”).
In 2003, Hill conveyed Lots 43 and 44, by separate deeds, to B-Marc
Rentals LLC (B-Marc). Consistent with Hill’s quitclaim deeds, the deeds to B-
Marc referenced the Plan and the 2-vehicle easement. Several months later, B-
Marc transferred Lot 44 to its managing member, Marc Grenier, as a result of
which Grenier, in his individual capacity, became the sole owner of Lot 44 and
B-Marc remained the sole owner of Lot 43. Similar to the prior deeds for Lot
44, B-Marc’s deed to Grenier referenced the Plan and the 2-vehicle easement.
In 2004, after conveying Lot 44 to Grenier, B-Marc executed and recorded a
partial release of easement purporting to abandon Lot 44’s parking easement
on Lot 43.
In the years that followed, Lots 43 and 44 changed hands several times
without incident. In March 2020, the Bowers purchased Lot 43. The deed to
the Bowers made the conveyance subject to the Plan and to “the rights and
easements to common use for parking of vehicle[s]” on the former Lot 42 area
now part of Lot 43 “as conveyed or reserved for” Lots 41 and 44. McCann
purchased Lot 44 in May 2020. His deed includes the 2-vehicle easement and
references the Plan.
In December 2020, McCann petitioned for permanent injunctive relief
against the Bowers’ alleged interference with his rights pursuant to this
parking easement. The Bowers disputed the existence of the easement and
counterclaimed for declaratory relief. The court (Schulman, J.) denied the
Bowers’ motion for summary judgment.
In October 2024, after further motion practice, the trial court (Frizzell, J.)
held a bench trial. The trial court granted McCann’s easement claim and his
injunction request, with the caveat that the Bowers may impose reasonable
rules and regulations concerning McCann’s parking rights on the Bowers’ lot.
The court denied the Bowers’ motion to reconsider, and the Bowers appealed.
II. Analysis
When reviewing a trial court’s decision after a trial on the merits, we
sustain the court’s factual findings and rulings “unless they lack evidentiary
support or are legally erroneous.” Stowell v. Andrews, 171 N.H. 289, 297
(2018). In this exercise, we determine only whether, based on the evidence, a
reasonable person could have reached the same decision as the trial court, and
2
we do not consider whether we would have ruled differently. Id. We defer to a
trial court’s judgment in resolving conflicts in testimony, assessing credibility
of witnesses, and determining the weight to place on any evidence. Id. We
review, however, the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de novo. Id.
Resolution of whether the bundle of rights conveyed with Lot 44 includes
a parking easement on Lot 43 requires the interpretation of a series of deeds,
which presents a question of law that we review de novo. See id. at 296. When
interpreting a deed, “we give it the meaning intended by the parties at the time
they wrote it, taking into account the surrounding circumstances at that time.”
Id. (quotation omitted). In the event of clear and unambiguous deed language,
we discern the parties’ intent from the deed itself, without resort to extrinsic
evidence. Id. In the event of ambiguous deed language, however, “extrinsic
evidence of the parties’ intentions and the circumstances surrounding the
conveyance [based upon the trial court’s findings of fact] may be used to clarify
its terms.” Id. (quotation omitted).
A. Creation of the Easement
As described above, through a collection of four deeds, Hill owned and B-
Marc came to own Lots 43 and 44. The trial court found, and the parties do
not contest on appeal, that although Hill purported to grant a parking
easement through her quitclaim deeds to herself and her deeds to B-Marc,
those deeds did not create an easement. This is because an owner cannot
grant an easement to him or herself. See Appletree Mall Assocs. v. Ravenna
Inv. Assocs., 162 N.H. 344, 347 (2011) (“[A] landowner cannot have an
easement over his or her own property.”). B-Marc’s sale of Lot 44 to Grenier,
however, destroyed the unity of title and created the easement.2
B-Marc’s deed to Grenier states that Lot 44 includes “the right and
easement to allow the full time residents, owners or occupants of the building
on the premises described herein to station or park up to 2 motor vehicles in
common with others on the lot marked Map 14, [former] Lot 42 which abuts
the premises herein described.” This plain language confirms B-Marc’s intent
to grant the parking easement to Grenier.
2 The Bowers challenge the validity of B-Marc’s deed to Grenier on corporate compliance and
authority grounds. But Grenier signed the deed in his role as B-Marc’s manager and the deed
includes confirmation that Grenier was “duly authorized on behalf of [B-Marc].” In short, the deed
at least facially demonstrates Grenier’s authorization to execute the deed on behalf of B-Marc, and
the record does not contain evidence undermining what the deed recites. As to the Bowers’
argument that “[t]he only permissible transfer of real estate from [a] limited liability company to its
members must have been by a non-gift ‘contractual transfer’ to both members” (emphasis
omitted), the Bowers have failed “to provide adequately developed legal argument and legal
support” for this argument. Sabinson v. Trustees of Dartmouth College, 160 N.H. 452, 459 (2010)
(quotation omitted). As a result, we will not address it. See id.
3