THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0029, Appeal of Estate of Matthew Kelley,
the court on April 9, 2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The
claimant, the Estate of Matthew Kelley, appeals an order of the New Hampshire
Compensation Appeals Board (CAB) ruling that the estate failed to prove that
Kelley’s death arose out of employment. See RSA 281-A:2, XI (2023). We
affirm.
The following facts are derived from the CAB’s order or are otherwise
supported by the record. Kelley worked as a carpenter for Evroks Corporation.
In April 2023, Kelley was working on a bridge over a river when he suffered a
pulmonary embolism. He fell about eight feet onto the embankment below and
then rolled into shallow water face down.
EMS arrived and provided immediate medical attention, but Kelley
remained unresponsive and was ventilated. EMS transported Kelley to the
hospital, where he remained on a ventilator. Despite treatment, Kelley went
into cardiac arrest, resuscitative efforts were unsuccessful, and he was
pronounced dead. The deputy chief medical examiner for the State of New
Hampshire (the medical examiner) performed an autopsy the following day. He
determined that Kelley’s cause of death was a pulmonary embolus with a
contributory condition of water aspiration.
The estate filed a workers’ compensation claim, which the respondent,
The Phoenix Insurance Company, insurer of Evroks Corporation (the carrier),
denied. The New Hampshire Department of Labor granted the estate benefits
and the carrier appealed that decision to the CAB. The CAB held a de novo
hearing. The parties agreed that the only issue was causation. The evidence
entered before the CAB included Kelley’s medical records, the autopsy report,
and a report from the carrier’s expert doctor, Dr. Pulde.
The CAB found that the essential determination was whether the water
aspiration was a substantial factor in Kelley’s death, or whether Kelley’s death
was caused by the embolism and subsequent cardiac arrests. After finding
that Pulde’s report was persuasive, the CAB determined that “[t]he aspiration is
a medical finding but not a cause of death.” The CAB thus unanimously
concluded that “the claimant Estate did not carry its burden of proof that the
decedent[’]s death arose from his employment.” The estate’s motion for
reconsideration was denied, and this appeal followed.
We will affirm the CAB’s decision absent an error of law, or unless, by a
clear preponderance of the evidence, we find it to be unjust or unreasonable.
Appeal of Doody, 172 N.H. 802, 805 (2020); see RSA 541:13 (2021). The CAB’s
factual findings are prima facie lawful and reasonable. RSA 541:13. We review
the CAB’s factual findings deferentially and will uphold them unless the
evidence does not support them. Appeal of Doody, 172 N.H. at 805. We review
the CAB’s legal rulings de novo. Id. We construe the Workers’ Compensation
Law liberally to give the broadest reasonable effect to its remedial purpose. Id.
Thus, when construing it, we resolve all reasonable doubts in favor of the
injured worker. Appeal of Estate of Dodier, 174 N.H. 548, 553 (2021). Here, as
the appealing party, the estate has the burden of demonstrating that the CAB’s
decision was erroneous. See Appeal of Doody, 172 N.H. at 806.
To obtain workers’ compensation benefits, a claimant must demonstrate
that the employee’s injury arose “out of and in the course of employment.” RSA
281-A:2, XI. A claimant must prove: (1) that the injury arose out of
employment by demonstrating that it resulted from a risk created by the
employment; and (2) that the injury arose in the course of employment by
demonstrating that (A) it occurred within the boundaries of time and space
created by the terms of employment, and (B) it occurred in the performance of
an activity related to employment, which may include a personal activity if
reasonably expected and not forbidden, or an activity of mutual benefit to
employer and employee. Murphy v. Town of Atkinson, 128 N.H. 641, 645-46
(1986). “The test, thus, contains three elements, and the failure to prove any
one of them is fatal to a claimant’s workers’ compensation claim.” Appeal of
Hawes, 175 N.H. 221, 224 (2022).
In the instant case, there is no dispute that Kelley was acting “in the
course of” employment at the time of his death. RSA 281-A:2, XI. Rather, the
issue in dispute is whether Kelley’s death “resulted from a risk created by [his]
employment.” Murphy, 128 N.H. at 645. In Appeal of Margeson, 162 N.H.
273, 277 (2011), we identified four types of injury-causing risks commonly
faced by an employee at work: “(1) risks directly associated with employment;
(2) risks personal to the claimant; (3) mixed risks; and (4) neutral risks.” We
also instructed that “in determining the appropriate test in future cases, the
CAB should first make a finding regarding the cause of the claimant’s injury.”
Appeal of Margeson, 162 N.H. at 284-85; see Appeal of Kelly, 167 N.H. 489,
494 (2015). Depending on which risk category the CAB determines the cause
of the employee’s injury falls within, different analytical tests will apply. See
Appeal of Kelly, 167 N.H. at 493-94 (providing that “[i]f the cause is a neutral
risk, the increased-risk test applies,” and “[i]f the cause is a non-neutral risk,
the claimant must prove legal and medical causation”).
2
The estate argues that the CAB erred when it failed to make a finding as
to the type of risk to which Kelley was exposed. The carrier counters that the
CAB did analyze the legal causation of Kelley’s death and found it was the
result of a personal risk. Having reviewed the CAB’s decision, we agree with
the carrier. See Appeal of LeBorgne, 173 N.H. 488, 493 (2020) (stating that the
interpretation of a CAB decision presents a question of law, which we review de
novo).
The CAB recognized that the essential determination was whether the
water aspiration was a substantial factor in Kelley’s death, or whether Kelley’s
death was caused by the embolism and subsequent cardiac arrests. The CAB
thus properly set forth the contested issue: whether Kelley’s death resulted
from a personal risk because his death was caused by the embolism and
cardiac arrests, or from a mixed risk because the water aspiration was a
substantial contributing factor to his death. See Appeal of Kelly, 167 N.H. at
492-94.
In considering this question, the CAB stated that “[i]t is clear that under
a Margeson analysis, if the embolism was the sole cause of Mr. Kelley’s death,
it would fall into the ‘personal risk’ category and not be compensable as arising
from his employment.” It described the estate’s argument that “since
aspiration/drowning was found to be a contributing cause, it is a ‘mixed risk’
and compensable under Margeson.” After setting forth Pulde’s opinion that
“the sole cause of [Kelley’s] death was the pulmonary embolism” and that
Kelley “was either dead or moribund before he rolled into the water and
aspirated,” the CAB found Pulde’s opinion persuasive. It thus concluded that
the water aspiration was “a medical finding but not a cause of death.” The
CAB accordingly determined that the estate “did not carry its burden of proof
that [Kelley’s] death arose from his employment.”
In summary, the CAB determined that: (1) if the embolism was the sole
cause of death, then the death resulted from a personal risk; (2) Pulde’s
opinion was that the embolism was the sole cause of death; (3) Pulde’s opinion
was persuasive; and accordingly, (4) Kelley’s death did not result from his
employment. These determinations show that the CAB found that the cause of
Kelley’s death was the result of a personal risk. See Appeal of Margeson, 162
N.H. at 284-85. Although the CAB could have been more clear in making this
finding, we conclude that the CAB sufficiently made the required determination
as to the relevant category of risk. See id.; Appeal of LeBorgne, 173 N.H. at
493.
Having determined that the CAB found Kelley’s death resulted from a
personal risk, we now address whether that finding is supported by the
evidence. See Appeal of Doody, 172 N.H. at 805 (“We . . . will uphold [the
CAB’s factual findings] unless the evidence does not support them.”). The
parties do not dispute that the embolism resulted from a risk personal to
3