THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0030, State Line Trailer Sales, LLC v.
Randall L. Bennett, Trustee of the April-May Realty Trust, the
court on August 27, 2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The
defendant, Randall L. Bennett, Trustee of the April-May Realty Trust, appeals
orders of the Superior Court (St. Hilaire, J.) granting summary judgment in
favor of the plaintiff, State Line Trailer Sales, LLC (State Line), on State Line’s
claim for specific performance and Bennett’s counterclaims.1 We affirm.
The following facts are taken from the summary judgment record and the
final merits order. Bennett listed for sale a 22.6-acre property in Hampstead
that included a closed restaurant building. He intended to subdivide the
property into five lots, one of which — Lot 15-3 — would consist of two acres
and include the restaurant building.
In December 2019, the parties executed a non-binding letter of intent for
State Line to purchase Lot 15-3 at a price of $575,000. Over the next few
months, the parties negotiated Bennett’s deliverables and the exact price State
Line would pay at closing. These negotiations resulted in an agreement to
increase the purchase price by approximately $7,000 to “cover certain
development costs.” In February 2020, the parties entered into a purchase and
sale agreement for State Line to acquire Lot 15-3, effective upon subdivision
and site plan approval. The purchase and sale agreement incorporated an
addendum (collectively, the P&S) that included: (1) an integration clause; (2)
Bennett’s agreement to provide a septic design and bring a water line to the
property; and (3) a statement of specific prices State Line would pay for
landscaping and engineering. The P&S did not “obligate[] State Line to bear
other, additional expenses beyond the purchase price” and was silent as to any
additional development costs.
Bennett secured conditional subdivision approval in November 2020,
followed by final approval in May 2021. After final subdivision approval,
Bennett notified State Line that, in addition to the purchase price, it owed its
pro rata share of the development costs in the approximate amount of $81,000.
1 Although State Line filed a cross-appeal challenging the final order issued after a trial on the
merits, it explicitly waived the cross-appeal at oral argument.
The development costs pertained to a common water line, lot drainage, and
installation of a driveway. State Line refused to pay these disputed costs. In
June 2021, Bennett refused to close on the sale of Lot 15-3 and declared that
he no longer remained contractually obligated to convey Lot 15-3 to State Line.
State Line filed this action seeking injunctive relief, specific performance,
and monetary damages. State Line later amended its petition to seek monetary
damages pursuant to New Hampshire’s Consumer Protection Act (CPA), see
RSA ch. 358-A (2022). Bennett asserted several counterclaims against State
Line: breach of contract, breach of the covenant of good faith and fair dealing,
intentional interference with contractual and economic relationships, unjust
enrichment, negligent misrepresentation, intentional misrepresentation, and
violation of the CPA.
In January 2022, State Line moved for summary judgment on its request
for specific performance. The trial court found the language of the P&S to be
“clear and unambiguous” and that, “[i]n accordance with its plain terms, [State
Line] was never required as part of the contract to pay the $81,000 as a [pro
rata] share of development costs.” The court granted summary judgment to
State Line on its equitable claim and, later, on Bennett’s counterclaims, leaving
just State Line’s CPA claim for trial.
In July 2024, the Trial Court (Kennedy, J.) held a bench trial on State
Line’s remaining CPA claim (CPA trial). During the trial, Bennett moved for a
directed verdict, which the court denied, though after conclusion of trial, the
court denied State Line any CPA relief. Also, in its final order, the trial court
observed that at trial Bennett “implicitly sought reconsideration of the Court’s
summary judgment rulings as they relate to the Disputed Costs.” The court
determined that, “[e]ven if [it] was inclined to entertain such a request, the
evidence presented at trial would not support reconsideration.” Bennett
appealed only the trial court’s summary judgment orders.
Bennett contends that the trial court erred by granting summary
judgment to State Line on both its claim for specific performance and Bennett’s
counterclaims because the court failed to view the evidence in the light most
favorable to Bennett and because material facts remained in dispute. We
conclude, however, that Bennett has failed to demonstrate that the arguments
he raises on appeal are entitled to appellate review because the trial court
resolved those issues in the unappealed final order. Cf. Petition of K.S., 177
N.H. 79, 85 (2024), 2024 N.H. 62, ¶13 (observing, in declining to address moot
issues, that “[a]n issue that has already been resolved is not entitled to judicial
intervention”).
Despite the trial court’s orders on summary judgment, the trial court
gave Bennett substantial latitude in the CPA trial to implicitly seek
reconsideration of the issues that had been resolved on summary judgment.
2
On appeal, Bennett does not raise any legal or factual issues from the
summary judgment proceedings that the CPA trial did not resolve, nor does
Bennett appeal any aspect of the final order.
To the contrary, as mentioned, the trial court made overlapping findings
at the conclusion of the CPA trial that were consistent with the summary
judgment orders. To the extent that Bennett raises factual issues that he
contends the trial court either ignored or misapprehended at summary
judgment, the CPA trial resolved those issues.
For example, in its summary judgment order on specific performance,
the trial court declined to consider Bennett’s parol evidence and found the
language of the P&S to be clear and unambiguous. The court determined that
the plain terms of the P&S did not require State Line to pay the disputed
development costs. In the final order following the CPA trial, the court adopted
the summary judgment finding and stated that the “P&S unambiguously
provides that State Line will bear certain costs without suggesting that State
Line will bear additional unspecified costs.”
The trial court also made findings consistent with its summary judgment
order on Bennett’s counterclaims. For example, in the summary judgment
order, the trial court found that State Line did not breach the P&S by refusing
to pay the disputed costs and that neither the P&S nor Bennett’s parol
evidence supported his argument to the contrary. In the final order, the trial
court again found that the P&S did not require State Line to bear the disputed
costs.
At summary judgment, the trial court found that even if State Line
agreed to bear its own development costs, the record did not establish that the
disputed costs fell into that category. Similarly, in the final order, the trial
court explicitly disagreed with Bennett’s contention that the disputed costs
constituted development costs and instead found, based on the evidence, that:
(1) State Line’s use of Lot 15-3 did not necessitate the new driveway, and thus
the driveway does not constitute a cost attributable to State Line; (2) because
State Line’s intended use of Lot 15-3 did not generate new drainage needs, the
drainage costs properly constituted subdivision costs not chargeable to State
Line; and (3) neither the letter of intent nor the P&S required State Line to bear
costs associated with the water line. The trial court further concluded that “if
tasked with resolving the parties’ claims concerning the Disputed Costs based
on the evidence presented at trial, the Court would find that State Line did not
agree to pay and should not otherwise bear responsibility for any portion of
those costs.”
Finally, at oral argument, Bennett argued only that it remained
unresolved which version of the P&S applied. The trial court resolved that
issue, however, in its denial of Bennett’s motion to reconsider following
3