THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0630, Sy Tebbetts v. Hudson School
District, the court on August 14, 2026, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Sy Tebbetts, appeals an order of the Circuit Court (Lyons,
R., approved by Manchester, J.), granting the motion of the defendant, the
Hudson School District, to dismiss the plaintiff’s civil complaint for wrongful
termination. On appeal, the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in
dismissing his complaint, and in denying his motions for default and to transfer
venue. We affirm.
“In reviewing an order granting a motion to dismiss, we assume the truth
of the facts as alleged in the plaintiff’s pleadings and construe all reasonable
inferences in the light most favorable to the plaintiff.” Beane v. Dana S. Beane &
Co., 160 N.H. 708, 711 (2010) (quotation omitted). “We will uphold the granting
of the motion to dismiss if the facts pled do not constitute a basis for legal relief.”
Id. (quotation and brackets omitted). In other words, although we do not assume
the truth of allegations that are merely conclusions of law, we test the facts
alleged in the pleadings against the applicable law and determine whether the
plaintiff’s allegations are reasonably susceptible of a construction that would
permit recovery. See id. The trial court may also consider documents attached
to the plaintiff’s pleadings, documents the authenticity of which are not disputed
by the parties, official public records, or documents sufficiently referred to in the
complaint. Id.
Here, the trial court found, and the plaintiff does not dispute, that “[t]he
parties were both under the terms of a Collective Bargaining Agreement, or CBA,”
which “established a series of steps that must be followed prior to accessing the
court system to resolve an employment dispute.” Because the plaintiff
acknowledged that he did not complete the process set forth in the CBA, the trial
court determined that, as a matter of law, the defendant was entitled to dismissal
of the plaintiff’s complaint. Based upon our review of the record, assuming the
truth of the facts alleged and construing all reasonable inferences in the light
most favorable to the plaintiff, we conclude that the trial court did not err in so
finding. See, e.g., Appeal of Silverstein, 163 N.H. 192, 197 (2012) (observing that
“grievance language specifically negotiated and agreed upon [in a collective
bargaining agreement] is binding on both public employees and the public
employer”); Konefal v. Hollis/Brookline Coop. School Dist., 143 N.H. 256, 258-60
(1998) (discussing exhaustion of administrative remedies doctrine).
Additionally, we conclude, based upon our review of the record, that the
trial court did not unsustainably exercise its discretion by denying the plaintiff’s
motion seeking entry of default. Cf. O’Brien v. Continental Ins. Co., 141 N.H.
522, 523 (1996) (stating that whether to strike an entry of default is within trial
court’s discretion). Nor can we conclude on this record that the trial court erred
by denying the motion to transfer venue.
Affirmed.
Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2