THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0155, Sharee Howard v. Town of Swanzey,
the court on June 23, 2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3).
In this appeal from the Superior Court (Klass, J.), the plaintiff, Sharee
Howard, challenges approval by the defendant Town of Swanzey’s Zoning Board
of Adjustment (ZBA) of a development project proposed by the intervenor, All
Purpose Storage West Swanzey, LLC (All Purpose). We affirm.
The trial court found, or the record otherwise supports, the following
facts. All Purpose and the plaintiff own “immediately abut[ting]” properties
located in Swanzey, New Hampshire (Town). The majority of All Purpose’s
property (Property) falls within the Town’s Business District.1
In a “two-lot subdivision and site plan review application,” All Purpose
proposed to construct “eight commercial buildings . . . totaling 61,200 square
feet divided into 30 x 60 foot individual units each with a bay door.” All
Purpose contemplated “a multi-tenant services facility to be leased to various
service businesses” (e.g., plumbing, electrical, and roofing companies).
(Quotation omitted.) All Purpose intended the units to serve the trades and
represented to the Swanzey Planning Board and the ZBA that tenants “might
do some fabrication or assembly on site” (“light industrial” use). All Purpose
acknowledged that “further approvals from the Town might be required
depending on the intended use of the particular tenant.”
After the planning board approved All Purpose’s project as a permitted
services use, the plaintiff appealed to the ZBA. The ZBA rejected All Purpose’s
designation of the project as a services use, characterizing it instead as a
“professional and business office” use — also permitted in the Business
District. See Swanzey, N.H., Zoning Ordinance § V.B.1.e. (2023). On that
basis, the ZBA approved the project. The ZBA denied the plaintiff’s rehearing
request, and she appealed to the superior court.
1 Swanzey Zoning Ordinance (SZO) § II.A.4. defines “Business District,” and § V.B.1. governs uses
permitted in the Business District. See Swanzey, N.H., Zoning Ordinance §§ II.A.4. (1947)
(amended 2022), V.B.1. (2023).
The superior court affirmed the ZBA’s approval of the project as a
permitted “professional and business offices” use and dismissed the plaintiff’s
appeal. The plaintiff now appeals the superior court’s order, arguing that All
Purpose’s project fits more properly within the “industrial park” category
(which requires a special exception). See Swanzey, N.H., Zoning Ordinance
§ V.B.2.a. (2023).
New Hampshire courts exercise limited review of local zoning decisions.
See Dartmouth Corp. of Alpha Delta v. Town of Hanover, 169 N.H. 743, 749,
750 (2017). Trial courts deem the ZBA’s factual findings prima facie lawful and
reasonable and will not set them aside absent errors of law, unless the
appealing party persuades the court, upon a balance of probabilities, that the
ZBA’s decision is unreasonable. See RSA 677:6 (2016). “The trial court’s
review is not to determine whether it agrees with the zoning board of
adjustment’s findings, but to determine whether there is evidence upon which
they could have been reasonably based.” Dietz v. Town of Tuftonboro, 171
N.H. 614, 618 (2019) (quotation omitted). In turn, we will affirm the trial
court’s decision unless it is “unsupported by the evidence or is legally
erroneous.” Monadnock Rod and Gun Club v. Town of Peterborough, 177 N.H.
70, 74 (2024), 2024 N.H. 61, ¶10 (quotation omitted).
The interpretation of a zoning ordinance presents a question of law that
we review de novo, through the application of traditional statutory construction
rules. See Batchelder v. Town of Plymouth Zoning Bd. of Adjustment, 160 N.H.
253, 256 (2010). This means that we construe the words and phrases in an
ordinance consistent with their commonly understood definitions and limit our
review to the language itself, barring ambiguity. See id. Our focus on the
language of an ordinance means, in part, that we will not guess what the
drafters of the ordinance might have intended nor add words that the drafters
did not see fit to include. See id. at 256-57. “We determine the meaning of a
zoning ordinance from its construction as a whole, not by construing isolated
words or phrases.” Id. at 257 (quotation omitted).
The SZO defines “Business District” as follows:
The intent of this District is to provide for the development of
commercial, retail, office, and similar uses that are oriented to
serving the needs of the community and the traveling public. This
District is also intended to accommodate traffic generators of such
size as to be more properly located on a highly accessible highway
network.
Swanzey, N.H., Zoning Ordinance § II.A.4. (1947) (amended 2022). Within the
Business District, the SZO permits “[p]rofessional and business offices,” but
does not further define that phrase. See Swanzey, N.H., Zoning Ordinance
§ V.B.1.e. (2023). The parties’ dispute centers on whether “[p]rofessional and
2
business offices” captures only professional offices, e.g., doctors, attorneys,
accountants; or whether it captures in addition offices that any business —
including a trade — might establish to support the work of the particular
business.
The trial court, focusing on the conjunction “and” between “professional”
and “business offices,” adopted the latter construction. The court observed
that “and” “is telling of a legislative intent to allow both professional offices and
business offices in the Business District.” We agree, and add that the
plaintiff’s argument to the contrary — that only professional offices may locate
in the Business District — improperly reads “and business” out of the SZO’s
designation of the types of offices allowed in the Business District. Cf. Appeal
of Town of Lincoln, 172 N.H. 244, 248 (2019) (“The legislature is not presumed
to waste words or enact redundant provisions and whenever possible, every
word of a statute should be given effect.” (quotation omitted)); see Batchelder,
160 N.H. at 256 (traditional rules of statutory construction govern review of
ordinances).
To be sure, All Purpose contemplates buildings with bays that could
accommodate a variety of uses, some of which the Business District may not
permit as a matter of right. But the record lacks any evidence that the
proposed buildings could accommodate only unauthorized uses as the plaintiff
contends. We have emphasized that future, contingent, and potentially
unauthorized uses a building might accommodate do not provide the measure
of whether a zoning ordinance permits that building. See Raymond, Tr. of J&R
Realty Trust v. Town of Plaistow, 176 N.H. 111, 118 (2023) (a ZBA must
consider “whether the proposed use as presented in the application falls within
the definition set forth in the ordinance and [must] not anticipate that the
company might later violate the ordinance by a use not authorized”). The fact,
for example, that a house could theoretically accommodate a commercial
enterprise does not necessarily make that house an impermissible structure in
a residential zone. As the trial court observed, “[t]he specific use of a
prospective tenant that deviates from a ‘business office’ (or other permitted use
under the Ordinance) may require further local approvals.” Current
speculation as to future tenants and their potential uses, however, does not
render the project non-compliant.
Affirmed.
MACDONALD, C.J., and DONOVAN, COUNTWAY, GOULD and WILL, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3