THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0376, P.R. v. J.G., the court on November
13, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, J.G., appeals the order of the Circuit Court
(Panebianco, J.), following a hearing, entering a civil stalking final order of
protection against him for the protection of the plaintiff, P.R. See RSA 633:3-a
(2016). We construe the defendant’s brief to argue that the evidence was
insufficient to prove that he committed the offense of stalking. We affirm.
We review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a matter of law and
uphold the findings and rulings of the trial court unless they are unsupported
by the evidence or erroneous as a matter of law. Fisher v. Minichiello, 155 N.H.
188, 190 (2007). A person commits the offense of stalking if he “[p]urposely,
knowingly, or recklessly engages in a course of conduct targeted at a specific
person which would cause a reasonable person to fear for his or her personal
safety. . . , and the person is actually placed in such fear.” RSA 633:3-a, I(a).
A course of conduct “means 2 or more acts over a period of time, however
short, which evidences a continuity of purpose.” RSA 633:3-a, II(a).
The plaintiff and the defendant are neighbors. The plaintiff testified that
after the defendant’s girlfriend moved out, the defendant “said some sexually
explicit things” to her that she told him made her uncomfortable. The plaintiff
testified that she told the defendant that she did not want to be around him,
and that she asked him to stop calling her. Nevertheless, the defendant again
contacted the plaintiff and made sexually suggestive comments, making her
“very uncomfortable.” The plaintiff testified that the defendant called her on
four consecutive days, roughly ten minutes after she arrived home from work,
and that she did not answer because she was not interested in communicating
with him. The plaintiff testified that when she arrived home from work one
day, the defendant was in her front yard with an axe in his hand.
The defendant testified that “[o]nly on one phone call early this year” did
he ask the plaintiff “if we could become closer.” He testified that, on one
occasion, he was on the plaintiff’s property because he was expecting a
package. He testified that, on another occasion, he was using an axe in his
own yard because a tree had fallen in his front yard about two years earlier
and, “after putting it off far too long,” he began chopping the tree so that he
could move it.
The trial court found that the defendant engaged in a course of conduct
targeted at the plaintiff when, on more than one occasion, he made sexually
suggestive comments to her, called her numerous days in a row when she
arrived home from work, and was on her property with an axe when she
returned home from work one day. The court found that the defendant
continued to contact the plaintiff after she told him to stop. The court found
that the defendant’s conduct would cause a reasonable person to fear for his or
her own safety, and that his conduct did, in fact, place the plaintiff in fear for
her safety.
The defendant argues that the plaintiff provided “no proof of her
accusations” and that she lacked credibility. “It was within the trial court’s
discretion to resolve conflicts in the testimony, measure the credibility of
witnesses, and determine the weight to be given evidence.” Despres v.
Hampsey, 162 N.H. 398, 404 (2011) (quotation omitted). Based upon this
record, we conclude that the evidence was sufficient to support the trial court’s
finding that the defendant committed the offense of stalking.
In his brief, the defendant makes additional factual allegations regarding
the plaintiff that he did not make in the trial court. On appeal, we consider
only evidence presented to the trial court. Flaherty v. Dixey, 158 N.H. 385, 387
(2009); see also In the Matter of Birmingham & Birmingham, 154 N.H. 51, 56
(2006) (self-represented litigants are bound by the same procedural rules that
govern parties represented by counsel).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, and Gould, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2