THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0679, J.F. v. E.M., the court on April 21,
2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, E.M., appeals the order of the Circuit Court
(Gorman, J.), following a hearing, entering a civil stalking final order of
protection against her for the protection of the plaintiff, J.F. See RSA 633:3-a
(2016). The defendant argues that the trial court erred by: (1) depriving her of
her right to due process; (2) issuing a stalking order that allegedly interferes
with her parental rights; (3) allegedly favoring the plaintiff in its evidentiary
rulings; (4) failing to make required findings to support its order; and (5) failing
to analyze whether her social media postings constituted constitutionally
protected free speech. We affirm.
The defendant first argues that the trial court deprived her of her right to
due process by “proceeding against a misidentified defendant” and by “denying
[her] a meaningful opportunity to be heard.” (Capitalization omitted.)
Specifically, the defendant complains that the trial court identified her as
“E.M.,” when, in fact, she had changed her name to “E.T.” shortly before the
stalking petition was filed. She also asserts that the physical description of her
in the protective order was inaccurate. Due process in this context provides
the right to be heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner.
Appeal of Doe (Bd. of Med.), 177 N.H. 274, 280 (2025), 2025 N.H. 13, ¶14.
The defendant received actual notice of the hearing and appeared at the
hearing in her defense. To that end, she testified at the hearing that, “I appear
today because I am the Respondent.” As to whether the protective order
properly identifies the defendant, the trial court granted, in part, the
defendant’s post-hearing motion, ruling that the final order shall be amended
to properly identify the defendant by name and physical description.
Accordingly, we find no error.
The defendant also argues that the trial court violated her due process
rights by allegedly denying her “a meaningful opportunity to present a defense.”
(Capitalization omitted.) The record, however, shows that the court allowed the
defendant to testify at length, without interruption or objection. The court also
admitted the defendant’s exhibits, stating “I’m going to take the documents.
I’m not going to take any of the accompanying statements that are in the
binder.”
To the extent that the defendant challenges the trial court’s decision not
to admit the “accompanying statements,” it bears emphasis that this presents
an evidentiary, not due process, issue. In any event, it is the burden of the
appealing party, here the defendant, to provide this court with a record
sufficient to decide her issues on appeal. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt.,
151 N.H. 248, 250-51 (2004); see also In the Matter of Birmingham &
Birmingham, 154 N.H. 51, 56 (2006) (self-represented litigants are bound by
the same procedural rules that govern parties represented by counsel).
Although the defendant describes the “accompanying statements” as “written
explanations providing context,” she did not provide copies of them for our
review. Accordingly, we conclude that she has failed to provide a record
sufficient to address this issue. See Bean, 151 N.H. at 250-51.
The defendant also challenges the trial court’s decision not to admit
recordings of the plaintiff that the defendant made without the plaintiff’s
knowledge or consent. This argument, too, challenges an evidentiary ruling
and not due process. RSA 570-A:6 (2001) prohibits evidentiary use of
intercepted communications. See State v. Clark, 177 N.H. 97, 102 (2024) (one-
party recording is an unlawful interception pursuant to RSA 570-A:2, I-a).
Accordingly, we find no error. We conclude that the defendant has failed to
show that the trial court violated her right to due process. See Appeal of Doe,
177 N.H. at 280.
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred by issuing a stalking
order that allegedly interferes with her parental rights. The trial court ordered
that the defendant “may attend her child’s sports, activities and events even if
[the] plaintiff is there but shall have no contact with [the] plaintiff.” The court
further ordered that the defendant “may also attend child exchanges with the
child’s father but shall have no contact with [the] plaintiff.” Importantly, the
trial court, in ruling on the defendant’s post-hearing motion, addressed her
concern by stating that its order “does not modify or interfere with any family
court custody orders and should not be construed to do so.” We conclude that
the defendant has failed to show that the stalking order improperly interferes
with her parental rights.
The defendant next argues that the trial court allegedly favored the
plaintiff in its evidentiary rulings and prevented her from presenting a defense.
This argument largely duplicates the defendant’s due process arguments,
which we have addressed above. The defendant complains that the trial court
“allowed extensive uncorroborated testimony from the plaintiff.” (Capitalization
omitted.) She misunderstands that admissibility of testimony — or any
evidence — does not hinge on corroboration. See State v. Blake, 113 N.H. 115,
123 (1973). Moreover, a party generally must make a specific and
contemporaneous objection to preserve an issue for appellate review. Milliken
v. Dartmouth-Hitchcock Clinic, 154 N.H. 662, 665 (2006). The record fails to
show that the defendant objected to the admission of the plaintiff’s testimony.
2
Nor does the record support the defendant’s assertion that the trial court
“categorically excluded [her] evidence and written explanations.”
(Capitalization omitted.) Accordingly, we cannot conclude that the trial court
erred in its evidentiary rulings or prevented her from presenting a defense.
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred by failing to make
required findings. When issuing a civil stalking order, the trial court must
make findings on the record that a defendant engaged in two or more specific
acts over a period of time, however short, which evidences a continuity of
purpose. Despres v. Hampsey, 162 N.H. 398, 402 (2011). The trial court
found that the defendant repeatedly sent messages to the plaintiff, posted the
plaintiff’s personal information online, and threatened to publicize recordings
of the plaintiff as a means of intimidating her. The court also found that the
defendant confronted the plaintiff at a football game, and that the plaintiff
testified credibly as to her legitimate fear and concern. These findings are
sufficient to support the trial court’s order. See id.
Finally, the defendant argues that the trial court erred by failing to
analyze whether her social media posts constituted constitutionally protected
free speech. The defendant did not provide copies of the social media posts
that she claims were entitled to constitutional protection. Accordingly, we
conclude that she has failed to provide a record sufficient to address this issue.
See Bean, 151 N.H. at 250-51.
To the extent that the defendant raises new issues in her reply brief, we
do not address them because we generally do not consider arguments raised
for the first time in a reply brief. Panas v. Harakis & K-Mart Corp., 129 N.H.
591, 617-18 (1987).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3