THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0161, Jeffrey C. Spear & a. v. Richard J.
Waite & a., the court on February 26, 2026, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiffs, Jeffrey C. Spear and Jennifer C. Kernan,
appeal an order of the Superior Court (St. Hilaire, J.) denying their motion to
enforce prior judgment against the defendants, Richard J. Waite and Heidi M.
Waite. We affirm in part, vacate in part, and remand.
This is the second appeal of this case. See Jeffrey C. Spear & a. v.
Richard J. Waite & a., No. 2022-0063 (non-precedential order), 2023 WL
5447689 (N.H. Aug. 24, 2023). The following facts are drawn from our order in
the first appeal or are otherwise supported by the record. At issue in this case
is a 30-foot-wide strip of land that runs alongside the parties’ properties (the
30’ Parcel). Id. at 1. The 30’ Parcel contains grassy areas and a shared
driveway, which is used by the parties and a third neighbor. Id. The plaintiffs’
front yard abuts the western edge of the 30’ Parcel, and a portion of their front
walkway sits within the 30’ Parcel. Id.
In 2015, the plaintiffs planted decorative groundcover in the grassy area
of the 30’ Parcel abutting their front yard. Id. at 4. The defendants, claiming
they owned the land, tore out the plantings. Id. The plaintiffs then filed a
petition to quiet title and the defendants filed cross-claims. Id. Following
cross-motions for summary judgment, the Trial Court (Tucker, J.) ruled that
the defendants own the 30’ Parcel and that the plaintiffs have an easement to
use it. Id. at 4-5. The court also determined that the purpose of the plaintiffs’
easement was to provide “the right to pass and repass” and thus, the plaintiffs
could not plant groundcover in the 30’ Parcel as the plantings were “decorative
in nature” and “not reasonable and necessary” to the plaintiffs’ use of the
easement. Id. at 5 (quotation omitted).
In December 2021, upon the plaintiffs’ motion to reconsider and clarify,
the trial court amended its order to add that:
[A]s holders of the dominant estate, the plaintiffs have the right
and the duty to maintain the easement so that it can be used for
the purpose for which it was granted. Permitted maintenance is
that necessary to prevent unreasonable interference with the
enjoyment of the servient estate (here, the right to pass and
repass). . . . In order to avoid future conflicts of the sort presented
in this case, it is ordered that maintenance of the portion of the
easement at issue shall be performed by or at the direction of the
plaintiffs only, for the purposes described.
(Citations, quotations, and brackets omitted.)
The plaintiffs then filed their first appeal. Id. After examining the
relevant deeds, we affirmed the trial court’s ruling that the defendants owned
the 30’ Parcel. Id. at 6-8. We also affirmed the trial court’s ruling that the
plaintiffs’ easement did not permit them to plant decorative groundcover. Id. at
8-9. We did not address the maintenance provision of the December 2021
order.
Thereafter, the defendants dug within the 30’ Parcel and installed an
irrigation system. In response, in March 2024, the plaintiffs filed a motion to
enforce the December 2021 order. The Trial Court (St. Hilaire, J.) initially
granted the plaintiffs’ motion without a hearing, but then granted the
defendants’ motion for reconsideration and held a hearing on the plaintiffs’
motion to enforce.
Following the hearing, the trial court denied the plaintiffs’ motion to
enforce the December 2021 order. It found that the defendants’ acts of digging
land and installing an irrigation system within the 30’ Parcel were acts of
improvement of the property, rather than maintenance. The trial court also
determined that it would be inequitable to enforce the provision in the
December 2021 order mandating that maintenance be performed by or at the
direction of the plaintiffs only. The trial court accordingly vacated the
maintenance provision of the December 2021 order and ruled that both parties
“have the right to maintain the area.”
The plaintiffs filed two motions to reconsider challenging the court’s
denial of their motion to enforce the December 2021 order, as well as its
authority to vacate the maintenance provision of the December 2021 order.
The trial court denied the motions, explaining in part that its modification of
the December 2021 order fell within its equitable powers. This appeal followed.
We first address the defendants’ argument that the plaintiffs failed to
provide a full record on appeal. The defendants contend that because the
plaintiffs provided neither a hearing transcript nor the trial court’s initial order
on the plaintiffs’ motion to enforce, the trial court order should be affirmed.
We agree with the plaintiffs, however, that these materials are not “relevant
and necessary for the court to decide the questions of law presented by the
2
case.” Sup. Ct. R. 13(2). We conclude that the plaintiffs have provided the
“relevant and necessary” portions of the record for us to resolve their appeal.
Id.
We next turn to the plaintiffs’ arguments on appeal. In reviewing a trial
court’s decision rendered after a trial on the merits, we uphold its factual
findings and rulings unless they lack evidentiary support or are legally
erroneous. Stowell v. Andrews, 171 N.H. 289, 297 (2018). Nevertheless, we
review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de novo. Id.
The plaintiffs argue that the trial court erred in refusing to enforce the
December 2021 order and applying its equitable powers to vacate part of it. We
affirm the trial court’s conclusion that the defendants’ installation of an
irrigation system within the 30’ Parcel did not violate the December 2021 order.
The trial court found that the defendants’ act of digging land and installing an
irrigation system within the 30’ Parcel was an act of “improvement of the
property rather than maintenance.” The court thus determined that, because
the plaintiffs did not allege that the defendants’ acts unreasonably interfered
with the plaintiffs’ ability to pass and repass for any significant time, the
defendants’ improvements were lawfully made.
Maintenance of property and improvement to property are distinct
activities. Compare Great Am. Dining v. Philadelphia Indem. Ins. Co., 164 N.H.
612, 625 (2013) (defining “maintenance,” in part, as ‘[t]he care and work put
into property to keep it operating and productive; general repair and upkeep”
(citation omitted)), with Phaneuf Funeral Home v. Little Giant Pump Co., 163
N.H. 727, 731 (2012) (defining “improvement” as “an alteration to or
development of real property that either (1) enhances or is intended to enhance
its value or (2) improves or is intended to improve its use for a particular
purpose”).
Although the December 2021 order mandated that the “maintenance of
the portion of the easement at issue shall be performed by or at the direction of
the plaintiffs only,” the plaintiffs were only permitted to perform maintenance
necessary to “prevent unreasonable interference with the enjoyment of the
servient estate (here, the right to pass and repass).” (Quotation and citation
omitted.) We conclude that while the December 2021 order prohibits the
defendants from performing maintenance of the at-issue portion of the
easement, it does not preclude the defendants from making improvements to
the 30’ Parcel. We accordingly agree with the defendants that the trial court
did not err in finding that the December 2021 order did not prohibit them from
installing the irrigation system.
We next address the plaintiffs’ argument that the trial court erred in
vacating the maintenance provision of the December 2021 order. The plaintiffs
contend that the trial court’s broad equity power to award or modify pre-
3