THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0222, Philip K. Cunningham v. Dover
Police Department, the court on January 14, 2026, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Philip K. Cunningham, appeals an order of the Superior
Court (Curran, J.) granting the motion of the defendant, the Dover Police
Department (Department), to dismiss the plaintiff’s civil complaint against the
Department for the wrongful death of his daughter. We construe the plaintiff’s
brief to argue that the trial court erred by dismissing his complaint on grounds
that it is barred by RSA chapter 507-B, and that it fails to state a claim upon
which relief may be granted. We affirm.
“In reviewing an order granting a motion to dismiss, we assume the truth
of the facts as alleged in the plaintiff’s pleadings and construe all reasonable
inferences in the light most favorable to the plaintiff.” Beane v. Dana S. Beane &
Co., 160 N.H. 708, 711 (2010) (quotation omitted). “We will uphold the granting
of the motion to dismiss if the facts pled do not constitute a basis for legal relief.”
Id. (quotation and brackets omitted). In other words, although we do not assume
the truth of allegations that are merely conclusions of law, we test the facts
alleged in the pleadings against the applicable law and determine whether the
plaintiff’s allegations are reasonably susceptible of a construction that would
permit recovery. See id.
According to the plaintiff’s complaint, his daughter died from a drug
overdose after purchasing from a neighbor and using cocaine that was,
unbeknownst to her, laced with fentanyl. The plaintiff alleged that the
Department was aware of the neighbor’s illicit drug dealing at the time, and
therefore claimed that the Department is liable for his daughter’s death because
it failed to prevent her death by arresting the neighbor beforehand. The
Department moved to dismiss the plaintiff’s complaint, arguing that it is
statutorily immune from liability, and that the complaint fails to state a valid
claim against the Department. The trial court agreed, and dismissed the
complaint. This appeal followed.
Although we assume the truth of the facts alleged in the plaintiff’s
pleadings, and construe all reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to
him, see Beane, 160 N.H. at 711, we nevertheless cannot conclude that the trial
court erred in dismissing the plaintiff’s complaint. In this case, the trial court
correctly determined that the Department is immune from suit under RSA
chapter 507-B. Pursuant to RSA 507-B:5 (2010), a governmental unit, such as
the Department, see RSA 507-B:1, I (2010), may not generally be held liable in an
action to recover for bodily injury, including wrongful death, see RSA 507-B:1, II.
However, the Department may be held liable if such action stems from fault
attributable to the Department arising out of its ownership, occupation,
maintenance, or operation of any motor vehicles or premises, see RSA 507-B:2
(2010); Dichiara v. Sanborn Reg’l Sch. Dist., 165 N.H. 694, 696-98 (2013), or if
such action stems from certain intentionally tortious conduct, see McCarthy v.
Manchester Police Dep’t, 168 N.H. 202, 208 (2015). Thus, because this is not an
action involving any municipal motor vehicles or premises, and because there is
no allegation that the Department intentionally caused harm to the plaintiff’s
daughter, we conclude that the trial court did not err in dismissing the plaintiff’s
complaint.
In light of our decision, we need not address the parties’ remaining
arguments. See Antosz v. Allain, 163 N.H. 298, 302 (2012) (declining to address
parties’ other arguments where holding on one issue is dispositive).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, and Gould, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2