THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0135, Phyllis Kennedy & a. v. Richard
Miller d/b/a Seacoast Braces/Miller Orthodontics, the court on
May 15, 2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). We affirm.
The defendant, Richard Miller d/b/a Seacoast Braces/Miller
Orthodontics, appeals from a jury verdict in Superior Court (Schulman, J.) in
favor of the plaintiffs, Phyllis Kennedy and Evan Kennedy. The plaintiffs sued
the defendant, who is an orthodontist, for professional negligence. In support
of their claim, the plaintiffs presented videotaped testimony from Louis Clarizio,
an oral and maxillofacial surgeon, who treated plaintiff Evan Kennedy. On
appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred by permitting Clarizio:
(1) to testify beyond the scope of his treatment of Evan; (2) to introduce hearsay
testimony; and (3) to provide expert testimony without the plaintiffs having
complied with the disclosure and qualification requirements in RSA 516:29-a
and :29-b.
RSA 516:29-b (2021) provides, in pertinent part:
I. A party in a civil case shall disclose to other parties the identity
of any person who may be used at trial to present evidence under
Rules 702, 703, or 705 of the New Hampshire rules of evidence.
II. Except as otherwise stipulated or directed by the court, this
disclosure shall, with respect to a witness who is retained or
specially employed to provide expert testimony in the case or
whose duties as an employee of the party regularly involve giving
expert testimony, be accompanied by a written report signed by the
witness. The report shall contain a complete statement of:
(a) All opinions to be expressed and the basis and reasons
therefor;
(b) The facts or data considered by the witness in forming the
opinions;
(c) Any exhibits to be used as a summary of or support for the
opinions;
(d) The qualifications of the witness, including a list of all
publications authored by the witness within the preceding 10
years;
(e) The compensation to be paid for the study and testimony;
and
(f) A listing of any other cases in which the witness has testified
as an expert at trial or by deposition within the preceding 4 years.
In June 2023, the plaintiffs disclosed Clarizio as an expert, but did not
provide a written report as set forth in RSA 516:29-b, II. The defendant
deposed Clarizio in February 2024. On January 2, 2025, the defendant filed a
motion in limine to exclude “evidence, argument, or reference to facts or
opinions that do not reasonably flow from a treating doctor[’]s treatment.”
(Capitalization omitted.) Thereafter, Clarizio’s trial testimony was videotaped.
In his motion in limine, the defendant stated that a treating doctor can
testify about matters when the source of the facts which form the basis for the
doctor’s opinions derive from information learned during the actual treatment
of the patient. He argued, however, that “to the extent that a treating doctor’s
testimony will exceed matters reasonably flowing from treatment,” the plaintiffs
were required to comply with the disclosure requirements in RSA 516:29-b, II.
Because the plaintiffs did not make such a disclosure, the defendant sought to
exclude such evidence.
The plaintiff’s motion was addressed at the beginning of the first day of
trial. At that time, the parties had transcripts of the videotaped trial testimony,
and the defendant represented that he had “highlighted certain portions” that
he believed were excludable as being “beyond the testimony appropriate for a
[treating physician].” The trial judge, however, did not have the transcripts. As
the court explained:
But the motion came in, and it didn’t have the video deposition.
Because I’m always — I guess, I’d be lying if I said I’m always
happy to go through transcript of a video deposition and make
individualized rulings. But I’m always willing to do that. But I get
a brief two-page motion that says, what are the ground rules? And
I prepare to, like, issue a ruling and say these are the ground
rules. And then I’m told, well, the problem with the ground rules
is we have a video deposition. How do we object? And you can’t
fault me for not going through a transcript that I wasn’t given —
2
When the defendant argued that a treating physician should not be allowed to
opine as to what the defendant should or should not have done, the court
responded: “I think they can, depending to a limited extent, on the nitty-gritty
small facts that won’t come out until trial.” Similarly, when the defendant
inquired as to a treating physician opining about the standard of care, the
court again qualified its response with “[d]epending on what the facts are.” The
court noted that if the defendant had an objection “to something important in
the course of the video deposition, I’m not dissuading you from making it.”
On the second day of trial, the court informed the parties that it had
received the transcript of Clarizio’s trial testimony, and noted that there was
one item highlighted in green, and others highlighted in yellow that apparently
had been redacted or otherwise dealt with. The parties informed the court that
the matter had been resolved, and defense counsel stated that the full video of
Clarizio’s testimony could be played for the jury.
Whatever the merits of the defendant’s arguments regarding the trial
court’s preliminary musings about the admissibility of the evidence, the
defendant waived these arguments when he stipulated that the entirety of
Clarizio’s testimony could be played for the jury. We will not consider on
appeal arguments that were waived in the trial court.
The defendant’s remaining arguments regarding Clarizio’s testimony are
not preserved for our review given the defendant’s stipulation that Clarizio’s
testimony could be played in its entirety. Accordingly, we affirm.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3