THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0082, State of New Hampshire v. Anthony
Jerrier, the court on August 13, 2026, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, Anthony Jerrier, appeals his conviction,
following a jury trial in Superior Court (Leonard, J.), on charges of aggravated
felonious sexual assault and attempted aggravated felonious sexual assault.
See RSA 632-A:2 (2016 & Supp. 2025); RSA 629:1 (2016). The victim was a
child at the time of the assaults. The defendant argues that the trial court
erred by admitting certain testimony over his objections that the testimony was
not relevant and that, even if relevant, its probative value was substantially
outweighed by a danger of unfair prejudice. See N.H. R. Ev. 401, 402, 403. We
affirm.
Evidence is relevant if “it has any tendency to make a fact more or less
probable than it would be without the evidence,” and if “the fact is of
consequence in determining the action.” N.H. R. Ev. 401. Relevant evidence is
generally admissible. N.H. R. Ev. 402. The trial court may, nevertheless,
exclude evidence that is relevant “if its probative value is substantially
outweighed by a danger of . . . unfair prejudice.” N.H. R. Ev. 403.
“Evidence is unfairly prejudicial if its primary purpose or effect is to
appeal to a jury’s sympathies, arouse its sense of horror, provoke its instinct to
punish, or trigger other mainsprings of human action that may cause a jury to
base its decision on something other than the established propositions in the
case.” State v. Town, 163 N.H. 790, 796 (2012) (quotation omitted). Unfair
prejudice “is an undue tendency to induce a decision . . . on some improper
basis, commonly one that is emotionally charged.” Id. (quotation omitted).
Whether evidence is relevant, or whether its probative value is
substantially outweighed by a danger of unfair prejudice, are matters within
the trial court’s sound discretion. See id. at 795-96. To establish that the trial
court unsustainably exercised its discretion, the defendant must demonstrate
that its ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his
case. See id. at 795.
In this case, the defendant filed a pretrial motion seeking to exclude
testimony from a medical professional, who had examined the victim following
the victim’s disclosure of the assaults, concerning a mark on the victim’s body
that the professional observed during the examination. Although the mark was
consistent with the victim’s description of some of the assaults, the medical
professional could not determine its cause. The defendant argued that,
because the mark’s ultimate cause was indeterminate, the fact that it was
there was not relevant, and that any probative value the evidence had was
substantially outweighed by a danger of unfair prejudice.
The trial court granted the motion in part and denied it in part. The
court permitted the professional to describe the mark, finding that its existence
made it more probable that the defendant had committed the charged acts that
were consistent with the mark’s existence. The professional would not,
however, be permitted to testify that the mark had caused her “concern,” to
opine as to its potential causes, or to refer to it as a “scar.” Consistent with the
pretrial order, the professional briefly described the mark at trial as a “pale,
linear discoloration,” and testified that it was “a small line that was paler than
the other part of the skin,” and that she could not determine its cause.
On this record, we conclude that the trial court’s ruling was not clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of the defendant’s case. See id.
The mark was discovered as part of a medical examination prompted by the
victim’s disclosure of the assaults, and its existence was consistent with the
victim’s description of some of the assaults. Thus, we agree with the State that
there was a sufficient nexus between the evidence and the victim’s allegations
for the trial court reasonably to have found the evidence relevant. See id. at
796 (determining that a statement by the defendant to the victim was relevant
because, although multiple interpretations of the statement were possible, one
possible interpretation implied an admission of guilt); State v. Graham, 142
N.H. 357, 362 (1997) (upholding trial court’s determination that testimony
concerning observations of the defendant’s physical condition several days
following the charged sexual assaults was not relevant because there was no
nexus linking the observations and the defendant’s claim regarding his
condition at the time of the assaults). Moreover, the testimony was brief, was
generally limited to a description of the mark, and included the medical
professional’s testimony that she could not determine what had caused the
mark. Under these circumstances, the trial court reasonably could have
determined that the probative value of the testimony was not substantially
outweighed by a danger of unfair prejudice. See Town, 163 N.H. at 797.
Affirmed.
Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2