THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0242, Robert Auger v. Jeremy L.
Pickering, the court on June 17, 2026, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). The defendant, Jeremy L. Pickering, appeals a jury verdict in favor of
the plaintiff, Robert Auger, following a multi-day trial in Superior Court (Leonard,
J.) in a tort action for battery. On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial
court erred by: (1) denying his post-trial motion for a remittitur of the $650,000
jury verdict, and (2) admitting certain medical bills as evidence at trial. We
affirm.
We first address the defendant’s argument that the trial court erred by
denying his motion for a remittitur. Specifically, he contends that the trial court
should have granted a remittitur because the jury’s damages award of $650,000
was manifestly exorbitant and against the weight of the evidence given that the
plaintiff’s medical expenses totaled only $14,153. We disagree.
“Whether remittitur is appropriate rests with the trial court’s sound
discretion.” Boynton v. Figueroa, 154 N.H. 592, 606 (2006). “Direct review of a
damages award is the responsibility of the trial judge, who may disturb a verdict
as excessive (or inadequate) if its amount is conclusively against the weight of the
evidence and if the verdict is manifestly exorbitant.” Stachulski v. Apple New
England, LLC, 171 N.H. 158, 172 (2018) (quotation omitted). “The amount of a
verdict is conclusively against the weight of the evidence only if no reasonable
jury could have reached it.” Boynton, 154 N.H. at 606.
“Once the trial court has reviewed the amount of the verdict under this
standard, we will not disturb the judge’s finding unless no reasonable person
could make it.” Id. at 606-07. “Our task on review is not to attempt to ascertain
or divine the one and only correct verdict.” Id. at 607 (quotation omitted).
Rather, we will uphold the trial court’s decision absent an unsustainable exercise
of discretion. See id. “The party seeking to modify the verdict’s amount bears a
heavy burden.” Id. Indeed, we have stated that “[w]e will not set aside a verdict
unless it is so manifestly exorbitant that no reasonable person could say that the
jury was not influenced by partiality or prejudice, or misled by some mistaken
view of the merits of the case.” Bennett v. Lembo, 145 N.H. 276, 282 (2000)
(quotation and emphases omitted); see also Daigle v. City of Portsmouth, 129
N.H. 561, 588 (1987).
In this case, the trial court issued a thorough and detailed narrative order
denying the defendant’s motion for a remittitur. Among other things, the trial
court noted that the jury heard evidence that, after the defendant punched the
plaintiff in the face, the plaintiff “fell to the floor, blood covering his face and
clothes,” and that he “suffered multiple facial fractures, black eyes, facial and
hand lacerations, neck pain and a broken tooth,” as well as “mental anguish
from the defendant’s actions.” The court noted that the plaintiff incurred
approximately $14,153 in medical bills for treatment of his injuries and post-
concussion syndrome, and also noted that the jury heard evidence that the
plaintiff continued to “suffer[] persistent sinus problems in the area of his facial
fractures, vertigo, dizziness and pain, among other symptoms,” as well as “facial
scarring that serves as a reminder for the plaintiff of the attack.” Accordingly,
the trial court concluded that the $650,000 damages award was not manifestly
exorbitant in light of “the evidence presented to the jury at trial, in particular the
unprovoked nature of the battery committed by the defendant and the plaintiff’s
resulting permanent injuries[,] combined with the jury’s apparent determination
that the defendant’s conduct was wanton, malicious[,] and with ill will.”
These findings are supported by evidence in the record. Although the
defendant argues that the large disparity between the jury award and the amount
of the plaintiff’s medical expenses must be the result of jury partiality, prejudice,
or a mistaken view of the merits, we disagree. To begin with, while lawyers often
use the amount of a plaintiff’s medical bills as a rough gauge of total damages,
the defendant cites no New Hampshire authority requiring that general damages
bear any specific proportion to the magnitude of medical bills. Here, the
defendant inflicted serious injuries upon the plaintiff, and the evidence supported
the conclusion that the plaintiff will continue to suffer significant physical
disfigurement and discomfort indefinitely. In light of these factors, we cannot
conclude that any reasonable person would necessarily conclude that the verdict
was a result of juror partiality, prejudice, or mistake.
A large disparity between a jury award and a plaintiff’s medical expenses,
moreover, “does not necessarily suggest an excessive award in a case in which
the jury was allowed to award enhanced damages.” Daigle, 129 N.H. at 588.
Indeed, in Daigle, we upheld a $500,000 jury award against medical expenses
totaling less than $13,000 because “in tort actions for wanton, malicious, or
oppressive conduct, damages may be enhanced to reflect the aggravating
circumstances.” Id. at 588-89 (quotations omitted). Here, as in Daigle, the trial
court instructed the jury that it could award enhanced, though not punitive,
damages for the defendant’s violent assault. See id. at 589; Stachulski, 171 N.H.
at 172-73 (upholding similarly large disparity); Thibeault v. Campbell, 136 N.H.
698, 703 (1993) (same).
Thus, we conclude, based upon our review of the record, that the trial
court sustainably exercised its discretion in finding that the jury’s damages
award was not conclusively against the weight of the evidence or manifestly
exorbitant. See Stachulski, 171 N.H. at 172-73; Boynton, 154 N.H. at 606-07.
Accordingly, the trial court did not err in denying the defendant’s motion for a
remittitur. See Stachulski, 171 N.H. at 172-73; Boynton, 154 N.H. at 606-07.
Next, we address the defendant’s argument that the trial court erred by
admitting certain medical bills as evidence. At trial, the defendant objected to the
admission of these records, arguing that the plaintiff needed an expert witness to
establish that the medical bills set forth reasonable and customary charges for
the services provided, and that the plaintiff’s wife — who had reviewed and
managed the bills — was not an appropriate witness for that purpose. The trial
court overruled the objection, finding that, because the plaintiff’s medical
expenses totaled less than $25,000.00, RSA 516:29-c obviated the need for
expert testimony on the issue of whether the charges were reasonable and
customary. See RSA 516:29-c (2021) (amended 2025).
On appeal, the defendant contends that the trial court erred in its
application of RSA 516:29-c because the medical bills are not certified copies,
and because he was not given advance notice of the plaintiff’s intent to offer
them. We conclude, however, that this argument is waived. Although the
defendant briefly argued at trial that the medical bills were not certified copies,
he abandoned this argument after acquiescing to the representation of plaintiff’s
counsel that the parties had agreed in advance to the admission of these
documents without such formalities. Accordingly, because the defendant
abandoned this argument, it is waived. Cf. State v. Therrien, 144 N.H. 433, 436-
37 (1999) (discussing waiver).
Additionally, the defendant now argues that the trial court erred in
admitting the medical bills because the plaintiff’s wife is not a “qualified witness”
capable of establishing that the medical bills are admissible records of a regularly
conducted activity under the exception to the rule against hearsay set forth in
N.H. R. Ev. 803(6). The defendant, however, did not advance this argument
before the trial court. Rather, as described above, the defendant argued that the
plaintiff’s wife was not an expert capable of opining on the issue of whether the
charges were reasonable and customary. Accordingly, because the defendant did
not advance the argument relative to Rule 803(6) before the trial court, it is not