THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0455, A.K. v. C.D., the court on December
22, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, C.D., appeals the order of the Circuit Court
(Clouatre, J.), following a hearing, granting a domestic violence final order of
protection to the plaintiff, A.K. See RSA 173-B:5 (2022). The defendant argues
that the evidence was insufficient to support the court’s order. We affirm.
To be granted a domestic violence final order of protection, the plaintiff
must establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the defendant
engaged in “abuse.” RSA 173-B:5, I. “Abuse” means the commission or
attempted commission of one or more enumerated crimes by a family or
household member or a current or former sexual or intimate partner when
such conduct “constitute[s] a credible present threat” to the plaintiff’s safety.
RSA 173-B:1, I (2022); see S.C. v. G.C., 175 N.H. 158, 163 (2022). The
enumerated crimes that may constitute abuse include “[i]nterference with
freedom as defined in RSA 633:1 through RSA 633:3-a.” See RSA 173-B:1, I(d).
The trial court found that the defendant committed abuse by stalking the
plaintiff as defined in RSA 633:3-a (2016).
The trial court’s “findings of facts shall be final, but questions of law may
be transferred from the circuit court to the supreme court.” RSA 173-B:3, VI
(2022). We review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a matter of law,
upholding the trial court’s findings and rulings unless they lack evidentiary
support or are tainted by legal error. S.C., 175 N.H. at 162. We defer to the
trial court’s judgments as to the credibility of the witnesses and the weight of
their testimony. Id. at 162-63. We view the evidence in the light most
favorable to the prevailing party, here, the plaintiff. Id. at 163.
The plaintiff testified that she ended her relationship with the defendant
by telephone on March 3, 2025. When she left work on March 12, she found
the defendant waiting for her outside her place of employment. She testified
that his appearance “took [her] a little aback” because she had not told him
where she worked, and his apparent effort to find her workplace “alarmed” her.
She testified that “[w]e had another long face-to-face conversation that this
relationship was not going to work, and that I did not want to continue the
relationship and that we should not see each other.”
The plaintiff testified that, after the conversation, she went home and
changed the locks on her door “immediately,” because she could tell that the
defendant “was not really happy with . . . ending the relationship.” That night,
the defendant went to her house when she was upstairs in bed and started
“knocking on the door, ringing the doorbell, [and] yelling for 40 minutes.” She
testified that she was “frozen upstairs in [her] room, not knowing what to do.”
The plaintiff testified that when the defendant came to her office on
March 12, she told him, “no more contact, no more letters, no more anything.”
She testified, however, that the defendant continued to email her, came to her
home uninvited, came to her work uninvited, and left gifts, letters, and notes
for her at her home and on her vehicle at work. She testified that she never
responded to the emails. On April 23, the defendant left a black box at her
home “that contained an 8-by-10 picture of us with multiple envelopes that
also had different pictures and little notes attached to them, as well as a long
typed out letter.” She testified that the last time he left something for her was
on May 19, four days before she filed her petition for a protective order.
The defendant first argues that the evidence was insufficient to prove
that he stalked the plaintiff. A person commits the offense of stalking if he
“[p]urposely, knowingly, or recklessly engages in a course of conduct targeted
at a specific person which would cause a reasonable person to fear for his or
her personal safety. . . , and the person is actually placed in such fear.” RSA
633:3-a, I(a). A course of conduct may include “[f]ollowing, approaching, or
confronting that person,” “[a]ppearing in close proximity to, or entering the
person’s residence [or] place of employment,” “[p]lacing an object on the
person’s property,” and “[a]ny act of communication, as defined in RSA 644:4,
II.” RSA 633:3-a, II(a)(2), (3), (5), (7). RSA 644:4, II (2016) defines
communication to include imparting “a message by any method of
transmission,” including delivering information “by written or printed note or
letter, package, mail . . . or electronic transmission.”
The trial court found that the defendant committed the act of stalking by
engaging in “[n]umerous instances of unwanted communications,” and
“appearing at her home/work,” which “[c]ontinued after he was explicitly told
to stop.” On appeal, the defendant concedes that “persistent, unwanted
contact after an individual has been explicitly told to cease contact can
constitute a course of conduct that would place a reasonable person in fear of
their safety.” (Emphasis omitted.) See State v. Simone, 152 N.H. 755, 760-61
(2005). He argues, however, that during his March 12 conversation with the
plaintiff, he received “mixed signals,” and “believed the relationship was
salvageable.”
On cross-examination, the plaintiff testified that she left open the
possibility of further conversation so that she “could leave the area without
things escalating.” She clarified that any further conversation with the
2
defendant would be “to answer questions that he may have of why things were
ending, not to continue that relationship.” She testified that she “did not want
the relationship to continue, and he knew that.” We defer to the trial court’s
judgments as to the credibility of the witnesses and the weight of their
testimony. S.C., 175 N.H. at 162-63. We conclude that the evidence supports
the court’s finding that the defendant stalked the plaintiff. See id.
The defendant next argues that there was insufficient evidence of a
present credible threat to the plaintiff’s safety. The plaintiff testified that she
wanted the March 12 conversation “to go smoothly,” so that she could
“hopefully, exit . . . without things escalating.” However, as previously noted,
she was “alarmed” to find the defendant at her workplace, and she changed the
locks on her door “immediately” when she returned home, because she could
tell that the defendant “was not really happy with . . . ending the relationship.”
The plaintiff’s concern was justified because that same night, the defendant
came to her house, “knocking on the door, ringing the doorbell, [and] yelling for
40 minutes,” while the plaintiff was “frozen upstairs in [her] room.” We
conclude that the evidence was sufficient to support the court’s finding that the
defendant’s conduct constituted a present credible threat to the plaintiff’s
safety. See id.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, and Gould, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3