THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0710, H.S. v. D.P., the court on March 27,
2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, D.P., appeals a decision of the Circuit Court
(Chabot, J.) granting a domestic violence final order of protection in favor of the
plaintiff, H.S. See RSA 173-B:5, I (2022). We construe the defendant’s brief to
argue that the trial court erred by finding that he engaged in “abuse,” by
allowing the plaintiff to dispose of certain property of the defendant, including
giving away or selling his dogs, and by ruling in the defendant’s absence at the
final hearing when he was allegedly deprived of an opportunity to attend the
hearing. We affirm.
To obtain relief under RSA chapter 173-B, a plaintiff is required to prove,
by a preponderance of the evidence, that the defendant engaged in “abuse.”
S.C. v. G.C., 175 N.H. 158, 163 (2022). A finding of “abuse” requires proof that
the defendant, a family or household member or a current or former sexual or
intimate partner of the plaintiff, committed or attempted to commit one or more
statutorily enumerated crimes and that such conduct constituted “a credible
present threat to the [plaintiff’s] safety.” RSA 173-B:1, I (2022); see S.C., 175
N.H. at 163. On appeal, the trial court’s findings of fact are final, and we
engage in de novo review of questions of law raised by the appealing party.
RSA 173-B:3, VI (2022); S.C., 175 N.H. at 162.
We review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a matter of law and will
uphold the trial court’s findings and rulings unless they lack evidentiary
support or are tainted by error of law. S.C., 175 N.H. at 162. We view the
evidence in the light most favorable to the prevailing party, here, the plaintiff,
deferring to the trial court’s judgment in evaluating the credibility of the
witnesses and the weight of the evidence presented. Id. at 162-63.
It is the burden of the appealing party, here, the defendant, to provide so
much of the record as is necessary to decide the issues raised, and to establish
that the appealing party raised those issues in the trial court. See Bean v. Red
Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004). “If the [appealing] party intends
to argue in the supreme court that a finding or conclusion is unsupported by
the evidence or is contrary to the evidence, the [appealing] party shall include
in the record a transcript of all evidence relevant to such finding or
conclusion.” Sup. Ct. R. 15(3). Absent a transcript of an evidentiary hearing,
we assume the evidence was sufficient to support the trial court’s decision.
See Bean, 151 N.H. at 250.
In this case, the defendant has not provided a transcript of whatever
hearing the trial court held on the domestic violence petition. Accordingly, we
assume that the evidence was sufficient to support the trial court’s finding that
the defendant engaged in “abuse.” See id. Moreover, the record does not
reflect that the defendant argued in the trial court that the court erroneously
allowed the plaintiff to dispose of his property or ruled in his absence when he
was deprived of an opportunity to attend the final hearing. See id.; Fam. Div.
R. 1.26(F) (“To preserve issues for an appeal to the Supreme Court, an
appellant must have given the Court the opportunity to consider such issues;
thus, to the extent that the Court, in its decision, addresses matters not
previously raised in the case, a party must identify any alleged errors
concerning those matters in a motion under this rule to preserve such issues
for appeal.”). We conclude that the defendant has failed to provide a record
necessary to decide the issues raised or to establish that he raised such issues
in the trial court, and thus, we affirm the protective order issued in this case.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2