THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0377, M.C. v. R.B., the court on November
20, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, R.B., appeals the order of the Circuit Court
(Chabot, J.), following a hearing, granting a domestic violence final order of
protection to the plaintiff, M.C. See RSA 173-B:5 (2022). We construe the
defendant’s brief to argue that the trial court’s order is unsupported by the
evidence and contrary to the weight of the evidence. We affirm.
To be granted a domestic violence final order of protection, the plaintiff
must establish, by a preponderance of evidence, that the defendant engaged in
“abuse.” RSA 173-B:5, I. “Abuse” means the commission or attempted
commission of one or more enumerated crimes by a family or household
member or a current or former sexual or intimate partner when such conduct
“constitute[s] a credible present threat” to the plaintiff’s safety. RSA 173-B:1, I
(2022); see S.C. v. G.C., 175 N.H. 158, 163 (2022). The enumerated crimes
that may constitute abuse include “[i]nterference with freedom as defined in
RSA 633:1 through RSA 633:3-a.” See RSA 173-B:1, I(d). The trial court found
that the defendant committed abuse by stalking the plaintiff as defined in RSA
633:3-a (2016). A person commits the offense of stalking if he “[p]urposely,
knowingly, or recklessly engages in a course of conduct targeted at a specific
person which would cause a reasonable person to fear for his or her personal
safety. . . , and the person is actually placed in such fear.” RSA 633:3-a, I(a).
A course of conduct may include “[a]ppearing in close proximity to, or entering
the person’s residence.” RSA 633:3-a, II(3).
The trial court’s “findings of facts shall be final, but questions of law may
be transferred from the circuit court to the supreme court.” RSA 173-B:3, VI
(2022). We review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a matter of law,
upholding the trial court’s findings and rulings unless they lack evidentiary
support or are tainted by legal error. S.C., 175 N.H. at 162. We defer to the
trial court’s judgments as to the credibility of the witnesses and the weight of
their testimony. Id. at 162-63. We view the evidence in the light most
favorable to the prevailing party, here, the plaintiff. Id. at 163.
We first address the defendant’s argument that the evidence was
insufficient to prove “abuse” as defined in RSA 173-B:1, I. The plaintiff testified
that, on the preceding Saturday, she saw the defendant parked in his car near
her house with no reason to be there. The defendant admitted that he was
present at that location, but asserted that he was planning to take the parties’
son to lunch. The plaintiff testified, however, that their son did not leave the
house that day.
The plaintiff also testified that the defendant records conversations in her
home when he is on the phone with their son, and the son’s cellphone is on
speaker setting. The plaintiff testified that she no longer feels safe talking in
her home, and that when she leaves the home, the defendant knows where she
is because their son is “taping [her].” She testified, “I don’t feel safe in my
home and I don’t feel safe leaving my home.”
The defendant argues that the trial court erred in relying upon his
presence near the plaintiff’s home to support a finding that he was stalking
her. He testified that the prior restraining order prohibited him from being
within 300 feet of the plaintiff and that, on this occasion, he was 328 feet away,
according to Google map radius calculator. The defendant also argues that the
trial court, in finding that he was “splitting hairs” by measuring distances so
precisely, demonstrated bias against him. The defendant also denied recording
the plaintiff’s conversations. The trial court did not find the defendant’s denial
credible. The court credited the plaintiff’s testimony that the defendant records
the “goings-on” and conversations in her home through their son’s cellphone.
We conclude that the record provides evidentiary support for the court’s
findings and therefore uphold them. See S.C., 175 N.H. at 162.
The defendant argues that the trial court disregarded “exculpatory
evidence” that the police chose not to prosecute him for recording the plaintiff’s
conversations without her consent. Contrary to the defendant’s argument, the
trial court considered the evidence but concluded that the decision by the
police not to charge the defendant did not compel a finding in this case that the
conduct did not occur.
The defendant also argues that the trial court erroneously excluded
evidence bearing on the plaintiff’s credibility. The defendant sought to
introduce a recording from a separate proceeding which, he asserted, showed
that the plaintiff falsely claimed that she had never received any alimony
payments from the defendant. However, at the start of the hearing in this case,
the trial court advised the parties that the court was aware that the parties had
been involved in a number of cases, and that it did not “want to spend too
much time” on past events. Later in the hearing, the court reminded the
defendant that the issue for determination was whether grounds existed for the
issuance of a protective order. The trial court has broad discretion in
managing the proceedings before it. In the Matter of Conner & Conner, 156
N.H. 250, 252 (2007). We conclude that the trial court sustainably exercised
its discretion by declining to accept the defendant’s recording. See id.
2
The defendant also argues that the court erred in relying upon his failure
to complete a batterer’s intervention program to support its abuse finding. He
asserts that the prior restraining order allowed him to choose to attend either a
batterer’s intervention program or counseling, and that neither option was
mandatory. On reconsideration, the trial court corrected its error, but ordered
the defendant to complete a batterer’s intervention program to bring about a
cessation of abuse. We reject the defendant’s argument that the trial court
exceeded its authority or penalized him for seeking reconsideration. See RSA
173-B:5, I.
The defendant also argues that, even if his conduct was sufficient to
support a finding that he committed a predicate act of abuse, the evidence was
insufficient to support a finding that his conduct constituted a present credible
threat to the plaintiff’s safety. The plaintiff testified that, “I continue to hope
every year that we’ll be in a different spot, and I will feel safe, and this will
cease.” However, she testified, “every year his behavior escalates.” The plaintiff
testified that the defendant “continues to be incredibly angry at me.” She
testified that the defendant “told me he’d spend the rest of his life ruining my
life if I went through with my divorce,” and that he now “continues to just find
ways to make my life terrible and scare me.” She testified that, “I’m scared to
see him [one] street over [from] me,” and that “I’m scared that he has my
son . . . taping my whereabouts, taping my conversations.”
The trial court found that the defendant “remains preoccupied or
obsessed with penalizing Plaintiff for pursuing a divorce, and that this ongoing
pattern of behavior reasonably causes or has caused Plaintiff to fear for her
safety or well-being.” The court found that a reasonable person would be
concerned for her personal safety based on the defendant’s proximity to the
plaintiff’s residence. We conclude that the evidence is sufficient to support the
court’s finding that the defendant’s conduct constitutes a present credible
threat to the plaintiff’s safety. See S.C., 175 N.H. at 162. We reject the
defendant’s assertion that the trial judge was biased against him. See Sup. Ct.
R. 38, Canon 2.11; State v. Bader, 148 N.H. 265, 271 (2002) (noting that
adverse judicial rulings alone do not render a judge biased).
We need not address the defendant’s remaining issues as they were not
raised in the trial court, see Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250
(2004), are not adequately briefed, see State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 48
3