THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0020, R.S. v. S.S., the court on April 11,
2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, S.S., appeals the order of the Circuit Court
(Prevett, J.), following a hearing, granting a domestic violence final order of
protection to the plaintiff, R.S. See RSA 173-B:5 (2022). He argues that the
trial court erred by: (1) allegedly relying upon allegations that were not stated
in the domestic violence petition; (2) allegedly relying upon prior filings in other
cases, rather than the plaintiff’s testimony at the hearing, to find that the
plaintiff met her burden of proof; and (3) precluding admission of certain
exhibits. We affirm.
To be granted a domestic violence final order of protection, the plaintiff
must establish, by a preponderance of evidence, that the defendant engaged in
“abuse.” Achille v. Achille, 167 N.H. 706, 716 (2015); RSA 173-B:5, I. “Abuse”
means the commission or attempted commission of one or more enumerated
crimes by a family or household member or a current or former sexual or
intimate partner when such conduct “constitute[s] a credible present threat” to
the plaintiff’s safety. RSA 173-B:1, I (2022); see Achille, 167 N.H. at 716. The
enumerated crimes that may constitute abuse include “[c]riminal threatening
as defined in RSA 631:4” and “[h]arassment as defined in RSA 644:4.” See RSA
173-B:1, I(b), (g).
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred by allegedly relying
upon allegations that were not stated in the petition. The defendant did not
object to the plaintiff’s testimony on this basis at the hearing. He seeks to raise
the issue under our plain error rule. See Sup. Ct. R. 16-A. We have held that
notice of the facts alleged against a defendant must be provided in advance of
the hearing on the petition. In the Matter of Aldrich & Gauthier, 156 N.H. 33,
34 (2007); RSA 173-B:3, I (2022). The plaintiff’s petition contains thirty
numbered paragraphs. Her testimony at the hearing was consistent with the
facts alleged in her petition.
Although the petition may not have contained some of the specific words
and phrases the defendant highlights from the plaintiff’s hearing testimony, we
conclude that the petition provided the defendant with adequate notice of the
facts alleged against him. Moreover, the defendant has not established that
the trial court relied upon any of the allegedly unnoticed allegations in finding
that he engaged in abuse. Accordingly, we conclude that there was no plain
error. See State v. Maxi, 176 N.H. 455, 459, 2024 N.H. 8, ¶7 (2024) (to find
plain error, there must be an error, and error must affect appellant’s
substantial rights).
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred by allegedly relying
upon prior filings in other cases, rather than the plaintiff’s testimony at the
hearing, to find that the plaintiff met her burden of proof. The record does not
support the defendant’s position. Although the trial court noted at the hearing,
without objection, that it had taken judicial notice of certain facts in previous
cases, the court instructed the plaintiff to direct her testimony to “what’s
happened recently.”
The plaintiff testified that the defendant is infatuated with her, and that
he has stated that he intends to end his life and express his feelings for her in
his final words. The plaintiff testified that the defendant “knows his words
incite fear in me because he said, when I die, she will not have to live in fear
anymore.” The plaintiff further testified that the defendant’s “imaginary
scenarios that describe him and I alone in dark, secluded areas with no one
around for miles to hear me scream are foretelling.” The plaintiff told the
defendant that his messages were harassing, and that he needed to stop, but
his response was that she did not have to read his messages. The court found
that the defendant makes his threats in the context of the parties’ ongoing
child custody disputes. We conclude that the trial court properly relied upon
the plaintiff’s testimony, rather than prior filings in other cases, to find that the
plaintiff met her burden of proof.
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred by precluding
admission of certain exhibits. We review challenges to a trial court's
evidentiary rulings under our unsustainable exercise of discretion standard
and reverse only if the rulings are clearly untenable or unreasonable to the
prejudice of a party’s case. In the Matter of McArdle & McArdle, 162 N.H. 482,
485 (2011). The record shows that the defendant sought to admit the parties’
separation agreement and text messages from before 2020, both of which the
court ruled were irrelevant to the issue of whether his conduct constituted a
credible present threat to the plaintiff’s safety.
The defendant also sought to admit messages from 2021, which the
court found to be too attenuated in time. The defendant alleges that he had
other exhibits, including a timeline showing his location on various dates. The
trial court asked the defendant to testify specifically about the incidents that
occurred on the dates the plaintiff cited in her testimony, which he did. Based
upon this record, we cannot conclude that the trial court’s evidentiary rulings
2
were clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of the defendant’s
case. See id.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3