THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0095, In the Matter of Robert Moulton
and Rebecca Moulton, the court on February 9, 2026, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The petitioner, Robert Moulton, appeals final orders entered
by the Circuit Court (Carroll, R., approved by Cabrera, J.), following a final
hearing in his divorce from the respondent, Rebecca Moulton. On appeal, the
petitioner challenges the division of property, arguing that the trial court erred
by awarding certain real property to the respondent. We affirm.
The trial court has broad discretion in fashioning a final divorce decree.
In the Matter of Spenard & Spenard, 167 N.H. 1, 3 (2014). Its discretion
includes decisions concerning the division of marital property. Id. We will not
overturn the trial court’s rulings on such matters absent an unsustainable
exercise of discretion, reviewing the record only to determine whether it
contains an objective basis to sustain the trial court’s discretionary judgments.
Id. We defer to the trial court’s judgment in resolving conflicts in testimony,
evaluating witness credibility, and determining the weight of evidence, mindful
that the trial court may accept or reject, in whole or in part, the testimony of
any witness, and is not required to believe even uncontested testimony. In the
Matter of Aube & Aube, 158 N.H. 459, 465-66 (2009). If the trial court
reasonably could have reached its findings on the evidence before it, they will
stand. Spenard, 167 N.H. at 3.
RSA 458:16-a, II (2018) requires the trial court to divide marital property
in a manner that is equitable. See In the Matter of Sarvela & Sarvela, 154 N.H.
426, 431 (2006). Marital property includes “all tangible and intangible
property and assets, real or personal, belonging to either or both parties” at the
time of the final decree, regardless of “whether title to the property is held in
the name of either or both parties,” or whether the property was acquired
during the marriage or was brought into it by one of the parties. RSA 458:16-
a, I (2018); see Sarvela, 154 N.H. at 431.
The trial court is required to presume that an equal division of marital
property is equitable unless it determines, after considering one or more
statutory factors, that an equal division would not be equitable or appropriate.
RSA 458:16-a, II; Sarvela, 154 N.H. at 430-31. Such factors include (1) the
“duration of the marriage”; (2) the “age, health, social or economic status,
occupation, vocational skills, employability, separate property, amount and
sources of income, needs and liabilities of each party”; (3) the “opportunity of
each party for future acquisition of capital assets and income”; (4) the “actions
of either party during the marriage which contributed to the growth or
diminution in value of property owned by either or both of the parties”; (5) the
“value of any property acquired prior to the marriage”; and (6) “[a]ny other
factor that the court deems relevant.” RSA 458:16-a, II(a), (b), (c), (f), (m), and
(o). The trial court is not to divide marital property by some mechanical
formula, but in a manner that it deems just based upon the evidence presented
and the equities of the case. Sarvela, 154 N.H. at 431. Nor is the trial court
required to consider all the statutory factors in RSA 458:16-a, II, or to give
such factors equal weight. Id. The trial court may award a particular marital
asset, in its entirety, to one party under the statute. In the Matter of Henry &
Henry, 163 N.H. 175, 183 (2012).
The parties had been married for nearly 30 years at the time of the
divorce. The petitioner was nearly 84 years old, received $2,400 per month in
social security, and operated a trucking business. The petitioner claimed that
he was not working in, or receiving income from, the trucking business at the
time of the divorce, and on that basis, he refused to make court-ordered
mortgage payments or temporary alimony payments. Nevertheless, in June
2024, only seven months prior to the final hearing, the petitioner submitted a
financial affidavit disclosing monthly self-employment income of nearly $5,000
in addition to his social security income. Moreover, the respondent introduced
evidence establishing that the petitioner had earned income from his trucking
business of approximately $45,000 in 2022 and $59,000 in 2023, and had
continued to work at the trucking business during the seven months between
the submission of his financial affidavit and the final hearing. Based on the
discrepancy between the petitioner’s claims not to have been working or
earning income and the evidence to the contrary, the trial court found that he
lacked candor and has “a problem with the truth.”
In contrast to the petitioner, the respondent, who was 69 years old at the
time of the divorce, was retired. Her sole source of income was her monthly
social security of approximately $1,223. As a result of the petitioner’s refusals
to pay the mortgage or alimony in accordance with the temporary orders, the
bank holding a mortgage on the marital residence had issued a foreclosure
notice, and the respondent’s family members had assisted her in making
mortgage payments that the petitioner had not reimbursed.
The marital property included two parcels of land: an approximately 27-
acre lot containing the marital residence, and an adjacent lot consisting of
between 50 and 60 acres referred to at trial and by the trial court as the
“Bump” property. The petitioner acquired the 27-acre lot approximately ten
years before the parties’ 1995 marriage and had built a residence on it.
Following the parties’ marriage, the respondent was added to the title for the
2
27-acre lot and the parties mortgaged it to obtain a loan to improve the
residence. At the time of the final hearing, the remaining debt secured by the
mortgage was approximately $69,000.
The parties acquired the Bump property in 2000 for $25,000; it was not
encumbered. The parties maintained the Bump property in “current use” for
property taxation purposes, and utilized it in support of their use of the 27-
acre lot as a farm. According to the trial court, continued use of the marital
residence property as a farm is “only sustainable with the inclusion of the
‘Bump’ property to support the animals” living on the property.
At trial, both parties requested a property division that included an
award of all of the real estate, which the trial court determined to have a total
of $227,494 in equity. According to the trial court, the petitioner sought “to
return to the farm, to work the farm, to assume the mortgage, and to utilize the
farm equipment, which is on the farm. He related [that] he needed all the farm
equipment to run the farm.” The petitioner proposed that the court award the
respondent the vehicles in her possession, found by the trial court to have total
equity of $6,281, and a dump truck that the petitioner used in his trucking
business worth $85,000, “as full settlement for the division of the marital
estate.”
The respondent likewise requested that the trial court award her the real
estate and the related mortgage debt so that she could continue to operate the
farm, but proposed that the petitioner be awarded a number of vehicles,
including the dump truck, several items of valuable farm equipment and
furniture, and a $28,000 cash payment. After making some adjustments to
the values of certain items of personal property that the respondent proposed
to be awarded to the petitioner and increasing her proposed cash payment to
$47,000, the trial court granted the respondent’s proposed property division.
Prior to applying certain offsets that the trial court allowed the respondent to
make against the $47,000 cash payment,1 the trial court awarded a property
division to the petitioner worth approximately $221,125, and a property
division to the respondent worth approximately $223,242.
1 In its narrative order, the trial court specifically allowed setoffs against the $47,000 cash
payment for the petitioner’s mortgage arrearage, alimony arrearage, future term alimony, and
attorney’s fees awarded to the respondent for the petitioner’s contempt. In her brief, the
respondent claims that the trial court also allowed a setoff of $6,000 for funds that the
petitioner had removed from a bank account in violation of the anti-hypothecation order.
However, nowhere in its narrative order does the trial court state that it was allowing the
respondent to offset the $47,000 cash payment with the $6,000 in funds withdrawn in
violation of the anti-hypothecation order. Indeed, in the final decree, the trial court expressly
awarded “the $6,000 [that the petitioner] took out of the business accounts in violation of the
anti-hypothecation order” to the petitioner as part of the final property division.
3