THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0008, D.M. v. C.A., the court on May 19,
2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). The plaintiff appeals an order of the Circuit Court (Christie, J.), issued
following a hearing, denying her petition for a civil stalking final order of
protection, and dismissing the case. See RSA 633:3-a (Supp. 2024). The plaintiff
argues that the trial court erred by dismissing her petition based on its finding
that she was not the “target” of the defendant’s course of conduct. See RSA
633:3-a, I(a). We vacate and remand.
In an appeal from an order on a civil stalking petition, we uphold the
findings and rulings of the trial court unless they are lacking in evidentiary
support or are erroneous as a matter of law, and accord considerable weight to
the trial court’s judgments on the credibility of witnesses and the weight to be
given testimony. Fisher v. Minichiello, 155 N.H. 188, 190 (2007). We view the
evidence in the light most favorable to the prevailing party; here, the defendant.
See id.
A person commits the offense of stalking if, among other things, that
person “[p]urposely, knowingly, or recklessly engages in a course of conduct
targeted at a specific person which would cause a reasonable person to fear for
his or her personal safety or the safety of a member of that person’s immediate
family, and the person is actually placed in such fear.” RSA 633:3-a, I(a).
“Course of conduct” is defined as two or more acts over a period of time, however
short, which evidences a continuity of purpose. RSA 633:3-a, II(a). A course of
conduct may include, among other things, “[f]ollowing, approaching, or
confronting that person, or a member of that person’s immediate family,”
“[a]ppearing in close proximity to, or entering the person’s residence, place of
employment, school, or other place where the person can be found, or the
residence, place of employment or school of a member of that person’s immediate
family,” or “[a]ny act of communication.” RSA 633:3-a, II(a)(2), (3), (7). However,
a course of conduct does not include constitutionally protected activity, nor
conduct that was necessary to accomplish a legitimate purpose independent of
making contact with the targeted person. RSA 633:3-a, II(a). The plaintiff bears
the burden to prove “stalking” by a preponderance of the evidence. RSA 633:3-a,
III-a; Fisher, 155 N.H. at 190.
In this case, the plaintiff’s husband was a candidate for an elected position
in municipal government. The defendant, believing that the husband was
ineligible for that position as a result of his domicile purportedly being in a
different municipality where the family owned another home, began investigating
the family. Among other things, the defendant gathered information about the
family’s whereabouts and movements using neighbors who, he stated, “walk and
drive past [the home] quite regularly.” He investigated where the family most
often spends overnights during the week, and whether they travel together or
separately between the two homes. At one point, the defendant himself drove to
the family’s other home in order to determine, and photograph, whether they had
put out any garbage for pickup. He also specifically investigated where the
plaintiff is registered to vote, and where the minor children attend school. The
defendant then posted all of this information to a public forum on social media,
where, among other things, he accused the husband of lying on a government
form, implied that the husband was defrauding the public, and openly
speculated about the health of the husband’s marriage with the plaintiff. The
plaintiff testified that this conduct placed her in fear for her own safety as well as
that of her family, that the children were afraid to play outside, and that one of
the children was afraid to participate in her school sport for fear that the
defendant might show up at games or practices.
The trial court denied the plaintiff’s petition for a civil stalking final order of
protection and dismissed the case on the basis that “while [the d]efendant failed
to prove he was engaging in conduct necessary to accomplish a legitimate
purpose, [the p]laintiff was not the target of [the d]efendant’s course of conduct.”
On appeal, the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred by dismissing her
petition based on its finding that she was not the “target” of the defendant’s
course of conduct. We agree.
As set forth above, a person commits the offense of stalking if, among other
things, that person “[p]urposely, knowingly, or recklessly engages in a course of
conduct targeted at a specific person which would cause a reasonable person to
fear for his or her personal safety or the safety of a member of that person’s
immediate family, and the person is actually placed in such fear.” RSA 633:3-a,
I(a). Here, although it appears that the plaintiff was not the intended target of
the defendant’s investigation, she was plainly targeted by his course of conduct.
He monitored her whereabouts and movements, inspected and photographed her
trash, investigated her voter registration, investigated the status of her marriage
with her husband, investigated where her minor children attend school, and
posted all of this information to a public forum on social media. In other words,
even if the defendant’s purpose in investigating the family was to discern the
husband’s domicile, the evidence demonstrates, as a matter of law, that he
knowingly, or at the very least recklessly, targeted the plaintiff with his course of
conduct. See id.; RSA 626:2, II (2016) (defining said culpable mental states).
2
Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court erred by finding that the
plaintiff was not targeted by the defendant’s course of conduct, and by
dismissing her petition on that basis. See Fisher, 155 N.H. at 190, 191-92. We
therefore vacate the trial court’s order dismissing the plaintiff’s petition, and
remand for the trial court to make findings of fact as to the remaining elements of
stalking.
Vacated and remanded.
MacDonald, C.J., and Bassett, Donovan, and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3