THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0267, Lauren C. Shearer v. Town of
Richmond, the court on June 17, 2026, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Lauren C. Shearer, appeals a decision of the Superior
Court (Edwards, J.), following a two-day bench trial, denying his petition to lay
out an approximately1,300-foot-long Class V public highway over an existing
private easement beginning at a public highway and terminating on his property.
See RSA 231:28, :38 (2009). In denying the petition, the trial court found that
the rights of the affected landowners . . . far outweigh[ed] any public interest in
the layout,” and thus, that there was no “occasion” to lay out the highway. See
RSA 231:8 (2009). We affirm.
On petition, a town will lay out a class V public highway when there is
“occasion” to do so. See Crowley v. Town of Loudon, 162 N.H. 768, 773 (2011);
RSA 231:8. If the town refuses to lay out the highway, the petitioning party may
petition the superior court to do so, which will “conduct a de novo hearing to
make an independent determination of the occasion, or appropriateness, of
laying out a road as requested.” Crowley, 162 N.H. at 773 (quotation omitted);
RSA 231:38, I. We will uphold the trial court’s determination as to whether
occasion exists if it is supported by some evidence and is not legally erroneous.
Crowley, 162 N.H. at 773.
We have outlined a two-step process for a trial court to
undertake when assessing whether “occasion” for laying out a road
exists. First, the court must balance the public interest in the layout
against the rights of the affected landowner.[1] If the rights of the
affected landowner outweigh the public interest, there is no occasion
for laying out the road. If, on the other hand, the public interest
justifies taking the land without the landowner’s consent, then the
court must engage in a second step, which is to balance the public
interest in the layout against the burden imposed upon the town. If
the balancing required by the second step favors the public interest,
occasion for the layout exists.
1 The affected landowner is typically the person whose land would be taken as the site of the
proposed road.
In assessing the “public interest,” the trial court may consider,
among other factors: (1) integration within an existing road system;
(2) ease of existing traffic flow; (3) improvement to convenience of
travel; (4) facilitation of transportation for school children; (5)
improved accessibility to business district and employment centers;
(6) improved accessibility for fire, emergency and police services; (7)
whether it would benefit a significant portion or just a small fraction
of the town tax base or year-round residents; and (8) anticipated
frequency of road use.
Id. at 773-74 (quotations, citations, and ellipses omitted).
In this case, the trial court determined that the proposed road would not
be substantially integrated with the town’s road system, would not ease traffic
flow or improve the convenience of travel, and would not markedly improve
access to a business district or employment centers. Instead, the court noted
that the proposed road would connect with the town’s road system only at its
intersection with a public highway, that it would terminate in a dead end on the
plaintiff’s lot only a short distance from that intersection, that it would serve only
four full-time residents of the town on a small number of lots that either have
access to the public highway already or are unoccupied or used only seasonally,
and that it would not facilitate the transportation of school children. The only lot
for which access to fire, police, or emergency services would be improved by the
proposed road, according to the trial court, was the plaintiff’s lot. The trial court
concluded that “whatever improvements the road would create would largely — if
not solely — benefit the plaintiff, and would otherwise have very little benefit for
the other 1,197 residents of” the town.
By contrast, the trial court observed that the proposed road would likely
result in the taking of land from both the owner of the lot that the existing private
easement crosses and the lot that it abuts, and that “the rights of all abutters to
the new road” would necessarily “give way to the public’s right to viatic use of the
highway.” The trial court found that creation of a public road over the existing
easement would result in “a marginal increase in traffic,” the “presence of road
and maintenance crews,” and a corresponding loss of quiet enjoyment rights in
the affected landowners. Accordingly, the trial court determined that “the rights
of the affected landowners . . . far outweigh[ed] any public interest in the layout,”
and thus, that the proposed road failed the first element of the occasion test.
Although the court declined to reach the second element of the occasion test, it
rejected several arguments raised by the plaintiff pertinent to whether the burden
imposed on the town by the layout outweighed the public interest.
On appeal, the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred by rejecting his
arguments relative to whether the burden imposed on the town by the layout
outweighed the public interest. The plaintiff additionally challenges the trial
2
court’s determination that the rights of the affected landowners far outweighed
the public interest in the layout, suggesting that takings would not be required
for the layout, and that, if takings were required, any damages to the affected
landowners would be minimal. Finally, the plaintiff suggests that the trial court’s
order will result in a regulatory taking of his property but does not develop this
argument.
As the appealing party, the plaintiff has the burden of demonstrating
reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014). Based upon our
review of the trial court’s well-reasoned order and findings of fact, the plaintiff’s
arguments, the relevant law, and the record submitted on appeal, the plaintiff
has not established that the trial court erred by determining that there was no
occasion to lay out the highway on the basis that the rights of the affected
landowners outweighed any public interest in the layout. See id.; Crowley, 162
N.H. at 773. Accordingly, we uphold the court’s determination that there was no
occasion for the layout, and need not address the plaintiff’s arguments pertaining
to the second element of the occasion test. The remaining arguments raised by
the plaintiff are either insufficiently developed, see State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H.
47, 49 (2003), or do not otherwise warrant further discussion, see Vogel v. Vogel,
137 N.H. 321, 322 (1993).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3