THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0531, B.G. v. J.A., the court on April 22,
2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, J.A., appeals a civil stalking final order of
protection issued by the Circuit Court (Murray, R., approved by Pendleton, J.),
following an evidentiary hearing, in favor of the plaintiff, B.G. See RSA 633:3-
a, III-a (2016). On appeal, the defendant challenges the sufficiency of the
evidence to support the trial court’s decision. We affirm.
Any stalking victim “may seek relief by filing a civil petition in the
[circuit] court”; upon proof by a preponderance of the evidence, the court “shall
grant such relief as is necessary to bring about a cessation of stalking.” Id.
“Stalking” is defined to include “[p]urposely, knowingly, or recklessly engag[ing]
in a course of conduct targeted at a specific person which would cause a
reasonable person to fear for his or her personal safety or the safety of a
member of that person’s immediate family, and the person is actually placed in
such fear.” RSA 633:3-a, I(a) (2016). “‘Course of conduct’ means 2 or more
acts over a period of time, however short, which evidences a continuity of
purpose.” RSA 633:3-a, II(a) (2016). Acts that may constitute a “course of
conduct” include, but are not limited to, “confronting” the targeted person,
“[c]ausing damage to the person’s residence or property,” “[p]lacing an object on
the person’s property,” and engaging in “[a]ny act of communication, as defined
in RSA 644:4, II.” RSA 633:3-a, II(a)(2), (4), (5), (7). RSA 644:4, II (Supp. 2025)
defines “communicates” to mean, “to impart a message by any method of
transmission.”
The trial court’s “findings of facts shall be final, but questions of law may
be transferred from the circuit court to the supreme court.” RSA 173-B:3, VI
(2022); see RSA 633:3-a, III-a (providing that, in civil stalking proceedings, “the
procedures and burdens of proof to be applied . . . shall be the same as those
set forth in RSA 173-B”). We review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a
matter of law and will uphold the trial court’s findings and rulings unless they
lack evidentiary support or are tainted by error of law. Despres v. Hampsey,
162 N.H. 398, 401 (2011). We view the evidence in the light most favorable to a
prevailing plaintiff, deferring to the trial court’s evaluation of the witnesses’
credibility, id. at 401, 404, recognizing that the trial court has the benefit of
observing the demeanor of the witnesses first-hand, see State v. Giles, 140 N.H.
714, 718-19 (1996) (“We defer to the [fact finder’s] findings on credibility in part
because a trial transcript provides no indication of a witness’s tone of voice or
demeanor, two useful tools in the assessment of credibility.”).
In this case, evidence in the record establishes that the defendant owns a
condominium unit directly above the plaintiff’s condominium, and that both
units have an exterior deck. On multiple occasions over the course of years,
the defendant allowed his dog to urinate or defecate on his deck, resulting in
urine and feces falling between the slats of the deck onto the plaintiff’s deck,
landing on her furniture or persons seated on her deck. This behavior led to
confrontations between the defendant and the plaintiff’s husband, and
eventually, to the adoption of a rule by the relevant unit owner’s association
prohibiting unit owners from allowing animals to defecate or urinate on decks,
and imposing a fine for violations of the rule.
In July 2025, the defendant allowed his dog to urinate and/or defecate
on his deck on three separate occasions. After the plaintiff complained to the
unit owner’s association, the defendant was assessed fines in the amount of
$600. Thereafter, the defendant poured an unknown liquid substance from a
bucket onto his deck on July 21, 2025. At that time, the plaintiff heard the
sound of liquid pouring onto her patio furniture from inside her unit, and when
she went outside to investigate, the defendant was in the parking area outside
the building and screamed at her words to the effect of, “you want piss? You’ve
got piss.” The defendant also yelled a number of obscenities and derogatory
names at the plaintiff, including that she was a “b*tch,” a “f*cking idiot,” and a
“crazy nutcase,” and that her husband was an “a**hole” and a “b*stard,” before
getting into his car and speeding off. The encounter caused the plaintiff to fear
for her personal safety and the safety of her husband. The plaintiff testified
that the defendant had, in the past, stated that he has guns and knows how to
use them.
At a minimum, the defendant’s pouring liquid onto the plaintiff’s deck
placed “an object on the person’s property,” and his shouted insults and
obscenities constituted acts “of communication, as defined in RSA 644:4, II.”
RSA 633:3-a, II(a)(5), (7). When we view the evidence in the light most
favorable to the plaintiff, then, the trial court’s findings that the defendant
purposely, knowingly, or recklessly engaged in a course of conduct targeted at
the plaintiff, that the course of conduct placed the plaintiff in fear for her
personal safety or the safety of a member of her immediate family, and that her
2
fear was reasonable, were neither lacking in evidentiary support nor tainted by
error of law. See Despres, 162 N.H. at 401.
Affirmed.
Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3