THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0319, J.M. v. D.E., the court on May 28,
2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The
defendant, D.E., appeals orders of the Circuit Court (Carroll, R., approved by
Keating and Lombardi, JJ.) issued following a hearing, granting a domestic
violence final order of protection in favor of the plaintiff, J.M., and denying the
defendant’s motion for reconsideration. See RSA chapter 173-B (2022). The
defendant argues that the trial court erred in failing to dismiss the domestic
violence petition on grounds of res judicata and collateral estoppel. We affirm.
The following facts are supported by the record. On August 5, 2024, the
plaintiff filed a domestic violence petition (first petition) in the Circuit Court
(McIntyre, J.) alleging that the defendant, her estranged husband, had
punched her in the arm while they were driving in a vehicle, broken her
vehicle’s windshield with a piece of wood while she was in the vehicle,
pretended to shoot her with a shotgun, and said he was going to kill her.
Following a hearing, the court found that the plaintiff had not been abused “as
defined in RSA [chapter] 173-B,” and dismissed the case on August 26, 2024.
On April 10, 2025, the plaintiff filed a second domestic violence petition
(second petition). In that petition and during an ex parte hearing, the plaintiff
alleged that: (1) video taken on November 28, 2023, showed the defendant with
“a 9mm handgun in his hand that he keeps loaded” and the defendant saying
“‘I’m hunting you honey,’” and “‘If I find my f****** keys are stolen by you,
you’re f****** going to get it’”; (2) the plaintiff is “in fear” of what the defendant
might do; (3) she took the video to the police who said they intended to arrest
the defendant, and the plaintiff “fears this will anger [the defendant] and, based
on his threats in the past that he would shoot her, she fears for her safety”;
and (4) the plaintiff believes she has seen the defendant driving by where she
stays. The petition also alleged that in May 2024, the defendant threw “a wood
block at [the plaintiff’s] windshield as [she] attempted to leave (He made a
pretend shotgun) [sic] hand gesture.”
The defendant filed a verified objection to the second petition, arguing
that the plaintiff was “asserting the same allegations that were previously
raised” in the first petition and, because “the doctrine of res judicata prevents
parties from relitigating matters that were litigated, or could have been
litigated, in a prior action,” the second petition should be dismissed. The
circuit court overruled the objection because the defendant “failed to prove that
the elements of the previous [petition were identical to those of] the present
complaint.”
At the final hearing on the second petition, the plaintiff showed the court
two videos, one from May 2024 and one from November 2023. The plaintiff
explained that the videos had been recorded on a camera installed outside on
the parties’ property. She testified that she did not introduce the videos at the
hearing on the first petition and report the November 2023 incident sooner
because “Fish and Game had [her] phone for a year and the video was on it.”
The plaintiff testified that she “recently” turned the videos in to the police
department and that, “in the past, [the defendant] has told [her] that if [she]
ever [goes] to the cops and turn[s] him in for any kind of crime . . . he would
kill [her].” She stated that after she provided the videos to the police
department two weeks earlier, she believed she saw the defendant driving by
her house “a couple times,” and she “was afraid that he would get revenge on
[her] and afraid to leave the house because he might be waiting for [her].” The
May 2024 video showed the defendant throwing a block of wood through her
windshield as she was trying to drive away and making the motion of shooting
a shotgun at her.
Thereafter, the court entered a domestic violence final order of
protection on the second petition, finding that the defendant committed abuse
pursuant to RSA chapter 173-B, including assault or reckless conduct,
criminal threatening, and destruction of property. Specifically, the court found
the defendant committed abuse when he “was viewed in videos threatening the
Petitioner [with a] firearm and throwing a ‘chunk’ of wood [at] a truck in [which]
the Petitioner was riding causing the windshield to break.” The court also
found that the defendant’s conduct constitutes a present credible threat to the
plaintiff’s safety because she “fears Defendant will continue to retaliate.” The
defendant unsuccessfully moved for reconsideration. This appeal from the
orders on the second petition followed.
In an appeal from an order on a domestic violence petition, the trial
court’s “findings of fact shall be final,” and we undertake de novo review of
“questions of law.” RSA 173-B:3, VI. The applicability of either res judicata or
collateral estoppel presents a question of law that we review de novo. Walker v.
Day, 173 N.H. 211, 213 (2020); Barry v. N.H. Dep’t of Health and Human
Servs., 170 N.H. 364, 367 (2017). The party asserting either preclusion
doctrine bears the burden of proving that it applies. Gray v. Kelly, 161 N.H.
160, 164 (2010).
Res judicata precludes the litigation in a later case of matters actually
decided, and matters that could have been litigated, in an earlier action
between the same parties for the same cause of action. Walker, 173 N.H. at
2
213. We have defined the term “cause of action” as the right to recover,
regardless of the theory of recovery. Gray, 161 N.H. at 165. Generally, in
determining whether two causes of action are the same for res judicata
purposes, we consider whether they arise out of the same factual transaction
or occurrence. Merriam Farm, Inc. v. Town of Surry, 168 N.H. 197, 199-200
(2015). By contrast, collateral estoppel is a narrower doctrine that bars a party
to a prior action, or a person in privity with such a party, from relitigating any
issue or fact actually litigated and determined in the prior action. Cook v.
Sullivan, 149 N.H. 774, 778 (2003).
The defendant argues that the trial court erred by “failing to apply . . .
res judicata to bar the second domestic violence petition filed in . . . April 2025
that relied on the same allegations from 2024 and introduced an incident
dating back to 2023.” (Capitalization omitted.) He asserts that because the
order dismissing the first petition in August 2024 “addressed the wood
throwing incident,” and the November 2023 incident “could have been litigated”
in the 2024 action,1 the trial court “should have precluded the second domestic
violence matter.” The defendant also argues that collateral estoppel applies
because “the issues were identical in both cases.” (Capitalization omitted.)
Amici contend that res judicata and collateral estoppel have limited or no
application in domestic violence cases under RSA chapter 173-B, and the trial
court was within its authority when it relied upon the previously adjudicated
conduct in ruling on the second petition.
To obtain relief under RSA chapter 173-B, the plaintiff must show
“abuse” by a preponderance of the evidence. L.C. v. W.C., 174 N.H. 355, 359
(2021). RSA 173-B:1, I, defines “[a]buse” as “the commission or attempted
commission” by “a family or household member or by a current or former
sexual or intimate partner” of one or more specified criminal acts “where such
conduct is determined to constitute a credible present threat” to the plaintiff’s
safety. Among the specified acts are assault or reckless conduct, criminal
threatening, and destruction of property. See RSA 173-B:1, I (a), (b), and (e).
Thus, before issuing a domestic violence final order of protection under RSA
chapter 173-B, a trial court must find by a preponderance of the evidence that
(1) the defendant committed or attempted to commit one or more of the
enumerated acts and (2) the defendant’s conduct constituted a credible present
threat to the plaintiff’s safety. See L.C., 174 N.H. at 359. In reaching its
conclusion, the trial court “may consider evidence” of acts of abuse as defined
in the statute, “regardless of their proximity in time to the filing of the petition,
1 This argument overlooks that res judicata bars only the claims that could have been litigated
and that arose from a transaction or occurrence actually litigated in the previous action. Gray v.
Kelly, 161 N.H. 160, 165 (2010). It does not preclude claims arising from an occurrence that was
not litigated, even if the plaintiff was aware of the occurrence at the time of the first action.
3