THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0429, Aclarify, LLC v. TecHustle, Inc., the
court on August 18, 2026, issued the following order:
Sean Marx’s Rule 33(2) written request to represent the plaintiff, Aclarify,
LLC, before this court on appeal is approved. The plaintiff’s motion to
supplement the record with new evidence is denied. “On appeal, we consider
only evidence and documents presented to the trial court.” Lake v. Sullivan,
145 N.H. 713, 717 (2001). The court has reviewed the written arguments and
the record submitted on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way
of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, TecHustle, Inc., appeals an
order of the Circuit Court (Lyons, R., approved by Tessier, J.), following a small
claim hearing, awarding $7,300 to the plaintiff for breach of contract. We
affirm.
We will uphold the trial court’s findings and rulings unless they lack
evidentiary support or are legally erroneous. Gaucher v. Waterhouse, 175 N.H.
291, 295 (2022). We defer to the trial court’s judgment on issues such as
resolving conflicts in testimony, evaluating the credibility of witnesses, and
determining the weight to be given to the evidence presented, mindful that the
trial court is not compelled to believe even uncontested evidence. Id. at 296;
Loon Valley Homeowner’s Ass’n v. Pollock, 171 N.H. 75, 78 (2018). “We do not
decide whether we would have ruled differently than the trial court, but, rather,
whether a reasonable person could have reached the same decision based
upon the same evidence.” Gaucher, 175 N.H. at 295-96. We assume that the
trial court made all findings necessary to support its decision. Bennett v. Town
of Hampstead, 157 N.H. 477, 486 (2008).
I. Factual and Procedural Background
a. Contract Formation/Relevant Terms
The parties entered into an agreement pursuant to which the plaintiff
would provide a French-speaking software engineer to assist the defendant in
developing a financial services application for use in the country of Togo.
Under the terms of the written contract, the plaintiff was responsible to: (1) find
and provide a worker with requisite skills and abilities identified by the
defendant; (2) hire, assign, reassign, counsel, discipline, and discharge the
selected worker; (3) pay the selected worker’s wages; (4) withhold amounts from
the worker’s pay for any applicable taxes or worker’s compensation insurance
premiums; (5) comply with any relevant labor laws; (6) maintain any personnel
and payroll records; and (7) address any “employee work-related claims and
complaints.” The defendant, in turn, was responsible to: (1) approve a worker
identified by the defendant for the assignment based upon “having personally
interviewed [the worker], . . . having reviewed [the worker’s] résumé[], or on
some other basis on which [the parties] will agree”; (2) pay for the selected
worker’s time based upon a contractual billing rate; and (3) “direct and
supervise” the selected worker’s on-the-job work.
The contract expressly stated that the plaintiff was not “undertaking to
provide [the defendant] with a specific design, engineering, or system concept
or solution to a particular problem,” and that the plaintiff did not “warrant or
guarantee that the [worker] will produce a technical solution to [the
defendant’s] particular problem or need.” The contract acknowledged, however,
that the “abilities” of the worker ultimately assigned to the defendant might not
“be up to [the defendant’s] expectations,” and thus provided that “if [the
defendant was] dissatisfied with the performance of [the selected worker, the
defendant] may cancel the[] assignment” simply by calling and notifying the
plaintiff, at which point the plaintiff would “instruct the worker to cease work
at once and submit a final timesheet,” and would “invoice [the defendant] for
the outstanding unpaid work on said timesheet.” Regarding invoicing, the
contract contained the following provision:
[The plaintiff] will send [the defendant] a bill at the end of two
calendar weeks for all hours worked by the [worker] according to
attached payment structures as defined by the confirmation letter
provided as Addendum 1 [to the contract], plus charges for any
other properly billable items. These invoices are payable upon
receipt.
Because invoices are principally based upon the number of hours
worked by the [worker], [the plaintiff] require[s] [the worker] to
submit the hours worked every week. This record is maintained on
a time card that is certified by the [worker] as being accurate. [The
defendant] or [the defendant’s] representative will also have the
opportunity to sign the [worker’s] time card to verify that the
[worker] has worked, for [the defendant], the hours listed on the
time card. However, if [the defendant] or [the defendant’s]
representative does not sign the timecard within three (3) business
days, it will be presumed to be accurate and [the defendant]
agree[s] to pay for the time indicated and to abide by the other
terms contained on the time card.
b. Contract Performance Disputes
The plaintiff sourced more than 50 potential candidates, ultimately
presenting three candidates to the defendant for interviews from which the
defendant selected one candidate for the assignment. The parties executed the
2
written contract on January 29, 2023, and the selected worker began the
assignment on February 1, 2023. The worker met with the defendant’s team,
including the defendant’s CEO, on a daily basis. These meetings included
review of the hours worked, the work completed, and any ongoing issues with
the work. Ten days into the assignment, the defendant’s CEO informed the
plaintiff that the assigned worker was “doing exceedingly well,” that he was
“very well received by the team,” that he “really seemed to know what he was
doing,” and that the defendant was “thrilled with his work thus far.”
By February 23, the plaintiff had not yet invoiced the defendant for any
work performed, and the defendant’s CEO inquired as to when she could
expect to receive an invoice. The plaintiff responded that invoicing for the first
few weeks of work was anticipated during the following week, and on Thursday,
March 2, the plaintiff sent the defendant timesheets for the worker’s first four
weeks of work. The timesheets showed that the worker worked five eight-hour
days per week with limited information regarding the specific work performed.
The worker reported that he had entered his time as he had been instructed to
do by the defendant’s CEO, and that, although he had worked more than 40
hours per week, she had instructed him to enter no more than 40 hours per
week on his timesheets.
On Monday, March 6, the defendant’s CEO requested a meeting with the
plaintiff “to quickly discuss” the timesheets. That meeting occurred on Friday,
March 10. During the meeting, the defendant’s CEO expressed her concern
that the timesheets were not sufficiently detailed. The plaintiff and the worker
agreed to provide greater detail on the timesheets regarding the work
performed, and the plaintiff provided the defendant’s CEO with an electronic
link to the worker’s “detailed time sheet.” On March 12, the defendant’s CEO
acknowledged and thanked the plaintiff for “the link re [the worker’s] hourly
log,” and based upon her experience working for a law firm, recommended that
he “provide a more detailed breakdown” of his time because “[g]eneralized
descriptions are not helpful.”
On Tuesday, March 28, the defendant’s CEO sent the plaintiff an email
requesting an “update[] on [the worker’s] timesheet/compensation.” By that
point, the worker’s assigned work was approximately 98 percent complete. The
plaintiff responded on the following day that the worker had “recently” provided
an update on his timesheets and had “carefully reviewed and adjusted the new
timesheets” to ensure their accuracy. The plaintiff again provided a link to the
timesheets. The plaintiff additionally stated that the worker would be re-
sending his “initial re-worked timesheets shortly,” and that once the re-worked
timesheets were provided, the plaintiff would “promptly send . . . an invoice for
the past work.” On Thursday, March 30, the defendant’s CEO responded by
stating that she had taken “a quick look at the updated timesheets,” that she
3