THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0172, Saher Abdel-Hadi v. ZJBV
Properties, LLC, the court on August 26, 2026, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, ZJBV Properties, LLC, appeals an order of
the Superior Court (English, J.), issued following a bench trial and entering
judgment in favor of the plaintiff, Saher Abdel-Hadi, on the plaintiff’s breach of
contract claim. We reverse in part, vacate in part, and remand.
The following facts are taken from the trial court’s order or recite the
contents of documents in the record before us. On November 22, 2022, the
parties entered into an agreement whereby the plaintiff would lease the
defendant’s commercial building located in Hampton Falls (“Lease”). The
plaintiff testified that the building had two floors, each about 5,000 square feet.
The Lease required the plaintiff to make monthly rental payments of $11,000
over a sixty-month term commencing December 1, 2022. The Lease also
required the plaintiff to pay the first and last months’ rent at the time of
signing along with an $11,000 security deposit. The Lease provided that the
plaintiff “may use the Premises for a Lounge or any other use permitted by law”
and that the plaintiff “shall have all City, State and Health permits required by
law.”
The Lease specified that the plaintiff “shall have the obligation to conduct
any construction or remodeling (at [his] expense) that may be required to use
the Premises as specified above and may construct such fixtures on the
Premises (at [his] expense) that appropriately facilitate its use for such
purposes.” “Such construction shall be undertaken, and such fixtures may be
erected only with the prior written consent of the [defendant] which shall not be
unreasonably withheld.” The Lease also required the plaintiff to maintain
liability, worker’s compensation, and property insurance and to deliver to the
defendant a certificate of insurance before commencement of the Lease. The
Lease also included the following provision:
If [the plaintiff] is unable to secure a permit to occupy the leased
space for a lounge from the Town of Hampton Falls; and [the
plaintiff] has exhausted all avenues and remedies allowed to him
by law, [the plaintiff] shall be allowed to terminate this lease and
will forfeit any and all rental payments made to the [defendant] for
the leased property.
Prior to signing the Lease, the parties negotiated additional terms that
included giving the plaintiff the option to extend the Lease, but the plaintiff
never executed a document containing the additional terms. At the time the
parties executed the Lease, the plaintiff paid the defendant $33,000 for the first
and last months’ rent along with the security deposit. The defendant provided
the plaintiff with a key to the premises the next day, November 23, 2022.
Both before and after the commencement of the Lease on December 1,
the defendant’s principal, Brian Thibeault, told the plaintiff that if he did not
sign a document reflecting the additional terms the parties negotiated,
Thibeault would lock the plaintiff out of the premises. Thibeault also asked the
plaintiff to provide the required certificate of insurance and to place the utilities
accounts into the plaintiff’s name. The plaintiff did not comply, but the
defendant did not lock the plaintiff out of the building.
There was a quantity of furniture on the main floor of the building when
the plaintiff was shown the premises, and it remained after the commencement
of the Lease. The furniture included several large tables, a sofa, a desk, and a
large antique, among other items.
On December 9, 2022, the plaintiff, through counsel, sent the defendant
a letter purporting to terminate the Lease. The letter noted that the plaintiff
intended to use the property for a hookah lounge and asserted that the parties
mutually understood that this was the plaintiff’s intention. The letter indicated
that the plaintiff met with the Hampton Falls building inspector who informed
him that a hookah lounge was not a permitted use in the zone where the
property is located. It alleged that the plaintiff “has been denied possession of
the property since December 1 as you continue to store your personal property
throughout the premises.” It also asserted that because the plaintiff was
unable “to obtain a permit to use the premises for a lounge and due to your
ongoing breach by denying our client possession of the premises, I am
declaring the lease to be terminated as of December 1, 2022.” The letter did
not acknowledge or attempt to demonstrate compliance with the plaintiff’s
obligation under the Lease to exhaust all “avenues and remedies” available by
law before terminating the Lease. The letter demanded return of the $33,000
paid by the plaintiff. The defendant apparently did not meet the plaintiff’s
demand. On April 13, 2023, the defendant secured a new tenant for the
premises.
On May 30, 2023, the plaintiff filed a complaint alleging breach of
contract and seeking to recover $33,000. On June 23, 2023, the defendant
filed a counterclaim against the plaintiff for breach of contract as a result of the
plaintiff’s alleged failure to pay rent from January 2023 to April 2023.
2
On November 15, 2024, the trial court held a bench trial. On February
4, 2025, the court issued an order concluding that the defendant materially
breached the lease “by refusing tenant possession.” The court explained that
while the plaintiff “was allowed some limited access to the property, that access
was limited by the substantial property Defendant maintained on the
premises.” “More importantly, Plaintiff’s possession was thwarted by
Defendant’s consistent assertion that Plaintiff could not occupy the premises
and that Defendant intended to change the locks on December 1 if the
document with additional terms was not signed by that time.” The court
ordered that the plaintiff “is entitled to the return of his $33,000” but did not
explicitly rule on the defendant’s counterclaim. The court denied the
defendant’s motion for reconsideration. This appeal followed.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court’s finding that there
was a material breach was not supported by the evidence. We agree.
“When reviewing a trial court’s decision rendered after a trial on the
merits, we will uphold the trial court’s factual findings and rulings unless they
lack evidentiary support or are legally erroneous.” Gaucher v. Waterhouse,
175 N.H. 291, 295 (2022). “We do not decide whether we would have ruled
differently than the trial court, but, rather, whether a reasonable person could
have reached the same decision based upon the same evidence.” Id. at 295-96.
“We defer to the trial court’s judgment on such issues as resolving conflicts in
the testimony, measuring the credibility of witnesses, and determining the
weight to be given to the evidence.” Id. at 296. “It is within the province of the
trial court to accept or reject, in whole or in part, whatever evidence was
presented.” Id. “We review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts
de novo.” Id.
“[A] breach of contract occurs when there is a failure without legal excuse
to perform any promise which forms the whole or part of a contract.” Keene
Auto Body v. State Farm Mut. Auto Ins. Co., 175 N.H. 503, 511 (2022)
(quotation omitted). “Whether a breach of contract is material is a question of
fact, and we will uphold the trial court’s findings of fact and rulings of law
unless they lack evidentiary support or constitute a clear error of law.” Found.
for Seacoast Health v. Hosp. Corp. of America, 165 N.H. 168, 181 (2013). A
breach is material if: (1) a party fails to perform a substantial part of the
contract or one or more of its essential terms or conditions; (2) the breach
substantially defeats the contract’s purpose; or (3) the breach is such that
upon a reasonable interpretation of the contract, the parties considered the
breach as vital to the existence of the contract. Id. at 182. Although the
absence of proof of damages is not dispositive of whether a breach is material,
where a breach causes no damages or prejudice to the other party, it may be
deemed to be immaterial. Id. A material breach excuses future performance.
Gaucher, 175 N.H. at 296.
3