THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0540, In the Matter of Nat King Rosa and
Jennifer Rosa, the court on September 24, 2026, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The respondent, Jennifer Rosa, appeals an order of the
Circuit Court (Rauseo, J.) finding her in contempt of the final divorce decree
between her and the petitioner, Nat King Rosa, and ordering her to sell the
marital home. We affirm the trial court’s finding that the respondent is in
contempt of the divorce decree, reverse the court’s order that she sell the
marital home, and remand.
I. Background
The trial court found, or the record supports, the following facts. The
parties were married and later divorced. In the divorce decree, the trial court
granted the respondent all right, title and interest in the marital home. The
divorce decree required the petitioner to transfer his interest in the marital
home to the respondent within thirty days of the issuance of the divorce decree.
The court awarded “[the respondent] 60% of the value of the marital residence
and [the petitioner] 40% of the value of the marital residence” and ordered that
“[the respondent] shall pay $122,304.00 to [the petitioner] within 120 days of
the issuance of the Decree of Divorce.”
The petitioner moved to hold the respondent in contempt for failing to
pay him forty percent of the value of the marital home. After a hearing, the
trial court found the respondent in contempt of the divorce decree because she
“willfully violated the Court order which required her to make a payment of
$122,304.00 to [the petitioner] within 120 days of the issuance of the Divorce
Decree.” Although the respondent claimed that she made efforts to refinance
the marital home to comply with the order, the court did “not find [the
respondent’s] testimony that she was unable to refinance credible” because
“[h]er credit report does not reference any denial to refinance.” The respondent
also asserted that “she could not proceed with refinancing until [the petitioner]
transferred his interest [in the property] to her.” The court, however, did not
find that explanation credible because the respondent “failed to provide any
corroborating evidence stating that the proposed lenders required the Deed
transfer to her prior to filing a refinance application” and, “[f]urther, she only
raised the issue after the deadline to refinance expired.”
Having found the respondent in contempt, the court ordered her to
“immediately list the property for sale with a real estate agent mutually
agreeable to [the petitioner].” The order further required that the petitioner
“provide [the respondent] with the names of three real estate agents for listing
the property for sale” and ordered the respondent to “make a selection within
ten (10) days of receiving the request.” If the respondent failed to make a
selection within ten days, the trial court ordered that the petitioner “may select
a real estate agent of his choosing from the list he provided to [the
respondent].” In addition, the court ordered that “[p]ending the sale of the
house, [the petitioner] shall sign a Quitclaim Deed, which shall be held in
escrow at his current attorney’s office, or with [the respondent’s attorney], if
[the petitioner] terminates services with his current attorney.” The respondent
unsuccessfully moved for reconsideration. This appeal followed.
II. Analysis
On appeal, the respondent argues that the trial court unsustainably
exercised its discretion when it found her in contempt of the divorce decree
because: (1) the court did not consider the petitioner’s failure to transfer his
interest in the property to her; (2) the court’s contempt finding was legally
erroneous; and (3) the court granted the petitioner equitable relief even though
he has unclean hands in the transaction. The respondent also argues that the
trial court impermissibly modified the divorce decree by ordering her to sell the
marital home. We address these arguments in turn.
The contempt power is discretionary and the proper inquiry is not
whether we would have found the respondent in contempt, but whether the
trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion in doing so. See Holt v. Keer,
167 N.H. 232, 239 (2015). To show an unsustainable exercise of discretion,
the respondent must demonstrate that the trial court’s ruling was clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of her case. See id.
The respondent first argues that, in finding her in contempt, the trial
court did not consider the petitioner’s failure to transfer his interest in the
property to her. We disagree. The trial court expressly considered, and
rejected, the argument that the petitioner’s failure to provide a quitclaim deed
precluded any efforts to refinance the property. Specifically, the trial court
found that the respondent presented no corroborating evidence to establish
that a quitclaim deed from the petitioner was a prerequisite to applying for
refinancing. The court also noted that the respondent first raised the issue
only after the deadline to pay the petitioner had passed.
The respondent next argues that the trial court applied an incorrect legal
standard when it found her in contempt. She asserts that the court erred
because it did not find that she “willfully” violated the order. See Stone v.
Stone, 111 N.H. 167, 168 (1971) (“The basis for a finding of contempt is the
2
wilful disobedience by the party charged of an existing court order.”). Instead,
the respondent argues, the trial court only found that she failed to act with
“due diligence” or in “good faith.”
The interpretation of a court order is a question of law, which we
review de novo. In the Matter of Sheys & Blackburn, 168 N.H. 35, 39
(2015). In construing a court order, we look to the plain meaning of the words
used in the document. Id. We construe subsidiary clauses so as not to conflict
with the primary purpose of the trial court’s decree. Id. at 39-40. As a general
matter, we construe a court decree or judgment with reference to the issues it
was meant to decide. See id. at 40.
The trial court found that the respondent “willfully violated the Court
order.” As a basis, the court concluded that even accepting the respondent’s
contention that she could not refinance the property without a quitclaim deed
from the petitioner, the respondent’s counsel provided the deed for signature
only when the petitioner’s counsel inquired about the status of the payment
after the deadline to pay the petitioner had passed. The trial court did not find
that the respondent took any meaningful steps to obtain the funds necessary
to satisfy the court’s order. We conclude that the trial court applied the correct
standard when it found the respondent in contempt and based that ruling
upon sufficient factual findings.
The respondent also claims that the trial court’s finding of contempt is
legally erroneous because the divorce decree was insufficiently clear. See
Dover Veterans Council v. City of Dover, 119 N.H. 738, 740 (1979) (“It is a
prerequisite to the exercise of the civil contempt power that the underlying
order clearly describe what the alleged contemnor must do to avoid the
sanction.”). Specifically, she asserts that the divorce decree was unclear
because it “ordered payment within 120 days but was silent on methods (sale,
refinance, or other) or consequences/remedies for non-payment.”
We cannot conclude, as a matter of law, that the order was insufficiently
clear about the respondent’s obligation: the order required her to pay the
petitioner $122,304.00 within 120 days of the issuance of the divorce decree.
By its silence on the issue, the order was equally clear that it placed no
limitation on how the respondent should acquire the funds. Although we do
not agree that the order lacked clarity, we note that the respondent had ample
opportunity to seek clarification from the court. In sum, we conclude that the
trial court did not err in finding the respondent in contempt.
The respondent nonetheless argues that the doctrine of unclean hands
precluded the trial court’s entry of equitable relief — that is, its finding of
contempt and the resulting order that she sell the marital home. See RSA 490-
D:3 (2010) (authorizing the family division to enter equitable relief in cases
within its subject matter jurisdiction); see also RSA 490-F:3 (Supp. 2025)
3