THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0486, M.B. v. J.C., the court on April 8,
2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). The defendant appeals an order of the Circuit Court (Hall, J.), issued
following a hearing, granting a domestic violence final order of protection in favor
of the plaintiff. See RSA 173-B:5 (2022). The defendant argues that the evidence
was insufficient to support the court’s order. We affirm.
“In an appeal from an order on a domestic violence petition, the trial
court’s ‘findings of facts shall be final,’ and we undertake de novo review of
‘questions of law.’” S.C. v. G.C., 175 N.H. 158, 162 (2022) (quoting RSA 173-B:3,
VI). “We review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a matter of law, upholding
the findings and rulings of the trial court unless they are lacking in evidentiary
support or tainted by error of law.” Id. “When performing this review, we accord
considerable weight to the trial court’s judgments on the credibility of witnesses
and the weight to be given testimony.” Id. at 162-63. We view the evidence in
the light most favorable to the prevailing party — here, the plaintiff. See id. at
163.
To be entitled to a domestic violence final order of protection, the plaintiff
must establish, by a preponderance of evidence, that the defendant engaged in
“abuse.” RSA 173-B:5, I. “Abuse” means the commission or attempted
commission of one or more enumerated crimes by a family or household member
or a current or former sexual or intimate partner when such conduct
“constitute[s] a credible present threat” to the plaintiff’s safety. RSA 173-B:1, I
(2022); see also S.C., 175 N.H. at 163. The trial court “may consider evidence of
such acts, regardless of their proximity in time to the filing of the petition, which,
in combination with recent conduct, reflects an ongoing pattern of behavior
which reasonably causes or has caused the [plaintiff] to fear for his or her safety
or well-being.” RSA 173-B:1, I; see also S.C., 175 N.H. at 163.
The trial court found that the defendant had engaged in abuse of the
plaintiff, his mother, by “charg[ing] at [p]laintiff with closed fists in the air, red
faced[, and] was inches from [p]laintiff’s face screaming at her,” and by
“slamm[ing] a door in [p]laintiff’s face with such force that it caused the screen
door to strike [p]laintiff’s arm causing bruising.” The trial court acknowledged
the plaintiff’s fear of the defendant, and further found that the defendant’s
conduct constituted a credible present threat to the plaintiff’s safety because,
among other things, the defendant “is volatile,” and “is involved in a high conflict
parenting case and is angry at [p]laintiff [and] feels [p]laintiff is aligned with
children’s mother.”
These findings are supported by evidence in the record. Although the
defendant challenges the plaintiff’s credibility, emphasizes different evidence, and
offers alternative explanations and interpretations of the evidence, “[w]e view the
evidence in the light most favorable to the prevailing party,” and “accord
considerable weight to the trial court’s judgments on the credibility of witnesses
and the weight to be given testimony.” S.C., 175 N.H. at 162-63. Based on our
review of the record, the trial court could reasonably have determined, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the defendant’s conduct constituted, at least,
simple assault under RSA 631:2-a, I(b) (2016) (recklessly causing bodily injury to
another), or criminal threatening under RSA 631:4, I(a) (2016) (purposely,
through physical conduct, placing or attempting to place another in fear of
imminent bodily injury or physical contact). We conclude, therefore, that the
evidence was sufficient to support the trial court’s decision to grant a domestic
violence final order of protection in favor of the plaintiff.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2