THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0154, City of Portsmouth, New Hampshire
Police Commission/Police Department v. Portsmouth Ranking
Officers Association, NEPBA, Local 220, the court on May 14,
2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, City of Portsmouth, New Hampshire Police
Commission/Police Department (City), appeals an order of the Superior Court
(Ruoff, J.) denying its motion to modify or vacate an arbitrator’s award of
approximately 26 months of backpay to a police officer whose employment was
terminated by the City and who was a member of the defendant, the
Portsmouth Ranking Officers Association, NEPBA, Local 220. The arbitration
award followed our opinion in City of Portsmouth, NH Police Comm’n v.
Portsmouth Ranking Officers Ass’n, 176 N.H. 14 (2023) (Portsmouth I), in
which we vacated the superior court’s confirmation of an earlier award in the
same amount so that the arbitrator could reconsider the award in light of the
opinion, see id. at 22. On appeal, the City argues that Portsmouth I compelled
an award of, at most, backpay of approximately two months, and thus, that the
trial court erred by not determining that the award amounted to “another plain
mistake that must be corrected,” see RSA 542:8 (2021). We affirm.
Judicial review of an arbitrator’s award is limited. Portsmouth I, 176
N.H. at 18. Under RSA 542:8, a party to an arbitration may apply to the
superior court to confirm an arbitration award, to correct or modify the award
for “plain mistake,” or to vacate the award “for fraud, corruption, or
misconduct by the parties or by the arbitrators, or on the ground that the
arbitrators have exceeded their powers.” A “plain mistake” is “an error that is
apparent on the face of the record and which would have been corrected had it
been called to the arbitrators’ attention.” Portsmouth I, 176 N.H. at 18
(quotation omitted). To demonstrate plain mistake, the party challenging the
award must show “that the arbitrators manifestly fell into such error
concerning the facts or law, and that the error prevented their free and fair
exercise of judgment on the subject.” Id. (quotation omitted). We consider
arbitration awards with deference to the arbitrator. Id.
In Portsmouth I, we examined the arbitrator’s application of the “after-
acquired-evidence” doctrine as set forth in McKennon v. Nashville Banner
Publishing Co., 513 U.S. 352, 361-63 (1995), and as adopted by McDill v.
Environamics Corp., 144 N.H. 635, 640-41 (2000), to the officer’s termination.
See Portsmouth I, 176 N.H. at 18-22. We observed that, pursuant to the
doctrine, damages for an employee’s tort-based wrongful termination claim
may be mitigated if, following the wrongful termination, evidence is discovered
of misconduct that is so severe that the employer would have terminated the
employee based on that misconduct alone. See id. at 19. We further observed
that the doctrine does not “necessarily bar all recovery,” and that, although
“[t]he beginning point in the . . . formulation of a remedy should be calculation
of backpay from the date of the unlawful discharge to the date the new
information was discovered,” the trier of fact “can consider taking into further
account extraordinary equitable circumstances that affect the legitimate
interests of either party.” Id. (quotations omitted).
In Portsmouth I, the City argued that the arbitration award should have
been limited to backpay from June 24, 2015, the date the City terminated the
officer, through August 20, 2015, the date evidence emerged that would have
justified the officer’s termination. See id. at 17-18. We noted that in awarding
backpay through August 7, 2017, nearly two years following the discovery of
the after-acquired evidence, the arbitrator had weighed four extraordinary
equitable circumstances: the severity of the officer’s actions, which weighed in
the City’s favor, and three equitable circumstances weighing in the officer’s
favor, namely, the City’s failure to provide procedural protections required by
Cleveland Board of Education v. Loudermill, 470 U.S. 532 (1985), the City’s
failure to provide protections guaranteed by the collective bargaining
agreement, and the failure of the police department’s command staff to
properly supervise the officer. Portsmouth I, 176 N.H. at 20.
In holding that the arbitrator had engaged in plain mistake, we
determined that “the arbitrator erred when she determined that the City
violated [the officer’s] due process rights and relied on that legal conclusion as
an extraordinary equitable circumstance.” Id. at 22. We further observed,
however, that “the weight that the arbitrator assigned to each of the four
equitable circumstances [was] not clear.” Id. Accordingly, we vacated the trial
court’s decision and directed the court to remand the matter to the arbitrator
to reconsider the backpay award in light of our opinion. Id.
On remand, the City argued before the arbitrator that “there was only
one extraordinary equitable circumstance relied upon to extend [the backpay
award] beyond August 20, 2015,” namely, the failure to provide procedural
protections under Loudermill, and that our opinion in Portsmouth I thus
required that the backpay award be limited to backpay from June 24 through
August 20, 2015. The arbitrator rejected this argument as meritless. After
reviewing, at length, her prior findings regarding the knowledge of the police
department’s command staff concerning the officer’s actions and their failures
to supervise him, the arbitrator reasoned:
2
In the remedy award, an extraordinary equitable
circumstance I considered why [the officer] should get back pay
was because he was not afforded due process rights under
Loudermill and the [collective bargaining agreement]. However, I
also based that decision on the overreaching [sic] problem that [the
officer] was not properly supervised . . . . Concluding that the
entire command staff had multiply [sic] opportunities to either
alter [the officer’s] actions and/or test his integrity . . . weighed
heavily on my determination that he should receive back pay.
There was a lack of accountability in the Police Department and
the City that the Court is not free to ignore.
If [the officer] had been properly supervised, the [officer’s
improper conduct] may not have occurred and if [it] did occur
because he did not correct his conduct then there would have been
just cause to discipline him. I note that the just cause concept
expects that the employer will do their job too and the [police
department] failed to do so. I took into consideration that [the
officer] used poor judgment throughout the situation, but I
determined that his command staff should have educated him that
the decisions he was making were poor ones.
Seven years later, even after reconsidering the backpay
award remanded by the New Hampshire Supreme Court . . ., my
opinion has not changed. Therefore, [the officer] shall receive back
pay from June 24, 2015 to August 7, 2017 minus any
compensation, benefits and/or unemployment received during the
same period.
The City moved to modify or vacate the decision in superior court, see
RSA 542:8, again arguing that in the initial arbitration award vacated by
Portsmouth I, the arbitrator had identified “one, and only one, ‘extraordinary
equitable circumstance’ that caused her to deviate from the required starting
point for backpay” under Nashville Banner, specifically, the deprivation of the
officer’s due process rights. Because we had held that the City had not violated
the officer’s due process rights under Loudermill, the City argued that the
arbitrator engaged in plain mistake by not amending the calculation of
backpay. The trial court rejected the City’s argument, determining that it had
not established plain mistake.
On appeal, the City contends that the arbitrator’s decision to issue “the
exact same backpay award, despite this Court’s finding — now law of this case
— that no due process violation had occurred” constitutes plain mistake, once
again suggesting that the failure to provide Loudermill protections was the only
extraordinary equitable circumstance relied upon by the arbitrator in her initial
backpay award. According to the City, “[t]he only way that the [initial] backpay
3