THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0138, Allan Lewis v. NBV-Briar Ridge,
LLC, the court on July 17, 2025, issued the following order:
The plaintiff’s motion seeking a “writ for emergency protection” is denied.
The plaintiff’s motion for “summary judgment” is likewise denied. To the extent
that the defendant, in objecting to the plaintiff’s motions, requests affirmative
relief, including sanctions and an award of attorney’s fees, the requests are
denied without prejudice to filing a properly supported motion for costs and
attorney’s fees incurred in defending the appeal. See Sup. Ct. R. 23.
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Allan Lewis, appeals an order of the Superior
Court (Livernois, J.), following a hearing, granting a motion of the defendant,
NBV-Briar Ridge, LLC, for periodic payment of a judgment that had awarded
$4,900 in attorney’s fees to the defendant. See RSA 524:6-a (2021). We
construe the plaintiff’s brief and memorandum of law to be arguing that the
trial court lacked subject matter jurisdiction to grant relief to the defendant’s
predecessor-in-title in an earlier lawsuit. We affirm.
It is the plaintiff’s burden, as the appealing party, to support the issues
he raises with developed legal argument, and to provide this court with those
portions of the trial court record that are necessary to decide such issues. See
Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004); State v. Blackmer,
149, N.H. 47, 49 (2003). We assume that relevant portions of the trial court
record not provided on appeal, including relevant pleadings, see Estate of Day
v. Hanover Ins. Co., 162 N.H. 415, 422 (2011) (applying Bean to failure to
provide relevant pleadings in the trial court), support the result reached by the
trial court, see Bean, 151 N.H. at 250.
In this case, the plaintiff has failed to develop an argument why the
purported jurisdictional defect — the superior court’s claimed lack of authority
to award the defendant’s predecessor-in-title possession of real property on its
counterclaim for common law ejectment in a prior case — deprived the trial
court of authority to award attorney’s fees to the defendant in this case. Nor
has the plaintiff provided the pleadings in this case, or any other relevant part
of the trial court record, establishing that the trial court lacked jurisdiction to
award the defendant attorney’s fees, or to grant the defendant’s motion for
periodic payments of the award. See Bean, 151 N.H. at 250.
Moreover, even if we were to assume, without deciding, that a party’s
ability to challenge subject matter jurisdiction “at any stage of the
proceedings,” Cooperman v. MacNeil, 123 N.H. 696, 700 (1983), authorizes the
plaintiff to challenge the trial court’s authority to award possession to the
defendant’s predecessor in the prior lawsuit, he has likewise not provided the
pleadings or any other portion of the record from the earlier lawsuit necessary
to address that issue.
Finally, to the extent that the plaintiff is attempting to challenge the
merits of the periodic payment order, he has failed to provide a transcript of the
periodic payment hearing. See Bean, 151 N.H. at 250.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2