THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0034, In the Matter of James Mann, the
court on March 17, 2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, has considered the oral arguments of the parties, and has
determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The
petitioner, James Mann, appeals a decision of the Superior Court (Kennedy, J.)
granting the motion to dismiss filed by the respondent, the New Hampshire
Department of Safety (DOS), for failure to state a claim upon which relief may
be granted. We affirm.
I. Background
We assume the following facts, as alleged in the petition, to be true. In
March 1995, the petitioner was convicted in Massachusetts of rape and abuse
of a child and indecent assault and battery of a person over the age of fourteen.
Subsequently, Massachusetts enacted a sex offender registry. In 2002, the
petitioner was informed of his “duty to register as a Level 2 Sex Offender”
pursuant to Massachusetts law. (Quotation omitted.) The Massachusetts Sex
Offender Registry Board later terminated the petitioner’s “obligation to register
as a Sex Offender” in Massachusetts.
The petitioner owns a home in New Hampshire. In 2022, he was
informed of his duty to register in New Hampshire as a tier II sexual offender in
accordance with RSA chapter 651-B. In 2024, he petitioned the trial court to
be relieved from that obligation pursuant to RSA 651-B:6, V(a) (Supp. 2025).
The DOS moved to dismiss, arguing that RSA 651-B:6, V(a) applies only to
offenders convicted prior to the 1992 establishment of the New Hampshire sex
offender registry. Because the petitioner’s 1995 conviction occurred after the
establishment of the New Hampshire sex offender registry, the DOS asserted
that he is not eligible for the relief sought under the statute.
Following a hearing, the trial court granted the motion to dismiss. The
court determined that RSA 651-B:6, V(a) does not apply to the petitioner and
rejected his argument that it would be fundamentally unfair to require him to
register in New Hampshire even though at the time of his conviction he resided
in a state that had no registration requirement. The petitioner unsuccessfully
moved for reconsideration. This appeal followed.
II. Analysis
On appeal, the petitioner argues that the trial court erred when it
granted the DOS’s motion to dismiss. He asserts that he is entitled to a
hearing to seek relief from New Hampshire’s registration requirement because:
(1) the legislature intended that RSA 651-B:6, V(a) apply to “someone who was
convicted prior to the establishment of the sex offender registry in the state
where he was convicted”; and (2) he is “similarly situated” to the plaintiff in Doe
v. State of New Hampshire, 167 N.H. 382 (2015).
When reviewing a trial court’s grant of a motion to dismiss, we consider
whether the allegations in the petitioner’s pleadings are reasonably susceptible
of a construction that would permit recovery. Adams v. Moose Hill Orchards,
LLC, 177 N.H. 55, 56 (2024), 2024 N.H. 58, ¶5. We assume the petitioner’s
pleadings to be true and construe all reasonable inferences in the light most
favorable to the petitioner. Id. However, we need not assume the truth of
statements in the petitioner’s pleadings that are merely conclusions of law. Id.
at 56-57. We then engage in a threshold inquiry that tests the facts in the
petition against the applicable law. See id. at 57. We will uphold the trial
court’s grant of a motion to dismiss if the facts pleaded do not constitute a
basis for legal relief. Id.
Resolving the petitioner’s appeal requires that we engage in statutory
interpretation. We review the trial court’s statutory interpretation de novo. Id.,
2024 N.H. 58, ¶6. We look first to the language of the statute itself, and, if
possible, construe that language according to its plain and ordinary meaning.
Id. We give effect to every word of a statute whenever possible and will not
consider what the legislature might have said or add language that the
legislature did not see fit to include. Id. We also construe all parts of a statute
together to effectuate its overall purpose. Id. However, we do not construe
statutes in isolation; instead, we attempt to construe them in harmony with the
overall statutory scheme. Id. This case requires us to interpret the Criminal
Code. “All provisions” of the Criminal Code “shall be construed according to
the fair import of their terms and to promote justice.” RSA 625:3 (2016).
Pursuant to RSA 651-B:2, I (2016), “[e]very sexual offender or offender
against children shall be registered with the department of safety, division of
state police, as provided in this chapter.” The division of state police “shall
register such person and shall include the relevant information in the SOR
system.” RSA 651-B:2, II, III (2016). The “SOR system” is defined as “the
division of state police sex offender registry system.” RSA 651-B:1, XII (Supp.
2025). All tier II offenders “shall be registered for life.” RSA 651-B:6, I (Supp.
2025). RSA 651-B:6, V(a), however, provides that “[a]ny tier II . . . offender who
was convicted prior to the establishment of the sex offender registry may
petition the court to be relieved from the registration requirements under this
chapter.”
2
The petitioner — a tier II offender convicted in Massachusetts prior to the
establishment of that state’s sex offender registry — argues that RSA 651-B:6,
V(a) “does not indicate whether the term ‘sex offender registry’ refers . . .
specifically to the New Hampshire sex offender registry” or to “registries or
similar databases administered by other states.” According to the petitioner,
the fact that the legislature chose not to use the term “SOR system” in RSA
651-B:6, V(a) “suggests that the phrase ‘sex offender registry’ . . . was intended
to mean something different than the ‘SOR System.’” Therefore, he asserts,
“because he was convicted prior to the establishment of the sex offender
registry in Massachusetts, he should be allowed to seek relief” under RSA 651-
B:6, V(a).
We are unpersuaded by the petitioner’s argument that the term “sex
offender registry” in RSA 651-B:6, V(a) is intended to refer to another state’s
sex offender registry. RSA 651-B:6, V(a) refers to “the establishment of the sex
offender registry.” (Emphasis added.) “[I]t is a rule of law well established that
the definite article ‘the’ particularizes the subject which it precedes. It is a
word of limitation as opposed to the indefinite or generalizing force of ‘a’ or
‘an.’” American Bus Ass’n v. Slater, 231 F.3d 1, 4-5 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (quotation
omitted); cf. Allstate Ins. Co. v. Stamp, 134 N.H. 59, 62 (1991) (finding that, in
an insurance policy, the “use of the indefinite article ‘an,’ rather than the
definite ‘the,’ before ‘insured’ is a clear reference to any insured”). Had the
legislature intended for “the sex offender registry” to refer to the registry of
another state, it could have used the indefinite generalized article “a” in
referring to “sex offender registry,” rather than the definite limiting article “the.”
We will not add language to a statute that the legislature did not see fit to
include. Adams, 177 N.H. at 57, 2025 N.H. 58, ¶6.
Further, when RSA chapter 651-B is considered as a whole, it is
apparent that the term “the sex offender registry” is used interchangeably with
the term “SOR system” and that both terms are intended to mean the New
Hampshire division of state police sex offender registry system. Compare RSA
651-B:2, II, III (upon receipt of information concerning the disposition of any
charges against any sex offender or offender against children, or when such an
offender has moved to New Hampshire, “the division shall register such person
and shall include the relevant information in the SOR system”); RSA 651-B:3, II
(2016) (when a sex offender has moved to New Hampshire, the division “shall
enter the information concerning the offender’s location in New Hampshire . . .
in the SOR system”); RSA 651-B:5, I (2016) (“[w]hen there is a change to any of
the information that a sexual offender or offender against children is required
to report pursuant to this chapter,” the division “shall include any new
information in the SOR system”), with RSA 651-B:11, I (2016) (providing that
an offender must pay an annual fee of $50 “to the department within 10 days
of the registration” of which the department “shall retain $40 . . . to be used to
defray the costs of maintaining the sex offender registry”).
3