THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0002, State of New Hampshire v.
Benjamin A. Marcroft, the court on October 9, 2025, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant appeals findings of guilt entered by the
Circuit Court (Boyle, R., approved by Christie, J.), following a bench trial, on a
violation-level charge of misuse of plates, and on misdemeanor charges of
driving after suspension, subsequent offense, and obstructing government
administration. See RSA 261:176 (2024); RSA 263:64, VI (2024); RSA 642:1
(2016). The defendant argues that the trial court unsustainably exercised its
discretion by not explaining, to the defendant’s satisfaction, the basis for its
jurisdiction, by entering a plea of not guilty on the defendant’s behalf, and by
initially not admitting into evidence certain memoranda the defendant had
prepared, and then admitting the memoranda as exhibits but stating that it did
not find them to be relevant or of significant weight. The defendant further
argues that the trial court was impermissibly biased. We affirm.
The trial court has broad discretion to manage the proceedings before it,
and to determine the admissibility of evidence offered at trial. See State v.
Plantamuro, 171 N.H. 253, 255 (2018); Leone v. Leone, 161 N.H. 566, 568
(2011). We will not upset the trial court’s determinations on such matters
absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See Plantamuro, 171 N.H. at
255; Leone, 161 N.H. at 568. This standard of review means that we review the
record only to determine whether it establishes an objective basis sufficient to
sustain the trial court’s discretionary judgments. Plantamuro, 171 N.H. at
255. To establish that the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion,
the defendant must demonstrate that the challenged rulings were clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of the defendant’s case. Id.
The record reflects that at the arraignment, the defendant inquired of the
court the basis of its jurisdiction. After the trial court explained the basis for
its jurisdiction, the defendant objected, claiming to have “canceled all . . .
contracts with the government,” and not to be someone who is subject to the
court’s jurisdiction. Although the defendant stated that he would not plead
guilty, the defendant objected when the trial court stated that it would enter a
plea of not guilty on the basis that the defendant did not consent to the entry of
any plea. The trial court subsequently issued an order concerning its
jurisdiction. We note that the defendant has not provided a copy of the trial
court’s order on jurisdiction as part of the record on appeal.
At the beginning of the subsequent bench trial, the defendant asserted, “I
am not here to plea or testify. I’m only here to challenge personal and subject
matter jurisdiction of this court.” When the defendant asked the court if it had
received a “notice of rebuttal and presumption and assumptions of jurisdiction”
and a “notice of rebuttal and presumption of claim of rights” that the defendant
had “entered into the record,” the trial court stated that it had denied the
pleadings. The defendant then objected to the pleadings not being “put on the
record,” and the trial court responded, “It’s in the record. You filed it. . . . And I
read it, and I denied it.” Later in the hearing, when the defendant asked the
trial court to confirm that the pleadings would “show up in an appeal,” the trial
court noted that it did not believe the pleadings were relevant or deserving of
any weight, but that it would admit them as exhibits “just to be sure” that they
would be part of the record on any appeal.
On appeal, the defendant first argues that the trial court erred by not
answering all of the defendant’s questions to the defendant’s satisfaction
regarding the trial court’s jurisdiction, and by entering a plea of not guilty
without the defendant’s consent. We disagree. The record on appeal reflects
that the trial court explained its jurisdiction both orally at the arraignment and
in a post-arraignment written order. To the extent the defendant is continuing
to dispute the trial court’s jurisdiction, the defendant’s arguments do not
warrant further discussion. See Vogel v. Vogel, 137 N.H. 321, 322 (1993); see
also RSA 502-A:11 (Supp. 2024) (establishing criminal jurisdiction of district
courts); RSA 490-F:3 (Supp. 2024) (granting circuit court the “jurisdiction,
powers, and duties conferred upon the former . . . district courts”). Given the
trial court’s proper exercise of jurisdiction and the defendant’s refusal to enter
any plea, the trial court’s entry of a not-guilty plea on the defendant’s behalf
was not an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred by not initially
entering the defendant’s memoranda into evidence but then admitting the
memoranda as exhibits and stating that the court did not find them to be
relevant or of significant weight. Based upon our review of the record, we
cannot conclude that the trial court’s treatment of the pleadings at the bench
trial was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of the defendant’s
case. Plantamuro, 171 N.H. at 255.
Finally, to the extent the defendant argues that the trial court was
impermissibly biased, the defendant has not established that a reasonable
2
person would have questioned the impartiality of the trial court. See Sup. Ct.
R. 38, Canon 2.11; State v. Bader, 148 N.H. 265, 268 (2002).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, and Gould, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
Distribution:
2nd N.H. Circuit Court - Plymouth District Division, 469-2023-CR-01635
Honorable Sarah D. Christie
Honorable Ellen V. Christo
Referee John F. Boyle
Benjamin Marcroft
Attorney General
Robert L. Baldridge, Esq.
Francis C. Fredericks, Supreme Court
Sherri L. Miscio, Supreme Court
File
3