THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0400, T.R. v. S.M., the court on November
21, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, S.M., appeals a domestic violence final order
of protection, see RSA 173-B:5 (2022), issued by the Circuit Court (Paine, J.),
following a hearing, in favor of the plaintiff, T.R. The defendant argues that the
trial court erred by (1) determining that it had jurisdiction; (2) failing to give full
faith and credit to an order of protection he had obtained from a court in
Florida several months before the plaintiff had filed her petition; and (3) not
dismissing the case as duplicative of a proceeding the plaintiff had earlier filed
in superior court seeking an equitable restraining order, or alternatively,
consolidating the two matters. The defendant raises each of these arguments
pursuant to the plain error rule. See Sup. Ct. R. 16-A. We affirm.
To obtain relief under RSA chapter 173-B, a plaintiff is required to prove,
by a preponderance of the evidence, that the defendant engaged in “abuse.”
S.C. v. G.C., 175 N.H. 158, 163 (2022). A finding of “abuse” requires proof that
the defendant, who is a family or household member or a current or former
sexual or intimate partner of the plaintiff, committed or attempted to commit
one or more statutorily enumerated criminal acts, and that such conduct
constitutes “a credible present threat to the [plaintiff’s] safety.” RSA 173-B:1, I
(2022); see S.C., 175 N.H. at 163. Criminal acts that may constitute abuse
include “[i]nterference with freedom as defined in RSA 633:1 through RSA
633:3-a.” RSA 173-B:1, I(d).
In turn, RSA 633:3-a, I (2016) criminalizes “stalking,” which includes
“[p]urposely, knowingly, or recklessly engag[ing] in a course of conduct targeted
at a specific person which would cause a reasonable person to fear for his or
her personal safety or the safety of a member of that person’s immediate
family, and the person is actually placed in such fear,” RSA 633:3-a, I(a).
“‘Course of conduct’ means 2 or more acts over a period of time, however short,
which evidences a continuity of purpose.” RSA 633:3-a, II(a) (2016). Such acts
include, but are not limited to, “[f]ollowing, approaching, or confronting that
person” and “[a]ppearing in close proximity to, or entering the person's
residence, place of employment, school, or other place where the person can be
found.” RSA 633:3-a, II(a)(2), (3).
On appeal, the trial court’s findings of fact are final, and we engage in de
novo review of questions of law raised by the appealing party. RSA 173-B:3, VI
(2022); S.C., 175 N.H. at 162. It is the burden of the appealing party, in this
case the defendant, to provide a record on appeal that is sufficient to decide the
issues he is raising. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250
(2004). We assume that relevant portions of the record not provided by the
appealing party support the result reached by the trial court. See id.
Appealing parties must raise all claims of error first in the trial court.
See id. (stating general rule that parties may not have judicial review of claims
not raised in trial court). Supreme Court Rule 16-A, however, provides an
exception that allows this court to consider “[a] plain error that affects
substantial rights . . . even though it was not brought to the attention of the
trial court or supreme court.” See State v. Hebert, 158 N.H. 306, 314 (2009).
We invoke the rule sparingly, limiting its application to those circumstances in
which a miscarriage of justice would otherwise result. See In re J.R., 175 N.H.
676, 687 (2023). For this court to find plain error, the defendant must
demonstrate that (1) there was an error; (2) the error was plain; (3) the error
affects substantial rights; and (4) the error seriously affects the fairness,
integrity, or public reputation of judicial proceedings. See id.
The record in this case reflects that the parties are married, that their
marital home is in Florida, that they own a second home in Freedom, and that
the Freedom property is across the street from other property owned by the
plaintiff’s family. In late 2024, the plaintiff filed for divorce. In February 2025,
an altercation between the parties ensued that led to the plaintiff being
criminally charged in Florida with domestic battery. An earlier altercation had
also allegedly occurred in the weeks leading to the February incident during
which the defendant threw the plaintiff’s phone at her and destroyed it.
However, no criminal charges arose out of the earlier incident. In March, the
plaintiff pleaded guilty to domestic battery, resulting in a sentencing order that
prohibited her from having any contact with the defendant.
The plaintiff alleged that in June, she “came to live at [the parties’] home
[in] Freedom . . . while [the defendant] occupied [their] primary residence in
Fl[orida].” On June 3, she sought an equitable restraining order from the
superior court, seeking, among other relief, to restrain the defendant “from
entering in or on the premises . . . where [she] reside[s]” based upon his alleged
“threat[] to visit [the New Hampshire property] this summer and [her] family
property across the street,” and upon the February 2025 incident. On July 1,
the plaintiff filed the present matter, asserting that the defendant was aware
that she was occupying the Freedom property and had “taken legal steps to
protect [her]self from him,” and that, despite this knowledge, he “drove across
the country” and, while she was at work on June 30, entered the Freedom
property and refused to leave when asked to do so by the State Police. The
plaintiff asserted that she was afraid the defendant would provoke a further
2
altercation, and that, based upon the February incident and the earlier,
uncharged altercation, she feared for her safety.
The circuit court held a hearing on the domestic violence petition on July
10, 2025, at which the defendant appeared and defended the claim. We note
that the defendant has not provided a transcript of the circuit court final
hearing. See Bean, 151 N.H. at 250. In granting the petition, the circuit court
noted that “[n]either party challenged jurisdiction.” The circuit court then
found that the defendant had “committed the crime of stalking” when he
“tracked the plaintiff by putting an ‘air tag’ in her car” with no authority to do
so in March 2025, and then “drove 1,600 miles” to the Freedom property “when
he learned the plaintiff was” there. In determining that the defendant’s
conduct constituted a credible present threat to the plaintiff’s safety, the circuit
court found that his actions were “threatening and persistent.” Separately, the
superior court dismissed the plaintiff’s earlier petition for an equitable
restraining order. This appeal followed.
We first address the defendant’s arguments that the trial court lacked
jurisdiction. The defendant contends that the trial court lacked jurisdiction
because it allegedly “was informed that both parties reside in Florida,” because
a Florida court had issued the no-contact order, because related legal
proceedings were pending in Florida, and because his use of the “air tag”
occurred in Florida. To the extent the defendant is arguing that the trial court
lacked personal jurisdiction, we note that “an order that prohibits abuse but
does not impose any personal obligations on a defendant is valid even without
personal jurisdiction over the defendant.” Hemenway v. Hemenway, 159 N.H.
680, 688 (2010) (quotation omitted). Moreover, it is well established that by
participating in the merits of a case without objecting to the exercise of
jurisdiction, a defendant consents, and thereby waives any objection, to the
court’s exercise of personal jurisdiction. Compare Estate of Lunt v. Gaylor, 150
N.H. 96, 97-98 (2003) (defendant’s motion to strike default based solely on
defective service of process did not address merits of the case so as to
constitute a waiver of personal jurisdiction), with Beggs v. Reading Company,
103 N.H. 156, 158 (1961) (defendant waived challenge to personal jurisdiction
by failing to timely move to dismiss and by participating in hearings relating to
merits of the case). Here, the defendant appeared at the final hearing and
defended the plaintiff’s claim, and as the trial court noted, he did not challenge
its exercise of jurisdiction. Accordingly, the defendant waived any objection he
may have had to the exercise of personal jurisdiction and cannot establish that
the trial court plainly erred by exercising its jurisdiction over him.
To the extent the defendant is arguing that the trial court lacked subject
matter jurisdiction because the act of stalking is based, in part, upon an action
he took in Florida, the argument is without merit. “The fundamental logic of
[RSA 173-B:2, II (2022), which authorizes a plaintiff to seek a protective order
in the New Hampshire ‘county or district where the plaintiff temporarily
3