THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0191, Joseph S. Haas, Jr. v. New
Hampshire Treasurer & a., the court on November 24, 2025,
issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Joseph S. Haas, Jr., filed a complaint in the
superior court against the defendants, the State Treasurer and the Speaker of
the New Hampshire House of Representatives. He alleged that the defendants
“paid wages to six New Hampshire State Representatives who did not complete
their terms” in violation of the law. See N.H. CONST., pt. II, art.15 (establishing
compensation of members of legislature at $200 per biennium plus mileage for
attendance not to exceed 45 days). He sought “$1,501.00 in damages.” The
defendants filed a motion to dismiss, arguing that the plaintiff’s action was
barred by sovereign immunity. They argued in the alternative that, if the trial
court were to find that the claim fell within the limited waiver of sovereign
immunity found in RSA chapter 541-B (2021), the Board of Claims had
exclusive jurisdiction because the claim did not exceed $5000, see RSA 541-
B:9, II. The Superior Court (Kissinger, J.) granted the defendants’ motion to
dismiss in a margin order. The plaintiff filed a motion for reconsideration in
which he requested a hearing on his claim; this motion was also denied in a
margin order. The plaintiff then appealed to this court. We affirm.
The plaintiff identifies five issues in his brief. All of these issues are
subsumed within the question: Did the trial court err when it ruled that the
plaintiff’s claim against the State Treasurer was barred by sovereign immunity?
We conclude that it did not.
When reviewing a trial court’s decision to grant a motion to dismiss, we
examine whether the allegations in the plaintiff's pleadings are reasonably
susceptible of a construction that would permit recovery. Wescott v. Warden,
N.H. State Prison, 177 N.H. 39, 41 (2024). We assume the facts alleged in the
plaintiff's pleadings to be true and construe all reasonable inferences in the
light most favorable to the plaintiff. Id. We then engage in a threshold inquiry
that tests the facts in the complaint against the applicable law, and if the
allegations do not constitute a basis for legal relief, we must affirm the grant of
the motion to dismiss. Id.
Although we are without the benefit of a narrative order from the trial
court, the issues presented in this case are questions of law, which we review
de novo. See Town of Hinsdale v. Town of Chesterfield, 153 N.H. 70, 73 (2005)
(“De novo review means that the reviewing court decides the matter anew,
neither restricted by nor deferring to decisions made [by the trial court]”). We
have reviewed the record before us and the plaintiff’s supporting arguments
and conclude that the allegations set forth in the complaint do not constitute a
basis for legal relief.
We have explained that, under the doctrine of sovereign immunity, the
State itself is immune from suit in its courts without its consent. See, e.g.,
Tilton v. Dougherty, 126 N.H. 294, 297 (1985). With the enactment of RSA 99-
D:1 (2023), the State’s sovereign immunity has been extended to state officers,
trustees, officials, or employees “acting within the scope of official duty and not
in a wanton or reckless manner, except as otherwise expressly provided by
statute.” See id. at 297-98 (explaining that official immunity is considered a
distinct doctrine from sovereign immunity that shields State officials and
employees themselves and is “a derivative or extension of the doctrine of
sovereign immunity”). In this case, as the plaintiff acknowledges, the State
Treasurer released the funds after a formal vote by the House of
Representatives. See N.H.H.R. Jour. 16 (2023). Accordingly, to the extent that
the plaintiff sought an award of $1500 in damages from the State Treasurer, his
claim was barred by the doctrine of official immunity. See RSA 541-B:9-a (2021)
(when claim filed against both state and its agent, official, or employee, if court
determines that state is responsible for actions of that individual, the individual
“shall be dismissed as a defendant and the plaintiff shall proceed solely against
the state”).
Although RSA 541-B:1, II-a provides a limited waiver of immunity, the
waiver is for claims seeking relief for “[b]odily injury, personal injury, death or
property damages.” Based upon the record before us, we find no error in the
trial court’s ruling. The plaintiff’s claim sought monetary damages for the
alleged unlawful payment of wages by the defendants to six members of the
House of Representatives and was therefore barred by sovereign immunity.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, and Gould, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2