THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0423, Randall Collier v. 4th Circuit
Family Division, the court on March 24, 2026, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Randall Collier, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Edwards, J.) granting a motion to dismiss filed by the
defendant, 4th N.H. Circuit Court-Laconia Family Division. We affirm.
In reviewing the trial court’s dismissal order, we consider whether the
allegations in the pleadings are reasonably susceptible of a construction that
would permit recovery. See Szewczyk v. Continental Paving, 176 N.H. 148, 151
(2023). We assume the truth of the well-pleaded factual allegations and
construe all reasonable inferences from those facts in the light most favorable
to the plaintiff. See id. We do not, however, assume the truth of statements in
the pleadings that are conclusions of law. See id.; ERG, Inc. v. Barnes, 137
N.H. 186, 190 (1993) (“The court will not, however, assume the truth or
accuracy of any allegations which are not well-pleaded, including the statement
of conclusions of fact and principles of law.”). We will uphold the trial court’s
decision if the facts pleaded do not constitute a basis for relief. See Szewczyk,
176 N.H. at 151.
In this case, the plaintiff alleged that in 2013, the defendant court issued
a protective order and orders pertaining to custody of the plaintiff’s child and
child support. According to the pleadings, the 2013 protective order has been
extended five times, and in May 2025, the plaintiff was arrested in connection
with the prior orders. The plaintiff sought “injunctive, compensatory, and
punitive relief prohibiting the Defendant . . . from denying this Plaintiff’s rights
afforded by the US Constitution and the Laws of the United States.” The
plaintiff requested that the superior court “uphold the US Constitution,”
“remove [the] protective order,” “return full custody” of the plaintiff’s child,
“[s]top all [c]hild support orders and return all child support fees paid,”
“[r]eturn fees paid for the NH [a]rrest warrant,” award “very large Financial
Compensation for 12 years of . . . [u]nlawful [d]etainment of” the child,
“[r]emove [a] North Carolina civil [o]rder for arrest,” and order the “NH
Executive Branch” to write an “apology letter . . . for abusing [the child] and
removing [the plaintiff] from [the child’s] life.”
The defendant moved to dismiss on grounds that the plaintiff’s claims
were barred by judicial immunity, official immunity, and the Eleventh
Amendment, that the complaint failed to allege sufficient facts entitling the
plaintiff to mandamus relief, that relief is not available to the plaintiff pursuant
to 42 U.S.C. § 1983, and that the plaintiff’s claims were, in substance, an
appeal of prior orders issued by the defendant court to a court lacking
appellate jurisdiction over the prior orders. The trial court granted the motion
“[f]or the reasons argued in th[e] motion and based on the cited law.”
On appeal, the plaintiff raises numerous arguments challenging the
merits and constitutionality of the prior orders issued by the defendant court,
the authority of the defendant court to issue binding court orders, the
defendant court’s entitlement to immunity, and the authority of the superior
court to “grant” the defendant court immunity. As the appealing party, it is the
plaintiff’s burden to demonstrate reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H.
737, 740 (2014). Based upon our review of the trial court’s order, the plaintiff’s
arguments, the relevant law, and the record provided on appeal, we conclude
that the plaintiff has not demonstrated that the trial court erred by granting
the motion to dismiss. See id.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2