THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0012, Adair Witkus v. George Stone & a.,
the court on November 24, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Adair Witkus, appeals the order of the Superior
Court (Honigberg, J.) in a quiet title action against the defendants, George
Stone and Jaye Stilwell, following a four-day bench trial, which included a
view, granting the plaintiff’s request, in part, for a prescriptive easement, and
denying the remainder of her claims. The plaintiff argues that the trial court
erred in: (1) locating the boundary line between the parties’ properties;
(2) finding that the disputed portion of a driveway is not a public way; and
(3) ruling that she failed to establish a prescriptive easement over the disputed
area for purposes of turning and parking vehicles, and for accessing the rear
field of her property by vehicle. We affirm.
“In an action to quiet title, the burden is on each party to prove good title
as against all other parties whose rights may be affected by the court’s decree.”
Hersh v. Plonski, 156 N.H. 511, 514 (2007) (quotation omitted). “We will
uphold the trial court’s determination unless it is erroneous as a matter of law
or unsupported by the evidence.” Id. This is particularly the case where, as
here, the court’s findings have been aided by a view of the property. Arcidi v.
Town of Rye, 150 N.H. 694, 702 (2004).
The parties own adjacent properties in Newport. Their dispute concerns
a roughly triangular section of land where a driveway used by both parties
enters a public way known as Court Street/Middle Street. The trial court ruled
that the plaintiff has a prescriptive easement for ingress and egress in “the area
of the driveway from point ‘D’ on the Richer Plan eastward to Court/Middle
streets.”
The plaintiff first argues that the trial court erred in ruling that the 2014
Richer plan correctly depicts a non-linear boundary line between the parties’
properties. In support of her position that the boundary line is linear, the
plaintiff cites Leigh v. LaPierre, which states that “in the absence of something
in the deed to cause a deviation, a boundary line between two points is
presumed to be a straight line.” Leigh v. LaPierre, 113 N.H. 633, 635 (1973).
In this case, however, the defendants’ property was formed by the merger of
three parcels. The defendants’ two experts, both licensed land surveyors,
placed the boundary as shown on the Richer plan, based on the location of
monuments that have been in place since at least 1925. The trial court noted
that the plaintiff, in arguing for a different boundary line, “presented no expert
testimony to support her interpretation of the deeds nor the testimony of any
surveyor as to the conditions on the land.” On the contrary, in 1981, the
plaintiff’s predecessor-in-interest submitted a hand-drawn plan to the town
showing a northern “jog” in the boundary line consistent with the Richer Plan.
Based upon our review of the record, we conclude that the trial court’s ruling
regarding the boundary line is supported by the evidence and not erroneous as
a matter of law.1 See Hersh, 156 N.H. at 514.
The plaintiff next argues that the trial court erred in finding that the
disputed portion of the driveway is not a public road. “The party asserting that
a public road was established has the burden of demonstrating this by a
balance of the probabilities.” Id. “We are bound by the trial court’s findings
with respect to the public status of the road unless they are not supported by
the evidence or are erroneous as a matter of law.” Id. The plaintiff argues that
an extension to Pleasant Street was created by prescription or by petition and
layout. Pursuant to RSA 229:1 (Supp. 2024), a public road could be created by
prescription if it was used for public travel for 20 years prior to January 1,
1968. Blagbrough Family Realty Trust v. A & T Forest Prods., Inc., 155 N.H.
29, 36 (2007). Whether a highway was created by prescription is a finding of
fact. Id. The trial court found the evidence insufficient to establish twenty
years of continuous public use prior to January 1, 1968. Based upon our
review of the record, we conclude that the court’s finding is supported by the
evidence and not erroneous as a matter of law. See Hersh, 156 N.H. at 514.
To support her claim of layout by petition, the plaintiff presented a 1935
petition to the town’s select board seeking the layout of a road. However, the
plaintiff submitted no evidence to show that the town acted on the petition.
The town’s planning and zoning administrator, and its assessing clerk, both
testified that no records exist to indicate that the claimed Pleasant Street
Extension was ever laid out as a public road. Accordingly, we conclude that
the record supports the court’s ruling that the disputed portion of the driveway
is not a public way.
The plaintiff next argues that the trial court erred in ruling that she
failed to establish a prescriptive easement over the disputed area for purposes
of turning and parking vehicles, and for accessing the rear field of her property
by vehicle. “To establish a prescriptive easement, the plaintiff must prove by a
1 To the extent the plaintiff argues that the trial court impermissibly required that she disprove
the accuracy of the Richer plan or introduce expert testimony, we do not read the trial court’s
order as does the plaintiff. See In the Matter of Salesky & Salesky, 157 N.H. 698, 702 (2008)
(stating that interpretation of trial court order is question of law subject to de novo review).
Rather we interpret the order as simply crediting the defendants’ experts and determining that
the plaintiff failed to carry her burden of proof.
2
balance of probabilities twenty years’ adverse, continuous, uninterrupted use
of the land claimed in such a manner as to give notice to the record owner that
an adverse claim was being made to it.” Jesurum v. WBTSCC Ltd. P’ship, 169
N.H. 469, 476-76 (2016) (quotation omitted). “The scope of a prescriptive
easement is defined by the character and nature of the use that created it.” Id.
at 479 (quotation omitted). We will uphold the trial court’s findings unless they
lack evidentiary support or are legally erroneous. Id. at 476. “[W]e defer to the
trial court’s judgment on such issues as resolving conflicts in the testimony,
measuring the credibility of witness, and determining the weight to be given
evidence.” Id. (quotation omitted). The court found that the plaintiff
established a prescriptive easement only as to the “driveway mouth” for ingress
and egress from Court/Middle Streets, not for turning and parking vehicles or
for accessing the rear field of her property by vehicle. We reject the plaintiff’s
assertion that the court misapprehended the facts or should have weighed the
evidence differently. See id. Based upon our review of the record, we conclude
that the court’s finding is supported by the evidence and not erroneous as a
matter of law. See Hersh, 156 N.H. at 514.
In light of our ruling on the above issues, we need not address the
plaintiff’s remaining arguments. See Antosz v. Allain, 163 N.H. 298, 302 (2012)
(declining to address parties’ other arguments where holding on one issue is
dispositive).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, and Gould, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3