THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0193, Hate to Paint, LLC v. Ambrose
Development, LLC & a., the court on January 27, 2026, issued
the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Hate to Paint, LLC, appeals the order of the
Superior Court (Schulman, J.), granting summary judgment in favor of the
defendants, Ambrose Development, LLC, and John Flatley, on its claims for
breach of contract, fraud, and violation of the Consumer Protection Act (CPA).
See RSA ch. 358-A (2022). The plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in
granting summary judgment for the defendants after remand but before
providing the plaintiff with an opportunity for additional discovery. We affirm.
We first set forth the relevant procedural aspects of the case. On May
15, 2020, the plaintiff filed a complaint against the defendants alleging three
counts: breach of contract; fraud; and violation of the CPA. In its breach of
contract claim, the plaintiff alleged only that the defendants’ invocation of the
contract’s “termination for convenience” clause, “merely in order to hire
someone to perform the work for a cheaper price,” is inconsistent with the
implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing. On August 12, 2020, the trial
court issued a case structuring order setting a discovery deadline of June 1,
2021. In October 2020, the defendants answered interrogatories and
responded to the plaintiff’s request for documents. On November 4, 2020, the
plaintiff moved for summary judgment as to liability on the breach of contract
claim, in support of which it attached an affidavit from its manager and the
defendants’ discovery responses. On February 26, 2021, the Trial Court
(Honigberg, J.) granted the plaintiff’s motion, ruling that the defendants
breached the parties’ contract by invoking the “termination for convenience”
clause to obtain a better price.
On June 24, 2021, the defendants sought an eight-month extension of
the deadline for discovery. The plaintiff objected, stating that an extension
should not be granted “simply because one of the parties chooses to forbear
from discovery while [the summary judgment] motion is resolved.” On
September 9, 2021, the trial court extended the deadline for discovery by eight
months, to February 1, 2022.
On September 19, 2022, the Trial Court (Attorri, J.) held a bench trial on
the “issues not resolved on summary judgment,” which included damages for
breach of contract, and the plaintiff’s claims for fraud and violation of the CPA.
The court awarded the plaintiff damages of $219,200 on its breach of contract
claim. The court rejected the plaintiff’s fraud claim, noting that the plaintiff
provided no evidence to support its claim that the defendant invited the
plaintiff’s bid with the intent to lock its price in place while continuing to seek
lower bids from other contractors. The trial court similarly rejected the
plaintiff’s CPA claim, finding no evidence to support the plaintiff’s claims that
the defendants’ conduct involved deceit or willful concealment.
The defendants appealed the trial court’s finding of liability on the breach
of contract claim, and on November 13, 2024, we reversed and remanded. See
Hate to Paint, LLC v. Ambrose Development, LLC, No. 2023-0076 (non-
precedential order), 2024 WL 4765322 (N.H. Nov. 13, 2024). We agreed with
the defendants that the trial court erred in ruling that they violated the implied
covenant of good faith and fair dealing by invoking the “termination for
convenience” clause in the parties’ contract to obtain a better price. See id.
After remand, the defendants moved for summary judgment, supporting
their motion with the prior summary judgment record, the trial court’s orders,
and the transcript of the bench trial. RSA 491:8-a, IV (2010) provides that
“when a motion for summary judgment is made and supported as provided in
this section, the adverse party may not rest upon mere allegations or denials of
his pleadings, but his response, by affidavits or by reference to depositions,
answers to interrogatories, or admissions, must set forth specific facts showing
that there is a genuine issue for trial.”
In opposing summary judgment, the plaintiff did not provide an affidavit
or refer to any part of the record setting forth specific facts to show that there
remained a genuine issue for trial. Nor did the plaintiff submit “an affidavit
showing specifically and clearly reasonable grounds for believing that
contradictory evidence can be presented at a trial but cannot be furnished by
affidavits.” RSA 491:8-a, II (2010). Rather, the plaintiff asserted in an
unverified pleading that it was entitled to additional discovery to prove “that
there has been a breach of the covenant of good faith and fair dealing due to
facts and circumstances that have not yet been placed before the Court.” As
recited above, the plaintiff had ample opportunity to conduct discovery relating
to its breach of contract claim. The trial court granted the defendants’ motion,
finding that the facts “show precisely what the Supreme Court found to be
consistent with a good faith termination of the contract.”
In reviewing a trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider the
affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from them, in
the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Szewczyk v. Continental
Paving, 176 N.H. 148, 163 (2023). If our review of the evidence does not reveal
any genuine issue of material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to
2
judgment as a matter of law, we will affirm the trial court’s decision. Id. Based
upon this record, we conclude that: (1) the trial court did not err in denying the
plaintiff’s request for additional discovery before ruling on the defendants’
motion; (2) the plaintiff failed to show that there was a genuine issue for trial;
and (3) the trial court did not err in ruling that the defendants were entitled to
judgment as a matter of law.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Countway and Gould, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3