THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0774, G.B. v. T.F., the court on May 12,
2026, issued the following order:
The court considers the defendant’s “motion: objection” filed April 3,
2026, to be a timely-filed reply brief. The court has reviewed the written
arguments and the record submitted on appeal, and has determined to resolve
the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, T.F.,
appeals orders of the Circuit Court (Alfano, J.), following the extension of a
stalking order issued for the protection of the plaintiff, G.B. See RSA 633:3-a,
III-c (2016). The defendant argues that the trial court violated his right to due
process and that the judge was biased against him. We vacate and remand for
a new hearing.
By a notice of hearing dated October 7, 2025, the Candia District
Division notified the parties that a hearing would be held on October 24, 2025,
at 8:00 a.m., at the Candia District Division, regarding the defendant’s
objection to the extension of the protective order. The parties appeared for the
hearing, but the court was closed that day.
The parties dispute the precise series of events, but the defendant alleges
that, approximately 15 minutes later, while he was en route to Northwood, he
spoke with a clerk from the Derry District Division, who instructed him to come
to Derry for the hearing. The defendant alleges that he advised the clerk that
he was not available for a hearing in Derry and that the hearing would need to
be rescheduled. The hearing was held in Derry without the defendant, and the
court granted the plaintiff a five-year extension of the protective order. The
defendant argues that he did not receive adequate notice of the hearing in
Derry. We agree.
“[N]otice and an opportunity to be heard are basic essentials of a judicial
proceeding.” Douglas v. Douglas, 143 N.H. 419, 423 (1999) (quotation
omitted). Such notice must be reasonably calculated to apprise the parties of
the pendency of the action and to provide them an opportunity to present their
case. Petition of Kilton, 156 N.H. 632, 638-39 (2007). Prior to the morning of
the hearing, the defendant did not receive any notice that the hearing would be
held in Derry. Under these circumstances, we conclude that the defendant did
not receive adequate notice and an opportunity to be heard. Accordingly, we
vacate the trial court’s extension order, including its award of lost wages and
attorney’s fees, and remand for a new hearing. The protective order, however,
shall remain in place pending the outcome of the new hearing, and the 30-day
deadline in RSA 173-B:5, VI shall run from the date of this order. Unless this
court orders otherwise, the filing of any motion to reconsider in this court shall
not stay the deadline for holding the hearing.
In light of our decision, we need not address the defendant’s remaining
arguments. See Antosz v. Allain, 163 N.H. 298, 302 (2012) (declining to
address parties’ other arguments where holding on one issue is dispositive).
Vacated and remanded.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2