THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0112, In the Matter of State of New
Hampshire and Scott Austin, the court on March 24, 2026,
issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). The respondent, Scott Austin (father), appeals an order of the Circuit
Court (Colligan, R., approved by Guptill, J.), issued following a hearing, awarding
child support to the petitioner, the New Hampshire Division of Child Support
Services. The father advances several arguments challenging the trial court’s
decision. We affirm.
“We will not disturb the circuit court’s rulings regarding child support
absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion or an error of law.” In the Matter
of Routhier & Routhier, 175 N.H. 6, 14 (2022). “Accordingly, we must determine
whether the record establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the court’s
discretionary judgment.” Id.
We first address the father’s argument that the trial court erred in
determining his present income available for child support by including $84,000
of income from 2023, the prior tax year. In so doing, he contends, the trial court
contravened the principle that “child support should be determined on the basis
of present income.” In the Matter of Hampers & Hampers, 166 N.H. 422, 442
(2014) (quotation omitted; emphasis added). We disagree. Here, the record
demonstrates that the father was earning, among other things, a fixed annual
amount of $84,000 from a particular corporate entity in both 2023 and 2024 —
in the form of a $7,000 per month “owner’s draw.” The record further
demonstrates that the father would continue to earn that amount until the
corporate funds “set aside” for that purpose “[ran] out,” or until the new business
venture turned a profit. Indeed, the father listed the $7,000 monthly “owner’s
draw” as 2024 income on his financial affidavit submitted at the final hearing,
dated October 24, 2024. Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court did not err
when it included $84,000 as present income in 2024.
Next, the father argues that the trial court erred in determining his present
income available for child support when, in calculating the net income for one of
his restaurants, the trial court disallowed a $31,053 deduction for business
expenses that the father characterized as “gift card liabilities.” The father
contends that the trial court erred by finding that this was not a valid deduction
for child support purposes. We disagree.
“To be deductible for purposes of determining ‘self-employment income’
under RSA 458-C:2, IV, business expenses must be actually incurred and paid,
and reasonable and necessary for producing income.” Hampers, 166 N.H. at 439
(quotation and brackets omitted). It is the burden of the parent seeking to
deduct an expense to demonstrate its deductibility, and it is for the trial judge to
determine whether the claimed expense meets the criteria. See id. 439-40.
Here, the trial court found that the father had failed to carry his burden of
demonstrating that the claimed “gift card liabilities” were expenses that had
actually been incurred and paid. Although the father proffered testimony at trial
that “the profit and loss statements do not include anything that’s not an actual
expense, meaning that there’s a check written out to it,” he offered no additional
evidence to show that these expenses had actually been incurred and paid.
Accordingly, based upon the record, we conclude that the trial court sustainably
found that the father had failed to carry his burden of demonstrating the
deductibility of the “gift card liabilities” as expenses that had actually been
incurred and paid. The trial court was not obligated to credit the conclusory
testimony to the contrary. See In the Matter of Aube & Aube, 158 N.H. 459, 465-
66 (2009) (observing that we defer to the trial court’s judgment on such issues as
resolving conflicts in testimony, measuring the credibility of witnesses, and
determining the weight to be given evidence, and that the court may accept or
reject, in whole or in part, the testimony of any witness or party, and is not
required to believe even uncontroverted evidence).
Next, the father argues that the trial court erred in determining his present
income available for child support when the court declined to offset the income
that he received from two of his businesses by the amount of certain losses that
he claimed were attributable to another of his businesses. He argues that the
businesses at issue have a common ownership, and that “[m]atching profits and
losses in the same fiscal year is a practical and sound business and accounting
practice.” Accordingly, he contends that, by “neglect[ing] to account for the
business losses in any manner, the lower court erred as a matter of law.” We
disagree. Contrary to the father’s argument, the trial court did not fail to take
the claimed losses into account. Rather, the trial court expressly considered the
claimed losses, but concluded that the father failed to establish that the claimed
losses, to the extent they were real, were not duplicative of other losses already
claimed by the father elsewhere in his businesses’ financial statements. As the
trial court explained, the father “does not get to double count his losses.” We
discern no error.
Lastly, the father argues that the trial court erred by not reducing his
guidelines child support obligation by the amount that he had already been
paying toward the mortgage and other costs related to maintaining the family
home for the mother and the children. We disagree. Here, the trial court found
2
that the father and mother, although unwed, had entered into an informal oral
agreement for the division of their assets upon separation, including the transfer
of ownership of the family home to the mother. In order to effectuate this
transfer without having to refinance the home, the father further agreed to
continue paying the mortgage and other costs of maintaining the home until the
mortgage was paid in full, at which time he would convey the property to the
mother. These findings are supported by the testimony of both the mother and
the father. Accordingly, the trial court sustainably found that the father’s
payments were not “in the nature of child support.” Cf. In the Matter of Jerome
& Jerome, 150 N.H. 626, 633 (2004) (observing that “property division and child
support serve different functions and are governed by different requirements”);
Rattee v. Rattee, 146 N.H. 44, 48-49 (2001) (same).
Moreover, there is a rebuttable presumption that a child support award
calculated under the statutory guidelines is correct, unless the trial court
specifically finds, after consideration of one or more special circumstances and
the best interests of the children, that the application of the guidelines would be
unjust or inappropriate. See RSA 458-C:4, II, :5 (2018 & Supp. 2024). Thus, to
the extent that the father is arguing that his payments mandate a finding that
the guidelines child support award is unjust or inappropriate in this case, we are
not persuaded.
Affirmed.
Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3