THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0199, S.L. v. S.B., the court on September
12, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, S.B., appeals a domestic violence final order
of protection, see RSA 173-B:5, I (2022), issued by the Circuit Court (Gorman,
J.) in favor of the plaintiff, S.L. On appeal, the defendant raises several
arguments challenging the trial court’s determination that he engaged in
abuse. See RSA 173-B:1, I (2022). We affirm.
To obtain relief under RSA chapter 173-B, a plaintiff is required to prove,
by a preponderance of the evidence, that the defendant engaged in “abuse.”
S.C. v. G.C., 175 N.H. 158, 163 (2022). A finding of “abuse” requires proof that
the defendant, who is a family or household member or a current or former
sexual or intimate partner of the plaintiff, committed or attempted to commit
one or more statutorily enumerated criminal acts, and that such conduct
constitutes “a credible present threat to the [plaintiff’s] safety.” RSA 173-B:1, I;
see S.C., 175 N.H. at 163. The trial court “may consider evidence of such acts,
regardless of their proximity in time to the filing of the petition, which, in
combination with recent conduct, reflects an ongoing pattern of behavior which
reasonably causes or has caused the [plaintiff] to fear for his or her safety or
well-being.” RSA 173-B:1, I.
On appeal, the trial court’s findings of fact are final, and we engage in de
novo review of questions of law raised by the appealing party. RSA 173-B:3, VI
(2022); S.C., 175 N.H. at 162. We review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a
matter of law and will uphold the trial court’s findings and rulings unless they
lack evidentiary support or are tainted by error of law. S.C., 175 N.H. at 162.
We view the evidence in the light most favorable to the prevailing party, here,
the plaintiff, deferring to the trial court’s judgment in evaluating the credibility
of the witnesses and the weight of the evidence presented. Id. at 162-63.
Viewed most favorably to the plaintiff, the evidence in this case
establishes that the parties were in an intimate relationship for approximately
two-and-a-half years, cohabiting in the defendant’s home with the plaintiff’s
two children, who were five and eight years old at the time of the final hearing,
and with the defendant’s child. On February 9, 2025, between 8:00 p.m. and
8:30 p.m., an argument ensued during which the plaintiff told the defendant
that she intended to leave him on the following day. The parties had previously
ended their relationship between June and August 2024, and the subject of the
plaintiff again leaving had been a topic of discussion during the week leading
up to the February 9 argument. When the plaintiff told the defendant on
February 9 that she intended to leave him, he became angry, yelled at the
plaintiff to “get the f**k out of his room” and “to go somewhere else,” and threw
the plaintiff’s personal property down the stairs and into the basement. When
the plaintiff attempted to open the door leading to the basement in order to
retrieve the item, the defendant grabbed the plaintiff from behind with his arm
around her neck, pulling her backwards several times in what she described as
a “tug of war” between herself and the door until the door released and she fell
backward. Following this incident, the plaintiff went into her children’s room
to sit with them until they fell asleep, and the defendant followed her and told
the children about the plaintiff’s prior sexual partners. At that point, the
plaintiff left with the children, reported the incident to local police, and filed the
present petition on the following day.
In addition to the February 9 altercation, the plaintiff described other
incidents that had occurred during the course of the parties’ relationship that
caused her concern. Specifically, she testified that during one incident,
following an argument and the plaintiff’s refusal to attend certain family events
with the defendant, the defendant held a gun to his chin. During another
incident in which the defendant was angry with the plaintiff, the plaintiff
testified that the defendant broke through a deadbolted garage door and
knocked it off its doorframe. Following another argument with the plaintiff, the
defendant punched a shower wall out of anger, fracturing the shower wall and
injuring his hand. When the parties were separated in June 2024, the plaintiff
testified that the defendant called her approximately 38 times during one 40-
minute period of time, and that multiple attendees of a birthday party for her
had seen him driving by the house where the party was occurring. As a result
of the defendant’s volatility, which had “increasingly gotten worse” during their
relationship, the plaintiff testified that she feared for her safety and the safety
of her children following the February 9 incident, and continued to fear the
defendant at the time of the evidentiary hearing.
In granting the petition, the trial court found that the defendant engaged
in “[a]ssault or reckless conduct as defined in RSA 631:1 through RSA 631:3,”
RSA 173-B:1, I(a), when he “grabbed plaintiff with his arm across her neck and
shoulders and pulled her back; she had been attempting to retrieve her
personal property that he had thrown down the stairs when he restrained her.”
The February 9 assault, according to the trial court, constituted a credible
present threat to the plaintiff’s safety because
in the past when he was angry at her he punched a shower wall
hard enough to break it; he had driven by her house and called her
repeatedly in instances when he could not make contact; this type
of behavior occurred when the parties’ relationship was on a break.
2
While he has not threatened plaintiff with a firearm, he did hold
one to his own chin when the parties had an argument. She
testified credibly as to her fear.
On appeal, the defendant argues that (1) the phone calls could not
constitute “abuse” because they did not include threats and did not constitute
criminal harassment for purposes of RSA 173-B:1, I(g) and RSA 644:4 (2016 &
Supp. 2024); (2) all of the incidents to which the plaintiff testified, other than
the February 9 incident, were too remote in time and not directed at the
plaintiff to constitute a credible present threat to her safety; (3) none of the
incidents to which the plaintiff testified constituted a present, credible threat to
the plaintiff’s safety because she reunited with the defendant following the
repeated phone calls and the driving by of her birthday party, because she did
not leave him in the immediate aftermath of the wall-punching incident or the
placing of a firearm under his chin, and because she initially intended to
remain overnight after the February 9 incident and did not immediately call the
police; (4) the plaintiff allegedly only articulated a generalized fear for her
safety; (5) the trial court erred by failing to consider that the police did not
arrest or charge him after the plaintiff reported the February 9 incident; and (6)
the February 9 incident, according to the defendant, was accidental and an
attempt to keep her from falling down the stairs. We disagree.
At the outset, we emphasize that the act of abuse relied upon by the trial
court in granting the protective order was the physical assault that the trial
court found occurred on February 9, 2025, not the other incidents described
by the plaintiff and found by the trial court to have occurred. Rather, the trial
court relied upon the other incidents to support its determination that the
February 9 conduct constituted a credible present threat to the plaintiff’s
safety. This is consistent with RSA 173-B:1, I, which expressly states that the
trial court “may consider evidence of such acts, regardless of their proximity in
time to the filing of the petition, which, in combination with recent conduct,
reflects an ongoing pattern of behavior which reasonably causes or has caused
the [plaintiff] to fear for his or her safety or well-being.”
Contrary to the defendant’s argument, the plaintiff did not testify only to
a generalized fear. Rather, she described an increasing volatility in the
behavior of the defendant when angered or during arguments that caused her
to fear for her safety and the safety of her children when it culminated in the
physical assault on February 9, 2025. The February 9 assault was not remote
to the filing of the petition, and the mere fact that the plaintiff may have
reconciled with the defendant or remained with him following earlier incidents,
and may have initially intended to remain in the defendant’s home overnight
after the February 9 assault, does not mean that the defendant did not pose a
credible present threat to her safety. See S.C., 175 N.H. at 163-65. Although
the defendant disputed the plaintiff’s description of the February 9 incident,
the trial court was free to credit the plaintiff’s testimony over that of the
3