THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0339, P.L. v. R.S., the court on November
13, 2025, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, P.L., appeals an order of the Circuit Court
(Greenhalgh, J.), following a hearing, denying her request to extend a civil
stalking final order of protection from the defendant, R.S., see RSA 633:3-a,
III-c (2016), raising numerous issues. We vacate and remand.
We first address the plaintiff’s argument that the trial court erroneously
limited her testimony to events occurring after the court issued its June 7,
2024 final order of protection. At the hearing, the plaintiff sought to testify
regarding an incident that occurred on May 26, 2024, when, she alleged, the
defendant violated the temporary protective order. She also offered a police
report relating to the incident. The trial court disallowed such evidence, ruling
that “[t]he only issue relevant to an extension is something that’s occurred
between the date of the final order and the date that the order is set to expire,”
and that “anything that happened in the temporary phase is irrelevant.”
We agree with the plaintiff that the court erred in so ruling. In
MacPherson v. Weiner, we held that the trial court, in addressing whether
there is “good cause” for an extension, will take into account the defendant’s
original act constituting stalking and any subsequent acts. MacPherson v.
Weiner, 158 N.H. 6, 12 (2008). Thus, we conclude that the trial court erred in
this case by precluding the plaintiff from introducing evidence relating to
events that occurred prior to the date of the final order, and by limiting its
consideration to events that occurred between the date of the final protective
order and the date that the order was set to expire. Accordingly, we vacate the
trial court’s order and remand for a new hearing.
We reject the plaintiff’s allegations of judicial misconduct and bias. We
conclude that the plaintiff has not established that a reasonable person would
have questioned the impartiality of the trial court. See Sup. Ct. R. 38, Rule
2.11; State v. Bader, 148 N.H. 265, 268 (2002).
In light of our decision, we need not address the plaintiff’s argument that
the trial court erred in denying her motion to continue the hearing and her
other remaining arguments. See Antosz v. Allain, 163 N.H. 298, 302 (2012)
(declining to address parties’ other arguments where holding on one issue is
dispositive).
The requests in the plaintiff’s brief that the case be assigned to another
judge and for various other forms of relief are denied.
Vacated and remanded.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, and Gould, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2