THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0768, G.N. v. I.N., the court on April 21,
2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). The plaintiff, G.N., appeals orders of the Circuit Court (Zaino, J.)
denying her request to extend a domestic violence final order of protection for one
year based upon her failure to attend the final hearing, and denying her motion
for reconsideration. See RSA 173-B:5, VI (2022). She argues that she did not
receive adequate notice of the final hearing. We vacate and remand.
In this case, the plaintiff filed a request for a one-year extension of her
protective order on October 10, 2025. On the same day, the plaintiff represents
that she filed a written change of address with the trial court. On October 14,
2025, the trial court issued a notice of decision granting an initial ex parte
extension of the protective order for one year. Based upon the record before us,
it appears that this notice of decision was mailed to the plaintiff at her updated
address. Thereafter, the defendant objected to the extension, and, accordingly,
on October 22, 2025, the court issued a notice of hearing scheduling a final
hearing for November 3, 2025. This notice, however, appears to have been sent
to the plaintiff’s old address. On November 3, 2025, the plaintiff failed to appear
at the final hearing, and the trial court therefore denied her request for an
extension of the protective order on that basis. The notice of decision, issued on
the same day, appears to have been sent to the plaintiff’s updated address. A few
days later, on November 7, 2025, the plaintiff moved for reconsideration, arguing,
among other things, that she had not received the notice of final hearing, and
that a court clerk had informed her by telephone that the final hearing had been
scheduled for a later date. The trial court denied the plaintiff’s motion for
reconsideration without explanation. The notice of decision, issued on November
26, 2025, appears to have been sent to the plaintiff’s updated address. This
appeal followed.
“We will uphold a trial court’s decision on a motion for reconsideration
absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion.” Walker v. Walker, 158 N.H. 602,
607 (2009) (quotation omitted). “To show that the trial court’s decision is not
sustainable, the defendant must demonstrate that the court’s ruling was clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.” Id. (quotation omitted).
“Our inquiry is whether the record establishes an objective basis sufficient to
sustain the discretionary judgment made.” Id. (quotation omitted). Similarly, we
will not disturb a ruling on default absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion
or error of law. Douglas v. Douglas, 143 N.H. 419, 422 (1999); cf. State v.
Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001) (explaining unsustainable exercise of
discretion standard).
On appeal, the plaintiff argues that the trial court deprived her of due
process in denying her request to extend the protective order based upon her
failure to attend the final hearing when she did not receive adequate notice of
that hearing. She further argues that, for the same reason, the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion in denying her motion for reconsideration.
Based upon our review of the record submitted on appeal — which also includes
a document purporting to be a photocopy of the hearing notice envelope,
apparently obtained from the trial court clerk’s office, bearing date stamps and
other markings suggesting that the hearing notice did not reach the plaintiff and
was “return[ed] to sender” — we agree that the record supports the plaintiff’s
argument that she was not provided adequate notice of the final hearing. See
Douglas, 143 N.H. at 423 (observing that “notice and an opportunity to be heard
are basic essentials of a judicial proceeding,” and that “an elementary and
fundamental requirement of due process is notice reasonably calculated, under
all the circumstances, to apprise interested parties of the pendency of the action
and afford them an opportunity to present their objections” (quotations omitted)).
Accordingly, we vacate the judgment and remand for the trial court to
determine, in the first instance, whether the plaintiff received adequate notice of
the final hearing, and to conduct such further proceedings as it deems necessary
consistent with this order. In light of our decision, we need not address the
parties’ remaining arguments.
Vacated and remanded.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2