THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2025-0175, Laszlo Pap v. Andrew P. Lane & a.;
Andrew P. Lane & a. v. Joseph Ippolito & a., the court on March
2, 2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendants, Andrew P. Lane and Christine J. Lane,
appeal from a jury verdict in favor of the plaintiff, Laszlo Pap, in Superior Court
(Schulman, J.), arguing that the verdict was conclusively against the weight of
the evidence. They also argue that the Trial Court (English, J.) erred in
denying their motion for summary judgment. We affirm.
As an initial matter, we note that the trial court did not rule on the
merits of the defendants’ timely-filed motion for a new trial based on the weight
of the evidence, mistakenly believing that a notice of appeal already had been
filed in this court. The plaintiff does not argue that a ruling on the merits of
the motion was necessary to preserve the defendants’ arguments for review;
nor does he challenge the standard of review the defendants set forth in their
brief. Accordingly, we will assume, without deciding, that the standard set
forth in the defendants’ brief applies: “[a] jury verdict may be set aside if it is
conclusively against the weight of the evidence.” Mullin v. Joy, 145 N.H. 96, 96
(2000) (quotation omitted). “Conclusively against the weight of the evidence
should be interpreted to mean that the verdict was one no reasonable jury
could return.” Id. (quotation omitted).
The plaintiff brought his claim against the defendants for representing,
in connection with the sale of their residential property, that the property
included an in-ground pool when, in fact, the pool was an above-ground pool
that had been buried in the ground. The plaintiff’s expert testified that the pool
was an electrical hazard and structurally unsound. The jury found the
defendants liable for negligent misrepresentation and awarded the plaintiff
$30,000 in damages. The jury also found that Joseph Ippolito and William
Raveis Real Estate, Inc. (the realtor defendants), whom the defendants sued for
indemnity and contribution, were not at fault to any degree for the defendants’
negligent misrepresentation.
The defendants first argue that the jury verdict was conclusively against
the weight of the evidence because, they assert, there was no evidence that any
misrepresentation about the pool was material to the plaintiff’s decision to
purchase the property. The plaintiff counters that the defendants failed to
preserve this issue for review because they did not raise it in their motion for
directed verdict. The defendants respond that the issue was fairly comprised
within the realtor defendants’ motion for directed verdict at trial, which they
joined. Assuming, without deciding, that the issue is preserved, we find the
evidence sufficient to support the jury’s verdict on this issue.
To establish a claim for negligent misrepresentation, a plaintiff must
prove that the defendant made a negligent misrepresentation of a material fact,
and that the plaintiff justifiably relied on that misrepresentation. Snierson v.
Scruton, 145 N.H. 73, 78 (2000). A fact is “material” if a reasonable person
would have regarded the fact “to be important in determining [his] course of
action.” Tessier v. Rockefeller, 162 N.H. 324, 333 (2011). The defendants
argue that the finding that the misrepresentation was “material” was contrary
to the weight of the evidence because the plaintiff testified that an in-ground
pool was not a “key factor” in his decision to purchase the property. However,
the plaintiff testified that a pool factored into his decision because he and his
wife wanted a pool “for the kids.” The plaintiff’s realtor likewise testified that
the plaintiff’s wife thought “it would be so wonderful for the boys to have a
pool.” A reasonable jury could infer from this testimony that the defendants’
misrepresentation about the pool was material to the plaintiff’s decision to
purchase the property because the plaintiff wanted a pool for his family.
The defendants next argue that the jury verdict was conclusively against
the weight of the evidence because, they assert, there was no evidence to
support the proper measure of damages. The defendants argue that the proper
measure of damages in a claim for negligent misrepresentation is the difference
between the value of what the plaintiff received and the value of what he
should have received if the property had been as represented. See Wilson v.
Came, 116 N.H. 628, 630 (1976). In this case, they argue, the proper measure
of damages is the difference between the value of the property with an in-
ground pool and the value of the property with an above-ground pool buried in
the ground. They assert that the plaintiff failed to provide such evidence.
Generally, the measure of damages recoverable for misrepresentation is
“actual pecuniary loss.” Crowley v. Global Realty, Inc., 124 N.H. 814, 818
(1984) (italics omitted). “New Hampshire law does not require that damages be
calculated with mathematical certainty, and the method used to compute them
need not be more than an approximation.” Boynton v. Figueroa, 154 N.H. 592,
606 (2006). The plaintiff testified that he considered the fair market value of
the property with an in-ground pool to be $690,000, the price he paid for the
property as it was represented to him. The plaintiff also testified that he
considered the fair market value of the property that he received to be the
purchase price minus the cost of installing an in-ground pool, which he
provided in his testimony. We conclude that a reasonable jury could find that
the plaintiff’s testimony provided a sufficient measure of his damages.
2
The defendants argue that the verdict was conclusively against the
weight of the evidence because the amount of damages awarded, $30,000,
“bears no relation” to the evidence. The plaintiff testified that his damages
included the price for an in-ground pool, $35,070, less certain enhancements.
The defendants concede that “the $30,000 awarded by the jury corresponds
almost exactly to the Plaintiff’s evidence of replacement cost for the pool.” As
previously noted, the law does not require mathematical certainty in computing
damages. Maloof v. Bonser, 145 N.H. 650, 655 (2000). We conclude that a
reasonable jury could find that the plaintiff sustained damages of $30,000.
The defendants next argue that the trial court erred in denying their
motion for summary judgment, asserting that the plaintiff failed to present
evidence of damages to defeat summary judgment. The plaintiff argues that
the issue is not reviewable, given that the case proceeded to final judgment
after trial. See O’Malley v. Little, 170 N.H. 272, 275 (2017) (declining to
address whether trial court erred in denying summary judgment and noting
substantial authority for view that issue is unreviewable after trial). Assuming,
without deciding, that the issue is properly before us, we find no error. In
reviewing a trial court’s order on summary judgment, we consider the affidavits
and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from them, in the light
most favorable to the non-moving party. Szewczyk v. Continental Paving, 176
N.H. 148, 163 (2023). In opposing the defendants’ summary judgment motion,
the plaintiff submitted an affidavit stating that he paid $35,070 for a similarly
sized in-ground pool. Accordingly, we find no error in the trial court’s finding
that the plaintiff presented sufficient evidence of damages to defeat the
defendants’ summary judgment motion.
The realtor defendants’ motion for attorney’s fees on appeal is denied.
See Sup. Ct. R. 23.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan and Countway, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3