THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2026-0191, In the Matter of Alysha Turcotte
and Troy Turcotte, the court on August 18, 2026, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). The respondent, Troy Turcotte (husband), appeals a final decree of the
Circuit Court (Cross, J.), issued following a hearing, in his divorce from the
petitioner, Alysha Turcotte (wife). On appeal, the husband advances numerous
arguments challenging the trial court’s decision. We affirm.
“It is the burden of the appealing party . . . to provide this court with a
record sufficient to decide [his] issues on appeal, as well as to demonstrate that
[he] raised [his] issues before the trial court.” Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151
N.H. 248, 250 (2004). Here, among other things, the husband did not provide us
with copies of the court’s final parenting plan, the uniform support order, nor the
wife’s request for findings of fact that was granted and incorporated by reference
in the court’s decree. The husband also did not provide official transcripts of the
relevant hearings in accordance with Supreme Court Rule 15, Rule 59, and our
prior orders in this case.
Further, the wife requests that we strike many of the documents contained
in the husband’s appendix, asserting that they were not presented to the trial
court in the first instance, and, therefore, are not properly part of the record on
appeal. See Sup. Ct. R. 13; Lake v. Sullivan, 145 N.H. 713, 717 (2001) (“On
appeal, we consider only evidence and documents presented to the trial court.”).
Without official transcripts, we are unable to determine which, if any, of the
disputed documents are properly before us.1
Thus, we conclude that the husband has not carried his burden to provide
us with a record sufficient to decide the issues raised on appeal. Indeed, without
official transcripts of the relevant hearings, “we must assume that the evidence
was sufficient to support the result reached by the trial court.” Bean, 151 N.H.
at 250; see also In the Matter of Birmingham & Birmingham, 154 N.H. 51, 56-57
1 The wife’s requests that we strike certain portions of the appendix are granted. Volumes 6
and 8 of the husband’s appendix, which contain confidential documents identified by the wife,
are also sealed.
(2006) (noting that procedural rules are not relaxed for self-represented parties).
Accordingly, the trial court’s final decree is affirmed.
Affirmed.
Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2