THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2026-0010, J.F. v. J.G., the court on May 12,
2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, J.G., appeals the order of the Circuit Court
(Gorman, J.), following a hearing, entering a civil stalking final order of
protection against her for the protection of the plaintiff, J.F. See RSA 633:3-a
(2016). The defendant argues that the trial court erred by: (1) relying upon
allegations not set forth in the stalking petition; and (2) finding the evidence
sufficient to support a stalking order. We affirm.
The defendant first argues that the trial court impermissibly relied upon
allegations that she was banned from a softball league because the allegations
were not included in the plaintiff’s stalking petition. It is the burden of the
appealing party, here the defendant, to provide this court with a record
sufficient to decide her issues on appeal. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt.,
151 N.H. 248, 250-51 (2004). The defendant did not provide a copy of the
plaintiff’s stalking petition for our review. See Estate of Day v. Hanover Ins.
Co., 162 N.H. 415, 422 (2011) (applying Bean to a party’s failure to provide
relevant pleadings). Accordingly, we conclude that she has failed to provide a
record sufficient to address this issue. See id.
The defendant next argues that the evidence was insufficient to prove
that she stalked the plaintiff. We review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a
matter of law, upholding the trial court’s findings and rulings unless they lack
evidentiary support or are legally erroneous. S.C. v. G.C., 175 N.H. 158, 162
(2022). We defer to the trial court’s judgments as to the credibility of the
witnesses and the weight of their testimony. Id. at 162-63. We view the
evidence in the light most favorable to the prevailing party, here, the plaintiff.
Id. at 163.
A person commits the offense of stalking if the person “[p]urposely,
knowingly, or recklessly engages in a course of conduct targeted at a specific
person which would cause a reasonable person to fear for his or her personal
safety or the safety of a member of that person’s immediate family, and the
person is actually placed in such fear.” RSA 633:3-a, I(a). A “course of
conduct” is defined as “2 or more acts over a period of time, however short,
which evidences a continuity of purpose,” and may include “[t]hreatening the
safety of the targeted person or an immediate family member,” “[f]ollowing,
approaching, or confronting that person, or a member of that person’s
immediate family,” and “[a]ny act of communication, as defined in RSA 644:4,
II.” RSA 633:3-a, II(a)(1), (2), (7).
The plaintiff testified that, on May 21, 2024, she received a text message
on her personal cell phone from an unknown number. The message was from
the defendant, who told the plaintiff that she had concerns regarding the
softball league that the plaintiff managed. The defendant also communicated
that she worked at the high school that the plaintiff’s children attend. Two
days later, the defendant sent the plaintiff another text message. The plaintiff
testified that this message was “threatening and defamatory,” “making false
claims and sending photos of screenshots of somebody else’s social media
account.”
In July 2025, more than one year later, a family member notified the
plaintiff that the defendant had published the names of the plaintiff and her
daughter on social media, and that the social media posts “includ[ed] photos.”
The plaintiff testified that, on October 19, 2025, seventeen months after the
defendant’s initial contact, she received several text messages from the
defendant that were “threatening and derogatory,” including one that stated, “I
helped your kid pass English. Meanwhile, you canceled mine. You better
lawyer up, c*nt.” The plaintiff testified that “[t]he derogatory texts continued
even after I asked her to leave me alone and not harass me.” The plaintiff
testified that, in seeking a protective order, she feared that the defendant’s
actions had escalated, and that she fears for her children’s safety, as the
defendant has shown that she has “physical access to [her] children” as well as
access to their personal records.
The trial court found that “[w]hat appears to have started as a dispute
regarding children’s sports got out of hand.” The court noted that, “[e]ven if
[the defendant’s] initial communications were not problematic,” her later
communications “began to take on a more combative and threatening tone.”
The court also found that the defendant “posted personal photos of one or more
of plaintiff’s children online.”
In addition, the court found that the defendant, who worked in the
school system where the plaintiff’s children attend school, “used confidential
information she learned from plaintiff’s child’s 504 Plan to aid her in her
dispute with the plaintiff.” The defendant herself testified that she was not
aware that the plaintiff, who has a different surname from her child, was the
mother of one of her students until she saw the plaintiff’s name on the child’s
504 Plan. The court noted that the “[d]efendant’s behavior demonstrates a
complete disregard for boundaries,” and that the plaintiff testified as to “her
legitimate fear for her or her children’s safety.”
2
The defendant argues that the trial court erred in finding that her initial
contact with the plaintiff in March 2024 was improper because she had not yet
been banned from the softball league. However, the court found that “[e]ven if
[the defendant’s] initial communications were not problematic,” her later
communications “began to take on a more combative and threatening tone.”
The defendant also argues that the plaintiff did not provide any documentary
proof that the defendant published the names and photographs of the plaintiff
and one or more of her children on social media, and that no reasonable
person in these circumstances would be in fear for her safety or the safety of
an immediate family member.
The trial court “is in the best position to assess and weigh the evidence
before it,” and “[c]onflicts in testimony, questions about the credibility of
witnesses, and the weight assigned to testimony are matters for the trial court
to resolve.” In re Deven O., 165 N.H. 685, 690 (2013). We conclude that the
evidence supports the trial court’s finding that the defendant’s behavior
constituted a “course of conduct” under RSA 633:3-a, II(a), that her conduct
objectively constituted a present credible threat to the safety of the plaintiff or
an immediate family member, and that the plaintiff was placed in fear as a
result of the defendant’s course of conduct. See S.C., 175 N.H. at 162-63.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3