THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2026-0127, Robert DiRosa v. Osgood Hill Farm,
LLC & a., the court on August 17, 2026, issued the following
order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Robert DiRosa, appeals the order of the Circuit
Court (Walch, J.), following a small claims hearing, denying his claim against
the defendants, Osgood Hill Farm, LLC, and Dennis Silva, for breach of an
alleged oral contract. The plaintiff argues that the trial court’s order is
contrary to the weight of the evidence. We affirm.
After considering the hearing testimony and the admitted exhibits, the
trial court found that the parties did not have an enforceable contract because
there was no “meeting of the minds.” It is the burden of the appealing party,
here the plaintiff, to provide this court with a record sufficient to decide his
issues on appeal and to demonstrate that he raised his issues in the trial
court. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004); see also In
the Matter of Birmingham & Birmingham, 154 N.H. 51, 56 (2006) (self-
represented litigants are bound by the same procedural rules that govern
parties represented by counsel).
The plaintiff has not provided us with a transcript of the December 9,
2025 hearing on the merits. See Sup. Ct. R. 15(3) (“If the moving party intends
to argue in the supreme court that a finding or conclusion is unsupported by
the evidence or is contrary to the evidence, the moving party shall include in
the record a transcript of all evidence relevant to such finding or conclusion.”).
Each of the issues raised by the plaintiff involves the trial court’s resolution of
disputed factual issues. Absent a transcript of the trial court hearing, we must
assume that the evidence supported the court’s decision. See Atwood v.
Owens, 142 N.H. 396, 396 (1997).
Affirmed.
Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk