THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2026-0174, Jose D. Marquez v. State of New
Hampshire; Jose D. Marquez v. Diane M. Nicolosi, the court on
June 5, 2026, issued the following order:
The plaintiff’s motion to remand in order to allow the trial court to enter
default against the defendants, and his requests for identical relief in multiple
additional filings, are denied. Although the trial court granted the defendants’
motion to extend the deadline to respond to the plaintiff’s discovery requests
until “thirty days after the Court rules on Defendant’s motion to dismiss,” by
subsequently granting the motion to dismiss, the trial court effectively
terminated any obligation on the part of the defendants to respond to pending
discovery requests because there is no right to discovery in a dismissed case.
The plaintiff’s motions to strike the defendants’ objection to the motion to
remand on timeliness grounds and to sanction the defendants for allegedly
misrepresenting in the objection that the plaintiff filed his motion to remand on
May 9, 2026, are denied. The plaintiff filed a document with this court that
was docketed on May 11, 2026, but was both dated and served on the
defendants on May 9, 2026, entitled “proposed order on motion for remand.”
That document contained a section entitled, “MOTION,” in which the plaintiff
expressly “MOVE[D] this court to REMAND this matter on DEFAULT to the
lower CV-00576 court for adjudication.” The document was, in substance, a
motion to remand that was duplicative of the plaintiff’s earlier motion to
remand, and the defendants were entitled to object to the motion regardless of
whether they had submitted a timely objection to the earlier motion to remand.
The plaintiff’s motion to reply to the defendants’ objection to his motion
to strike the defendants’ memorandum of law is granted to the limited extent
that the motion requests that the court accept and consider the reply that the
plaintiff filed with the motion. All other requests for relief in the motion to
reply are denied. The plaintiff’s motion to strike the defendants’ memorandum
of law, and his requests for identical relief in multiple additional filings, are
denied. That the plaintiff disagrees with the arguments in the memorandum of
law is not a basis to strike the memorandum of law.
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). Accordingly, the motion to waive oral argument is moot. To
the extent the motion to waive oral argument seeks other relief, it is denied.
The plaintiff, Jose D. Marquez, appeals an order of the Superior Court
(Ogden, J.) dismissing his amended complaint seeking damages against the
defendants, the State of New Hampshire and retired Superior Court Justice
Diane M. Nicolosi, pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983 (2018). The trial court
dismissed the amended complaint on grounds that it failed to establish the
deprivation of a federal right for purposes of § 1983, and alternatively, that the
defendants are entitled to judicial and sovereign immunity. The plaintiff
argues that the trial court erred in so ruling. We affirm.
In reviewing the dismissal order, we consider whether the allegations in
the amended complaint are reasonably susceptible of a construction that
would permit recovery. See Szewczyk v. Continental Paving, 176 N.H. 148, 151
(2023). We assume the truth of the well-pleaded factual allegations in the
amended complaint and construe all reasonable inferences from those facts in
the light most favorable to the plaintiff. See id. In ruling on the motion to
dismiss, the trial court may also consider documents attached to the plaintiff’s
pleadings, documents sufficiently referred to in the amended complaint, official
public records, or documents the authenticity of which are undisputed. Bean
v. Dana S. Beane & Co., 160 N.H. 708, 711 (2010). We do not, however,
assume the truth of allegations that “are not well-pleaded, including the
statement of conclusions of fact and principles of law.” ERG, Inc. v. Barnes,
137 N.H. 186, 190 (1993). We will uphold the trial court’s decision if the facts
pleaded do not constitute a basis for relief. See Szewczyk, 176 N.H. at 151.
As the appealing party, the plaintiff has the burden of demonstrating
reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014). Based on our
review of the trial court’s well-reasoned order, the plaintiff’s arguments, the
relevant law, and the record submitted on appeal, including the well-pleaded
factual allegations construed most favorably to the plaintiff, we conclude that
the plaintiff has failed to demonstrate that the trial court erred. See id.;
Szewczyk, 176 N.H. at 151; see also Sup. Ct. R. 25(8).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, and Gould, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2