THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2026-0052, H.P. v. B.F., the court on June 10,
2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, B.F., appeals the order of the Circuit Court
(Carbon, R., approved by Joseph, J.), following a hearing, entering a civil
stalking final order of protection against her for the protection of the plaintiff,
H.P. See RSA 633:3-a (2016). The defendant argues that: (1) the judicial
referee should have disqualified herself; (2) the referee provided an inadequate
disclosure; (3) the defendant’s waiver was not knowing, intelligent, and
voluntary; and (4) the referee’s failure to recuse herself violated the defendant’s
right to due process. We affirm.
At the start of the hearing, the referee stated that she recognized the
person seated behind the plaintiff, whom the plaintiff identified as her mother.
The referee disclosed to the parties that she knew the plaintiff’s mother “from
all of her work at the Bar association.” The referee noted that she did not
“think there’s any conflict,” but that she wanted to “put that on the record” in
case the parties had any objection. The defendant stated, “As long as things
remain fair, . . . I’m not worried about it.”
The defendant alleges that “it was only after leaving the courthouse and
conducting independent research” that she discovered that the plaintiff’s
mother had worked for the bar association for more than 40 years. The
defendant argues that the referee erred by “failing to disclose a 45-year
professional relationship,” which “deprived [her] of the ability to make a
meaningful and informed decision regarding recusal.”
The defendant argues that, “[u]nder these circumstances, any purported
waiver cannot be considered knowing, intelligent, or voluntary,” and that “[t]he
combination of incomplete disclosure, a self-represented litigant, and a
significant undisclosed relationship created, at minimum, an appearance of
bias that undermines confidence in the proceedings.”
We generally do not consider issues raised on appeal that were not
presented to the trial court. Thompson v. D’Errico, 163 N.H. 20, 22 (2011); see
also In the Matter of Birmingham & Birmingham, 154 N.H. 51, 56 (2006) (self-
represented litigants are bound by the same procedural rules that govern
parties represented by counsel). The purpose of this requirement is to give the
trial court the opportunity to correct any errors before they are presented to
this court. In the Matter of Mannion & Mannion, 155 N.H. 52, 54 (2007). The
record fails to show that the defendant preserved her issues on appeal by
raising them in the trial court. Nothing in the record shows that the defendant
asked the referee to provide a more complete disclosure. Nor did the defendant
file a motion to disqualify the referee. See Dist. Div. R. 1.8(H). Entirely absent
from the defendant’s brief, moreover, is any factual assertion that creates a
facial basis to question whether disqualification was warranted. The length of
the tenure of the plaintiff’s mother with the bar association does not suggest
that the referee was anything but an acquaintance of the mother. Accordingly,
we conclude that the defendant failed to preserve her arguments for review,
and we decline to address them. See In the Matter of Nassar & Nassar, 156
N.H. 769, 780 (2008) (declining to address party’s allegation of judicial bias
because argument not raised in trial court).
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2