THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2026-0365, In re Town of Newington, the court
on August 17, 2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The intervenor, John S. Chamberlain, appeals an order of
the Superior Court (English, J.), issued following a hearing, granting a verified
petition of the plaintiff, the Town of Newington, to authorize a special town
meeting for the purpose of raising and appropriating funds on the basis that an
“emergency” had arisen requiring an immediate expenditure of funds. See RSA
31:5, I (Supp. 2025). On appeal, the appellant challenges the trial court’s
determination that a sufficient “emergency,” as defined by the statute, see RSA
31:5, I(b)-(c), existed so as to authorize the special town meeting. We affirm.
We will uphold the trial court’s findings and rulings unless they lack
evidentiary support or are legally erroneous. See Cook v. Sullivan, 149 N.H.
774, 780 (2003). The trial court may accept or reject, in whole or in part,
whatever evidence was presented, and we defer to the trial court’s judgment in
matters such as resolving conflicts in testimony, evaluating the credibility of
witnesses, and determining the weight of the evidence presented. See id. We
do not determine whether we would have ruled differently than the trial court,
but whether a reasonable person could have reached the same decision as the
trial court based upon the same evidence. See id. It is the burden of the
appealing party, in this case, the intervenor, to provide this court with those
portions of the trial court record that are necessary to decide the issues raised
on appeal. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004). In
the absence of a relevant hearing transcript, we assume that a transcript would
support the result reached by the trial court. See id.
In this case, the intervenor challenges the trial court’s determination that
an “emergency” existed authorizing the special meeting for purposes of RSA
31:5, I. The trial court made its determination, following a hearing, after
“review[ing] . . . the petition,” “listening to the presentations made to the
Court,” and expressly considering the relevant statutory factors set forth in
RSA 31:5, I(c). The trial court specifically found in its order that “there was a
combination of occurrences, of a serious and urgent nature, that demands
prompt action.” The intervenor has not provided a transcript of the hearing on
the petition, and thus, we assume that a transcript would support the trial
court’s finding that an emergency existed for purposes of the statute. See
Bean, 151 N.H. at 250; RSA 31:5, I. On this record, the trial court’s
determination that an emergency existed was neither unsupported by the
evidence nor erroneous as a matter of law. See Cook, 149 N.H. at 780.
Affirmed.
Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2