THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2026-0141, G.B. v. J.J., the court on August 14,
2026, issued the following order:
The plaintiff’s motion to allow her to submit audio recordings of the final
hearing and her call to police is denied. This court did not consider the police
department arrest report submitted by the defendant, so the plaintiff’s motion
“to remove” that document is moot.
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, G.B., appeals the order of the Circuit Court
(Boyle, R., approved by Lombardi, J.), following a hearing, finding that she has
not been stalked by the defendant, J.J. See RSA 633:3-a (2016). The plaintiff
argues that the trial court erred in ruling on the evidence and weighing the
evidence, allegedly violating her right to due process. We affirm.
A person commits the offense of stalking if he “[p]urposely, knowingly, or
recklessly engages in a course of conduct targeted at a specific person which
would cause a reasonable person to fear for his or her personal safety. . . , and
the person is actually placed in such fear.” RSA 633:3-a, I(a). A course of
conduct “means 2 or more acts over a period of time, however short, which
evidences a continuity of purpose.” RSA 633:3-a, II(a). The trial court found
that the plaintiff failed to prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the
defendant stalked her.
The plaintiff argues that the trial court erred by refusing to allow her to
submit evidence allegedly proving that the defendant’s mother testified falsely.
The plaintiff also argues that the court erred by failing to consider the
defendant’s alleged admissions at the hearing. The plaintiff argues that the
trial court’s alleged errors denied her due process.
It is the burden of the appealing party, here the plaintiff, to provide this
court with a record sufficient to decide her issues on appeal. See Bean v. Red
Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004); see also In the Matter of
Birmingham & Birmingham, 154 N.H. 51, 56 (2006) (self-represented litigants
are bound by the same procedural rules that govern parties represented by
counsel). The plaintiff did not provide a transcript of the December 18, 2025
final hearing on her stalking petition. See Sup. Ct. R. 15(3) (“If the moving
party intends to argue in the supreme court that a finding or conclusion is
unsupported by the evidence or is contrary to the evidence, the moving party
shall include in the record a transcript of all evidence relevant to such finding
or conclusion.”). Absent a transcript of the hearing, we must assume that the
evidence supported the trial court’s decision. See Atwood v. Owens, 142 N.H.
396, 396 (1997). We review the court’s order for errors of law only, see id. at
397, and find none.
Affirmed.
Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2