THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2026-0003, K.P. v. O.V., the court on April 24,
2026, issued the following order:
The plaintiff’s motion for reconsideration of the court’s order to proceed
on the defendant’s brief only, and the plaintiff’s motion to dismiss the appeal,
are denied.
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, O.V., appeals the order of the Circuit Court
(Chabot, J.), following a hearing, entering a civil stalking final order of
protection against her for the protection of the plaintiff, K.P. See RSA 633:3-a
(2016). We construe the defendant’s brief to argue that the trial court’s ruling
was contrary to the evidence, and that the evidence was insufficient to prove
that she committed the offense of stalking. We affirm.
Following a December 3, 2025 hearing, the trial court found that the
defendant repeatedly telephoned the plaintiff at all hours of the day and night,
after the plaintiff had blocked her on Facebook and other social media
platforms. The court found that the defendant then sent the plaintiff an
intimate photograph and text message. The court found that the defendant
later followed the plaintiff in her car to the police department, where the
defendant confronted the plaintiff. The court concluded that the plaintiff met
her burden to prove that the defendant committed the offense of stalking.
We review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a matter of law,
upholding the trial court’s findings and rulings unless they lack evidentiary
support or are tainted by legal error. S.C. v. G.C., 175 N.H. 158, 162 (2022).
We accord considerable weight to the trial court’s judgments on the credibility
of witnesses and the weight to be given testimony. Id. at 162-63.
It is the burden of the appealing party, here the defendant, to provide
this court with a record sufficient to decide her issues on appeal. See Bean v.
Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004); see also In the Matter of
Birmingham & Birmingham, 154 N.H. 51, 56 (2006) (self-represented litigants
are bound by the same procedural rules that govern parties represented by
counsel). The defendant did not provide a transcript of the December 3, 2025
hearing. See Sup. Ct. R. 15(3) (“If the moving party intends to argue in the
supreme court that a finding or conclusion is unsupported by the evidence or
is contrary to the evidence, the moving party shall include in the record a
transcript of all evidence relevant to such finding or conclusion.”).
In her notice of appeal, the defendant affirmatively represented that a
transcript was not necessary. See Sup. Ct. R. 15(2)(a) (establishing procedure
for ordering transcripts in notice of appeal form). However, the issues raised
by the defendant involve the trial court’s resolution of disputed factual issues.
Absent a transcript of the hearing, we must assume that the evidence was
sufficient to support the court’s decision. See Atwood v. Owens, 142 N.H. 396,
396 (1997). Accordingly, we review the court’s order for errors of law only, see
id, at 397, and find none.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2