THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2026-0225, Rosemary Pierce v. Concord
Housing Authority, the court on July 22, 2026, issued the
following order:
The plaintiff’s motion for “relief,” in which she seeks an award of $1
million, is denied. The plaintiff’s motions “to add to [her] brief” and “to demand
a” professional are likewise denied. The motions to add to the plaintiff’s brief
and to demand a professional make numerous factual allegations based upon
post-appeal issues or concerns and do not cite any portion of the record in
support of the factual allegations. “On appeal, we consider only evidence and
documents presented to the trial court.” Lake v. Sullivan, 145 N.H. 713, 717
(2001). The correspondence filed by the plaintiff on June 30, 2026, does not
seek affirmative relief, and will not be acted upon.
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The plaintiff, Rosemary Pierce, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Honigberg, J.), following a hearing, dismissing her complaint
against the defendant, Concord Housing Authority, in which she sought an
award of damages for personal injuries. The trial court dismissed the
complaint on grounds that the plaintiff’s claims are barred by the doctrine of
collateral estoppel and by the applicable statute of limitations. We affirm.
Collateral estoppel is a defense that bars a party or someone in privity
with that party from relitigating any issue or fact that was actually litigated and
resolved against the party in a prior case. See 412 S. Broadway Realty v.
Wolters, 169 N.H. 304, 314 (2016). The doctrine precludes relitigating issues
when: (1) the issue subject to estoppel is identical in each action; (2) the first
case resolved the issue finally on the merits; (3) the party to be estopped
appeared in the first case or was in privity with one who appeared in the first
case; (4) the party to be estopped had a full and fair opportunity to litigate the
issue in the prior case; and (5) the finding was essential to the judgment
rendered in the prior case. See id. In New Hampshire, all “personal actions,”
other than actions for slander or libel, must generally be brought “only within 3
years of the act or omission complained of,” unless “the injury and its causal
relationship to the act or omission were not discovered and could not
reasonably have been discovered at the time of the act or omission.” RSA
508:4, I (2010).
As the appealing party, the plaintiff has the burden of demonstrating
reversible error. Gallo v. Traina, 166 N.H. 737, 740 (2014). It is also the
plaintiff’s burden to provide those portions of the trial court record that are
necessary to decide her appeal, and we assume that relevant portions of the
trial court record not provided on appeal, including relevant trial court
pleadings, support the trial court’s decision. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop.
Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004); Estate of Day v. Hanover Ins. Co., 162 N.H.
415, 422 (2011) (applying Bean to relevant trial court pleadings). These
requirements are not relaxed for self-represented parties. See In the Matter of
Birmingham & Birmingham, 154 N.H. 51, 56 (2006).
In this case, after reviewing the defendant’s motion to dismiss, the
plaintiff’s response to it, and the parties’ arguments at a hearing, the trial court
granted the motion, finding that the plaintiff had “presented her evidence to
three prior courts and those courts ha[d] found against [the plaintiff] on her
factual claims” by final decisions. The court determined that the claims were
barred by collateral estoppel, reasoning that the factual basis for the plaintiff’s
personal injury claims was the same as the factual basis for her prior claims.
The trial court additionally determined that the three-year statute of limitations
had expired before the plaintiff brought the present action. The plaintiff has
not provided the defendant’s motion to dismiss, her response to it, or a
transcript of the hearing as part of the record on appeal, as a result of which
we assume those pleadings and transcript support the trial court’s decision,
Bean, 151 N.H. at 250. We have reviewed the trial court’s well-reasoned order,
the plaintiff’s arguments, the relevant law, and the portions of the record
provided on appeal, and we conclude that the plaintiff has not established that
the trial court erred by dismissing her complaint. See Gallo, 166 N.H. at 740.
In light of this order, the motion to expedite the appeal is moot.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2