THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2026-0216, K.V. v. C.B., the court on August
17, 2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). The defendant appeals an order of the Circuit Court (Cabrera, J.),
issued following a hearing, granting a domestic violence final order of protection
to the plaintiff. See RSA 173-B:5 (2022). On appeal, the defendant advances
several arguments challenging the trial court’s decision. We reverse.
The relevant facts follow. At the time of the alleged abuse in this case, the
plaintiff had recently withdrawn a domestic violence petition against the
defendant, a former intimate partner. The plaintiff testified that she had done so
at the request of the defendant’s attorney, and had acceded to that request
because the defendant had “left [her] alone” and “wasn’t bothering [her] in any
sort of way.” At the outset of the hearing in this case, however, the parties
expressly agreed to go forward only on the allegations set forth in the plaintiff’s
new petition, and that the prior petition would be excluded from consideration in
this case.
Accordingly, the plaintiff testified that, on or about the same day that she
withdrew the prior petition, she voluntarily contacted the defendant’s attorney,
gave him an SD card containing photos belonging to the defendant, and asked
that he deliver it to the defendant. The plaintiff testified that she told the
defendant’s attorney that she “hope[d] everybody can move on from here,” but
acknowledged that she did not specifically foreclose any further contact.
Thereafter, the defendant emailed the plaintiff informing her that some of
the files on the SD card were corrupt, and asking for her apartment number so
that he could send her a new storage device to try again. The plaintiff responded
that she was sorry, but that the photos “were already corrupt on there,” and that
she “didn’t think that there was a way to retrieve those photos.” The plaintiff
testified that she “ended the conversation with, take care, hoping that that would
be the last of the emails.” The plaintiff then left to go shopping.
While she was shopping, the plaintiff received another email from the
defendant informing her that he had left a letter with a new storage device in her
mailbox. The plaintiff “panicked,” went home, and discovered the letter in her
neighbor’s mailbox. She called the police, and then contacted the defendant’s
attorney, returned the storage device to him, and “asked . . . if he could kindly
have [the defendant] leave [her] be, and that [her] withdrawal was not an
invitation for contact.”
Approximately a week later, a friend of the plaintiff contacted her to inform
her about messages that the friend had received from the defendant, in which the
defendant insinuated that the plaintiff had engaged in a sexual relationship with
the friend’s husband. The plaintiff testified that she “felt as if [the defendant]
[was] trying to sabotage [her] friendships and their marriage.” Accordingly, the
plaintiff filed the instant domestic violence petition in order “to be left alone
again.” Following the hearing, the trial court issued a final order of protection to
the plaintiff. This appeal followed.
On appeal, the defendant argues, in part, that the evidence was
insufficient to support the trial court’s order. We agree. “In an appeal from an
order on a domestic violence petition, the trial court’s ‘findings of facts shall be
final,’ and we undertake de novo review of ‘questions of law.’” S.C. v. G.C., 175
N.H. 158, 162 (2022) (quoting RSA 173-B:3, VI). “We review sufficiency of the
evidence claims as a matter of law, upholding the findings and rulings of the trial
court unless they are lacking in evidentiary support or tainted by error of law.”
Id. “When performing this review, we accord considerable weight to the trial
court’s judgments on the credibility of witnesses and the weight to be given
testimony.” Id. at 162-63. We view the evidence in the light most favorable to
the prevailing party — here, the plaintiff. See id. at 163.
To obtain relief under RSA chapter 173-B, the plaintiff must establish, by a
preponderance of evidence, that the defendant engaged in “abuse.” RSA 173-B:5,
I. “Abuse” means the commission or attempted commission of one or more
enumerated crimes by a family or household member or a current or former
sexual or intimate partner when such conduct “constitute[s] a credible present
threat” to the plaintiff’s safety. RSA 173-B:1, I (2022); see also S.C., 175 N.H. at
163. The trial court “may consider evidence of such acts, regardless of their
proximity in time to the filing of the petition, which, in combination with recent
conduct, reflects an ongoing pattern of behavior which reasonably causes or has
caused the [plaintiff] to fear for his or her safety or well-being.” RSA 173-B:1, I;
see also S.C., 175 N.H. at 163.
With respect to the predicate act of abuse in this case, the trial court found
that
[a]fter receiving a[n] SD card through an attorney (so no direct
contact), [the defendant] went ahead and directly emailed plaintiff
and asked her mailing address; Plaintiff responded and declined to
give her mailing address — and invited no further contact;
Defendant emailed her again and said he had gone to her residence
and left a letter for her.
2
The court concluded that this conduct amounted to “stalking” within the
meaning of RSA 633:3-a, I(a), (b) (Supp. 2025). See RSA 173-B:1, I(d). In
support of its finding that the defendant’s conduct constituted a “credible present
threat” to the plaintiff’s safety, the trial court found that
Defendant clearly disregarded Plaintiff’s boundaries. Given the past
controlling behavior; a recently withdrawn [domestic violence]
petition; and defendant’s history of demeaning the Plaintiff[,]
including to her friends. Defendant is also still displaying jealous
behavior.
Although we express doubt as to the trial court’s finding that the
defendant’s conduct amounted to stalking — especially in light of the fact that
much of the conduct was directly responsive to the legitimate purpose for which
the plaintiff initiated contact — we need not address that issue because the trial
court erred when it found that the defendant’s conduct constituted a “credible
present threat” to the plaintiff’s safety. Here, there was simply no evidence
presented at the hearing that the defendant posed a threat to the plaintiff’s
safety. Indeed, the plaintiff acknowledged that the defendant had never
threatened her. Rather, in finding to the contrary, the trial court appears to have
improperly relied, at least in part, upon events and allegations relative to the
withdrawn domestic violence petition that the parties had expressly agreed would
be excluded from consideration in this case. Further, although the trial court
found that the defendant “clearly disregarded Plaintiff’s boundaries,” we note that
there was no evidence that such “boundaries”1 had actually been communicated
to the defendant before the conduct at issue. Accordingly, we conclude that the
trial court erred when it granted a domestic violence final order of protection to
the plaintiff.
Reversed.
Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
1 Merely transgressing “boundaries” is not a predicate act under the statute.
3