THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2026-0295, N.C. v. B.J., the court on August 31,
2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(3). The defendant, B.J., appeals the order of the Circuit Court
(Collins, J.), following a hearing, granting a domestic violence final order of
protection to the plaintiff, N.C. See RSA 173-B:5 (2022). The defendant argues
that the evidence was insufficient to support the court’s finding that he poses a
credible present threat to the plaintiff’s safety. We affirm.
To be granted a domestic violence final order of protection, the plaintiff
must establish, by a preponderance of evidence, that the defendant engaged in
“abuse.” RSA 173-B:5, I. “Abuse” means the commission or attempted
commission of one or more enumerated crimes by a family or household
member or a current or former sexual or intimate partner when such conduct
“constitute[s] a credible present threat” to the plaintiff’s safety. RSA 173-B:1, I
(2022); see S.C. v. G.C., 175 N.H. 158, 163 (2022). The enumerated crimes
that may constitute abuse include “[c]riminal threatening as defined in RSA
631:4.” See RSA 173-B:1, I(b). The trial court found that the defendant
engaged in abuse by criminal threatening.
The trial court’s “findings of facts shall be final, but questions of law may
be transferred from the circuit court to the supreme court.” RSA 173-B:3, VI
(2022). We review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a matter of law,
upholding the trial court’s findings and rulings unless they lack evidentiary
support or are legally erroneous. S.C., 175 N.H. at 162. We defer to the trial
court’s judgments as to the credibility of the witnesses and the weight of their
testimony. Id. at 162-63. We view the evidence in the light most favorable to
the prevailing party, here, the plaintiff. Id. at 163.
The plaintiff testified that she sought the restraining order because the
defendant threatened her “on multiple separate occasions,” and she felt “like
[her] life is in danger.” The plaintiff testified that the defendant was arrested
for his threats, which he does not dispute. The plaintiff submitted the
defendant’s arrest record “and a screenshot of him telling [her] that he was
going to kill [her].” The plaintiff played a voice recording of the defendant
“threatening to kill [her]” on December 6, 2025. She filed her petition for a
protective order on February 24, 2026, the day after another phone call from
the defendant. The plaintiff testified that she did not report the threats earlier
because she was “still in a relationship with [the defendant],” but that “it came
to the point where [she] felt safe now to report them.” Based upon the evidence
presented at the hearing, the trial court found that the defendant committed
the act of criminal threatening when he threatened to kill the plaintiff several
times in voice messages and text messages.
The defendant does not dispute that he committed an act of criminal
threatening. He argues, however, that his conduct does not constitute a
present credible threat to the plaintiff’s safety. The plaintiff testified that the
defendant “caused me to lose my son” in connection with a parenting matter.
The defendant asserts that the record “strongly supports the inference” that the
plaintiff filed her domestic violence petition because she was angry with the
defendant over the parenting matter, not because he presents a credible threat
to her safety. Conflicts in testimony, questions about the credibility of
witnesses, and the weight assigned to testimony are matters for the trial court
to resolve. In the Matter of Kurowski & Kurowski, 161 N.H. 578, 585 (2011).
The trial court was not required to draw the inferences from the testimony that
the defendant suggests. We conclude that the evidence was sufficient for the
trial court to conclude that the defendant poses a credible present threat to the
plaintiff’s safety. See S.C., 175 N.H. at 162.
Moreover, we note that it is the burden of the appealing party, here, the
defendant, to provide a record on appeal sufficient to decide the issues raised.
Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004). The transcript does
not include the voice recordings, and the defendant did not provide us with
copies of them. Nor did he object to the plaintiff playing the recordings at trial
rather than submitting them in a form that could be preserved as an exhibit.
The defendant acknowledges that the trial court found his recorded messages
to be “vicious.” We assume that the recordings further support the trial court’s
finding that the defendant’s conduct constitutes a present credible threat to the
plaintiff’s safety. See id.; see also In the Matter of Rokowski & Rokowski, 168
N.H. 57, 62 (2015) (applying Bean to appealing party’s failure to provide
exhibits admitted into evidence at evidentiary hearing).
Affirmed.
Donovan, Countway, and Will, JJ., concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
2