THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2026-0004, M.C. v. J.Z., the court on June 9,
2026, issued the following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted on
appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See Sup. Ct.
R. 20(3). The defendant appeals an order of the Circuit Court (Tessier, J.), issued
following a hearing, granting a domestic violence final order of protection in favor
of the plaintiff, his former intimate partner. See RSA 173-B:5 (2022). The
defendant argues that the evidence was insufficient to support the court’s order.1
We affirm.
“In an appeal from an order on a domestic violence petition, the trial
court’s ‘findings of facts shall be final,’ and we undertake de novo review of
‘questions of law.’” S.C. v. G.C., 175 N.H. 158, 162 (2022) (quoting RSA 173-B:3,
VI). “We review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a matter of law, upholding
the findings and rulings of the trial court unless they are lacking in evidentiary
support or tainted by error of law.” Id. “When performing this review, we accord
considerable weight to the trial court’s judgments on the credibility of witnesses
and the weight to be given testimony.” Id. at 162-63. We view the evidence in
the light most favorable to the prevailing party — here, the plaintiff. See id. at
163.
To obtain a domestic violence final order of protection, the plaintiff must
establish, by a preponderance of evidence, that the defendant engaged in
“abuse.” RSA 173-B:5, I. “Abuse” means the commission or attempted
commission of one or more enumerated crimes by a family or household member
or a current or former sexual or intimate partner and such conduct “constitute[s]
a credible present threat” to the plaintiff’s safety. RSA 173-B:1, I (2022); see also
S.C., 175 N.H. at 163. The trial court “may consider evidence of such acts,
regardless of their proximity in time to the filing of the petition, which, in
combination with recent conduct, reflects an ongoing pattern of behavior which
reasonably causes or has caused the [plaintiff] to fear for his or her safety or well-
being.” RSA 173-B:1, I; see also S.C., 175 N.H. at 163.
In this case, the trial court found that the defendant had engaged in abuse
of the plaintiff on multiple occasions in 2022 and 2024 by “committ[ing] a
random and humiliating assault by pushing Plaintiff off some stairs while visiting
1 We assume without deciding that the defendant’s arguments are preserved for appellate
review.
neighbors”; by “str[iking] Plaintiff in the face[,] and [then doing so] again while
she was driving”; and by “forc[ing] himself into [the] bedroom through a locked
door causing damage [while] in pursuit of the Plaintiff[,] . . . [and] then shov[ing]
Plaintiff into a dresser, pinn[ing] her on [a] bed[,] and chok[ing] her against her
will and without her consent.” The trial court further found that the defendant’s
more recent conduct included threats to release intimate photos in the spring of
2025, and displays of anger and jealousy. These findings are supported by
evidence in the record.
On appeal, the defendant first argues that the evidence was insufficient to
support a finding that his conduct constituted a credible present threat to the
plaintiff’s safety because the plaintiff acknowledged that he had not used
physical violence against her during the preceding year, and, therefore, such acts
were “too attenuated and distant in time” to support the court’s finding. We
disagree. The defendant’s recent conduct justified the trial court’s consideration
of his history of violent conduct toward the plaintiff to determine whether there
was a pattern of conduct that would reasonably cause her to fear for her safety or
well-being. See RSA 173-B:1, I.
Next, the defendant argues that the evidence was insufficient to support a
finding that his conduct constituted a credible present threat to the plaintiff’s
safety because his more recent conduct was “for a legitimate purpose, non-
harassing, and non-threatening,” and because the plaintiff had, for a period of
time, maintained contact and even bought him new kitchen knives as a gift.
Accordingly, he contends that his recent conduct does not reflect an ongoing
pattern of behavior which reasonably caused the plaintiff to fear for her safety or
well-being. See id.
The trial court, however, was not obligated to credit the defendant’s
innocent characterization of his recent conduct toward the plaintiff. See S.C.,
175 N.H. at 162-63 (observing that “[w]e view the evidence in the light most
favorable to the prevailing party,” and “accord considerable weight to the trial
court’s judgments on the credibility of witnesses and the weight to be given
testimony”). Nor was it obligated to find that the plaintiff’s decision to maintain
contact with the defendant for a period of time was inconsistent with a finding
that he posed a credible present threat to her safety at another. See id. at 163-
64. Rather, the trial court was free to find, as it did, that, although the defendant
may have stopped physically abusing the plaintiff, he nevertheless continued to
engage in other conduct that, when viewed together with his history of anger,
jealousy, and “significant intimate partner violence,” was sufficient to constitute a
credible present threat that reasonably caused the plaintiff to fear for her safety.
These findings are supported by evidence in the record.
Lastly, we are not persuaded by the defendant’s argument that Tosta v.
Bullis, 156 N.H. 763 (2008), mandates a different result. Unlike Tosta, this case
involves several serious physical assaults over a period of years, as well as more
2
recent conduct and threats that could constitute “abuse” within the meaning of
RSA 173-B:1, I. Accordingly, we conclude, based upon our review of the record,
that the evidence was sufficient to support the trial court’s decision to grant a
domestic violence final order of protection in favor of the plaintiff.
Affirmed.
MacDonald, C.J., and Donovan, Countway, Gould, and Will, JJ.,
concurred.
Timothy A. Gudas,
Clerk
3