THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Salem Family Division
No. 2005-089
IN THE MATTER OF KAREN BIRMINGHAM AND GREGORY BIRMINGHAM
Argued: June 8, 2006
Opinion Issued: August 4, 2006
Law Offices of Edward W. Richards & Associates, P.C., of Nashua
(Edward W. Richards and Tanya Pardo on the brief, and Mr. Richards orally),
for the petitioner.
Wiggin & Nourie, P.A., of Manchester (Carol L. Kunz on the brief and
orally), for the respondent.
GALWAY, J. The respondent, Gregory Birmingham, appeals an order of
the Trial Court (DiMeo, J.) denying his motion to: (1) strike the default
judgment and vacate the final divorce decree; and (2) vacate or modify the
division of property in the final decree. He also appeals an order of the Marital
Master (DalPra, M.) denying his request that the modification of child support
and alimony be retroactive to the date of the temporary agreement rather than
the date of notice to the petitioner, Karen Birmingham. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. In July 2002, the petitioner filed
for divorce. The parties had two minor children. Throughout the divorce
proceedings, the petitioner was represented by counsel while the respondent
appeared pro se. Until approximately January 2001, the respondent was
employed as a software developer and consultant at a company in Merrimack.
He was reportedly unemployed from January 2001 until approximately
January 2002.
In September 2002, both parties appeared at the Salem Family Division
for a Case Manager Conference. At that conference, the respondent
represented that since approximately January 2002, he had been employed by
TransWorld, Inc. (TWI) at a salary of $180,000 per year, and submitted a
financial affidavit disclosing his monthly income as $15,000. Based upon
these representations, the parties reached a temporary agreement, which
granted the petitioner use of the marital residence and included child support
and alimony based upon a child support guidelines worksheet and a temporary
uniform support order. The respondent also agreed to pay some of the marital
debt on or before October 1, 2002. Both parties and the case manager signed
the temporary agreement, and the Marital Master (Kelly, M.) approved it that
same day. The respondent failed to comply with the temporary agreement, and
the petitioner filed a motion for contempt in October 2002.
In November 2002, the Trial Court (Taube, J.) conducted a temporary
hearing at which it considered the petitioner’s motion for contempt. At that
hearing, the respondent testified that he had received none of his expected
salary from TWI and was no longer employed by it. He testified that he was
seeking other employment and had no other income. He voluntarily agreed to
provide the petitioner’s counsel with information regarding his employment
with TWI. The trial court withheld an immediate finding of contempt and
issued an order requiring the respondent to either pay all of the obligations
identified in the temporary agreement or provide the petitioner’s counsel with
proof of his inability to pay the required amount by December 8, 2002.
The respondent did not comply with the trial court’s order and on
December 30, 2002, the petitioner filed a notice of noncompliance. In January
2003, the petitioner filed a motion to compel the respondent to produce
documents that had been ordered by the court and that the respondent had
agreed to produce; the court granted that motion. The respondent neither filed
an objection nor produced any of the requested documents. Also in January
2003, the petitioner filed a motion for final default and a proposed final default
order.
In February 2003, the respondent filed a motion for relief, essentially
setting forth, among other things, his request for sole legal and physical
custody of the minor children, an equitable division of all marital assets, and a
modification of the existing child support, alimony, visitation, and debt
obligations set forth in the September 2002 temporary agreement and the trial
court’s November 2002 order. The court scheduled a hearing in May 2003 and
provided notice that the hearing would include the motion for final default.
2
The Trial Court (Taube, J.) conducted a hearing in May 2003, at which it
heard testimony from both parties as well as a representative from the office of
child support enforcement, who was involved in the collection of child support
and alimony orders. At the conclusion of the hearing, the trial court requested
that the petitioner file a revised proposed default order with findings regarding
the respondent’s lack of response to court orders, the respondent’s contact—or
lack thereof—with his minor children, and the disposition of assets, with a
copy to be sent to the respondent for his response. It also stated that it would
issue a final order once this was completed. The petitioner submitted the
requested revised proposed default order to the court on May 21, 2003, and
provided the respondent with a copy. The respondent failed to respond and the
court issued a final default order on June 16, 2003. The respondent filed no
motion to reconsider or strike the default order, or otherwise challenge that
order for approximately one year.
According to the respondent, he obtained employment in November 2003
and retained legal counsel at that time. In approximately June 2004, the
respondent filed an expedited motion to bring forward and modify, requesting,
among other things, that the court vacate the final decree and default
judgment, vacate or modify the division of property, and vacate or modify child
support and alimony. The Trial Court (DiMeo, J.) conducted a hearing in
September 2004, limiting the issue to whether, as a matter of law, the final
decree could be stricken or vacated. In December 2004, the court denied the
respondent’s motion to vacate the final decree and property division, ruling
that: (1) the final decree could be vacated only upon a showing of accident,
mistake, or misfortune; and (2) without such a showing, the final property
division cannot be modified. The respondent’s timely motion to reconsider was
denied.
In February 2005, the Salem Family Division (DalPra, M.) conducted a
hearing on the respondent’s motion to modify alimony and child support and
reduced both the child support and alimony retroactive to August 20, 2004.
The respondent filed a timely motion to reconsider, arguing, among other
things, that the modification should be retroactive to September 23, 2002, the
date of the temporary agreement. The court denied the respondent’s motion to
reconsider, ruling that it had no discretion to modify any child support order
earlier than the date the petitioner received notice of the respondent’s motion
to modify, which was August 20, 2004.
On appeal, the respondent argues the trial court erred in: (1) denying his
motion to strike the default judgment and vacate the divorce decree; (2)
denying his motion to modify the property division and ruling that property
divisions in a divorce may never be modified under New Hampshire law; and (3)
ruling that it had no discretion to retroactively modify a child support order
beyond the date of notice to the petitioner.
3
The respondent first contends that: (1) the default judgment was
impermissibly based upon the respondent’s failure to provide discovery when
no formal discovery was propounded upon him; (2) the trial court failed to
provide him with adequate notice that the May 2003 hearing would include
entry of a final decree and distribution of marital property; (3) the trial court
failed to make any findings to support its unequal division of the marital
property and allocation of debt; and (4) the trial court failed to make findings to
support its inequitable award of alimony and child support. The petitioner,
however, counters that the respondent failed to file a timely motion to
reconsider or timely appeal the default judgment and final decree, thereby
waiving any subsequent appeals.
We will not disturb a decision denying a motion to vacate a default
judgment unless the trial court erred as a matter of law or engaged in an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. Brito v. Ryan, 151 N.H. 635, 637 (2005);
see State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001) (explaining unsustainable
exercise of discretion).
“In all actions at law or in equity, in which a verdict or decree is entered
. . . all appeals relating to the action shall be deemed waived and final
judgment shall be entered . . . unless the Court has otherwise ordered, or
unless a notice of appeal has then been filed with the Supreme Court pursuant
to its Rule 7.” Super. Ct. R. 74. Where no motion, or an untimely motion, has
been filed after a verdict or decree, a final judgment shall be entered thirty-one
days from the date on the Clerk’s written notice of the court’s decision. Super.
Ct. R. 74(a); see Super. Ct. R. 209 (providing that upon the default of either
party, the decree will not become final until expiration of the appeal period,
pursuant to Superior Court Rule 74). To be timely, a motion for
reconsideration or other post-decision relief “shall be filed within ten (10) days
of the date on the Clerk’s written notice of the order or decision.” Super. Ct. R.
59-A(1).
In the instant case, after conducting a full evidentiary hearing, the trial
court issued a final default order on June 16, 2003. The clerk’s notice of that
decision stated, in pertinent part:
This matter will become final on 7/18/2003, known as the
Judgment Day, if no objections or appeals are filed. Objections
must be filed with this court within 10 days of the date of the
Notice of Decision, Appeals to the Supreme Court within 30 days.
The respondent received express, written notice that if he failed to file either an
objection or an appeal of the decision, the default order and final divorce decree
would become final on July 18, 2003. The respondent took no action until
June 2004—almost twelve months after the deadline.
4
The respondent argues that the trial court erroneously ruled that his
motion to strike the default judgment and vacate the final decree must be
grounded upon accident, mistake, or misfortune. He contends that this ruling
is contrary to longstanding principles of equity, which allow courts to correct or
modify decrees for good cause shown.
In this case, however, the respondent’s expedited motion requesting the
court to, among other things, strike the default judgment and vacate the final
decree essentially sought a new hearing on the merits before the trial court.
See Case v. Case, 121 N.H. 647, 652 (1981) (petition to bring forward prior
decree construed as motion for new trial). RSA 526:1 (1997) states: “A new
trial may be granted in any case when through accident, mistake or misfortune
justice has not been done and a further hearing would be equitable.”
“Accident, mistake or misfortune has been defined as something outside of [the
respondent’s] control, or something which a reasonably prudent person would
not be expected to guard against or provide for.” Lakeview Homeowners Assoc.
v. Moulton Constr., 141 N.H. 789, 791 (1997) (quotations omitted). Whether
accident, mistake, or misfortune occurred is determined by the trier of fact,
and its finding will be conclusive unless it is unsupported by the evidence. Id.
The record supports the trial court’s finding that there was no accident,
mistake, or misfortune that occurred in the instant case. Nothing that was
reasonably beyond the respondent’s control precluded him from acting in a
timely manner to challenge the default judgment and final decree. Thus, we
conclude the trial court’s ruling was not an unsustainable exercise of
discretion.
The respondent argues that as a pro se litigant, he was ill-equipped to
either: (1) understand or satisfy the “court’s burden”; or (2) respond to the
court’s inequitable orders and, therefore, he “more than satisfies the ‘good
cause’ requirement of [sic] necessary to vacate the decree.” “Pro se litigants,
however, are bound by the same procedural rules that govern parties
represented by counsel.” Appeal of Demeritt, 142 N.H. 807, 811 (1998); see
Faretta v. California, 422 U.S. 806, 834-35 n. 46 (1975) (recognizing that the
right of self-representation is not a license to not comply with the relevant
procedural rules). The respondent was informed of all applicable procedural
deadlines throughout the entire proceedings. He, however, took no timely
action to challenge the default judgment and final decree despite receiving
written notice that the divorce decree would become final if he failed to do so.
He cannot avoid the consequences of his failure to comply with the procedural
rules simply because he appeared pro se. To conclude otherwise would
undermine the finality of judgments involving a pro se litigant and prejudice
parties who are represented by counsel. Accordingly, the trial court did not err
when it denied the respondent’s untimely request to strike the default
judgment and vacate the final decree. Furthermore, for the same reasons, we
5
conclude the trial court did not err in denying the respondent’s motion to
vacate the property division set forth in the final decree. See In the Matter of
Gronvaldt & Gronvaldt, 150 N.H. 551, 554 (2004) (we will not overturn trial
court’s determination of property distribution absent unsustainable exercise of
discretion).
Next, the respondent argues the trial court erroneously denied his
motion to modify the property division set forth in the final divorce decree.
Specifically, he contends the trial court erroneously concluded that a property
division in a divorce may never be modified under New Hampshire law. He
argues that the trial court has the equitable power to modify a prior property
division.
“A property settlement in a divorce decree is a final distribution of a sum
of money or a specific portion of the spouses’ property and is not subject to
judicial modification on account of changed circumstances.” Sommers v.
Sommers, 143 N.H. 686, 689 (1999). “[S]uch a property distribution will not be
modified unless the complaining party shows that the distribution is invalid
due to fraud, undue influence, deceit, misrepresentation, or mutual mistake.”
Id. (quotations omitted). After reviewing the record as well as the parties’ briefs
and arguments, we conclude that the trial court correctly ruled that it could
not modify the property division in the final decree. The respondent failed to
show that the property division was invalid for any of the foregoing reasons.
Instead, he argued that the property division was inequitable and was not
supported by written reasons as required by RSA 458:16-a, IV (2004).
However, as the trial court correctly noted, these issues should have been
raised on appeal, and they did not meet the respondent’s burden of showing
fraud, undue influence, deceit, misrepresentation, or mutual mistake.
Therefore, we cannot conclude that the trial court’s denial of his motion to
modify the property division was an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
Finally, the respondent argues the trial court erroneously denied his
request to modify child support and alimony retroactive to September 23,
2002, the date of the temporary agreement, instead of August 20, 2004, the
date the petitioner received notice of the respondent’s modification petition. He
contends that the court’s ruling “ignores the unique factual circumstances in
this case”; namely, that the original award of child support and alimony was
based upon an inaccurate assessment of his income. He also argues that the
trial court has discretion to allow credit toward arrearages under certain
circumstances and asserts that it failed to consider the disproportionate
division of property and allocation of marital debt in this case.
RSA 458-C:7, II (2004) provides, “Any child support modification shall
not be effective prior to the date that notice of the petition for modification has
been given to the [opposing party].” RSA 458:32 (2004) provides, in pertinent
6
part: “Upon motion and notice to the adverse party in the proceeding, . . . the
court may modify or revise its orders and decrees.” (Emphasis added.)
Additionally, “[e]xcept as otherwise provided in RSA 458:19, I and VII, the
court, upon proper application and notice to the adverse party, may revise and
modify any order made by it . . . .” RSA 458:14 (2004) (emphasis added). We
have also recognized that a marital master “[has] the power to order retroactive
alimony as far back as the time the [party seeking alimony] filed [the] motion.”
Walker v. Walker, 133 N.H. 413, 418 (1990); see 3A C. Douglas, New
Hampshire Practice, Family Practice § 18.09, at 22 (2002) (“master traditionally
has the discretion to order retroactive alimony as far back as the time the
motion was filed”).
Thus, the trial court correctly ruled that, pursuant to RSA 458-C:7, II, it
had “no discretion to modify any child support order beyond the date of ‘notice’
to the [petitioner],” which was August 20, 2004. There is no analogous statute
that expressly limits the trial court’s authority to grant a retroactive
modification of alimony beyond the date of notice to the adverse party.
However, our case law and our interpretation of the statutes governing the
modification of alimony lead us to conclude that the trial court’s authority to
grant a retroactive modification of alimony beyond the date of notice to the
adverse party is similarly limited. See Walker, 133 N.H. at 418; RSA 458:32;
RSA 458:14. If the legislature wishes to clarify this issue, it is free to address
it.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
7