THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Original
No. LD-2006-009
BOSSE’S CASE
Argued: February 21, 2007
Opinion Issued: April 4, 2007
Landya B. McCafferty, of Concord, on the brief and orally, for the
attorney discipline office.
Gallagher, Callahan & Gartrell, P.C., of Concord (David A. Garfunkel on
the brief and orally), for the respondent.
DALIANIS, J. On November 13, 2006, the attorney discipline office (ADO)
appealed the decision of the Supreme Court Professional Conduct Committee
(PCC) to suspend the respondent, Leigh D. Bosse, from the practice of law in
New Hampshire for six months. We order the respondent suspended from the
practice of law in New Hampshire for two years.
I
The parties stipulated to the following: The respondent has been an
attorney admitted to the practice of law in New Hampshire since 1975. At all
material times, he was self-employed as both a real estate agent and an
attorney. In February 2003, he wrote to landowners on a small lake in
Hillsboro, informing them that he could “almost guarantee a quick sale” of their
lots “for at least $10,000.00” to one of three builders with whom he was
working. In response to this letter, the respondent received a telephone call
from Raymond Grimard who expressed interest in selling his lot for
$10,000.00. The respondent told Grimard that he would send him a listing
packet and, if he could contact one of the builders identified in the letter, he
would also send a purchase and sale agreement.
The next day, at the request of one of the builders, the respondent
prepared a $10,000.00 offer to purchase Grimard’s property. Also, at the
builder’s request, the respondent prepared a listing for the house to be
constructed on Grimard’s property and entered the listing into his office
computer. The respondent then uploaded this information to the Northern
New England Real Estate Network (NNEREN), which is the computerized
multiple listing service for New Hampshire.
Two days after the respondent uploaded the listing to the NNEREN,
James Boike, the administrator of the NNEREN, asked him for documents to
verify the listing. The respondent attempted, unsuccessfully, to reach Grimard.
Rather than tell Boike that he had uploaded the Grimard listing too soon, he
signed Grimard’s name to the exclusive listing agreement and the purchase
and sale agreement. Although the respondent expected Grimard to forward
executed documents to him shortly thereafter, he signed Grimard’s name
without his consent or authorization. The respondent then forwarded the
documents to Boike and falsely informed him that the purchase and sale
agreement was “in effect.”
Unbeknownst to the respondent, Grimard had decided not to list his
property with the respondent and had listed his property with a different
realtor. When the respondent discovered this, he wrote to Boike: “I don’t know
what’s going on. Grimard now says he listed with [another realtor] for twice as
much and I have withdrawn my agreement & listing.”
The ADO originally charged the respondent with violating New
Hampshire Rules of Professional Conduct (Rules) 8.4(a), (b) and (c). The parties
eventually stipulated that the respondent’s conduct violated Rules 8.4(a) and
(c). The ADO did not pursue its charge under Rule 8.4(b), which makes it
professional misconduct to commit a criminal act that reflects adversely upon
the lawyer’s honesty, trustworthiness or fitness as a lawyer in other respects.
For the purposes of this appeal, therefore, we accept the parties’ stipulation
that the respondent violated Rules 8.4(a) and (c).
Rule 8.4(a) makes it professional misconduct to violate the Rules.
Rule 8.4(c) makes it professional misconduct for an attorney to engage in
conduct involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation. The
respondent violated this rule when he signed Grimard’s name to the exclusive
listing agreement and purchase and sale agreement without Grimard’s
2
knowledge or consent, and forwarded these documents to the NNEREN so that
Boike would believe that the respondent had secured Grimard’s agreement to
list his property with the respondent and to sell it to the builder. He also
violated this rule when he falsely informed Boike that the purchase and sale
agreement between Grimard and the builder was “in effect.” When the
respondent signed the documents and forwarded them to the NNEREN, he
knew that he lacked Grimard’s consent to sign them.
For the above misconduct, the ADO recommended disbarment and the
respondent requested public censure. The PCC ordered the respondent
suspended from the practice of law in New Hampshire for six months. The
ADO moved for reconsideration, which the PCC denied, and this appeal
followed.
II
In attorney discipline matters, we retain ultimate authority to determine
whether, upon the facts found, a violation of the rules governing attorney
conduct has occurred and, if so, the proper sanction. Coddington’s Case, 154
N.H. ___, ___ (decided Mar. 8, 2007). In determining a sanction, we are mindful
that the purpose of attorney discipline is to protect the public, maintain public
confidence in the bar, preserve the integrity of the legal profession, and prevent
similar conduct in the future; the purpose is not to inflict punishment. Id. We
judge each attorney discipline case upon its own facts and circumstances,
taking into account the severity of the misconduct and any mitigating
circumstances appearing in the record. Id.
Although we have not adopted the American Bar Association’s Standards
for Imposing Lawyer Sanctions (2005) (Standards), we look to them for
guidance. Id. The Standards list the following factors for consideration in
imposing sanctions: (a) the duty violated; (b) the lawyer’s mental state; (c) the
actual or potential injury caused by the lawyer’s misconduct; and (d) the
existence of aggravating or mitigating factors. Standards, supra § 3.0;
Coddington’s Case, 154 N.H. at ___.
In applying these factors, we first categorize the respondent’s misconduct
and then identify the appropriate sanction. Coddington’s Case, 154 N.H. at
___. We then consider the effect of any aggravating or mitigating factors on the
ultimate sanction. Id.
Here, the respondent’s misconduct involves failure to maintain personal
integrity. Standards, supra § 5.1. The Standards provide that disbarment is
generally proper, absent mitigating circumstances, when “a lawyer engages in
any . . . intentional conduct involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or
misrepresentation that seriously adversely reflects on the lawyer’s fitness to
practice.” Id. § 5.11.
3
The respondent’s conduct involved “intentional . . . dishonesty, fraud,
deceit [and/or] misrepresentation that seriously adversely reflects on [his]
fitness to practice.” Id. Even though he engaged in this conduct in his
capacity as a real estate agent, his conduct adversely reflects upon his fitness
to practice. “[T]he privilege of practicing law does not come without the
concomitant responsibilities of truth, candor and honesty.” Basbanes’ Case,
141 N.H. 1, 7 (1996) (quotation omitted). “Lawyering involves a public trust
and requires an unswerving allegiance to honesty and integrity.” Bruzga’s
Case, 145 N.H. 62, 71 (2000). Accordingly, “it is the responsibility of every
attorney at all times to be truthful.” Kalil’s Case, 146 N.H. 466, 467 (2001)
(quotation omitted).
With respect to the respondent’s mental state, the PCC found that he
acted intentionally and deliberately. The Standards define “[i]ntent” as the
“conscious objective or purpose to accomplish a particular result.” Standards,
supra at 9. The parties’ stipulated facts establish that the respondent acted
with a conscious objective or purpose to accomplish a particular result –
inducing Boike to believe that he had secured Grimard’s agreement to list the
property and sell it to the builder. We therefore uphold the PCC’s
determination that the respondent acted intentionally.
We next consider the actual or potential injury from the respondent’s
conduct. The Standards define “[i]njury” as “harm to a client, the public, the
legal system, or the profession which results from a lawyer’s misconduct.” Id.
The PCC determined that the injury was “subjective in nature and not
quantifiable,” but that “[w]henever an attorney engages in . . . deceit, . . . the
injury to the integrity of the New Hampshire Bar is substantial.” We agree with
the PCC that the injury to the integrity of the legal profession is substantial
whenever an attorney engages in deceit. “[N]o single transgression reflects
more negatively on the legal profession than a lie.” Kalil’s Case, 146 N.H. at
467 (quotation omitted).
There is no evidence, however, of any injury to Grimard. As the
respondent aptly points out in his brief: “[The respondent] could not have
compelled . . . Grimard to sell his property based upon the documents . . . and
. . . Grimard was not precluded from choosing to list his property with another
realtor, which he did the same day that [the respondent] signed the
documents.” Nor is there any evidence of injury to the NNEREN.
We next consider the effect of mitigating or aggravating factors with
respect to the sanction to be imposed. The parties agreed to the following
mitigating factors: (1) the respondent’s lack of a prior disciplinary record; (2)
his cooperation during the proceedings, which included expressing remorse
and admitting his misconduct; and (3) the loss of his real estate license. See
4
Standards, supra § 9.32(a), (e), (k), (l). The parties also agreed that the
respondent’s selfish or dishonest motive and his substantial experience in the
practice of law were aggravating factors. Id. § 9.22(b), (i).
The ADO urges disbarment, despite the presence of four mitigating
factors, the lack of injury to Grimard or the NNEREN, and the fact that the
respondent engaged in an isolated instance of misconduct. Although “we have
ordered disbarment for attorney misconduct involving dishonesty[,] [w]e have
observed . . . that those cases involved additional and repeated misconduct,
including the respondents’ failure to cooperate with the professional conduct
committee.” O’Meara’s Case, 150 N.H. 157, 159 (2003) (quotation and citation
omitted).
For instance, we disbarred the attorney in Wolterbeek’s Case, 152 N.H.
710, 717 (2005), where, in addition to acquiring three mortgages and becoming
the holder of a note owed by his client, the attorney engaged “in a course of
deceitful conduct toward a client and a tribunal over a span of several years
with the intent to benefit himself.” Similarly, in Astles’ Case, 134 N.H. 602,
604-05 (1991), we disbarred an attorney who forged his wife’s signature on two
mortgage applications; lied to a paralegal, who was investigating one of the
applications; forged a document that purported to give him his wife’s power of
attorney; and repeatedly lied to the PCC during its investigation. In that case,
we observed that the attorney, having sought commercial financing for his
home by committing fraud, compounded his misconduct by repeatedly lying
about it. Astles’ Case, 134 N.H. at 606.
Additionally, we disbarred the attorney in Basbanes’ Case, 141 N.H. at 6,
for lying to a marital master “over a period of several months” and for giving
false and misleading testimony to a judicial referee at a de novo hearing. See
also Cohen’s Case, 143 N.H. 169, 171 (1998) (attorney disbarred for “falsely
stating to [his client] that he had filed her bankruptcy petition when he had not
done so, . . . signing her name to the bankruptcy petition without her consent,
. . . filing [it] after [she] instructed him not to do so, and . . . falsely answering
bar counsel’s interrogatory”); Eshleman’s Case, 126 N.H. 1, 2-3 (1985)
(attorney disbarred where his trust account was out of trust by more than
$70,000.00, he lied at his disciplinary hearing and failed to notify the PCC or
this court that he had been arrested for grand theft); Jones’ Case, 137 N.H.
351, 353-56, 360-61 (1993) (attorney disbarred where, against client’s
instructions, he leaked letter to news reporters, repeatedly lied to client about
source of leak, and filed and signed numerous pleadings falsely accusing
government of being source of leak); Nardi’s Case, 142 N.H. 602, 607-08 (1998)
(attorney disbarred where he knowingly violated terms of escrow agreement by
relinquishing control of funds expressly given to him for safekeeping, knowingly
made false statements to client, and had been privately reprimanded for
misconduct in the past).
5
In cases in which there has not been repeated deceit or dishonesty, we
have not heretofore ordered the attorney disbarred. At oral argument, counsel
for the ADO conceded that we have never before disbarred an attorney for
engaging in a single episode of deceitful conduct.
For instance, we ordered public censure in O’Meara’s Case, 150 N.H. at
159-60, and Welts’ Case, 136 N.H. 588, 592 (1993), where the attorneys in
these cases engaged in an isolated instance of deceit. In O’Meara’s Case, 150
N.H. at 158, the attorney lied to the court about the date on which he had a
subpoena issued and made allegations about his wife in a motion that were
“gross embellishments on the truth lacking sound factual predicates.”
(Quotation omitted.) We observed that the attorney’s dishonesty involved “two
isolated incidents of misconduct.” O’Meara’s Case, 150 N.H. at 159. We ruled
that in the absence of factors that justified imposing suspension, such as
“engag[ing] in a concerted course of unethical conduct that involved multiple
incidents occurring over an extended period of time,” and because of the
presence of mitigating factors, public censure was the proper sanction. Id. at
160.
Similarly, in Welts’ Case, 136 N.H. at 593, we ordered public censure of
the attorney where his violations of the Rules “flow[ed] essentially from an
isolated course of conduct, which he voluntarily disclosed in a manner
calculated to mitigate prejudice to his clients.” In that case, the attorney lied to
his clients about filing a lawsuit on their behalf. Welts’ Case, 136 N.H. at 590.
In other cases involving dishonesty, we have suspended the attorney. In
Feld’s Case, 149 N.H. 19, 21 (2002), for instance, we suspended the attorney
for one year where he “orchestrated, assisted, counseled and tolerated the
formulation of inaccurate and incomplete sworn [discovery] responses that he
knew were inaccurate.” (Quotation omitted.) We also suspended the attorney
in Bruzga’s Case, 145 N.H. at 71-72, for one year where he knowingly made
misrepresentations about his ex-wife in an abuse and neglect petition,
submitted the petition to harass and injure her, and instead of expressing
remorse for his misconduct, engaged in “semantical gamesmanship” to justify
it. We explained that disbarment was not proper, in part, because the attorney
faced discipline for the first time in his career and because the violations
occurred in a single event. Bruzga’s Case, 145 N.H. at 72.
The respondent’s conduct was significantly less egregious than that of
the attorneys in cases in which we have ordered disbarment. The respondent’s
Rule violations, unlike those of the attorneys in disbarment cases, involved an
isolated instance of misconduct. His conduct did not span “several years,”
Wolterbeek’s Case, 152 N.H. at 717, or even “several months,” Basbanes’ Case,
141 N.H. at 6; nor did it involve a continuing course of dishonest conduct,
6
including lying to the PCC, Astles’ Case, 134 N.H. at 604-05; Cohen’s Case,
143 N.H. at 171. Moreover, unlike the attorneys in Wolterbeek’s Case, 152
N.H. at 716-17, and Nardi’s Case, 142 N.H. at 608, the respondent has no prior
disciplinary offenses. Additionally, unlike the attorneys in Basbanes’ Case, 141
N.H. at 7-8, and Astles’ Case, 134 N.H. at 606, he cooperated fully with the
PCC’s investigation and “displayed genuine remorse by admitting his
misconduct in the stipulation,” Wolterbeek’s Case, 152 N.H. at 716.
On the other hand, his conduct was more egregious than that of the
attorneys in O’Meara’s Case and Welts’ Case. There was no finding in this
case, unlike in O’Meara’s Case, 150 N.H. at 159, and Welts’ Case, 136 N.H. at
593, that the respondent suffered from personal and emotional problems that
contributed to his misconduct.
Based upon our consideration of all of the above, we agree with the PCC’s
recommendation that the respondent be suspended from the practice of law.
We decline the ADO’s invitation to disbar the respondent for the single episode
of deceit at issue. While there may be instances where a single episode of
deceit is sufficiently egregious to warrant disbarment, this is not such an
instance.
We disagree with the PCC, however, that a six-month suspension is
sufficient “to protect the public, maintain public confidence in the bar, preserve
the integrity of the legal profession, and prevent similar conduct in the future.”
Richmond’s Case, 152 N.H. 155, 159-60 (2005). Weighing the severity of the
respondent’s misconduct, his dishonest or selfish motive and his years of
experience against his lack of a prior disciplinary record, his cooperation and
remorse, and the loss of his real estate license, we conclude that the
respondent should be suspended from the practice of law for two years. See
Feld’s Case, 149 N.H. at 30. We hold that suspending the respondent from the
practice of law in New Hampshire for two years satisfies the goals of the
attorney discipline system by protecting the public and preserving the integrity
of the legal profession. The period of suspension shall run from the date upon
which this order becomes final. To be reinstated, the respondent shall comply
with all requirements for reinstatement set forth in Supreme Court Rule 37(14).
We further order the respondent to reimburse the attorney discipline system
for all expenses incurred in the investigation and enforcement of discipline in
this case. Sup. Ct. R. 37(19).
So ordered.
BRODERICK, C.J., and GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
7