THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham County Probate Court
No. 2008-849
Rockingham
No. 2008-919
IN RE WILL AND ESTATE OF DAVID J. BOURASSA
Argued: May 14, 2009
Opinion Issued: October 30, 2009
Coughlin, Rainboth, Murphy & Lown, P.A., of Portsmouth (Kenneth D.
Murphy on the brief and orally), for Desiree Bourassa & a.
Michael E. Chubrich P.A., of Portsmouth (Michael E. Chubrich on the
brief and orally), for Deborah Beck.
BRODERICK, C.J. This is a consolidated appeal from the Superior Court
(McHugh, J.) and the Rockingham County Probate Court (Hurd, J.). Deborah
Beck, the fiancée of decedent David Bourassa, appeals an order of the probate
court granting Desiree Bourassa’s petition for extension of time to file suit
against her father’s estate, and an order of the superior court awarding the
proceeds of the decedent’s life insurance policy to his five daughters. We
reverse.
The record supports the following facts. The decedent, David Bourassa,
and his wife, Toni Lynn Bourassa, were divorced in 1996. The divorce decree
contained a provision requiring the parties to maintain “any and all life
insurance policies” and to “designate a trustee to receive the proceeds of any
such policies for the benefit of the children.” At that time, David Bourassa was
insured under a life insurance policy issued in 1992 by Alexander Hamilton
Life Insurance Company in the principal amount of $150,000. The policy listed
Toni Lynn Bourassa as the primary beneficiary and the “children of insured” as
the contingent beneficiaries. In 1992, the couple had four minor children,
Danielle, Devin, Dayna and Desiree.
In February 1999, David Bourassa changed the primary beneficiary
under the life insurance policy from Toni Lynn Bourassa to Deborah Beck, and
the contingent beneficiaries from his four children to his brother, Gary
Bourassa. In October 2000, David Bourassa executed his will, bequeathing all
of his property to his four children in equal shares. In February 2002, he and
Beck had a child, Katherine Bourassa.
On August 16, 2006, David Bourassa died in a motor vehicle accident.
On August 18 his will was allowed and letters testamentary were issued by the
probate court. On September 26 the executor notified David Bourassa’s four
eldest daughters, three of whom had reached majority, that Beck was the sole
beneficiary of the life insurance policy. In early December, the parties began
negotiating a settlement of the estate including entitlement of the life insurance
proceeds. The negotiations continued sporadically until March 12, 2007, but
no agreement was reached.
On September 24, 2007, over thirteen months after the grant of
administration of David Bourassa’s estate, the four eldest daughters brought
suit in superior court against the estate, seeking to recover “the amount of the
life insurance policy proceeds that would have been paid to them but for the
breach of the obligations by David Bourassa.” In May 2008, Beck, having
previously been granted leave to intervene, filed a motion to dismiss raising the
one-year statute of limitations applicable to claims against estates, see RSA
556:5 (2007). In response, Desiree, for herself only, filed in the probate court a
petition, after the fact, for extension of time to file suit in superior court. In her
petition, Desiree explained that an extension was necessary because the
superior court action had been “filed approximately one month after the time
required.” In late June, the superior court denied Beck’s motion to dismiss. In
late September 2008, the probate court granted Desiree’s request for an
extension of time.
A bench trial was held in superior court in October. The court ruled that
because the action regarding the proceeds of the insurance policy was not a
claim against the estate, the statute of limitations was four years and, thus,
the claims of the four eldest daughters were not time-barred. The court also
ruled that the term “children,” as used in the divorce decree, meant “offspring”
2
and therefore the term did not refer only to the decedent’s minor children. As
to the language in the divorce decree regarding life insurance, the court found
that the life insurance policy was under the control of the superior court
because it had granted the divorce, and David Bourassa had the ongoing
obligation to maintain the policy for the benefit of his children. The court ruled
that he had no authority to change the beneficiaries; therefore, the 1999
change, which named Beck as the primary beneficiary, was void. The court
further ruled that because David had a child with Beck born before he died but
after he had obtained the life insurance policy, that child was also entitled to
recover her proportionate share of the policy proceeds because she was a “child
of the insured.”
Beck filed a motion for reconsideration, arguing that the trial court had
erred as a matter of law in ruling that the one-year statute of limitations in
RSA 556:5 did not apply and, because the three eldest daughters never sought
permission to extend the one-year statute of limitations, that their action was
time-barred. She also argued that it was error to award Desiree any portion of
the life insurance proceeds because her delay in filing suit against the estate
within one year was the result of “culpable neglect” under RSA 556:28. The
trial court granted Beck’s motion to the extent it acknowledged that the one-
year statute applied, but refused to reconsider its decision on the merits
because “the Probate Court ha[d] authorized this case to be brought in
Superior Court and this Court’s rational[e] for its decision is sound.” This
appeal followed.
Beck raises five issues: (1) whether the probate court had subject matter
jurisdiction to extend the time to file suit for purposes of RSA 556:28; (2)
whether the probate court erred by granting Desiree an extension of time to file
suit; (3) whether the probate court denied her due process of law by issuing a
sua sponte order under RSA 556:28; (4) whether the superior court erroneously
interpreted the divorce decree to deny the decedent his right to change his life
insurance beneficiaries; and (5) whether the superior court unsustainably
exercised its discretion by depriving her of the life insurance proceeds.
We note at the outset that Desiree was the only daughter to file a petition
for extension of time to file suit against the estate. Because the other sisters
failed to request an extension under RSA 556:28, their action was time-barred
under RSA 556:5.
Beck first argues that “[b]ecause life insurance proceeds payable to a
living person are not probate assets,” the probate court lacked subject matter
jurisdiction to enter an order under RSA 556:28. Desiree contends that the
nature of the claim is one against the estate in the amount of the life insurance
policy proceeds because she should have been named as a primary beneficiary
under the policy. Therefore, she argues, because the claim is one for money
3
owed and not the actual proceeds of the life insurance policy, the probate court
had jurisdiction to grant her an extension of time to bring the claim.
RSA 547:3 (Supp. 2008) provides: “The probate court shall have
exclusive jurisdiction over . . . [t]he granting of administration and all matters
and things of probate jurisdiction relating to the composition, administration,
sale, settlement, and final distribution of estates of deceased persons . . . .” A
person with a claim against the estate of a deceased person “may apply to the
court having subject matter jurisdiction over the nature of the claim” for an
extension of time to file suit. RSA 556:28. We agree with Desiree that the
“nature of the claim” at issue is a claim against her father’s estate for money
owed in the amount of the life insurance policy, and that such a claim falls
within the exclusive jurisdiction of the probate court pursuant to RSA 547:3.
Accordingly, the probate court had subject matter jurisdiction over the nature
of the claim for purposes of the petition for an extension of time to file suit.
Beck next argues that the probate court erred by granting Desiree an
extension of time to sue under RSA 556:28 because she was chargeable with
“culpable neglect.” Desiree contends that it was proper and reasonable for the
probate court to grant her the extension. RSA 556:5 provides: “No suit shall
be maintained against an administrator for any cause of action against the
deceased, unless it is begun within one year next after the original grant of
administration . . . .” The purpose of this provision “is to secure the orderly
and expeditious settlement of estates.” Sullivan v. Marshall, 93 N.H. 456, 458
(1945). Pursuant to RSA 556:28:
Whenever any person has a claim against the estate of a deceased
person, which has not been prosecuted within the time limited by
law, such person may apply to the court having subject matter
jurisdiction over the nature of the claim, by petition setting forth
all the facts; and if the court shall be of the opinion that justice
and equity require it, and that the claimant is not chargeable with
culpable neglect in not bringing or prosecuting his or her suit or
claim within the time limited by law, it may extend the time for
filing and prosecuting the claim to a date certain . . . .
A petition for relief pursuant to RSA 556:28 must therefore set forth facts
demonstrating not only the absence of culpable neglect, but that justice and
equity require an extension. See Stewart v. Farrel, 131 N.H. 458, 461 (1989).
The burden is on the petitioner to demonstrate lack of culpable neglect. See
Cass v. Ray, Ex’r, 131 N.H. 550, 554 (1989). “Whether conduct in a particular
case constitutes culpable neglect is a question of fact for the trial court.” Id. at
553. “Like other findings of fact, a finding as to culpable neglect can be set
aside on appeal only if it is unsupported by the evidence or erroneous as a
matter of law.” Id.; see RSA 567-A:4 (2007) (findings of fact of the probate
4
judge are final unless so plainly erroneous that such findings could not be
reasonably made).
In interpreting the term “culpable neglect,” we have stated that it is “less
than gross carelessness, but more than the failure to use ordinary care, it is
culpable want of watchfulness and diligence, the unreasonable inattention and
inactivity of creditors who slumber on their rights.” Stewart, 131 N.H. at 462
(quotations omitted). Culpable neglect “exists if no good reason, according to
the standards of ordinary conduct, for the dormancy of the claim is found.” Id.
(quotations omitted). “[W]e have further stated that ‘culpable neglect’ would
seem to convey the idea of neglect for which the claimant was ‘to blame’; that
is, the neglect which exists where the loss can fairly be ascribed to his own
carelessness, improvidence or folly.” Ray, 131 N.H. at 553 (quotations and
brackets omitted).
Desiree’s petition for extension of time alleged that, at the time of the
appointment of the administrator in August 2006, she was a minor and
remained a minor during the one-year period during which suit was to be filed,
that timely notice of her claim was given to the administrator, that the parties
were attempting to resolve the matter, and that a mediation was held in
February 2007 to accomplish a settlement. An affidavit in support of the
petition, prepared by Desiree’s sister, Devin, states that in October 2006, the
parties agreed that Beck and the five daughters would each be entitled to a
one-sixth share of the estate, and that the daughters would get the life
insurance proceeds. The affidavit further states that in December 2006, the
parties traveled together to Disney World, “reinforcing that everything would be
okay and that [Beck] still was not planning on . . . claiming the insurance
money.”
However, despite the fact that Desiree was only seventeen years old when
the administrator of her father’s estate was appointed in August 2006, she was
represented by counsel by November of that year, nine months before the
statute of limitations expired. She offers no reason why her attorney failed to
file suit before the expiration of the statute of limitations. See id. at 554 (client
may not generally have relief from the consequences of an attorney’s failure to
meet deadlines and other procedural requirements). She also offers no reason
why her minority would toll the statute under these circumstances. See Steir
v. Girl Scouts of the U.S.A., 150 N.H. 212, 214-15 (2003) (statutes of
limitations apply against minors unless statute expressly provides otherwise).
In addition, although the parties attempted to reach agreement informally
among themselves and by mediation, those attempts had broken down by early
March 2007. Thus, from March 2007, five months before the statute of
limitations expired, Desiree was aware that Beck claimed sole ownership of the
life insurance proceeds. She failed, however, to bring a claim against her
father’s estate in a timely fashion. Indeed, Desiree did not file a petition for
5
extension of time until May 27, 2008, a full fourteen months after attempts to
reach agreement had failed, and a full nine months after the statute of
limitations had expired.
“There was no evidence of a mistake of law or fact or some circumstance
beyond the plaintiff’s or her counsel’s control of the kind we usually
understand to provide good reason for the dormancy of a claim.” Ray, 131 N.H.
at 554. If there is no good reason, according to the standards of ordinary
conduct, for the dormancy of the claim, it must be disallowed, although
otherwise “justice and equity” sustain it. In re Estate of Bennett, 149 N.H.
496, 498 (2003). We hold that under the facts and circumstances of this case
Desiree failed to sustain her burden of demonstrating lack of “culpable neglect”
in failing to file a petition for extension of time to bring a claim against her
father’s estate until nine months after the expiration of the one-year statute of
limitations set forth in RSA 556:5. We conclude, therefore, that the probate
court’s order granting an extension to file suit in superior court pursuant to
RSA 556:28 must be set aside as not supported by sufficient evidence. Cf. id.
at 499. Accordingly, we reverse both the probate and superior courts’ orders,
and need not address Beck’s remaining arguments.
Reversed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6