THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Coos
No. 2005-342
DEBRA A. CLOUTIER
v.
CITY OF BERLIN
Argued: May 10, 2006
Opinion Issued: August 2, 2006
Hall Stewart, P.A., of Manchester (Michael P. Hall and John B. Kenison,
Jr. on the brief, and Mr. Hall orally), for the plaintiff.
Wadleigh, Starr & Peters, P.L.L.C., of Manchester (John A. Lassey on the
brief and orally), for the defendant.
Paul G. Sanderson, staff attorney, of Concord, by brief, for The N.H.
Local Government Center, as amicus curiae.
DUGGAN, J. The plaintiff, Debra A. Cloutier, sued the defendant, City of
Berlin, for personal injuries and economic losses that she suffered while
operating her vehicle on one of its streets. The jury returned a verdict for the
City. The plaintiff appeals an order of the Superior Court (Houran, J.) denying
her post-trial motion to set aside the verdict and for a new trial. The City
cross-appeals the denial of its pre-trial motion for summary judgment. We
affirm the trial court’s denial of the plaintiff’s post-trial motion and do not
reach the issues raised in the City’s cross-appeal.
The record reflects the following facts. On the night of August 7, 2000,
the plaintiff was traveling in her vehicle through the intersection of Grafton and
Rockingham Streets in Berlin. A heavy rainstorm was just ending. During the
rainstorm, excess water displaced a manhole cover in the intersection. As the
plaintiff drove through the intersection, she either drove over the open manhole
or collided with the displaced manhole cover. As a result, the plaintiff suffered
personal injuries and property damage.
The intersection of Grafton and Rockingham Streets is located on a
slope. There had never before been a reported manhole cover displacement at
this particular intersection. There had, however, been reports made to City
officials of partial and complete manhole cover displacement at manholes
located on or near long slopes at other locations in the City, usually during
heavy rainfall.
After the accident, the plaintiff sued the City, alleging that her damages
resulted from the City’s failure to correct the conditions that caused the
manhole cover to become displaced. She alleged that the City was aware of
manhole cover displacement at similarly situated manholes and, accordingly, it
should have anticipated and guarded against manhole cover displacement at
the intersection where the accident occurred. The jury returned a verdict in
favor of the City. The plaintiff’s post-trial motions were denied and this appeal
followed.
The plaintiff contends on appeal that the trial court erred by instructing
the jury regarding the municipal liability provisions in RSA 231:90 through
:92-a (1993 & Supp. 2005). She argues first that RSA 231:90 through :92
(1993) are “immunity defenses,” which, pursuant to RSA 412:3 (1998) (repealed
2002) (current version at RSA 507-B:7-a (Supp. 2005)), the City was prohibited
from asserting because it had liability insurance. Next, she argues that,
regardless of the existence of liability insurance coverage, RSA 231:92, I(b) is
not applicable in this case. Finally, she argues that the trial court’s inclement
weather instruction, given pursuant to RSA 231:92-a (Supp. 2005), was
erroneous because: (1) RSA 231:92-a is not applicable to the facts of this case;
and (2) even if the statute is applicable, the language of the instruction itself
was deficient.
I. RSA 412:3
The plaintiff first argues that RSA 412:3 renders the municipal liability
provisions of RSA 231:90 through :92 inapplicable to a municipality which has
2
liability insurance. RSA 412:3, at the time of the plaintiff’s accident, provided,
in pertinent part:
In any action against . . . [a municipality] to enforce liability on
account of a risk [for which the municipality has procured a policy
of insurance], the insuring company or . . . [municipality] shall not
be allowed to plead as a defense immunity from liability for
damages resulting from the performance of governmental
functions, and its liability shall be determined as in the case of a
private corporation except when a standard of care differing from
that of [a] private corporation is set forth by statute; provided,
however, that liability in any such case shall not exceed the limits
of coverage specified in the policy of insurance or as to
governmental units defined in RSA 507-B, liability shall not exceed
the policy limit or the limit specified in RSA 507-B:4, if applicable,
whichever is higher, and the court shall abate any verdict in any
such action to the extent that it exceeds such limit.
The plaintiff argues that RSA 231:90 through :92 are immunity defenses within
the meaning of RSA 412:3, and thus the City is prohibited from relying upon
them because it has liability insurance. The City, however, argues that RSA
231:90 through :92 set forth a standard of care differing from that of a private
corporation, and thus trigger the exception contained in RSA 412:3 to permit
the City to rely upon RSA 231:90 through :92 in its defense.
The trial court interpreted RSA 412:3 to provide that “even where, as
here, a defendant municipality has procured insurance for the risk at issue, it
is nonetheless entitled to have its liability determined under an applicable
statutory standard of care differing from that of a private corporation.” It
concluded that RSA 231:90 through :92 “establish[] such an applicable
statutory standard of care.”
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de
novo. Carlisle v. Frisbie Mem. Hosp., 152 N.H. 762, 773 (2005). We are the
final arbiters of the legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute
considered as a whole. Id. We first examine the language of the statute, and,
where possible, ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used. Id.
When a statute’s language is plain and unambiguous, we need not look beyond
it for further indication of legislative intent, and we will not consider what the
legislature might have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit
to include. Id. If a statute is ambiguous, however, we consider legislative
history to aid our analysis. Id. Our goal is to apply statutes in light of the
legislature’s intent in enacting them, and in light of the policy sought to be
advanced by the entire statutory scheme. Id.
3
The language of RSA 412:3 is plain and unambiguous. It provides that a
municipality with insurance coverage may not “plead as a defense immunity
from liability for damages resulting from the performance of governmental
functions,” and further provides that its liability “shall be determined as in the
case of a private corporation except when a standard of care differing from that
of [a] private corporation is set forth by statute.” RSA 412:3 (emphasis added).
The parties dispute whether any of the provisions in RSA 231:90 through
:92 set forth a defense of immunity or a statutory standard of care. The
plaintiff suggests that even if any provision in RSA 231:90 through :92
establishes a standard of care, it cannot apply under RSA 412:3 because each
provision is “entangled with prohibited immunity defenses.” We examine each
of the relevant provisions in turn.
RSA 231:90, entitled “Duty of Town After Notice of Insufficiency,” defines
“insufficiency” and describes the form of written notice required by RSA
231:92, I(a). It provides, in pertinent part,
I. Whenever any class IV or class V highway . . . in any
municipality shall be insufficient, any person may give written
notice of such insufficiency to one of the [designated municipal
officials], and a copy of said notice to the town or city clerk. The
notice shall be signed and shall set forth in general terms . . . the
location of such highway . . . and the nature of such insufficiency.
II. [A] highway . . . shall be considered “insufficient” only if:
(a) It is not passable in any safe manner by those persons or
vehicles permitted on such . . . highway by state law or by any
more stringent local ordinance or regulation; or
(b) There exists a safety hazard which is not reasonably
discoverable or reasonably avoidable by a person who is traveling
upon such highway at posted speeds . . ., in obedience to all
posted regulations, and in a manner which is reasonable and
prudent as determined by the condition and state or repair of the
highway . . ., including any warning signs, and prevailing visibility
and weather conditions.
III. A highway . . . shall not, in the absence of impassability or
hidden hazard as set forth in paragraph II, be considered
“insufficient” merely by reason of the municipality’s failure to
construct, maintain or repair it to the same standard as some
other highway or sidewalk, or to a level of service commensurate
with its current level of public use.
RSA 231:90.
4
The plaintiff argues that RSA 231:90 “does not establish a standard of
care but rather limits a municipality’s liability to narrowly defined hazards
(insufficiencies),” thus creating an immunity defense. However, RSA 231:90
does nothing more than define “insufficiency,” RSA 231:90, II, III, and “written
notice,” RSA 231:90, I. Standing alone, it is neither a standard of care
provision nor an immunity provision.
RSA 231:91 describes the municipality’s duty to respond to a notice of
insufficiency, see RSA 231:90, I, and provides for municipal liability resulting
from a failure to respond as required. RSA 231:91 provides, in pertinent part,
I. Upon receipt of such notice of insufficiency, and unless the
highway agents or street commissioners determine in good faith
that no such insufficiency exists, the municipality shall
immediately cause proper danger signals to be placed to warn
persons by day or night of such insufficiency, and shall, within 72
hours thereafter, develop a plan for repairing such highway . . .
and shall implement such plan in good faith and with reasonable
dispatch until the highway . . . is no longer insufficient, as defined
by RSA 231:90, II.
II. If the municipality fails to act as set forth in paragraph I, it
shall be liable in damages for all personal injury or property
damage proximately caused by the insufficiency identified in the
notice, subject to [statutory limitations].
The plaintiff argues that RSA 231:91 “is primarily an immunity statute
because it relies on the narrow liability-limiting definition of ‘insufficiency’ as
well as the liability-limiting written notice requirements of RSA 231:90.” The
plaintiff concedes, however, that RSA 231:91 “establish[es] a standard of care
for municipalities which have received written notice of insufficiencies.” We
disagree that RSA 231:91, standing alone, is an immunity statute. RSA 231:91
does not limit the liability of municipalities; rather, it provides that a
municipality is required to respond to a written notice of an insufficiency, RSA
231:91, I, and, if it fails to do so, will be liable for any injury caused by that
insufficiency, RSA 231:91, II. At most, RSA 231:91 sets forth a standard of
care which establishes municipal liability, but it does not expressly limit such
liability. Standing alone, RSA 231:91 does not provide that a lack of written
notice or a lack of a statutory “insufficiency” will result in limited liability on
the part of the municipality. It is, therefore, not an immunity provision.
RSA 231:92, entitled “Liability of Municipalities; Standard of Care,”
provides, in pertinent part,
5
I. A municipality shall not be held liable for damages in an action
to recover for personal injury or property damage arising out of its
construction, maintenance, or repair of public highways . . . unless
such injury or damage was caused by an insufficiency, as defined
by RSA 231:90, and:
(a) The municipality received a written notice of such
insufficiency as set forth in RSA 231:90, but failed to act as
provided by RSA 231:91; or
(b) [Certain municipal officials or employees] had actual
notice or knowledge of such insufficiency, by means other than
written notice pursuant to RSA 231:90, and were grossly negligent
or exercised bad faith in responding or failing to respond to such
actual knowledge; or
(c) The condition constituting the insufficiency was created
by an intentional act of a municipal officer or employee acting in
the scope of his official duty while in the course of his employment,
acting with gross negligence, or with reckless disregard of the
hazard.
Because the jury in this case was instructed regarding only paragraph I of RSA
231:92, we do not consider whether the remaining paragraphs are immunity
provisions or whether they set forth a standard of care.
The plaintiff argues that RSA 231:92, I, “is primarily an immunity statute
because it, like RSA 231:91, relies on the liability-limiting definition of
‘insufficiency’ as well as the liability-limiting written notice requirements
contained in RSA 231:90.” We agree that RSA 231:92, I, is a municipal
immunity provision. By providing that a municipality “shall not be held liable
. . . unless” certain statutory requirements are met, RSA 231:92, I, provides
limited liability to municipalities and, in essence, confers some degree of
immunity upon them. RSA 231:92, I (emphasis added).
However, the plaintiff concedes that RSA 231:92, I, simultaneously
establishes a standard of care different from that of a private corporation that
is applicable to municipalities. By providing that a municipality may be liable
for injuries or damages caused by a statutory insufficiency when, among other
things, it fails to act in accordance with RSA 231:91 upon receipt of a written
notice of an insufficiency, or it is grossly negligent or it acts in bad faith in
response to a municipal official’s actual notice or knowledge of an insufficiency,
RSA 231:92, I, establishes a special standard of care applicable to
municipalities in the construction, maintenance, and repair of public
highways.
Because RSA 231:92, I, assumes this dual role, it is unclear from its
plain language and the plain language of RSA 412:3 whether the legislature
6
intended that insured municipalities be able to avail themselves of its
protections. We thus turn to legislative history for guidance. See Carlisle, 152
N.H. at 773.
Prior to 1991, RSA 507-B:2 (1983) (repealed and reenacted 1991)
provided, in pertinent part:
A governmental unit may be held liable for damages in an action to
recover for bodily injury, personal injury or property damage
caused by its fault or by fault attributable to it, arising out of
ownership, occupation, maintenance or operation of . . . [a]ll
premises, except public sidewalks, streets, highways or publicly
owned airport runways and taxiways.
In City of Dover v. Imperial Casualty & Indemnity Co., 133 N.H. 109, 120
(1990), we held that the exception in RSA 507-B:2 for public sidewalks, streets,
and highways violated Part I, Article 14 of the State Constitution. Shortly
thereafter, the legislature repealed and reenacted RSA 507-B:2, as well as RSA
231:90 through :92, as part of Senate Bill 151-FN. See Laws 1991, ch. 385;
see also Opinion of the Justices, 134 N.H. 266, 271 (1991) (considering Senate
Bill 151-FN prior to its enactment). The purpose of Senate Bill 151-FN was “to
provide municipalities with the greatest possible protection from highway and
sidewalk liability, consistent with the constitution.” Laws 1991, 385:1.
Senate Bill 151-FN also amended RSA 412:3 to add the phrase “except
when a standard of care differing from that of [a] private corporation is set forth
by statute.” Laws 1991, 385:8. Prior to this amendment, RSA 412:3 did not
include any such exception, providing only that a municipality’s liability “shall
be determined as in the case of a private corporation.” RSA 412:3 (1983).
The legislative record does not reveal how the legislature intended the
revision to RSA 412:3 to interact with the other statutory provisions created by
Senate Bill 151-FN. Viewing the legislation as a whole, however, it appears
that the legislature intended the exception added to RSA 412:3 to refer
specifically to RSA 231:92. See Laws 1991, ch. 385. Section 5 of the
legislation, entitled “Municipality Standard of Care,” created RSA 231:92 and is
the only section of Senate Bill 151-FN which is labeled as a standard of care.
See Laws 1991, 385:5. We thus conclude that RSA 231:90 through :92 do, in
fact, establish “a [statutory] standard of care differing from that of [a] private
corporation,” within the meaning of RSA 412:3 (1998) (repealed 2002) (current
version at RSA 507-B:7-a (Supp. 2005)). We agree with the argument of the
amicus that, with the 1991 amendment to RSA 412:3, the legislature expressed
its intention that “[t]he presence or absence of liability insurance does not
change the legal duty owed to users of highways, or change the type of conduct
that constitutes a breach of such duty. The amount of any insurance available
7
only serves to determine the amount of damages that may, upon proof, be
recoverable from the municipality if it is in fact found to be a tortfeasor.”
The plaintiff argues that this interpretation of RSA 231:90 through :92
and RSA 412:3 “render[s] meaningless [RSA 412:3]’s prohibition against
insured municipalities asserting immunity defenses.” We disagree. RSA 412:3
applies to an insured municipality’s assertion of an immunity defense under
any circumstances, not only with respect to the construction, maintenance, or
repair of public highways and sidewalks. See RSA 412:3. Thus, the
prohibition remains applicable under circumstances in which a statute does
not set forth a standard of care different from that of a private corporation.
Although we have clearly stated that “a municipality may be held to a
lower standard of care with respect to its highways and sidewalks than a
private corporation,” Opinion of the Justices, 134 N.H. at 279, we recognize the
legitimate public policy concern, as stated by the plaintiff in her brief, that
under our interpretation of RSA 231:90 through :92 and RSA 412:3, insurance
purchased to guard against the risk of injury or damage involving hazardous
highways and sidewalks may be “illusory and [may] negate one of the long-
recognized justifications for allowing some degree of immunity for highways
and sidewalks: namely, that [injured] citizens . . . can be compensated by
insurance purchased by [municipalities], thus helping to mitigate the
harshness of the sovereign immunity rule.” Such matters of public policy,
however, are reserved for the legislature, and we therefore leave to it the task of
addressing the plaintiff’s concerns. Cf. Minuteman, LLC v. Microsoft Corp.,
147 N.H. 634, 641-42 (2002).
In light of the foregoing, we conclude that the trial court did not err in
instructing the jury with respect to the municipal liability provisions of RSA
231:90, RSA 231:91, and RSA 231:92, I.
II. Applicability of RSA 231:92, I(b)
Next, the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred by instructing the jury
regarding RSA 231:92, I(b), which provides that a municipality having actual,
but not written, notice of an insufficiency will be liable only if it was grossly
negligent or exercised bad faith in responding or failing to respond to its
knowledge of the insufficiency. She contends that, pursuant to our holding in
City of Dover, 133 N.H. at 120, Part I, Article 14 of the State Constitution
requires that a municipality which has actual notice of an insufficiency in its
highways and sidewalks be held to a standard of ordinary negligence so long as
it has had an adequate opportunity to correct the condition, protect travelers
from injury, or warn travelers of the hazard. She contends that, because the
legislature intended to provide municipalities with “the greatest possible
protection from highway and sidewalk liability, consistent with the
8
constitution,” Laws 1991, ch. 385 (emphasis added), we should conclude that
“the legislature did not intend that the gross negligence standard of RSA
231:92[, I(b)] would be applied in a case like the present one where the
municipality had ample actual notice and opportunity to repair.” The plaintiff,
however, failed to object to the instruction on this basis when it was given.
It is well established that a party must make a specific and
contemporaneous objection during trial to preserve an issue for appellate
review. Broughton v. Proulx, 152 N.H. 549, 552 (2005). This requirement
affords the trial court an opportunity to correct any error it may have made and
is grounded in common sense and judicial economy. Id. Here, although the
plaintiff did object to instructing the jury regarding RSA 231:92, I(b), she
argued only that: (1) RSA 231:90 through :92 are inapplicable due to the
existence of liability insurance, pursuant to RSA 412:3; (2) RSA 231:92, I(b) is
inapplicable because the City received “sufficient written notice” of the alleged
insufficiency under RSA 231:92, I(a); and (3) RSA 231:92, I(b) is “void for
vagueness” because it does not define “gross negligence.” The trial court was
not afforded an opportunity to consider her current objection to the
instruction. Cf. Broughton, 152 N.H. at 552. Therefore, the issue has not been
preserved for our review. See State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 48 (2003).
III. The Inclement Weather Instruction
Finally, the plaintiff argues that the trial court’s inclement weather
instruction, given pursuant to RSA 231:92-a (the inclement weather provision),
was erroneous because: (1) the inclement weather provision is not applicable
to the facts of this case; and (2) even if it is applicable, the language of the
instruction itself was deficient. We address each argument in turn.
The inclement weather provision provides, in pertinent part:
[A] municipality . . . shall not be held liable for damages arising
from insufficiencies or hazards on public highways, bridges, or
sidewalks, even if it has actual notice or knowledge of them, when
such hazards are caused solely by snow, ice, or other inclement
weather, and the municipality’s . . . failure or delay in removing or
mitigating such hazards is the result of its implementation, absent
gross negligence or reckless disregard of the hazard, of a winter or
inclement weather maintenance policy or set of priorities adopted
in good faith by the officials responsible for such policy . . . .
RSA 231:92-a.
The trial court, based upon the inclement weather provision, instructed
the jury that “a municipality may not be held liable for damages arising from
9
hazards on public highways, bridges or sidewalks caused by snow, ice or other
inclement weather unless there is evidence of reckless disregard or gross
negligence in failing to remove such hazards.” The plaintiff objected, stating
that she believed that RSA 231:92-a “does not apply under the circumstances
of this case because this was not the issue of a sudden ice, snow or rainstorm
creating a hazard but rather the situation of a preexisting hazard that the City
had plenty of time to anticipate.” The plaintiff again raised her objection to the
applicability of the inclement weather instruction in her motion to set aside the
verdict and for a new trial. The trial court concluded that “the evidence in
[this] case concerning the rain event at issue and its effect was sufficient to
support the giving of [the inclement weather] instruction.”
A. Applicability of the Inclement Weather Provision
The plaintiff contends that the inclement weather provision does not
apply to the facts of this case “because here the hazardous displacement of the
manhole cover was caused only in part by heavy rain, and the failure of the city
to correct the conditions which allowed manhole covers to be displaced was
also a major cause of the displacement, the resulting collision, and plaintiff’s
injuries.” We disagree.
It is within the sound discretion of the trial court to determine whether
or not a particular jury instruction is necessary. State v. Littlefield, 152 N.H.
331, 334 (2005). We review the trial court’s decision to give the inclement
weather instruction in this case for an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
See id.
The applicability of the inclement weather provision’s limitation on
municipal liability is predicated upon a finding that the hazard at issue is
caused solely by inclement weather. See RSA 231:92-a. Whether the hazard is
caused solely by inclement weather is a factual issue for the jury to decide.
Generally, a trial court may give a jury instruction so long as there is some
evidence supporting the applicability of the instruction to the facts of the case.
See Vachon v. New England Towing, 148 N.H. 429, 433-34 (2002). When the
instruction is predicated upon the jury’s finding of a fact that is in dispute, the
trial court is justified in giving the instruction where “there is testimony
tending to support the supposed state of facts with which the jurors are
properly made acquainted.” 89 C.J.S. Trial § 666 (2001); see Frost v. Stevens,
88 N.H. 164, 165-66 (1936). If the predicate factual finding is not supported by
the evidence, however, it is error for the trial court to instruct the jury on the
issue. See Lindberg v. Swenson, 95 N.H. 184, 186 (1948).
Here, while there may have been testimony to support the plaintiff’s
argument that the hazard of manhole cover displacement was not caused solely
by inclement weather, there was also testimony tending to support the
10
argument that the same hazard was caused solely by inclement weather.
Several City employees testified that manhole cover displacement in the City
was caused by heavy rain. Given this testimony, we cannot say that the trial
court’s decision to give the inclement weather instruction was an
unsustainable exercise of discretion.
The plaintiff urges us to consider the policy behind RSA 231:92-a and
find it inapplicable to her case. She argues that the rationale behind RSA
231:92-a “is to protect municipalities from liability for sudden weather hazards,
which do not allow time for corrective action.” She contends that “[t]he
evidence showed that . . . displacement of manhole covers was a long-standing
problem of which the [City] was well aware” and, accordingly, the hazard “was
not the type of sudden weather event RSA 231:92-a was intended to address.”
However, the plain and unambiguous language of the inclement weather
provision contains no requirement that the hazard caused by inclement
weather be sudden, unpredictable, or difficult to correct promptly. See RSA
231:92-a. When a statute’s language is plain and unambiguous, we need not
look beyond it for further indication of legislative intent, and we will not
consider what the legislature might have said or add language that it did not
see fit to include. Carlisle, 152 N.H. at 762.
B. The Language of the Inclement Weather Instruction
The plaintiff also argues that the trial court erred in instructing the jury
based upon the inclement weather provision by omitting the word “solely” from
its instruction. The City argues that the plaintiff failed to timely object to the
instruction on this basis, and thus failed to preserve her objection for appellate
review.
The plaintiff concedes that she did not object to the omission of the word
“solely” when the instruction was given. She argues, however, that the
objection that she did make to the inclement weather instruction, arguing that
the instruction was inappropriate because the hazard was not caused solely by
inclement weather, was “sufficient to put the trial court on notice that the
instruction as given was inappropriate to the circumstances of the case.” We
disagree.
As stated above, it is well established that a party must make a specific
and contemporaneous objection during trial to preserve an issue for appellate
review. Broughton, 152 N.H. at 552. Here, the plaintiff’s objection addressed
only the applicability of the inclement weather provision, and the trial court
was not afforded an opportunity to consider her current objection to the
language of the instruction. Cf. id. Therefore, the issue has not been
preserved for our review. See Blackmer, 149 N.H. at 48.
11
Nevertheless, the plaintiff argues that we should review the trial court’s
instruction for plain error. See Sup. Ct. R. 16-A. The plain error rule allows us
to consider errors not brought to the attention of the trial court. Id. However,
the rule should be used sparingly, its use limited to those circumstances in
which a miscarriage of justice would otherwise result. State v. MacInnes, 151
N.H. 732, 736-37 (2005). For us to find error under the rule: “(1) there must
be an error; (2) the error must be plain; (3) the error must affect substantial
rights; and (4) the error must seriously affect the fairness, integrity or public
reputation of judicial proceedings.” Id. at 737. Even assuming that there was
error in this case, and that the error was plain, the burden is on the plaintiff to
prove that the error affected substantial rights. See State v. Emery, 152 N.H.
783, 787 (2005).
The plaintiff contends in her brief that the error affected her substantial
rights. However, she provides no argument in support of her contention except
to cite to our decision in Carson v. Maurer, 120 N.H. 925, 931-32 (1980), and
to note parenthetically that the decision “recogniz[es] that the right to seek
compensation for personal injuries is an important substantive right protected
by the New Hampshire Constitution.” (Quotation omitted.) The plaintiff
apparently contends that an error affects the substantial rights of the
appealing party whenever that party is seeking compensation for personal
injuries. The plaintiff appears to have misconstrued the third prong of the
plain error rule.
Generally, for a plaintiff to satisfy the burden of proving that an error
affected the substantial rights of the plaintiff, he or she “must demonstrate that
the error was prejudicial – that it affected the outcome of the proceeding.”
Emery, 152 N.H. at 787. Here, the plaintiff failed to demonstrate that the
omission of the word “solely” from the inclement weather instruction affected
the outcome of the proceeding, and thus failed to satisfy her burden of proof on
the third prong of the plain error rule. Therefore, we do not find error under
the rule.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
12