THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Original
No. LD-2003-004
DOUGLAS’ CASE
Argued: November 13, 2007
Opinion Issued: December 28, 2007
Abramson, Brown & Dugan, of Manchester (Kenneth C. Brown and Jared
R. Green on the brief, and Mr. Green orally), for the Committee on Professional
Conduct.
Caroline G. Douglas, of Concord, by brief, pro se.
BRODERICK, C.J. On July 11, 2003, the Supreme Court Committee on
Professional Conduct (committee) filed a petition seeking disbarment of the
respondent, Caroline G. Douglas. The Judicial Referee (Horton, J.) found by
clear and convincing evidence that the respondent violated New Hampshire
Rules of Professional Conduct (Rules) 1.15(a)(1), 1.15(c), 8.4(c) and 8.4(a), and
recommended a five-year suspension as a sanction. The committee
recommends disbarment. We conclude that the respondent’s conduct warrants
disbarment.
I
The referee made the following findings of fact. On June 14, 1994,
Marjorie VanderKruik retained the respondent to represent her in her divorce.
The retention agreement provided that VanderKruik would reimburse the
respondent’s law firm, Douglas & Douglas, for all costs advanced and expenses
incurred that were directly related to the legal services provided. The
agreement further provided that, each month, the firm would render a
statement to VanderKruik that detailed the time and expenses incurred. The
agreement provided that “fees for legal services and other chargeable expenses”
would be paid upon presentation of the statement “unless [another] mutually
satisfactory agreement” was made. Under the agreement, VanderKruik agreed
to pay a $5,000 retainer and that the amount of each bill would first be paid
out of the retainer account. She also agreed that whenever the retainer was
reduced, she could be asked to replenish it. At the end of representation, any
balance left in the retainer account would be used to pay the final bill and any
portion left over would be returned to VanderKruik. The referee rejected
testimony by the respondent that she and VanderKruik later entered into
another fee agreement, finding that such testimony lacked credibility.
On June 10, 1997, the respondent’s then-husband, Charles Douglas,
whom she was in the process of divorcing, filed an attorney’s lien against
VanderKruik in the amount of approximately $65,000 for services rendered by
the law firm of Douglas & Douglas in VanderKruik’s divorce. The superior
court ordered that issues regarding the validity, amount and payment of the
lien would be determined in the respondent’s divorce case, not in
VanderKruik’s divorce case.
The final decree in VanderKruik’s divorce was entered on June 23, 1997,
and judgment in the case was entered on September 8, 1997. The decree
awarded VanderKruik the funds in an escrow account held by Attorney Robert
Bowers, who represented VanderKruik’s ex-husband. VanderKruik intended to
use the funds, which were partial proceeds from the sale of the marital home,
to pay the remaining debts and financial obligations associated with the sale of
the residence, as required by the divorce decree. The respondent suggested to
VanderKruik that the funds in the escrow account be forwarded directly to the
respondent’s trust account so that she could protect them and keep them safe
from Mr. Douglas. The respondent told VanderKruik that if the funds were
turned over to VanderKruik directly, Mr. Douglas would take them.
On August 18, 1997, Attorney Bowers responded to an inquiry from the
respondent about closing the escrow account. He indicated that before he
could close the account, he needed a signed statement from VanderKruik
requesting the release of the escrow funds. He wrote that if VanderKruik
“wishes to have the funds wired to [the respondent’s] account, rather than have
the account closed out and a check made payable to her, then the statement
signed by her should specify that”; otherwise under the escrow agreement he
was obligated to ensure that the check was made out to VanderKruik.
Consequently, VanderKruik signed a statement on August 18, 1997, requesting
that Attorney Bowers authorize the bank to wire the balance of the escrow
2
account to the respondent’s trust account. On August 25, 1997, the bank
completed the wire transfer of $49,790.44 from the escrow account.
On September 15, 1997, a hearing was held in the respondent’s divorce
case. Instead of attending the hearing, the respondent went to the bank and
withdrew the $49,000 from her trust account that Attorney Bowers had wired
to her, leaving approximately $790. The respondent testified that she withdrew
the $49,000 because she had a “premonition” that if she did not do so, Mr.
Douglas “would take it somehow.” She took the money in cash, converted it
into Traveler’s Checks and put them into a safe. She testified that she took the
money from the trust account as her fee. She justified taking the money
because she was “in a cash crunch” and “really needed [it],” in contrast to
VanderKruik, who was living with a multi-millionaire boyfriend who had “taken
care of her for years.”
Shortly after withdrawing the money, the respondent spent
approximately $22,000, paying fees to new attorneys who were taking her
clients, paying her payroll and paying her operating bills. She did not hold any
of the $49,000 in anticipation of a dispute about its disposition between her
and VanderKruik, between her and Mr. Douglas, or between VanderKruik and
Mr. Douglas. At approximately 4:00 p.m. on September 15, 1997, Mr. Douglas
moved ex parte for an attachment of the respondent’s trust account, alleging
that a partner of his was at the respondent’s bank at 10:00 a.m. that day and
heard the respondent discussing withdrawing $49,000 from that account. The
court granted the motion, ordering that the respondent not cash or negotiate or
otherwise withdraw any funds she held for VanderKruik until further court
order.
On September 17, 1997, the respondent sent VanderKruik a letter
advising that Mr. Douglas had “placed an attachment on all of the Law Office of
Caroline G. Douglas bank accounts,” which included “the account in which I
hold your trust funds.” The respondent told VanderKruik that the attachment
affected the respondent’s and VanderKruik’s access to VanderKruik’s funds.
The letter did not inform VanderKruik that, before the attachment was issued,
the respondent had withdrawn the $49,000 that had been wired to the
respondent for VanderKruik’s benefit.
On September 22, 1997, the respondent sent another letter to
VanderKruik, informing her that the respondent was closing her law practice
and advising her to obtain another attorney. She also advised VanderKruik
that she would “work to obtain a release of the attachment of your funds if
your funds have been improperly attached by Charles Douglas.” She further
informed VanderKruik that her billing department would send a final
accounting within two weeks and that she would “forward the balance of
[VanderKruik’s] retainer account.” The respondent did not inform VanderKruik
3
that, in fact, she had already withdrawn the $49,000 from her trust account
and applied it to VanderKruik’s fees.
On September 23, 1997, the respondent informed VanderKruik by letter
that she was claiming and attaching the proceeds of the escrow account
previously held by Attorney Bowers and that she had a “lien of approximately
$50,000” on the proceeds. She requested that VanderKruik contact her
immediately to “arrange a written agreement for installment payments” on the
outstanding bill. She did not inform VanderKruik that she had already taken
the proceeds of the escrow account and was in the process of spending them.
The referee found that, based upon this correspondence, VanderKruik
reasonably believed that the $49,000 remained in the trust account.
In addition, on October 8, 1997, VanderKruik wrote to the superior court
asserting that, as of that date, the respondent was “keeping an escrow account
in the amount of $49,790.44, which [Mr.] Douglas has attached” and requested
the court “not release the money in the escrow account” to either the
respondent or Mr. Douglas, “since it’s not theirs to have.”
The respondent testified that she called VanderKruik on her cell phone
on September 15, 1997, shortly after she took the money and told her that she
“just went to the bank, because I had a feeling that I needed to take the forty-
nine thousand dollars” to “protect” it. VanderKruik denied that this phone call
ever took place. She also denied giving the respondent permission to apply the
$49,000 to her fees. She testified that had the respondent asked her
permission, she would have refused it because she “needed the money to pay
my taxes and other financial obligations” and because her bill with the
respondent had not yet been reconciled.
The referee concluded that VanderKruik’s version of the events was more
credible than that of the respondent. The referee found that VanderKruik
would not have written the letter to the court on October 8, 1997, if, on
September 15, 1997, the respondent had informed her that the respondent had
withdrawn the $49,000 from the trust account. Furthermore, the referee found
that the respondent would not have written the September 23, 1997 letter,
telling VanderKruik that she had asserted a lien of approximately $50,000 on
the proceeds in the escrow account if, on September 15, 1997, she had told
VanderKruik that, in fact, she had withdrawn all but $790 from that account.
The referee rejected the respondent’s claim that the phone records showing
that she called VanderKruik on September 15, 1997, “disappeared,” and
additionally found that if, as the respondent asserted, she had a standing
agreement with VanderKruik to withdraw funds from her trust account as her
fees were earned, it was not credible that the respondent would have believed it
necessary to inform VanderKruik that she withdrew the $49,000.
4
In late May 1997, VanderKruik had received a bill from the respondent in
the amount of $59,155.20 for services rendered between April 10, 1997, and
May 21, 1997. The bill indicated that the total amount remaining in
VanderKruik’s retainer account was $1,000. At the respondent’s request,
VanderKruik sent an additional $10,000 to be deposited in the retainer
account. At some point, VanderKruik expressed concerns about the May bill
and asked the respondent for more detail. The respondent gave her an income-
expense worksheet, which VanderKruik reviewed. She informed the
respondent that she had several questions and concerns about the
respondent’s fees, and absent an explanation from the respondent, she refused
to pay the bill.
The respondent and VanderKruik had several heated conversations in
August and September 1997 about payment of the bill. In late August 1997,
the respondent sent VanderKruik another copy of the income-expense
worksheet and asked her to “annotate any questions or discrepancies.” In this
letter, the respondent informed VanderKruik that she needed to make “some
arrangement” to pay off her final bill. On September 5, 1997, the respondent
sent VanderKruik another copy of the income-expense worksheet, asking for
the same information. Although the retainer agreement between the
respondent and VanderKruik required the respondent to send itemized
statements on a monthly basis, VanderKruik did not receive any itemized
statements from September 1997 through December 1997, and never received
a final bill. The respondent asserted that this was because VanderKruik would
not cooperate and that VanderKruik “knew roughly what her bill was.”
On January 7, 1998, VanderKruik wrote to the fee dispute resolution
committee of the New Hampshire Bar Association, alleging that there were
“many errors” in the expense sheet that the respondent had given her. She
stated that “[a]s of now [the respondent and Mr. Douglas] have received in
excess of $115,000.00 and it looks like between the two of them, they are
looking for another $120,000.00. They have already taken far more than they
are entitled to.” She requested help from the bar association because she
“ha[d] a very difficult time standing [her] ground when [the respondent] starts
yelling at [her],” and she was unable to afford legal counsel.
Soon after VanderKruik’s letter to the bar association, the respondent
answered a number of VanderKruik’s questions about her legal bill and sent a
billing statement which, for the first time, documented the fact that she had
taken the $49,000 as her fee. The respondent and VanderKruik eventually
reached an agreement regarding the fees.
5
II
The referee found, by clear and convincing evidence, that the respondent
violated: Rule 1.15(a)(1) by failing to safeguard certain funds belonging to her
client and by removing those funds from her trust account without her client’s
permission; Rule 1.15(c) because she withdrew the funds and applied them to
her fees despite the fact that the respondent and VanderKruik disagreed as to
whether the $49,000 should be applied to VanderKruik’s bill; Rule 8.4(c) by
engaging in conduct involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation by
writing letters to VanderKruik that misrepresented the status of the funds; and
Rule 8.4(a), which prohibits an attorney from violating any of the Rules.
“[A]lthough we defer to the referee’s factual findings if supported by the
record, we retain the ultimate authority to determine whether, on the facts
found, a violation of the rules governing attorney conduct has occurred and, if
so, the appropriate sanction.” Coffey’s Case, 152 N.H. 503, 507 (2005)
(quotation omitted). “We review the findings made by the referee to determine
whether a reasonable person could reach the same conclusion based upon the
evidence presented.” Id. “It is not our role to make independent findings and
substitute them for the judgment of the referee.” Sheridan’s Case, 146 N.H.
736, 738 (2001) (quotation and brackets omitted).
Rule 1.15(a)(1) requires an attorney to: (1) hold the property of clients or
third persons separate from the lawyer’s own property; (2) deposit funds in one
or more clearly designated trust accounts in accordance with the provisions of
the New Hampshire Supreme Court Rules; (3) identify all other property as
property of the client, promptly upon receipt; and (4) safeguard that property.
The duty to safeguard property means that “[a] lawyer may not use a client’s or
third party’s funds for his own or his law firm’s purposes. Such misuse is
conversion.” ABA/BNA Lawyers’ Manual on Professional Conduct 45:501 (Jan.
24, 2007). “Conversion in the extreme sense occurs when a lawyer
intentionally takes or uses client funds for his own or the law firm’s use.” Id.
Applying client funds to the client’s bill without permission is an example of
conversion. See id.
The referee found that on August 25, 1997, Attorney Bowers wired
$49,790.44 from an escrow account he was maintaining in connection with
VanderKruik’s divorce to the respondent’s trust account and that such money
was VanderKruik’s property as set forth in her divorce decree. Instead of
safeguarding this money, which she was keeping in trust for her client, the
respondent withdrew the money from the trust account, without her client’s
knowledge or permission, and applied it to her legal fees. We hold, based upon
the evidence presented, that the referee’s factual findings are reasonable and
that the respondent violated Rule 1.15(a)(1).
6
Under Rule 1.15(c), when “[i]n the course of representation a lawyer is in
possession of property in which both the lawyer and another person claim
interests, the property shall be kept separate by the lawyer until there is an
accounting and severance of their interests. If a dispute arises concerning
their respective interests, the portion in dispute shall be kept separate by the
lawyer until the dispute is resolved.” Under this Rule, “if two or more persons
(including the lawyer) claim interests in the same property, the lawyer must
segregate the disputed assets until the dispute is resolved. The lawyer cannot
unilaterally seize the property, even if the lawyer believes that she has a valid
retaining lien.” ABA/BNA Lawyers’ Manual on Professional Conduct 45:1101
(July 25, 2007). “A lawyer may not in the event of a fee dispute unilaterally
withdraw her fees from the client funds.” Id. at 45:1112. “Instead, the
disputed amount of the fee should be left untouched in the client trust fund
until the dispute is resolved in court, by an arbitrator, or by the parties.” Id.
The referee found that both VanderKruik and the respondent claimed an
interest in the $49,000, that there was a dispute between them about the
respondent’s fees, and that when the respondent took the money as fees,
VanderKruik’s concerns and questions about the respondent’s fees had not
been resolved. The referee concluded that, “[u]nder these circumstances, the
respondent violated Rule 1.15(c) when, instead of leaving the funds in her trust
account until these disputes were resolved, she withdrew the funds and
applied them to her fees.” The record supports the referee’s factual findings,
and we conclude that the respondent violated Rule 1.15(c).
Under Rule 8.4(c), it is professional misconduct for an attorney to engage
in conduct involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation. “A basic
premise of Rule 8.4(c) is that a lawyer may not make misrepresentations to a
client, tribunal, or others.” ABA/BNA Lawyers’ Manual on Professional
Conduct 101:402 (Jan. 21, 1998). “A lawyer’s failure to disclose important
information may constitute misconduct under this rule.” Id. Moreover,
“[m]isuse of funds entrusted to a lawyer is dishonest conduct that violates this
rule.” Id. at 101:403.
The referee found that the respondent violated this Rule by writing letters
to VanderKruik dated September 17, 1997, and September 23, 1997, that
misrepresented the status of her client’s funds. In the September 17 letter, the
respondent led VanderKruik to believe that the funds she received from
Attorney Bowers remained in her trust account despite the fact that the
respondent had withdrawn $49,000. In the September 23 letter, the
respondent again led VanderKruik to believe that the funds wired to her by
Attorney Bowers remained in her trust account when she informed
VanderKruik that she was claiming and attaching the proceeds from the
escrow account and asserting a lien on them in the amount of approximately
7
$50,000. Based upon the evidence presented, we hold that the referee’s factual
findings were reasonable, and that the respondent violated Rule 8.4(c).
Finally, we conclude that the respondent violated Rule 8.4(a), which
prohibits an attorney from violating any of the Rules.
III
Although the referee concluded that disbarment is the proper sanction
for a violation of Rule 1.15(a)(1), he recommended, based upon mitigating
factors, that we suspend the respondent from the practice of law in New
Hampshire for five years. The committee contends that disbarment is the
appropriate sanction in this case. The respondent asserts that both the
referee’s and the committee’s recommendations are “excessive and overly
harsh.”
“We retain the ultimate authority to determine the appropriate sanction
for a violation of the rules governing attorney conduct.” Morgan’s Case, 143
N.H. 475, 476-77 (1999). “When determining whether to impose the ultimate
sanction of disbarment, we focus not on punishing the offender, but on
protecting the public, maintaining public confidence in the bar, preserving the
integrity of the legal profession, and preventing similar conduct in the future.”
Nardi’s Case, 142 N.H. 602, 606 (1998). “In deciding the appropriate sanction,
we consider the case on its own facts and circumstances.” Wolterbeek’s Case,
152 N.H. 710, 714 (2005).
We look to the ABA Standards For Imposing Lawyer Sanctions (1992)
(Standards) for guidance. See Richmond’s Case, 152 N.H. 155, 160 (2005).
Under the Standards, courts are to consider the following factors when
imposing sanctions: “(a) the duty violated; (b) the lawyer’s mental state; (c) the
potential or actual injury caused by the lawyer’s misconduct; and (d) the
existence of aggravating or mitigating factors.” Standards, supra § 3.0. “In the
case of multiple charges of misconduct, the ABA recommends that the sanction
imposed should at least be consistent with the sanction for the most serious
instance of misconduct among a number of violations; it might well be and
generally should be greater than the sanction for the most serious
misconduct.” Richmond’s Case, 152 N.H. at 160 (quotation omitted).
The referee concluded that the respondent knowingly violated the duty to
preserve her client’s property, the duty to be candid and the duty to maintain
personal integrity, and that her conduct caused injury or potential injury to
VanderKruik. As the referee found, “the respondent knowingly converted Ms.
VanderKruik’s property when she withdrew the $49,000 from her trust
account, without Ms. VanderKruik’s knowledge or permission, and applied it to
her fees.” Accordingly, disbarment is the proper sanction. Standards, supra
8
§ 4.11; see Coddington’s Case, 155 N.H. 66, 68 (2007). “An attorney’s misuse
of funds entrusted to him demonstrates such lack of common honesty as to
clearly justify an attorney’s disbarment.” Nardi’s Case, 142 N.H. at 606
(quotation omitted).
Based upon mitigating factors including personal or emotional problems,
delay in disciplinary proceedings, and imposition of other penalties and
sanctions, the referee recommended that the respondent be suspended for five
years. See Standards, supra § 9.32. We acknowledge that the respondent’s
personal or emotional problems are a mitigating factor. See Grew’s Case, 156
N.H. ___, ___ (decided Oct. 30, 2007). However, we do not agree that the delay
in disciplinary proceedings presents a mitigating factor in this case.
Standards, supra § 9.32(j). Here, the time it has taken for these proceedings to
reach finality is the result of a lengthy discovery process that was complicated
by VanderKruik’s absence from the state, the committee’s difficulty contacting
the respondent, time spent on a medical evaluation of the respondent’s fitness
to practice law, and the overlapping investigation and prosecution by the
committee of the respondent’s misconduct in a separate disciplinary matter.
Under these circumstances, we decline to find that the delay in disciplinary
proceedings presents a mitigating factor. Cf. Wolterbeek’s Case, 152 N.H. at
716 (rejection of respondent’s argument that ten-year “passage of time” since
his misconduct was a mitigating factor). As to the fact that the respondent is
currently suspended from practicing law because of a separate disciplinary
action, “[t]o suggest that prior sanctions on unrelated matters occurring in the
same general time frame as the case before us render any further sanction
unnecessary misses the mark. Sanctions relate to conduct, not to time
periods. Independent violations warrant discrete sanctions.” Sheridan’s Case,
146 N.H. at 739.
Weighing against the mitigating factors are several serious aggravating
factors. The referee found the presence of aggravating factors including prior
disciplinary offenses, dishonest or selfish motive, pattern of misconduct, and
refusal to acknowledge the wrongful nature of her misconduct. See Standards,
supra § 9.22. “[T]he fact that the respondent has had other disciplinary
actions constitutes an aggravating circumstance.” Wolterbeek’s Case, 152 N.H.
at 717. In 2002, the respondent was disciplined by this court for engaging in
strikingly similar behavior. Douglas’ Case, 147 N.H. 538 (2002). In that case,
the respondent was maintaining an escrow account for her client, Mr. Foster,
whom she was representing in his divorce. Id. at 539. There was a dispute
between Foster and his ex-wife about to whom and in what proportion the
funds belonged. Id. at 539-40. Without obtaining her client’s authorization
and before the dispute between Foster and his spouse was resolved, the
respondent withdrew the funds from the escrow account and applied them to
her bill. Id. at 540. She failed to inform Foster that she had done this and, in
fact, wrote a letter to him shortly thereafter that led him to believe that the
escrow account remained intact. Id.
9
We affirmed the referee’s findings that because there was a dispute as to
whether Foster should receive the entire amount of the escrow funds, the
actions of the respondent in withdrawing the entire escrow account and
applying them to Foster’s legal fees violated Rule 1.15(c). Id. at 544. We also
agreed “with the referee’s conclusion that by withdrawing the escrow funds
without her client’s permission and by failing to keep the funds segregated
until an accounting occurred, the respondent violated Rule 1.15(a)(1).” Id.
Based upon these violations and “the respondent’s inability to comprehend
that her conduct violated her ethical obligation to safeguard her client’s funds,”
we suspended the respondent from the practice of law for a period of six
months. Id. at 545-46.
When the respondent withdrew VanderKruik’s funds from her trust
account, as when she similarly withdrew Foster’s funds, “there was no
arguable question of professional duty because Rules 1.15(a)(1) and 1.15(c)
clearly articulate that the funds should have been maintained in the escrow
account.” Id. at 545 (quotation omitted). The respondent was aware when she
withdrew VanderKruik’s funds that two attorneys and a superior court judge
had made professional conduct complaints against her based upon her
unilateral withdrawal of Foster’s funds.
In addition, the record supports the existence of other aggravating
factors, including evidence of a dishonest or selfish motive in that the
respondent stole money from her client to use for her own personal needs and
lied to cover up her actions, Wolterbeek’s Case, 152 N.H. at 717, a pattern of
misconduct, and the respondent’s refusal to acknowledge the wrongful nature
of her conduct, see Coffey’s Case, 152 N.H. at 515. To those factors we also
add that this case presents the commitment of multiple violations of the Rules,
“an aggravating factor that justifies an increase in the degree of discipline
imposed.” Richmond’s Case, 152 N.H. at 161; see Wolterbeek’s Case, 152 N.H.
at 717.
After considering all of the relevant factors, we find that disbarment is
the only sanction that attains the goals of the attorney discipline system to
protect the public, maintain public confidence in the bar, preserve the integrity
of the legal profession and prevent similar conduct in the future. Wolterbeek’s
Case, 152 N.H. at 717. We order the respondent disbarred and order her to
reimburse the committee for its expenses in investigating and prosecuting this
case, see Sup. Ct. R. 37(16) (repealed and replaced effective Jan. 1, 2004, by
Rule 37(19)).
So ordered.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
10