THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
Nos. 2007-219
2008-064
DOVARO 12 ATLANTIC, LLC
v.
TOWN OF HAMPTON
Argued: November 19, 2008
Opinion Issued: January 9, 2009
Casassa and Ryan, of Hampton (Robert A. Casassa on the brief and
orally), for the petitioner.
Mark S. Gearreald, of Hampton, by brief and orally, for the respondent.
DALIANIS, J. In these consolidated appeals, the respondent, Town of
Hampton (Town), challenges two trial court decisions concerning the
condominium conversion project of the petitioner, Dovaro 12 Atlantic, LLC.
The first Superior Court (Morrill, J.) order partially reversed and modified the
denial by the Town of Hampton Planning Board (board) of the petitioner’s
subdivision application, and ordered the respondent to allow the condominium
conversion project to proceed. The second Superior Court (Nadeau, J.) order
upheld the board’s decision to condition its eventual approval of the project
upon the elimination of four of the petitioner’s parking spaces, but reversed its
decision to require “additional perpetual parking spaces offsite.” We affirm.
The record reflects the following facts. The petitioner owns a 5000
square foot lot on Atlantic Avenue in Hampton Beach with two buildings on it.
The first is a three-story structure with six apartments; the second, located at
the rear of the lot, is a three-bedroom cottage. Use of the lot for dwelling units
is a nonconforming use because the lot has too few parking spaces to satisfy
the terms of the Town’s zoning ordinance, which, until it was amended in
2006, required two parking spaces for each dwelling unit. The lot cannot
accommodate two parking spaces for each of the seven dwelling units. Renters
at the property typically have leased parking spaces offsite. The lot is also
nonconforming to the extent that any onsite parking spaces are not nine feet by
eighteen feet and are not “connected with a street or immediately by a surfaced
driveway which affords satisfactory ingress and egress.” It is also
nonconforming to the extent that the required parking spaces, if not onsite, are
not “assured perpetual existence by easement.” Because the lot has been used
for dwelling units since before the zoning ordinance was enacted, this use is
deemed a preexisting nonconforming use.
The petitioner seeks to convert the apartments and cottage into a
condominium project with seven units. It filed its first application with the
board to convert the units in October 2005. The application proposed no
change to the footprint of the buildings, but proposed changing the use of the
units from seasonal to year-round. Each condominium was to have its own
parking space, one of which would abut the street while the remaining six
would consist of two rows of cars stacked three deep.
The board initially denied the application upon the ground that there was
a lack of accessible parking for each unit and that, if the petitioner sought
certificates of occupancy for year-round use, the preexisting nonconforming
use would be expanded. In May 2006, upon rehearing, the board denied the
application upon the ground that converting the units to condominium units
would perpetuate “a public nuisance with respect to parking ingress and
egress” and jeopardize public health and safety “because of the difficulty with
emergency access.”
The petitioner appealed to the superior court, which partially reversed
and modified the board’s decision. In its February 2007 order denying the
Town’s motion for reconsideration, the trial court clarified:
The Planning Board committed legal error when denying [the
petitioner’s] application to convert the apartments in its buildings
on Atlantic Avenue to condominiums. [The petitioner’s] present
nonconforming use of its property – which the board did not find to
be a nuisance or safety hazard – must be permitted to continue,
regardless of the form of ownership of the units.
2
With respect to parking, the court ruled that the board could not deny the
petitioner’s application in its entirety on the ground that the proposed parking
spaces would create a nuisance and safety hazard. The court ordered the
board to grant the petitioner’s application “without the parking spaces it deems
offensive.” The Town appealed to this court.
In light of the trial court’s ruling, the petitioner submitted a revised
application to the board, which the board conditionally approved in April 2007.
Under the revised proposal, the seven condominium units would have eight
parking spaces, stacked in two adjacent columns. One column would contain
three stacked spaces and the other would contain five. Only two spaces would
have direct ingress and egress to the street; owners using the other six spaces
might need to have other vehicles moved each time they parked or left the
premises.
Of the eight parking spaces proposed, the board found that four spaces
would perpetuate “a public nuisance with respect to parking ingress and
egress” and jeopardize public safety “because of the difficulty with emergency
access.” The board deemed the remaining four spaces to be “inoffensive and
safe.” These spaces consisted of three stacked spaces in one column and a
single space in the other column. The board required the condominium
association “to secure offsite parking for the other units in perpetuity.”
The petitioner appealed to the superior court, which upheld the board’s
decision to eliminate four parking spaces but reversed its decision to require
the condominium association to secure perpetual offsite parking. The Town
again appealed to this court, and its two appeals were consolidated.
Our review of the trial court’s decisions is deferential. Derry Senior Dev.
v. Town of Derry, 157 N.H. 441, 447 (2008). We will uphold the decisions on
appeal unless they are unsupported by the evidence or legally erroneous. Id.
Superior court review of planning board decisions is equally limited. Id. The
superior court is obligated to treat the factual findings of the planning board as
prima facie lawful and reasonable and cannot set aside its decision absent
unreasonableness or an identified error of law. Id. The appealing party bears
the burden of demonstrating that, by the balance of the probabilities, the
board’s decision was unreasonable. Id. The review by the superior court is not
to determine whether it agrees with the planning board’s findings, but to
determine whether there is evidence upon which they could have been
reasonably based. Id.
The Town first argues that the trial court erred when it reversed the
board’s decision to require the condominium association to secure offsite
parking for some units in perpetuity. The Town contends that “the utilization
of off-site parking was part and parcel of the pre-existing, non conforming use
3
of this site,” and, thus, the board acted consistently with the petitioner’s vested
right to continue its preexisting nonconforming use when the board required
offsite parking.
The trial court found, however, that the tenants of the property – not the
property owner – had secured offsite parking. Thus, contrary to the Town’s
assertion, use of offsite parking was not part of the property owner’s
nonconforming use of the land. Although, in a footnote, the Town contends
that the record does not support the trial court’s finding, whether the record
supported the trial court’s finding is not one of the questions in the Town’s
notice of appeal. See Sup. Ct. R. 16(3)(b). Indeed, the Town appears to have
accepted this finding in its notice of appeal by asking: “Was the trial court’s
decision erroneous, where its conclusion that the proposed conversion ‘would
not fundamentally alter the property’s present usage’ . . . was inconsistent with
its own finding that ‘[t]ypically, renters at the . . . property had leased parking
spaces located nearby, but off site?” Further, the Town has not provided a
record that demonstrates that it raised this issue in the trial court, thereby
preserving it for our review. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248,
250 (2004). Therefore, we accept the trial court’s finding, and reject the Town’s
assertion that using offsite parking was part of the petitioner’s nonconforming
use of the property.
The Town next argues that the trial court overstepped its bounds by
leaving only some of the board’s parking limits intact. The Town asserts that
when the trial court upheld the board’s decision to retain four onsite parking
spaces and eliminate the remaining onsite spaces, the court, in effect, stripped
the petitioner’s preexisting nonconforming use of its protected status. Having
done so, the Town argues, the trial court then erred by ruling that the
petitioner’s property did not have to comply with the Town’s zoning ordinance.
Once the petitioner’s preexisting nonconforming use was stripped of its
protected status, the court should have ruled that the petitioner’s use must
now conform in all respects to the ordinance’s parking requirements.
The Town provides no support for this assertion, which appears to
conflict with the Town’s zoning ordinance. The Town’s zoning ordinance
defines a nonconforming use as: “A building, structure or use of land, existing
and lawfully occupied at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance or any
subsequent amendment thereto, . . . which does not conform to one or more
provisions of the Ordinance for the district in which it is located.” The
ordinance prohibits “[t]he expansion of non-conforming uses and structures,”
and provides that no such use or structure “may be altered for use for a
purpose, or in a manner, substantially different from the use to which it was
put to before alteration, or to be permitted to revert to its original non-
conforming use or structure once [it] changes to a conforming use or
structure.”
4
In this case, the board’s decision to eliminate four of the proposed eight
parking spaces brought the parking on the petitioner’s lot into compliance with
the ordinance’s requirement that all parking connect with a street or
immediately to a driveway that affords sufficient ingress and egress. While we
agree that the ordinance will prohibit the petitioner from reverting to parking
spaces that lack sufficient ingress and egress, it does not require the petitioner
to change his preexisting use of the lot to conform to the rest of the ordinance’s
parking space requirements (e.g., to assure that all spaces that are not on site
have “perpetual existence by easement”). Additionally, the right to continue a
nonconforming use is a vested right, secured not only by statute, see RSA
674:19 (2008), but also by Part I, Articles 2 and 12 of the New Hampshire
Constitution. Ray’s Stateline Market v. Town of Pelham, 140 N.H. 139, 143
(1995). In light of all of the above, we decline to hold that having brought its
preexisting use into compliance with one parking requirement, the property
owner in this case had to bring its preexisting use of the property into
compliance with all such requirements.
We do not address whether the trial court erred by upholding the board’s
decision to eliminate the “offensive” parking spaces in the first place because
the petitioner did not file a cross-appeal raising that issue.
The Town next asserts that the trial court erred when it declined to find
that converting the seasonal apartments into year-round condominiums
substantially changed or expanded the petitioner’s nonconforming use. We
disagree.
A nonconforming use is a lawful use existing on the land when the
ordinance prohibiting that use was adopted. Town of Salem v. Wickson, 146
N.H. 328, 330 (2001). The zoning ordinance prohibiting the use generally will
not apply to it unless the use has substantially changed. See RSA 674:19. The
zoning ordinance will apply “to any alteration of a building or use for a purpose
or in a manner which is substantially different from the use to which it was put
before alteration.” Id.
Whether a proposed use would constitute a substantial change in the
nature or purpose of the preexisting nonconforming use turns upon the facts
and circumstances of the particular case. Hurley v. Town of Hollis, 143 N.H.
567, 571 (1999). Because the Town’s zoning ordinance does not define what
constitutes a substantially different use or the factors that must be examined,
cf. Severance v. Town of Epsom, 155 N.H. 359, 362 (2007), we look to our
common law. See Hurley, 143 N.H. at 571.
Under the common law, to determine whether there has been a
substantial change in the nature or purpose of a preexisting nonconforming
5
use, we consider: (1) the extent to which the use in question reflects the
nature and purpose of the preexisting nonconforming use; (2) whether the use
at issue is merely a different manner of using the original nonconforming use
or whether it constitutes a use that is different in character, nature, and kind;
and (3) whether the use will have a substantially different effect upon the
neighborhood. Hurley, 143 N.H. at 571-72. We strictly construe provisions
that permit the continuance of preexisting nonconforming uses, and the party
asserting that a proposed use is not new or impermissible bears the burden of
proof. Town of Salem, 146 N.H. at 330.
Because the proposed use is a condominium project, we must also be
mindful of RSA 356-B:5 (1995), which provides, in pertinent part:
No zoning or other land use ordinance shall prohibit
condominiums as such by reason of the form of ownership
inherent therein. Neither shall any condominium be treated
differently by any zoning or other land use ordinance which would
permit a physically identical project or development under a
different form of ownership. . . . Nevertheless, cities and towns may
provide by ordinance that proposed conversion condominiums and
the use thereof which do not conform to the zoning, land use and
site plan regulations of the respective city or town in which the
property is located shall secure a special use permit, a special
exception, or variance, as the case may be, prior to becoming a
conversion condominium.
Under this statute, where the preexisting nonconforming use is use of the units
as rental properties, and where the condominium units would be “physically
identical” to the apartment units, the condominium conversion must be
allowed to avoid disparate treatment. Cohen v. Town of Henniker, 134 N.H.
425, 428 (1991). While a municipality may require a special use permit,
special exception or variance for the project, such a requirement may be denied
only if the conversion itself would have an actual effect on the use of land. Id.
To determine whether the conversion would have an actual effect on the use of
land, we examine the same factors that determine whether there has been a
substantial change to a preexisting nonconforming use. See id. at 429. “A
mere change from tenant occupancy to owner occupancy,” however, “is not an
extension of a nonconforming use.” New London Land Use Assoc. v. New
London Zoning Board, 130 N.H. 510, 516 (1988).
We conclude that the trial court did not err when it declined to find that
converting the seasonal apartments to year-round condominium units was a
substantial change in the petitioner’s preexisting nonconforming use. In this
case, the use of the lot for dwelling units even though the lot lacks sufficient
parking to satisfy the zoning ordinance is the same regardless of whether the
6
dwelling units are occupied seasonally or year-round. See Severance, 155 N.H.
at 362. The identical nonconforming use is carried on. See id. Further, there
was no evidence in the record that year-round occupancy of the units will
substantially affect the surrounding neighborhood. See id. at 362-63. Nor
does the Town argue that such evidence exists. Accordingly, we agree with the
trial court that converting the seasonal apartments to year-round
condominium units does not constitute a substantial change or expansion of
the petitioner’s preexisting nonconforming use.
The Town asserts that it is the year-round parking that constitutes a
substantial change in use, not the year-round occupancy of the dwelling units.
The Town contends that changing the onsite parking from seasonal to year-
round will make the parking spaces more crowded and will require the unit
owners to find parking on the street so that snow can be removed from the lot,
which “may well interfere with the process of clearing snow from the public
street.”
The Town, however, has failed to demonstrate that evidence of these
allegedly substantially different effects on the neighborhood was ever presented
to the board. Indeed, the board itself found that the four onsite parking spaces
were “inoffensive and safe.” Because the Town has failed to demonstrate that
the record compelled a finding that year-round onsite parking would have a
substantially different effect on the neighborhood than seasonal parking would
have, we conclude that the trial court did not err when it ruled that this change
was not a substantial change in the petitioner’s preexisting nonconforming use.
We, thus, affirm the trial court’s determination that converting the seasonal
apartments to year-round condominium units did not constitute a substantial
change or expansion of the petitioner’s nonconforming use.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
7