THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
Nos. 2008-606
2008-721
DAN GARAND
v.
TOWN OF EXETER & a.
Argued: March 17, 2009
Opinion Issued: July 31, 2009
Law Offices of Penny S. Dean, of Concord (Penny S. Dean on the brief
and orally), for the plaintiff.
Flygare, Schwarz & Closson, PLLC, of Exeter (Daniel P. Schwarz on the
brief and orally), for the defendants.
HICKS, J. The plaintiff, Dan Garand, appeals orders of the Superior
Court (McHugh, J.): (1) dismissing his appeal from a decision of defendant
Richard Kane, Chief of Police for defendant Town of Exeter, that denied the
plaintiff a license to carry a loaded pistol or revolver (license to carry), see RSA
159:6 (Supp. 2008); and (2) denying his motion to introduce late authority to
the court. We affirm.
The trial court found or the record supports the following facts. On April
14, 2008, the plaintiff filed an application with Kane for a license to carry. By
letter dated April 22, 2008, Kane denied the application, specifically citing
“many contacts [the plaintiff had] with the Exeter police department starting in
2001,” including a number of arrests. Kane concluded:
You have consistently showed a disregard for the law. You have
displayed a violent behavior. You have threatened to kill a police
officer. You have a history of drug use, which you denied to me on
the phone. This type of behavior is of great concern to me in
allowing you to carry a concealed weapon. As a result of the above
information, I am rejecting your application under my powers as
outlined in RSA 159:6. According to RSA 159:6-c you may appeal
this denial to the Exeter District Court within 30 days.
Instead of filing an appeal with the district court, the plaintiff filed with
the superior court a pleading captioned, “PETITION FROM DENIAL OF
LICENSE TO CARRY – PURSUANT TO NEW HAMPSHIRE RSA 159:6-c-f.”
(Bolding omitted.) The petition requested the court to “[o]rder the Town of
Exeter to issue a license to carry to [the plaintiff]” and alleged, inter alia, that:
(1) the plaintiff had a “proper purpose and was a suitable person to be
licensed” (quotations omitted); (2) the denial failed to state any criminal
conviction that would prohibit the plaintiff from possessing a gun; (3) “denial
without valid statutory reason is in violation of . . . RSA 159:6”; and (4) “this
petition is necessary in order to obtain compliance with RSA 159:6 et seq.”
Finally, the petition stated:
This Petition seeks judicial review and redress pursuant to RSA
159:6-e, a reversal of the licensing authority’s denial, and the
issuance of an order directing the Exeter Chief of Police to issue
[the plaintiff’s] license and an award of all attorneys’ fees, and
related costs and filing and other fees for the bringing of this
Petition.
The defendants moved to dismiss, arguing that the action must be
brought in district court rather than superior court. The superior court agreed
and granted the defendants’ motion. Following the denial of his motion for
reconsideration, the plaintiff filed a motion to bring late authority to the
attention of the superior court, which the court denied. The plaintiff appealed
both the decision on the merits and the denial of the motion to submit late
authority, and the two appeals were consolidated.
The plaintiff argues that the trial court erred: (1) in determining that the
superior court has jurisdiction over only procedural violations of RSA 159:6; (2)
in “refus[ing] to allow him to amend his Petition to allege that the Chief
2
(through his agents) had in fact specifically violated RSA 159:6, II by
demanding a copy of [his] drivers license”; (3) in failing to find that Part I,
Article 15 of the State Constitution and the 14th Amendment to the Federal
Constitution require that he be allowed to elect his choice of forum as provided
by New Hampshire law; and (4) in refusing to allow the introduction of late
authority.
Before addressing the plaintiff’s arguments, we review the relevant
statutes. RSA 159:6 provides, in pertinent part:
I. The selectmen of a town or the mayor or chief of police of a
city or some full-time police officer designated by them
respectively, upon application of any resident of such town or city,
. . . shall issue a license to such applicant authorizing the
applicant to carry a loaded pistol or revolver in this state for not
less than 4 years from the date of issue, if it appears that the
applicant has good reason to fear injury to the applicant’s person
or property or has any proper purpose, and that the applicant is a
suitable person to be licensed. Hunting, target shooting, or self-
defense shall be considered a proper purpose. . . . The license
shall be issued within 14 days after application, and, if such
application is denied, the reason for such denial shall be stated in
writing, the original of which such writing shall be delivered to the
applicant . . . . The director of state police is hereby authorized
and directed to prepare forms for the licenses required under this
chapter and forms for the application for such licenses and to
supply the same to officials of the cities and towns authorized to
issue the licenses. No other forms shall be used by officials of
cities and towns. . . . .
II. No photograph or fingerprint shall be required or used as a
basis to grant, deny, or renew a license to carry for a resident or
nonresident, unless requested by the applicant.
RSA 159:6.
The two provisions specifically at issue are RSA 159:6-c (2002) and RSA
159:6-e (2002). RSA 159:6-c provides:
Appeal From Denial, Suspension, or Revocation. Any person
whose application for a license to carry a loaded pistol or revolver
has been denied pursuant to RSA 159:6 or whose license to carry a
loaded pistol or revolver has been suspended or revoked pursuant
to RSA 159:6-b may within 30 days thereafter, petition the district
or municipal court in the jurisdiction in which such person resides
3
to determine whether the petitioner is entitled to a license. The
court shall conduct a hearing within 14 days after receipt of the
petition. During this hearing the burden shall be upon the issuing
authority to demonstrate by clear and convincing proof why any
denial, suspension, or revocation was justified, failing which the
court shall enter an order directing the issuing authority to grant
or reinstate the petitioner’s license. The court shall issue its
decision not later than 14 days after the hearing on whether the
petitioner is entitled to a license.
RSA 159:6-e, in turn, provides:
Violation. Any person aggrieved by a violation of the licensing
sections of this chapter by a licensing entity may petition the
superior court of the county in which the alleged violation occurred
for injunctive relief. The court shall give proceedings under this
chapter priority on the court calendar. Such a petitioner may
appear with or without counsel. The petition shall be deemed
sufficient if it states facts constituting a violation of the licensing
sections of this chapter by the licensing entity, and may be filed by
the petitioner or the petitioner’s counsel with the clerk of court or
the justice. The clerk of court or any justice shall order service by
copy of the petition on the licensing entity or a person employed by
the entity. If the justice finds that time is of the essence, the
justice may order notice by any reasonable means, and shall have
authority to issue an order ex parte when the justice reasonably
deems such an order necessary to insure compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
The plaintiff contends that “[b]oth statutes provide an avenue for appeal
from a violation of RSA 159:6” and that the plaintiff may choose either forum.
The trial court disagreed, ruling:
A person is charged with the responsibility of petitioning either
the district or superior court depending upon how his application
for a license to carry a weapon has been considered by a town. If
for example a town simply ignores an application or formally
denies an application without giving any reasons for such a
decision then the aggrieved person’s only remedy is seeking an
injunction in superior court forcing the town to comply with the
requirements of the statute. If however a person has received a
letter from a town denying an application complete with specifics
as to why that application was denied, then the town has complied
with its licensing requirement under RSA 159. In that event a
4
person’s only remedy is to appeal the factual determination by the
town to the local district court.
The issue before us is one of statutory construction, which we review de
novo, Formula Dev. Corp. v. Town of Chester, 156 N.H. 177, 178 (2007),
applying well-settled standards:
We are the final arbiter of the intent of the legislature as expressed
in the words of the statute. When construing the statute’s
meaning, we first examine its language, and where possible,
ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to words used. If the
language used is clear and unambiguous, we will not look beyond
the language of the statute to discern legislative intent. We will,
however, construe all parts of the statute together to effectuate its
overall purpose and to avoid an absurd or unjust result.
Formula Dev., 156 N.H. at 178-79 (citations omitted). “The legislature is not
presumed to waste words or enact redundant provisions and whenever
possible, every word of a statute should be given effect.” Town of Amherst v.
Gilroy, 157 N.H. 275, 279 (2008). We also “presume that the legislature does
not enact unnecessary and duplicative provisions.” State v. Gifford, 148 N.H.
215, 217 (2002). Finally, “we interpret statutes in the context of the overall
statutory scheme and not in isolation.” State v. Balliro, 158 N.H. 1, 4 (2008)
(quotation omitted).
RSA 159:6-e “is part of a statutory scheme that requires individuals to
obtain permits to carry loaded concealed weapons.” Bleiler v. Chief, Dover
Police Dep’t, 155 N.H. 693, 696 (2007). RSA 159:6 directs the appropriate
licensing authority to issue a license to an applicant “if it appears that the
applicant has good reason to fear injury to the applicant’s person or property or
has any proper purpose, and that the applicant is a suitable person to be
licensed.” RSA 159:6, I. Thus, the licensing authority is required to make two
– and only two – determinations in deciding whether to grant a license: (1)
whether the applicant has either (a) good reason to fear injury to his person or
property or (b) any proper purpose; and (2) whether the applicant is “a suitable
person to be licensed.” Id.
We discussed these determinations in Bleiler in the context of a license
revocation. We noted:
By statute, hunting, target shooting and self-defense are proper
purposes. RSA 159:3 (2002) and RSA 159:3-a (2002) provide that
certain convicted felons are unsuitable for the purposes of
obtaining a license to carry a concealed weapon. An individual
5
may also be unsuitable if he or she has a “significant and
unexplained arrest history.”
Bleiler, 155 N.H. at 702 (citation omitted) (quoting Silverstein v. Town of
Alexandria, 150 N.H. 679, 683 (2004)). We concluded that “[i]n light of the
statutory limitations on the phrase ‘proper purpose’ and the judicial narrowing
of the term ‘suitable person,’ discussed above, . . . RSA 159:6-b [the revocation
provision] is not unconstitutionally vague on its face.” Id. at 703.
RSA 159:6 also contains certain mandatory provisions primarily
regarding the form of the application, certain information the licensing
authority may not require or use in making the decision to issue or deny a
license, the time frame in which the decision must be made, and the form of
notification of denial. Execution of these provisions does not require a
determination by the licensing authority, but merely compliance with their
terms.
The plaintiff counters the argument that RSA 159:6-e applies only to
“procedural violations of the licensing statute, such as a demand for
fingerprints or photographs in violation of RSA 159:6[,] II,” by asserting that
“[i]f the legislature had wanted to, it could have clearly required that the
remedy found in RSA 159:6-e was limited to violations by the licensing entities
pertaining to the mandated forms. It did not do so.” The plaintiff therefore
concludes that denial of a license to a qualified applicant is a violation of the
“licensing sections” of RSA chapter 159 within the meaning of RSA 159:6-e.
While the term “licensing sections,” RSA 159:6-e, taken alone, does not
clearly refer only to the procedural requirements of RSA 159:6, we conclude
that RSA 159:6-e, read as a whole and construed in light of RSA 159:6 and
RSA 159:6-c, applies only to alleged derelictions of a licensing authority’s
ministerial duties and does not provide a means to appeal a determination that
the applicant does not meet the suitability or proper purpose requirements for
licensure.
First, unlike RSA 159:6-e, RSA 159:6-c is, according to its title, an
appeal provision. “While the title of a statute is not conclusive of its
interpretation, it provides significant indication of the legislature’s intent in
enacting the statute.” State v. Gubitosi, 157 N.H. 720, 725 (2008). We have
consistently interpreted RSA 159:6-c as an appeal provision and noted that its
scope “is limited to the issue of whether the petitioner is entitled to a license.”
Silverstein v. Town of Alexandria, 150 N.H. 679, 681 (2004). Interpreting a
prior version of the statute, we “consider[ed] the standard of review in RSA
159:6-c (Supp. 1979) appeals,” Kozerski v. Steere, 121 N.H. 469, 471 (1981),
and reasoned:
6
Unlike many other appeal statutes, e.g. RSA 541:13; RSA 31:78
(Supp. 1979), there is no requirement under RSA 159:6-c (Supp.
1979) that any presumption of reasonableness be accorded the
decision of the selectmen. It appears to us that the statute
contemplates that the district court would hear evidence and make
its own determination “whether the petitioner is entitled to a
license.”
Kozerski, 121 N.H. at 472.
The statute was amended in 1998 to place the burden upon the issuing
authority “to demonstrate by clear and convincing proof why any denial,
suspension, or revocation was justified.” RSA 159:6-c. Although the statutory
standard of review is far from deferential, RSA 159:6-c still clearly provides an
appeal from a decision of the issuing authority.
RSA 159:6-e, on the other hand, does not contain the word “appeal” or
anything suggesting that it prescribes an appellate process. See RSA 159:6-e.
Rather, it provides a mechanism for obtaining “injunctive relief.” Id. The
issuance of an injunction is an exercise of original, not appellate, jurisdiction.
See Consol. Freightways v. Human Rights Com’n, 713 N.E.2d 148, 150 (Ill.
App. Ct. 1999) (noting that “[a]n action for injunctive relief implicates the
original jurisdiction of the [trial] court”); City of Laredo v. Martin, 52 Tex. 548,
554 (1878) (“[I]ssuing an injunction for . . . a purpose [other than when
necessary to enforce the jurisdiction of the issuing appellate court] would be
the exercise of original, and not of appellate, jurisdiction in the case.”). Thus,
we conclude that RSA 159:6-e does not provide a means for appealing a
decision (i.e., a determination that the applicant does not meet the suitability
or proper purpose requirements for licensure) of the licensing authority.
Rather, it offers a means of enforcing those procedural provisions of RSA
chapter 159 that require strict compliance by the licensing authority rather
than the exercise of deliberation. Indeed, the remedy of injunctive relief is well
suited to enforcing such provisions. The term “violation,” which is the title of
RSA 159:6-e, connotes a breach of duty rather than an error in deliberative
decision-making. See Black’s Law Dictionary 1600-01 (8th ed. 2004) (defining
“violation” to include “the contravention of a right or duty”).
We note that in Silverstein, after stating that “[a]n appeal under RSA
159:6-c is limited to the issue of whether the petitioner is entitled to a license,”
we stated in dicta that “[a] separate appeal avenue to superior court is provided
for alleged violations of the licensing sections of RSA chapter 159 by a licensing
authority. See RSA 159:6-e (2002).” Silverstein, 150 N.H. at 681. We now
clarify that our reference to RSA 159:6-e as an avenue of appeal was mistaken;
a petition under that section is addressed to the original jurisdiction of the
superior court.
7
Having found the legislative intent unambiguously expressed in the plain
meaning of the words used, we need not address the plaintiff’s argument based
upon legislative history. See Weare Land Use Assoc. v. Town of Weare, 153
N.H. 510, 511 (2006) (noting that we “will not examine legislative history unless
the statutory language is ambiguous”). Moreover, having found that RSA
chapter 159 does not provide a choice of appellate forum, we need not address
the plaintiff’s argument regarding the alleged constitutional requirement that
he “be allowed to elect his choice of forum as clearly mandated by New
Hampshire law and envisioned by the legislature.” (Bolding omitted.)
The plaintiff next argues that the trial court erred: (1) by suggesting that
he was trying to bootstrap his argument that the court had jurisdiction by
referencing a violation of RSA 159:6, II; and (2) by not allowing him to amend
his petition to allege such a violation. In order to properly address these
arguments, we trace their procedural history.
The first reference to RSA 159:6, II in the record before us appears in the
plaintiff’s objection to the motion to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction. There the
plaintiff “claim[ed] that the Chief violated [RSA] 159:6[,] II by essentially
demanding a photograph.” He further alleged:
The male dispatcher/officer of the Exeter Police Department that
received [the plaintiff’s] application demanded that [the plaintiff]
provide his driver license with his Application for a Resident
Pistol/Revolver License; as further evidence that this is the pattern
and practice of the Exeter Police Department the Exeter Police
Chief personally demanded to copy my father’s drivers license
when my father applied for a Pistol/Revolver License in the past
month.
The defendants filed a responsive pleading, noting that a violation of RSA
159:6, II was not alleged in the plaintiff’s petition. The plaintiff then filed a
further response, arguing, inter alia, that “if the court finds the original Petition
defective . . . [for failing to specifically allege a violation of RSA 159:6, II, then
the plaintiff] should be given an opportunity to amend.”
In its order granting the motion to dismiss, the trial court ruled:
Although the plaintiff references [RSA 159:6, II] in his
memorandum in support of his belief that this Court has
jurisdiction to hear his appeal, the Court notes that in the appeal
itself said section was never mentioned. Thus the reference to it in
the memorandum is merely a red herring. The plaintiff cannot
now attempt to bootstrap his claim that this Court has jurisdiction
by referencing RSA 159:6[,] II in a memorandum of law. Moreover
8
the Court adopts the defendant’s position on the applicability of
said section even if it was ripe for decision on its merits.
Presumably the court’s final reference is to the defendants’ contention that “a
driver’s license is not a photograph and thus taking a copy of it did not violate
RSA 159:6, II.”
The plaintiff moved for reconsideration, requesting in his prayer for relief
that “[i]f the court’s denial of the Petition hinges on [the plaintiff] not having
clearly alleged the photograph violation of [RSA] 159:6[,] II in his original
Petition, [the court] allow the [plaintiff] to amend his Petition to allege that
violation.” The court reversed its position on the violation of RSA 159:6, II, but
still denied the motion, ruling:
In an apparent effort to keep this case in Superior Court, the
plaintiff has argued that the defendant has violated RSA 159:6[,] II.
. . . To the extent therefore that the defendant did request a
photograph or fingerprint before agreeing to grant a license to the
plaintiff, the Court finds that such a request was improper.
However it is clear that the basis for the denial is the character of
the plaintiff himself which is detailed specifically in the Chief of
Police rejection letter. The legislature intended this type of
character dispute to be heard in the District Court. Accordingly,
the plaintiff’s Motion for Reconsideration is denied.
We find no error. The trial court correctly concluded that the inclusion
in the plaintiff’s petition of an alleged violation of RSA 159:6, II would not vest
it with jurisdiction over the plaintiff’s appeal of Kane’s determination that he
was not a suitable person for licensure. The court also correctly concluded
that even if it took cognizance of the only claim over which it had jurisdiction –
the alleged violation of RSA 159:6, II – it could not grant the plaintiff the relief
he seeks (issuance of a license) in light of the not yet validly challenged finding
that he is not a suitable person for licensure. We express no opinion as to
whether the defendants violated RSA 159:6, II by requesting the plaintiff’s
driver’s license.
Finally, the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred by refusing to allow
the introduction of late authority. Specifically, he sought to introduce
McQuade v. Donovan, Rockingham Cty. Super. Ct., No. 04-E-0507, a case in
which the plaintiff asserts the superior court exercised jurisdiction over a claim
factually similar to the instant one. The defendants dispute the relevance of
the McQuade case.
It appears from the record provided us that the plaintiff in McQuade filed
an action in superior court captioned as a petition under RSA 159:6-c from
9
denial of a license to carry. A hearing was scheduled, but continued by
assented-to motion in which the parties expressed hope that an “extrajudicial
resolution” could be achieved. The case was later terminated by stipulated
“neither party” docket markings. The plaintiff considers McQuade evidence
that the superior court routinely and properly hears cases filed pursuant to
RSA 159:6 et seq. and that it exercised jurisdiction pursuant to RSA 159:6.
We review the trial court’s ruling for an unsustainable exercise of
discretion. Cf. Farris v. Daigle, 139 N.H. 453, 454 (1995) (“Whether to receive
further evidence on a motion for reconsideration rests in the sound discretion
of the trial court.”). “To show that the trial court’s decision is not sustainable,
the [party] must demonstrate that the court’s ruling was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.” State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295,
296 (2001) (quotation omitted).
We find no reversible error because, even assuming McQuade supported
the plaintiff’s position, he cannot now show prejudice in light of our holding
herein that the superior court does not have subject matter jurisdiction over
RSA 159:6-c proceedings. As “we are the final arbiter of the intent of the
legislature as expressed in the words of the statute,” Formula Dev., 156 N.H. at
178, a contrary decision by the superior court has no precedential value.
Thus, the plaintiff cannot be prejudiced by the trial court’s failing to consider a
case that purportedly advances a legal proposition we have rejected.
Accordingly, we uphold the trial court’s denial of the plaintiff’s motion to
introduce late authority.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
10