THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2005-471
ROBERT L. GARRISON & a.
v.
TOWN OF HENNIKER
Argued: March 9, 2006
Opinion Issued: August 2, 2006
Fernald, Taft, Falby & Little, P.A., of Peterborough (Silas Little on the
brief and orally), for the plaintiffs.
Soule, Leslie, Kidder, Sayward, of Salem (Diane M. Gorrow on the joint
brief), for the defendant.
Shaheen & Gordon, P.A., of Concord (Arpiar G. Saunders, Jr. and Karyn
P. Forbes on the joint brief, and Mr. Saunders orally), for the intervenor, Green
Mountain Explosives, Inc.
DUGGAN, J. The intervenor, Green Mountain Explosives, Inc. (GME),
appeals an order of the Superior Court (McGuire, J.) reversing the decision of
the Henniker Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) granting GME two conditional
variances. We affirm.
The following facts were found by the superior court or are evident from
the record. GME manufactures explosives for use in mining, quarrying and
construction. GME proposed to lease a 1,617-acre parcel owned by the
Vincent Barletta Trust for purposes of storing and blending explosives. The
parcel was comprised of eighteen separate lots. According to GME’s proposal,
an explosives storage and blending facility would be centrally located on twenty
acres. The remaining 1,597 acres would surround the facility, acting as a
buffer zone, as required by Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF)
regulations.
The parcel is located in a district zoned rural residential. On October 7,
2004, GME, acting on behalf of the Vincent Barletta Trust, filed an application
with the ZBA for two variances. First, it sought a variance to allow the
proposed commercial use where only a residential use is permitted. Second, it
sought a variance to allow the storage and blending of explosive material where
injurious or obnoxious uses are prohibited.
The ZBA conducted a hearing at which GME made a video presentation
describing the nature of its business and providing information on safety
issues related to its operations. Several employees, GME’s attorney, and
Steven Keach, a professional engineer retained by GME, spoke in favor of
granting the variances. Following GME’s presentation, members of the public
who attended the hearing questioned GME’s representatives as to the proposed
use of the property.
Board deliberations followed the public question period, during which
board members and Laura Scott, a town-planning expert retained by the ZBA,
discussed GME’s application. At the close of the hearing, the ZBA voted three
to two to grant the variances subject to two conditions. First, GME had to
merge the eighteen lots into a single 1,617-acre parcel, subject to approval by
the ZBA. Second, the variances would terminate if GME discontinued the
proposed use.
Plaintiffs Robert L. Garrison and Cheryl Morse, landowners whose
properties abut the proposed site, requested a rehearing before the ZBA. The
ZBA denied the requests and the plaintiffs appealed to the superior court
pursuant to RSA 677:4 (Supp. 2005). The superior court reversed the ZBA
decision, ruling that it was unreasonable because the evidence before the ZBA
failed to demonstrate unnecessary hardship.
Specifically, the superior court found that:
The problem with GME’s application and the record in this case is
that, while they support a conclusion that the zoning restrictions
interfere with GME’s proposed use of the property, they do not
2
support a finding that the restrictions interfere with the reasonable
use of the property. That is, there is no evidence in the record that
the property at issue is different from other property zoned rural
residential. While its size may make it uniquely appropriate for
GME’s business, that does not make it unique for zoning purposes.
The superior court also noted that “[a]lthough the evidence in the
certified record and GME’s application show that the property is ideal for
GME’s facility, ‘the burden must arise from the property and not from the
individual plight of the landowner,’” quoting Harrington v. Town of
Warner, 152 N.H. 74, 81 (2005).
On appeal, GME raises six issues. It argues that: (1) the superior court
erroneously applied the reasonable use requirement for unnecessary hardship
that we abrogated in Simplex Technologies v. Town of Newington, 145 N.H. 727
(2001); (2) the superior court erroneously required expert testimony to establish
unnecessary hardship; (3) there was sufficient evidence to support the ZBA’s
decision; (4) the superior court erred by not accepting the ZBA’s findings as
prima facie lawful and reasonable, and instead acted as a super zoning board by
substituting its own judgment for that of the ZBA; (5) the superior court erred by
failing to distinguish between evidence submitted by the applicant to prove
uniqueness and evidence submitted to prove that federal and State safety
regulations insured that granting the variance would not be contrary to the
public interest; and (6) the superior court erred by finding that GME’s proposed
use was “strikingly inconsistent” with the present zoning. We address each
argument in turn.
The superior court’s review in zoning cases is limited. See Fox v. Town of
Greenland, 151 N.H. 600, 603 (2004). Factual findings of the ZBA are deemed
prima facie lawful and reasonable and will not be set aside by the superior
court absent errors of law, unless the court is persuaded by a balance of
probabilities on the evidence before it that the ZBA decision is unreasonable.
Harrington, 152 N.H. at 77; RSA 677:6 (1996). The party seeking to set aside
the ZBA decision bears the burden of proof in the superior court. Harrington,
152 N.H. at 77.
In determining whether the superior court erred by vacating the ZBA’s
decision, we note that we do not act as a super zoning board. See id. at 82.
Our inquiry is not whether we would find as the superior court found, but
whether the evidence before the superior court reasonably supports its
findings. Id.
3
I. “Unnecessary hardship” standard
GME first argues that the superior court erroneously applied the pre-
Simplex standard for unnecessary hardship by requiring that GME
demonstrate that the ordinance prevented it from making any reasonable use
of the land. We disagree.
An applicant seeking a variance must demonstrate that: (1) the variance
will not be contrary to the public interest; (2) special conditions exist such that
a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will result in
unnecessary hardship; (3) the variance is consistent with the spirit of the
ordinance; (4) substantial justice is done; and (5) granting the variance will not
diminish the value of surrounding properties. Harrington, 152 N.H. at 77; see
RSA 674:33, I(b) (Supp. 2005).
Prior to our decision in Simplex, an applicant seeking to establish the
second prong of the variance test, “unnecessary hardship,” had to show that
the zoning ordinance unduly restricted his use of the land. See Governor’s
Island Club v. Town of Gilford, 124 N.H. 126, 130 (1983), abrogated by
Simplex, 145 N.H. at 731. For unnecessary hardship to exist under the pre-
Simplex standard for reasonable use, “the deprivation resulting from
application of the ordinance must [have been] so great as to effectively prevent
the owner from making reasonable use of the land.” Rancourt v. City of
Manchester, 149 N.H. 51, 53 (2003).
In Simplex, we held that “our definition of unnecessary hardship ha[d]
become too restrictive in light of the constitutional protections by which it must
be tempered” and adopted an approach “more considerate of the constitutional
right to enjoy property.” Simplex, 145 N.H. at 731. We stated that “applicants
for a variance may establish unnecessary hardship by proof that: (1) a zoning
restriction as applied to their property interferes with their reasonable use of
the property, considering the unique setting of the property in its environment;
(2) no fair and substantial relationship exists between the general purposes of
the zoning ordinance and the specific restriction on the property; and (3) the
variance would not injure the public or private rights of others.” Id. at 731-32
(emphasis added). In satisfying the first prong of the Simplex test, “applicants
no longer must show that the zoning ordinance deprives them of any
reasonable use of the land. Rather, they must show that the use for which
they seek a variance is ‘reasonable,’ considering the property’s unique setting
in its environment.” Rancourt, 149 N.H. at 53-54 (citation omitted).
GME argues that “[t]he Superior Court, during most of the oral
arguments applied the pre-Simplex standard by repeatedly asking whether
GME currently had reasonable use of the property.” However, the clear
language of the superior court’s order acknowledges the Simplex standard by
4
stating that “[a]pplicants do not have to show that ‘the zoning ordinance
deprives them of any reasonable use of the land. . . . Rather, they must show
that the use for which they seek a variance is reasonable considering the
property’s unique setting in its environment.’” (Quoting Rancourt, 149 N.H. at
53.)
GME also argues that the superior court’s order “failed to appreciate and
correctly apply the Simplex hardship criteria to the facts of record.” “Simplex
requires a determination of whether the [unnecessary] hardship is a result of
the unique setting of the property.” Harrington, 152 N.H. at 81. Here, the
superior court, after reviewing the record before the ZBA, concluded that GME
had failed to prove that the property was “unique for zoning purposes.”
Specifically, it stated that “there is no evidence in the record that the property
at issue is different from other property zoned rural residential.” Based upon
the language of the order, we are simply not persuaded that the superior court
failed to apply the correct standard for unnecessary hardship.
II. Expert testimony
GME next argues the superior court erroneously required that it present
expert testimony to prove that enforcement of the ordinance in this case would
result in unnecessary hardship. We disagree with GME’s reading of the
superior court order. In its order the superior court stated:
Comments [that the development of the parcel is difficult or
unlikely] are not enough to demonstrate that a special condition
exists on this land so as to warrant the issuance of the variances
given. [Harrington, 152 N.H. at 81.] (“[M]ere conclusory and lay
opinion concerning the lack of . . . reasonable return is not
sufficient [to establish unnecessary hardship]; there must be
actual proof . . . .”) (quoting Matthew v. Smith, 707 S.W.2d 411,
[417] (Mo. 1986)[(en banc)]).
In Harrington, we discussed what evidence is required to prove
unnecessary hardship and cited Matthew for the proposition that an applicant
seeking to demonstrate lack of reasonable return must provide “actual proof.”
Id. We stated:
[Unnecessary hardship] requires a determination of whether the
zoning restriction as applied interferes with a landowner’s
reasonable use of the property. This factor includes consideration
of the landowner’s ability to receive a reasonable return on his or
her investment. [Matthew, 707 S.W.2d at 416] . . . . “[M]ere
conclusory and lay opinion concerning the lack of reasonable
return is not sufficient; there must be actual proof, often in the
5
form of dollars and cents evidence.” Matthew, 707 S.W.2d at 417.
Id. at 80-81 (citation and ellipses omitted). Harrington does not require expert
testimony concerning either lack of reasonable return on the applicant’s
investment or interference with reasonable use. Applicants may show both
through lay or expert testimony. See id. Indeed, in Harrington we upheld the
superior court’s ruling that the evidence before the zoning board – which
consisted entirely of lay testimony – supported the zoning board’s decision to
grant a variance. Id. at 81-82. In this case, the superior court’s citation to
Matthew does not indicate that it reversed the ZBA decision because GME
failed to present expert testimony.
III. Sufficiency of the evidence
GME argues that the evidence before the ZBA was sufficient to support
its decision to grant the variances. Specifically, it contends that there was
evidence before the ZBA to demonstrate that the property was unique. We
disagree.
As discussed above, to demonstrate “unnecessary hardship” applicants
must show that “a zoning restriction as applied to their property interferes with
their reasonable use of the property, considering the unique setting of the
property in its environment.” Simplex, 145 N.H. at 731-32. The reasonable
use factor “is the critical inquiry for determining whether unnecessary
hardship has been established.” Harrington, 152 N.H. at 80. The reasonable
use factor “requires a determination of whether the hardship is a result of the
unique setting of the property.” Id. at 81. The applicant must show that “the
hardship is a result of specific conditions of the property and not the area in
general.” Id. The property must be “burdened by the zoning restriction in a
manner that is distinct from other similarly situated property.” Id. While this
does not require that the property be the only such burdened property, “the
burden cannot arise as a result of the zoning ordinance’s equal burden on all
property in the district.” Id. The burden must “arise from the property and not
from the individual plight of the landowner.” Id.
In this case, the following evidence was introduced before the ZBA
regarding unnecessary hardship. GME, in its variance application, stated that
“the denial of the requested variances would result in an unnecessary hardship
to GME.” It also stated:
The current residential zoning interferes with GME’s proposed
reasonable use for the property. Under current zoning, GME is
unable to use the property to conduct its business in any way.
The unique characteristics of this property make the proposed use
reasonable. The fact that this parcel is extremely large and
6
uninhabited makes it ideal for use by GME. GME must maintain
its storage facilities a significant distance from any occupied
structures according to [ATF] regulations. The size of the parcel at
issue permits GME to meet this legal obligation. For the same
reason, the proposed use of the property for storage and blending
of explosives is reasonable. The central location of the facility
within the proposed [site] will permit the facility to be both a safe
distance from any other structures and out of view from any
neighbors or the roadway.
The ZBA hearing minutes reflect that professional engineer Steven Keach
stated that the property was unique in its environment and that the denial of
the requested variances would result in unnecessary hardship. Both ZBA
chairman Leon Parker, who had driven through the proposed site earlier in the
day, and ZBA town-planning expert Laura Scott testified that the site would be
difficult to develop as a residential subdivision.
The superior court concluded that the record evidence did not support
the ZBA’s decision on unnecessary hardship because it did not demonstrate
that the proposed site was unique. In its order, it stated, in pertinent part,
that “there is no evidence in the record that the property at issue is different
from other property zoned rural residential. While its size may make it
uniquely appropriate for GME’s business, that does not make it unique for
zoning purposes.” The superior court also expressly considered the
statements of Keach, Scott and Parker. The order provides that these
statements did “not demonstrate ‘a special condition of the land which
distinguishes it from other land in the same area with respect to the suitability
for the use for which it is zoned,’” quoting Ryan v. City of Manchester Zoning
Board, 123 N.H. 170, 173 (1983).
After reviewing the certified record, we agree that the record reasonably
supports the superior court’s conclusion that the evidence did not demonstrate
uniqueness. GME directs us to no evidence in the record that would
demonstrate that the proposed site was different from any other property in the
rural residential district. Rather, the record merely demonstrates that the
proposed site was large, difficult to develop because of its topography and
relatively isolated location, and ideally suited to GME’s needs because it could
provide a buffer zone as required by the applicable ATF regulations. These
factors alone, however, do not distinguish GME’s proposed site from any other
rural land in the area. Cf. Harrington, 152 N.H. at 81.
GME argues further that Rancourt squarely controls the outcome of this
case. Specifically, it argues that in Rancourt, 149 N.H. at 54, the large size,
relatively inaccessible location and buffer zone of the property were “special
conditions of the property” which provided a basis for granting a variance, and
7
that these same factors provide a basis for granting a variance here. We
disagree.
In Rancourt, the intervenors purchased a three-acre lot in an area zoned
lower-density residential. Id. The intervenors then applied for a permit to
build a stable for two horses on the rear section of the lot. Id. The City of
Manchester denied the permit because it had recently amended its zoning
ordinance to prohibit livestock, including horses, in lower-density residential
districts. Id. The zoning board granted the intervenors’ request for a variance.
Id. The abutters appealed the zoning board decision to the superior court,
which affirmed the zoning board’s decision. Id.
We affirmed the superior court’s decision, reasoning that “[b]oth the
[superior] court and the [zoning board] could rationally have found that the
zoning ordinance precluding horses in a [lower-density residential] district
interfered with the intervenors’ reasonable proposed use of their property,
considering its unique setting.” Id. at 54. We stated that:
Evidence before the [zoning board] showed that the intervenors’ lot
was located in a country setting. Evidence before the [zoning
board] also showed that the lot was larger than most of the
surrounding lots and was uniquely configured in that the rear
portion of the lot was considerably larger than the front. The
[zoning board] also had evidence that there was a “thick wooded
buffer” around the proposed [stables] area. Further, the area in
which the intervenors proposed to keep the two horses constituted
an acre and a half, which, according to the city’s zoning laws, was
more land than required to keep two livestock animals.
Id. We upheld the zoning board’s ruling because the evidence before the ZBA
demonstrated that the property was unique in its environment. Id.
Like the intervenors in Rancourt, GME had to demonstrate that its
property was unique in its surroundings. Id.; see also Harrington, 152 N.H. at
81. In Rancourt, the size, configuration, location and buffer made the property
unique, as compared to the surrounding lots. Rancourt, 149 N.H. at 54. The
evidence presented by GME simply did not demonstrate that its proposed site
was similarly unique in its setting.
IV. Superior court’s review
GME argues that the superior court erred by not treating the ZBA
decision as prima facie lawful and reasonable. The superior court correctly set
forth the standard of review in its order, when it wrote that “[a]ll findings of the
[ZBA] . . . upon all questions of fact properly before the court shall be prima
8
facie lawful and reasonable. The order or decision appealed from shall not be
set aside or vacated, except for errors of law, unless the court is persuaded by
the balance of probabilities, on the evidence before it, that said order or
decision is unreasonable.” The superior court’s review, which focused upon
whether the ZBA’s findings were reasonable in light of the evidence before it,
was consistent with this standard. Accordingly, the superior court applied the
correct standard of review.
V. Consistency of Variance With Ordinance
GME’s next claim of error is that the superior court incorrectly found
that GME’s proposed use was “strikingly inconsistent with the present zoning.”
However, we need not address this argument because we affirm the superior
court’s finding that enforcement of the ordinance will not create unnecessary
hardship.
VI. Remaining Issue
GME’s final claim of error is that the superior court failed to distinguish
between evidence submitted by the applicant to prove uniqueness and evidence
submitted to prove that federal and State safety regulations insured that granting
the variance would not be contrary to the public interest. We conclude that this
argument lacks merit and warrants no further discussion. See Vogel v. Vogel,
137 N.H. 321, 322 (1993).
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
9