THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Family Division at Salem
No. 2004-738
IN THE MATTER OF JEFFREY G. AND JANETTE P.
Argued: September 29, 2005
Opinion Issued: January 27, 2006
Jeffrey G., by brief and orally, pro se.
Janette P., by brief, pro se.
Lisa S., by brief, pro se.
Mary Pilkington-Casey, of Concord, by brief, for the Franklin Pierce
Administrative Law and Advocacy Clinic, as amicus curiae.
GALWAY, J. The petitioner, Jeffrey G., appeals the Trial Court’s (DiMeo,
J.) order granting primary physical custody of two minor children to Lisa S.,
the children’s paternal aunt, arguing that it violated his constitutional right to
make decisions concerning the care, custody, and control of his children. We
reverse and remand.
The record supports the following facts. Jeffrey G. and Janette P. are the
parents of J.G., born in 1996, and L.G., born in 1997. They were granted a
divorce on August 7, 2002, after a three-day contested hearing in the Family
Division at Salem. Both Jeffrey G. and Janette P. were represented by counsel,
and a Guardian Ad Litem (GAL) represented the children’s interests. The issue
of the children’s custody has been intensely disputed since the parents’ initial
separation in 1998.
Throughout the pendency of the couple’s divorce and post-divorce
proceedings, three different GALs have represented the children’s interests.
Prior to the final divorce decree, Jeffrey G. had primary physical custody of the
children from approximately October 1999 through August 2002. Prior to the
final divorce hearing, the GAL filed a report documenting the parents’ turbulent
history together, much of which arose from and/or affected custody
arrangements pertaining to the children. In the final divorce decree, the Trial
Court (Taube, J.) awarded Janette P. sole legal custody and primary physical
custody of the two children, while granting Jeffrey G. “reasonable physical
custodial rights,” including liberal visitation as detailed in the decree.
The parents’ acrimonious and volatile relationship continued to
deteriorate and reportedly had a negative impact on all parties, including the
children. Both parents filed multiple motions and petitions with the trial court,
which were addressed in a subsequent custody modification hearing conducted
in June 2004. Prior to that hearing, the third GAL filed a written report, dated
March 11, 2004, which, among other things, revealed that: (1) both parents
had violated conditions and provisions contained in the divorce decree; (2)
during 2003, both parents were involved in four assessments by child reporting
agencies in Massachusetts and New Hampshire, one of which resulted in a
finding of neglect against Janette P.; and (3) the children received inconsistent
counseling and their behavioral, health and educational needs were affected by
the lack of cooperation and hostility between their parents. Despite her
conclusion that the children were being harmed by the parents’ behavior, the
GAL recommended that they share joint legal custody and that Janette P.
retain physical custody of the children.
In June 2004, the court conducted a modification of custody hearing.
Over two days, the trial court heard evidence, including testimony from the
children’s therapist and the GAL. After the completion of the first two days of
testimony, but prior to the conclusion of the hearing, the court issued an order,
acknowledging its “grave concerns about the emotional, physical and mental
health of the children,” and ordering the GAL to investigate the parents’
relatives for potential placement of the children. On July 30, 2004, when the
parties reconvened to continue the custody modification hearing, the GAL
recommended that the children reside with their paternal aunt, Lisa S., in
Maine.
Jeffrey G. asserts that the hearing was never completed and that both he
and Janette P. were denied the opportunity to complete their testimony and
fully present evidence pertaining to their case. Nevertheless, it is undisputed
that, in light of the GAL’s recommendation, the parents reached another
2
consent agreement, which the trial court approved, whereby the parents shared
joint legal custody and Jeffrey G. assumed primary physical custody of the
children.
On October 1, 2004, the GAL filed an “Interim Case Update” with the
court “to document the failure of co-parenting and communication between
Janette and Jeffrey.” In addition to detailing several incidents of concern to the
GAL, the report concluded, “[t]he children deserve better than their parents are
willing and able to provide at this time,” and recommended that the children be
placed with Lisa S. “for the school year.” The court conducted a review hearing
on October 8, 2004, at which the GAL reported that both parents’
circumstances had changed since the July 30, 2004 stipulation, resulting in
their noncompliance with the terms of that agreement. The GAL also described
a proposed custodial change, to which the parents agreed, granting Janette P.
primary physical custody of the children. However, recognizing that the
proposed change would be the fourth custodial change in four years, the trial
court determined that “[t]he children will reside with their aunt in [Maine], end
of discussion.” The court further stated:
You can come back in a year after the parents have
been through co-parenting classes, after [J.G.] has
received the appropriate special education services
he’s to receive. Parents can pay. This is outrageous
what the two of you are doing to your children. We
have done this before and before, and again and again
and again and again. That will be my order. This
hearing’s over. Thank you.
After denying Jeffrey G.’s counsel’s repeated requests to be heard, the court
further stated:
I’ve heard this case. I’ve heard it every two weeks for
the last two months. I’m not going to hear it again.
These children are in grave danger remaining with
their parents. We’ve already heard testimony from the
therapist how damaged they are as a result of their
parents [sic] behavior. I will not allow it to continue.
The hearing is over.
The hearing lasted seventeen minutes. The court denied both counsels’
requests to reconsider.
On October 13, 2004, prior to the proposed custodial change, the trial
court granted the GAL’s ex parte request that the two children be placed in Lisa
S.’ immediate custody. By order dated October 15, 2004, the court found that
3
“[r]esiding with either parent is detrimental to these children,” and granted
physical custody to Lisa S. and supervised visitation to both parents.
The petitioner appeals the trial court’s custody determination, arguing
that the trial court: (1) did not have jurisdiction to grant custody of the
children to Lisa S. under RSA 458:17; and (2) violated his fundamental
procedural due process rights when it denied him custody of the children
without following the requisite procedures set forth in RSA chapter 169-C.
Lisa S. urges us to uphold the trial court’s custody determination,
arguing that the trial court properly considered the best interests of the
children when it: (1) found that the children were in danger if left in the care of
their parents; and (2) required continuing protection for the children by
limiting the parents to supervised visits.
We also permitted the filing of an amicus curiae brief, which argues that
the trial court properly considered the best interests of the children when it
found that the parents were unfit and granted physical custody to Lisa S. It
contends the trial court’s custody determination comports with precedent set
in Troxel v. Granville, 530 U.S. 57 (2000) (plurality opinion).
The right of biological and adoptive parents to raise and care for their
children is a fundamental liberty interest protected by Part I, Article 2 of the
New Hampshire Constitution. In the Matter of Nelson & Horsley, 149 N.H. 545,
547 (2003). Similarly, the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment
to the United States Constitution protects the fundamental right of parents to
make decisions concerning the care, custody, and control of their children.
Troxel, 530 U.S. at 66. This fundamental right is not absolute, but is
subordinate to the State’s competing parens patriae power to intervene if a
child’s welfare is at stake. Preston v. Mercieri, 133 N.H. 36, 40 (1990). We first
address this issue under the State Constitution and cite federal opinions for
guidance only. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
The superior court’s jurisdiction to award custody is purely statutory,
and the best interests of the child guide all custody decisions in New
Hampshire. Bodwell v. Brooks, 141 N.H. 508, 512 (1996). RSA 458:17 vests
the superior court with authority to make child custody determinations in the
case of divorce or annulment. RSA 458:17, I (2004). Thus, in the context of a
divorce, the superior court “may interfere with parental rights to determine a
child’s best interests as between two fit parents.” Nelson, 149 N.H. at 548
(emphasis added); see Troxel, 530 U.S. at 58 (recognizing a presumption that a
fit parent is acting in the best interests of the child). RSA 458:17, VI identifies
only two classes of third parties, grandparents and stepparents, who may be
awarded custody “if the court determines that such an award is in the best
interests of the child.” See In the Matter of R.A. & J.M., ___ N.H. ___, ___
4
(decided December 30, 2005) (Broderick, C.J.) (construing RSA 458:17, VI as
authorizing superior court to grant custody to stepparent or grandparent in
appropriate circumstances). We have narrowly interpreted RSA 458:17, VI to
protect the fundamental liberty interests of biological and adoptive parents
while balancing the State’s interest in protecting the welfare of children within
its jurisdiction. See id. at . Therefore, in the context of a custody
determination, unless a third party is either a grandparent or stepparent who
has established in loco parentis status, he or she may not obtain custody of the
child over a biological or adoptive parent. See id.; RSA 458:17, VI.
The fundamental liberty interest of biological and adoptive parents in the
care, custody and management of their children “does not evaporate simply
because they have not been model parents.” In re Bill F., 145 N.H. 267, 275
(2000). “Absent a showing of specific harm to the children, growing up in a so-
called disadvantaged home is not a sufficient basis for coercive intervention.”
Id. (quotations and citation omitted). Therefore, even though their parenting
skills are less than ideal, biological and adoptive parents are presumed to be fit
parents, see Troxel, 530 U.S. at 58, until they are found to be unfit under
either RSA chapter 169-C (abuse and neglect proceedings) or RSA chapter 170-
C (termination of parental rights).
The Child Protection Act, RSA chapter 169-C, governs custody
determinations in child abuse and neglect proceedings and enumerates
detailed procedures to be followed when any interested party asserts that a
child has been abused or neglected. Under this statute, the welfare of an
allegedly abused or neglected child is of paramount importance. See In re
Preisendorfer, 143 N.H. 50, 54 (1998). However, in addition to “provid[ing]
protection to children whose life, health or welfare is endangered,” the purpose
of this chapter is also “to establish a judicial framework to protect the rights of
all parties involved in the adjudication of child abuse or neglect cases.” RSA
169-C:2, I (2002) (emphasis added). Thus, when appropriate, and pursuant to
enumerated procedures in the statute, RSA chapter 169-C provides for
emergency interim relief, see RSA 169-C:6-a, as well as temporary placement
with relatives or other appropriate third parties. See RSA 169-C:19, I & III.
The instant case initially arose in the context of a divorce proceeding
between two parents who had not been found unfit and, therefore, the trial
court had jurisdiction to determine custody of the children pursuant to RSA
458:17. However, Lisa S. is not a potential custodial recipient named in RSA
458:17, VI, and, therefore, the court did not have authority to grant custody to
her in this context.
Because the State Constitution is at least as protective of individual
liberties in these circumstances as the Federal Constitution, see In re Tracy M.,
5
137 N.H. 119, 122 (1993), we reach the same result under the Federal
Constitution.
Accordingly, we reverse the trial court’s custody determination and
remand this case to the trial court for further proceedings consistent with this
opinion.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., concurred; DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred
in part and dissented in part.
DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurring in part and dissenting in part.
Though we concur in the result, we disagree with the majority’s holding that:
Therefore, in the context of a custody determination,
unless a third party is either a grandparent or
stepparent who has established in loco parentis
status, he or she may not obtain custody of the child
over a biological or adoptive parent.
As we made clear in our dissent to In the Matter of R.A. & J.M., __ N.H.
__ (decided December 30, 2005), we believe that no relative or other third party
can obtain custody of a child over fit biological or adoptive parents. See id. at
__ (Dalianis and Duggan, JJ., dissenting). Thus, we concur as to the result,
but respectfully dissent as to the majority’s reasoning concerning grandparents
or stepparents.
6