THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
Nos. 2008-012
2008-548
IN THE MATTER OF JANICE JOHNSON AND MARK JOHNSON
Argued: January 9, 2009
Opinion Issued: April 9, 2009
Janice Johnson, by brief and orally, pro se.
Gottesman & Hollis, P.A., of Nashua (Anna Barbara Hantz on the briefs
and orally), for Mark Johnson.
BRODERICK, C.J. In these two related, but not consolidated, cases,
Mark Johnson (husband) and Janice Johnson (wife), respectively, appeal
successive orders of the Superior Court (Groff, J.; Love, M.) that: (1) first
denied the husband’s petition to terminate child support; but (2) later
terminated his child support obligation and dismissed the wife’s cross-petition
to modify child support. We affirm both orders.
I
The record supports the following. Janice and Mark Johnson are the
parents of three daughters born in 1981, 1984 and 1989. The couple divorced
in November 1993. The final decree of divorce “approved and incorporated”
their permanent stipulation, including Paragraph 5.C (“SUPPORT”), which
states in pertinent part:
The [husband’s] obligation for support of the parties’ minor
children shall continue until . . . the obtainment of age eighteen
(18) or graduation from high school, whichever occurs later.
Paragraph 13.B (“PRIVATE SCHOOLS/POST SECONDARY EDUCATION
EXPENSES”) of the same stipulation provides, in pertinent part, as follows:
Therefore, at such time as their children shall matriculate to an
accredited college or university having as an objective the attaining
of a degree from that institution, provided that the children have
made their own reasonable efforts regarding contribution to
expenses, both the [wife] and the [husband] shall contribute to the
college education of their minor children, including both tuition
and room and board, to the best of their ability at that time. The
parties’ obligation shall not exceed beyond the acquisition of a
bachelor’s degree and not be beyond the age of 24 which ever shall
occur first. For the purpose of this Permanent Stipulation, college
education expenses shall include but are not limited to college
start up expenses such as SAT fees, college application fees, travel
expenses to visit college and other related costs and expenses as
well as tuition, room, board, books, fees, reasonable allowances
and reasonable travel to and from college to the student’s principal
residence. . . . The [husband] shall have a right to participate in
the selection and financing of the child’s post secondary education.
In February 1999, in response to the wife’s petition requesting the court
to determine the husband’s specific contribution towards their oldest
daughter’s college expenses, the Trial Court (Hampsey, J.) ordered:
The [wife] is not requesting any specific assistance for college-
related expenses. Rather, she is requesting the continuation of
child support as long as a child is a full-time college student.
Upon due consideration, I find the [wife’s] request to be fair,
appropriate and reasonable. Accordingly, the [husband] shall be
required to pay child support for any child that is enrolled as a
full-time college student so long as the child remains a full-time
college student. On the other hand, the [husband] shall have no
further obligation regarding assistance for the college-related
expenses for any of the children.
The husband unsuccessfully moved for reconsideration and we declined his
appeal.
2
In May 2001, the Trial Court (Groff, J.) approved the parties’ proposed
modification to their permanent stipulation. In the paragraph entitled “Child
Support,” the parties’ stipulated as follows:
A. [The husband] shall pay to the [wife] the sum of $222.00 per
week as child support beginning April 1, 2001 for the parties’
children in accordance with the New Hampshire Child Support
Guidelines. In accordance with the [February 1999 court order],
the [husband] shall be required to pay child support for any child
that is enrolled as a full-time college student so long as the child
remains a full-time college student. Said child support payments
will continue to be made through the wage assignment already in
place payable through the Division. Arrearage payments will
continue at the rate of $20.00 per week until said arrearage is paid
in full.
B. Both parties[ ] agree not to seek a modification of child
support [any] earlier than January 1, 2004.
In May 2007, the husband petitioned to terminate his child support
obligation. The parties’ oldest daughter had graduated from college, their
second daughter was in graduate school, and the youngest child was eighteen
and soon to graduate from high school. In September 2007, after a hearing
conducted on offers of proof, the Trial Court (Groff, J.; Love, M.) denied the
husband’s petition. Citing In the Matter of Donovan & Donovan, 152 N.H. 55
(2005), the court held that the child support order “was specifically intended to
implement the [husband’s] obligation to contribute towards college expenses”
and that the “continuance of child support as the [husband’s] contribution
towards college involves a substantive right.” (Emphasis omitted.) The
husband’s motion for reconsideration was denied, and he appealed.
In January 2008, while his appeal of the September 2007 order was
pending, the husband petitioned to modify his college contribution. Pursuant
to RSA 458-C:7 (Supp. 2008), the wife cross-petitioned to modify child support,
citing an increase in the husband’s income. During an evidentiary hearing on
the petition and cross-petition, the wife argued that the only existing order was
one for child support through the college years, and that the husband’s petition
was moot because it requested modification of a non-existent order. In June
2008, the trial court ordered the termination of the husband’s child support
obligation, as of April 1, 2008, fixed his college contribution for their youngest
daughter’s freshman year at what he had already paid through March 2008,
and dismissed the wife’s cross-petition. The court further ordered that the
husband’s future college contribution would be fifty percent of each future
semester’s expenses for the youngest daughter, not to exceed $3,000 per
semester. The wife unsuccessfully moved for reconsideration, and appealed.
We first turn to the husband’s appeal.
3
II
“The court’s powers in custody, maintenance, and education of children
in divorce and separation cases are conferred entirely by statute. We afford
broad discretion to the trial court in divorce matters, and will not disturb the
trial court’s rulings regarding child support absent an unsustainable exercise
of discretion or an error of law.” In the Matter of Goulart & Goulart, 158 N.H.
___, ___ (decided January 30, 2009) (citation and quotations omitted). “The
party challenging the court’s order has the burden of showing that the order
was improper and unfair.” In the Matter of Gilmore & Gilmore, 148 N.H. 111,
112 (2002) (quotation omitted).
In his appeal of the trial court’s September 2007 order denying his
petition to terminate the previously-ordered child support, the husband argues
that, “[p]ursuant to RSA 461-A:14, IV, a parent’s child support obligation,
including all educational obligations, ‘terminates without further legal action’
when the child turns eighteen or graduates from high school, whichever is
later.” The current statutory language cited by the husband, however, does not
apply in this case.
Prior to the October 1, 2005 effective date of RSA 461-A:14, IV (Supp.
2008), the duration of child support obligations was governed by RSA 458:35-c
(2004) (repealed October 1, 2005; recodified as RSA 461-A:14, IV). The 1999
and 2001 trial court orders required the husband to pay child support for any
of his daughters enrolled as full-time college students for so long as the child
remained a full-time college student, and approved the parties’ modification to
their permanent stipulation that fixed child support at $222 per week. At the
time of the 1999 and 2001 orders, however, RSA 458:35-c (1992) read, in
pertinent part, as follows:
Unless the court or other body empowered by law to issue and
modify support orders specifies differently, the amount of a child
support obligation stated in the order for support shall remain as
stated in the order until all dependent children for whom support
is provided in the order shall terminate their high school education
or reach the age of 18 years, whichever is later . . . at which time
the child support obligation terminates without further legal
action.
(Emphasis added.) The underlined language was removed from the statute,
effective May 19, 2004.
Consequently, pursuant to the governing statute at the time, both the
1999 and 2001 orders specified that the husband would be obligated to pay
child support “for any child that is enrolled as a full-time college student so
4
long as the child remains a full-time college student,” and that amount was
fixed at $222 per week as of April 2001. We have previously held that RSA
458:17, XI-a (“No child support order shall require a parent to contribute to an
adult child’s college expenses or other educational expenses beyond the
completion of high school.”) (effective February 2, 2004; repealed October 1,
2005; recodified as RSA 461-A:14, V), had prospective application only, and did
not apply to post-enactment modifications of orders that were issued prior to
the change in legislation. See Donovan & Donovan, 152 N.H. at 61-64; In the
Matter of Forcier & Mueller, 152 N.H. 463, 466 (2005). For the identical
reasons, it follows that the amendment to RSA 458:35-c, later recodified as
RSA 461-A:14, IV, has prospective application only, and does not apply to post-
enactment modifications of orders that were issued prior to the change in
legislation. See Donovan & Donovan, 152 N.H. at 61-64 (new statute does not
require vacating a pre-existing order that requires parents to contribute to their
children’s college education; statute applied prospectively in absence of clear
indication of legislative intent for retrospective application and where statute
affects substantive right of post-divorce financial support). Therefore, RSA
461-A:14, IV does not operate to automatically terminate the husband’s
obligation to provide child support for his daughters when they turned eighteen
or graduated from high school.
The husband’s remaining arguments all relate to perceived errors on the
part of the trial court in determining the amount and manner of payment of his
“college contribution.” Specifically, he contends that: (1) his college
contribution is limited to sharing the costs of tuition, books, room, board, and
other directly related fees; (2) he is not responsible for transportation, medical
expenses, entertainment, personal expenses and clothing “as these constitute
general support and maintenance which terminates when a child reaches the
age of eighteen”; (3) his payments for college room and board must be paid
either directly to the college or to the student; and (4) his payments for
educational expenses are paid only during the months that his youngest
daughter is attending college.
We find no merit in his arguments. The February 1999 order mandated
that the husband continue to pay child support for so long as any child was
enrolled as a full-time college student, as a substitute for a specific obligation
to pay college-related expenses. The May 2001 court order approved the
parties’ proposed modification to their permanent stipulation, and fixed the
amount of the husband’s weekly child support payment. Although the trial
court ordered child support to continue so long as the husband’s youngest
daughter remained a full-time college student, the order did not transform his
child support payment into an exclusive college contribution payment, subject
to a more limited definition as to what constitutes reasonable educational
expenses and restrictions concerning their payment. See Gilmore & Gilmore,
5
148 N.H. at 114. Consequently, we affirm the September 2007 denial of the
husband’s petition to terminate child support.
III
In her appeal of the trial court’s June 2008 order granting the husband’s
petition to modify his college contribution and dismissing her cross-petition,
the wife essentially contends that the trial court’s actions constituted an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. Specifically, she argues that the trial
court erred because it modified a “non-existent” order (the 1993 divorce decree
provision concerning college expenses) in derogation of statutes and case law.
She further argues that the trial court erred in granting the husband’s petition
because it failed to allege sufficient facts to warrant such a modification, and
because the husband failed to show a substantial change in circumstances to
warrant a termination of child support. We disagree.
At the outset, we note the following with regard to the trial court’s June
2008 order and the parties’ briefs. The order characterizes the husband’s
petition as one requesting that his “contribution towards college [be]
determined by the terms of the parties’ decree of divorce dated November 22,
1993.” The petition itself, however, specifically requests that his college
contribution be modified to comport with applicable state law. Thus, the trial
court’s characterization of the husband’s petition as a “request to terminate
child support and fix his obligation for college expenses in accordance with the
terms of the divorce decree” appears to be unwarranted. Further, while the
February 1999 order provided that the husband would pay child support, and
the May 2001 order approved a specific modification to the permanent
stipulation concerning child support, both the trial court and the husband
characterized the payment, not as child support, but as the husband’s college
contribution. Finally, both parties contend that the trial court erred by
essentially revoking the 1999 and 2001 orders and “reinstating” the portion of
their 1993 divorce decree calling for them to “contribute to the college
education of their minor children . . . to the best of their ability at that time.”
We need not further parse the language of the parties’ competing
petitions and arguments, or their characterization by the trial court. Instead,
we construe the husband’s petition in accordance with the relief it requested;
specifically, that the trial court reexamine his obligation to contribute toward
his daughter’s post-secondary education, and modify it to comport with our
decision in In the Matter of Jacobson & Tierney, 150 N.H. 513 (2004).
In February 1999, in response to the wife’s petition requesting a
determination with regard to the husband’s specific contribution towards their
oldest daughter’s college expenses, the trial court fixed the amount of child
support. It further ordered the husband to pay that amount for any of his
6
three daughters for so long as she was a full-time college student. Essentially,
the trial court had conflated the college contribution with child support by
ordering that the husband’s contribution toward college expenses would be
paid via the mechanism of child support. Such a conflation was not clearly in
conflict with our decisions at that time.
In 2004, however, we made clear that child support and educational
expenses are not synonymous and are not to be conflated. Jacobson &
Tierney, 150 N.H. at 517. Given this change in the law, or at least clarification
thereof, unforeseen by either the parties or the trial court in 1999, we believe
the husband was entitled to petition the trial court in 2008 to modify his
contribution to college expenses. Cf. Snyder v. Clifton, 139 N.H. 549, 551
(1995) (to obtain modification of parties’ support obligations, petitioner has
burden of “proving a substantial change in circumstances such that the
continuance of the decree would have been improper and unfair”).
In its 2008 order, the trial court granted the husband’s request for a
ruling of law that cited our decision in Jacobson & Tierney, and read, in
pertinent part:
The child support guidelines formula is an incorrect method of
funding a parent’s college contribution because the order directs
child support . . . in an amount without regard to the actual costs
of the educational expenses for college attendance [and] improperly
conflates child support and college contribution.
Consequently, we disagree with the wife’s argument that the husband’s petition
failed either to allege sufficient facts or to show a substantial change in
circumstances to warrant the modification or termination of child support.
Further, and contrary to the wife’s contention, we see no evidence that the trial
court’s decision to terminate the husband’s child support payments
impermissibly relied upon the 2004 enactment of RSA 458:17, XI-a (“No child
support order shall require a parent to contribute to an adult child’s college
expenses or other educational expenses beyond the completion of high
school.”). See, e.g., In the Matter of Cole & Ford, 156 N.H. 609, 612 (2007)
(RSA 458:17, XI-a not applicable retroactively to divorce orders issued before
statute’s effective date).
In sum, we cannot say that the trial court’s termination of the husband’s
child support obligation was an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Having
terminated the husband’s child support obligation, the trial court properly
exercised its discretion to dismiss the wife’s cross-petition to modify that same
child support obligation.
7
As previously discussed, the trial court’s discretionary authority in 1999
and 2001 to order that the husband’s obligation to pay child support would
continue beyond either his daughters’ reaching the age of eighteen years or
completing their secondary school education was grounded solely in the
version of RSA 458:35-c then in effect. Consequently, and once the trial court
terminated the husband’s child support obligation, we believe it was also
within its discretion to examine the situation anew, and to distinguish the
husband’s college contribution from the mechanism of child support payments.
Both parties contend that the trial court erred in “reinstating” that
portion of their 1993 divorce decree calling for them to “contribute to the
college education of their minor children . . . to the best of their ability at that
time.” The husband further argues that once the trial court, in 1999,
“replaced” the college contribution provision of the 1993 divorce decree with
the child support obligation, the college contribution provision was no longer
viable and the court was precluded from modifying it, pursuant to RSA 461-
A:14, V (Supp. 2008). Although the wife has not made the latter statutory
argument, we disagree with both the reinstatement and statutory preclusion
arguments.
It is clear that the trial court intended the child support ordered in 1999
to satisfy the husband’s obligation to contribute toward college expenses.
Indeed, that portion of the order was entitled “COLLEGE EXPENSES—CHILD
SUPPORT FOR CHILDREN IN COLLEGE.” Moreover, while the 1999 order
addressed the husband’s obligation to contribute toward the college expenses,
it did not amend the requirement in the divorce decree that the wife contribute
toward the college education of their daughters. Further, the 2001 order
modified only the child support provision of their 1993 permanent stipulation;
it did not modify Paragraph 13.B (“PRIVATE SCHOOLS/POST SECONDARY
EDUCATION EXPENSES”) of the same stipulation.
Thus, under the facts of this case, we conclude that in substance, both
parties remained obligated to contribute to college expenses in 2001, prior to
the 2004 enactment of RSA 458:17, XI-a (recodified as RSA 461-A:14, V), and
the trial court retained the authority to order contributions toward college
expenses. See Cole & Ford, 156 N.H. at 612. In examining the situation anew
in order to provide for an equitable college contribution from each party, the
trial court took guidance from the divorce decree’s original college contribution
provision that the parties “shall contribute to the college education of their . . .
children, including both tuition and room and board, to the best of their ability
at that time.” We are not persuaded that the court erred by doing so.
The trial court made its decision, including its findings of fact and
rulings of law, based upon the testimony and exhibits presented at the hearing.
Within this context, trial courts are in the best position to determine the
8
parties’ respective needs and their respective abilities to meet them. See In the
Matter of Jerome & Jerome, 150 N.H. 626, 628 (2004). Having notified this
court that she wished to proceed without preparation of the transcript, the wife
has not provided an adequate record for this court to review her allegation that
the trial court’s decision was “contrary to the weight of the evidence presented.”
See Sup. Ct. R. 15(3); Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004)
(“[A]bsent a transcript of the hearing, we must assume that the evidence was
sufficient to support the result reached by the trial court.”).
We fail to see any unfair prejudice to the wife by the trial court’s action,
and she has consequently failed to meet her burden of showing that the trial
court’s decision was an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See State v.
Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001). Accordingly, we affirm the June 2008 trial
court order granting the husband’s petition to modify his college contribution,
terminating his child support obligation, and dismissing the wife’s cross-
petition to modify child support.
Affirmed.
DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
9