THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2005-189
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
KEITH LACASSE
Argued: March 8, 2006
Opinion Issued: June 16, 2006
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Simon R. Brown, senior assistant
attorney general, on the memorandum of law and orally), for the State.
Andrew Winters, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief,
and Richard C. Guerriero, Jr., public defender, of Keene, orally, for the
defendant.
BRODERICK, C.J. The defendant, Keith Lacasse, appeals his conviction
for knowingly using an on-line computer service to solicit a person whom he
believed to be a child under the age of sixteen to engage in sexual intercourse.
See RSA 649-B:4, I (Supp. 2005). He argues that the Superior Court (Groff, J.)
erred by denying his motion to dismiss because there was insufficient evidence
to establish that he believed the person he solicited to be under the age of
sixteen. We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. On November 30, 2003,
the defendant went to his cousin’s house to watch a football game. While
there, he used his cousin’s computer to enter an America Online “chat room”
devoted to the subject of New Hampshire romance. The chat room could be
used by a participant to observe or take part in an ongoing, “public”
conversation among all the entrants in the room, and also to engage in a
private conversation with one particular entrant through use of “instant
messaging.” Each participant uses a “screen name” of choice which appears
on the computer screen for all entrants to see. An entrant may also create a
“profile” which purports to provide some description of the person using the
screen name. Entrants can choose to access another participant’s profile but
need not do so in order to remain in the chat room, engage in the public
conversation, or have a private conversation through instant messaging.
On the afternoon of November 30, the defendant used his cousin’s screen
name “Jay Paul 29.” Meanwhile, Sergeant Richard Mello of the Hollis Police
Department also entered the same chat room under the screen name
“JennyNHJenny” with the following profile:
Name: Jenny
New Hampshire
Female 14
Oh ya…im single! ;)
Hobbies & Interests: Hangin’ & partying w/friends
.......do u need a smile?
Mello assumed the identity of a fourteen-year-old girl for the purpose of
conducting an undercover investigation into the solicitation on the internet of
minors to engage in sexual conduct. While in the chat room, the defendant
initiated a private conversation with “JennyNHJenny” by sending an instant
message as “Jay Paul 29.” During the approximately one-hour conversation,
the two discussed meeting to engage in sexual intercourse. At one point in the
conversation, “JennyNHJenny” gave “Jay Paul 29” her telephone number and
told him to call her after 2:00 p.m., once her parents had left the house. “Jay
Paul 29” called the number, an undercover phone line at the Hollis Police
Department, and Officer Tracey Dunne answered, posing as “JennyNHJenny.”
After some conversation, they agreed to meet at a designated time and location
in Hollis.
After the call concluded, Sergeant Mello determined that insufficient
police coverage existed to safely monitor the arranged meeting. Officer Dunne
attempted to contact the defendant on-line in the chat room to cancel the
meeting, but the defendant’s cousin responded, informing her that the
defendant had already left. Officer Dunne then dressed undercover and
proceeded to the meeting for the purpose of identifying the defendant. Once
she located the defendant, she informed him that they would need to meet on a
2
different occasion because her “parents” or “father” had unexpectedly returned
home early. The defendant then gave Officer Dunne his phone number so that
they could arrange another meeting.
According to the defendant’s cousin, once the defendant returned from
the meeting, he acted “nervous,” worrying that “JennyNHJenny” had been
looking at his license plate. The following day, Officer Dunne called the
defendant and left him a message as “JennyNHJenny.” Upon hearing her
message, the defendant contacted his cousin, expressing reservations about
returning the call. The defendant called “JennyNHJenny,” spoke with Officer
Dunne and repeatedly asked her whether she had looked at his license plate.
The defendant was later arrested and charged under RSA 649-B:4, I, with
using a computer on-line service to solicit a person whom he believed was a
child under the age of sixteen to engage in sexual intercourse.
At trial, the defendant moved to dismiss the charge. He argued, among
other things, that the evidence was insufficient to establish beyond a
reasonable doubt that he believed “JennyNHJenny” was a child under the age
of sixteen. The court denied the motion, and the jury returned a guilty verdict.
This appeal followed.
To succeed on a motion to dismiss, the defendant bears the burden of
establishing that the evidence, viewed in its entirety and with all reasonable
inferences drawn in the State’s favor, was insufficient to prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that he was guilty of the crime charged. State v. Littlefield,
152 N.H. 331, 349 (2005). “When reviewing the trial court’s denial of a motion
to dismiss, we view the evidence and reasonable inferences arising therefrom in
the manner most favorable to the State,” even when the evidence presented is
solely circumstantial. Id. at 349-50. Further, we review the evidence in
context, and not in isolation. Id. at 350. When the evidence is purely
circumstantial, it must exclude all rational conclusions except guilt. Id. We
emphasize, however, that “[t[he proper analysis is not whether every possible
conclusion has been excluded but, rather, whether other rational conclusions
based on the evidence have been excluded.” State v. Cobb, 143 N.H. 638, 658
(1999).
The defendant argues that there was insufficient evidence to prove
beyond a reasonable doubt that he believed “JennyNHJenny” was a child under
the age of sixteen. He contends that no evidence was presented showing he
reviewed the profile of “JennyNHJenny,” which listed her age as fourteen, and
the transcript of the on-line conversation makes no reference to her specific
age. He argues that his statements during that conversation leave “serious
doubt” that he knew she was under sixteen, and concludes that because the
circumstantial evidence supports the rational inference that he believed
3
“JennyNHJenny” to have been at least sixteen years old, his conviction must be
reversed. We disagree.
Viewing the initial portion of the on-line conversation in the State’s favor,
a rational jury could have concluded beyond a reasonable doubt that the
evidence excluded all rational conclusions except that the defendant believed
“JennyNHJenny” to be fourteen as purported by the screen name profile. The
defendant initiated the private conversation with “JennyNHJenny” at 1:06
p.m., asking whether she was looking “to meet a sweet guy.” Within the first
few minutes, he inquired about the size of her breasts and characteristics of
her pubic area. The following conversation immediately ensued:
JennyNHJenny [1:11 PM]: age?
Jay Paul 29 [1:11 PM]: do you like older guys?
JennyNHJenny [1:11 PM]: yes
Jay Paul 29 [1:12 PM]: is 30 too old for [you]?
JennyNHJenny [1:12 PM]: no lol
Jay Paul 29 [1:13 PM]: no?
JennyNHJenny [1:13 PM]: no, Y?
Jay Paul 29 [1:14 PM]: most people your age would not
talk to someone my age
Significantly, when “JennyNHJenny” inquired about the defendant’s age,
he immediately brought up the purported age discrepancy between them by
asking, “do you like older guys?” He continued by asking whether “30 was too
old for [her]” and stated that “most people your age would not talk to someone
my age.” (Emphasis added.) Viewing all inferences in the State’s favor, the
jury could have discerned that the only rational conclusion to be drawn from
this initial exchange was that the defendant believed that “JennyNHJenny”
would perceive a significant age discrepancy between them, with
“JennyNHJenny” being the younger of the two. For the defendant to discern an
age discrepancy, he obviously had some information about the age of
“JennyNHJenny” in order to compare it with his own. The screen name
“JennyNHJenny” itself provides no intrinsic reference to her age. Nor did the
statements or questions offered by “JennyNHJenny,” leading up to the
defendant’s apprehension, provide an intimation that she was any particular
age. Indeed, at this initial juncture of their on-line conversation, the profile of
“JennyNHJenny,” which listed her age as fourteen, comprised the sole source
of her purported age by which the defendant could have measured and
compared his own age. Therefore, a rational jury could have determined
beyond a reasonable doubt that the evidence excluded all rational conclusions
except guilt; namely, that the defendant believed that “JennyNHJenny” was
under sixteen years old.
4
We observe that later portions of the on-line conversation, the phone
dialogue between the defendant and Officer Dunne posing as “JennyNHJenny,”
and the defendant’s nervous behavior after their meeting confirm that the
defendant believed the person he conversed with on-line to be underage. For
example, the defendant was concerned that “JennyNHJenny” was a “cop,” and
that he might incur legal ramifications for talking and meeting with her. Also,
the proffered persona of “JennyNHJenny” throughout their conversations
suggested a youthful teenaged girl, such as that she ran track, lived at home
with her parents and needed to wait for her parents to leave the house that
afternoon in order to talk to the defendant on the telephone. None of this later
evidence, standing apart from the initial portion of the on-line conversation,
demonstrates that the defendant believed “JennyNHJenny” to be under the age
of sixteen. That evidence could support a rational conclusion that he believed
“JennyNHJenny” to be youthful but at least sixteen. See RSA 639:3 (1996)
(endangerment of child under eighteen years old). We, however, view the
evidence in totality, Littlefield, 152 N.H. at 350, and because the defendant’s
initial interaction with “JennyNHJenny” would have permitted the jury to
exclude all rational conclusions other than he had reviewed her profile, which
listed her age as fourteen, we affirm the defendant’s conviction.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
5