THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. LD-2022-0009, In the Matter of Justin P.
Nadeau, Esquire, the court on April 16, 2024, issued the
following order:
The court has reviewed the written arguments and the record submitted
on appeal, and has determined to resolve the case by way of this order. See
Sup. Ct. R. 20(2). On December 8, 2022, the Supreme Court Professional
Conduct Committee (PCC) filed a petition recommending that the respondent,
Justin P. Nadeau, be disbarred. See Sup. Ct. R. 37A(III)(d)(2)(D)(iv). We order
the respondent disbarred.
I. Procedural Background
The conduct code violations at issue arise from the respondent’s
representation of Shawn Fahey. An investigation into the respondent’s conduct
began after Attorney Christopher Hawkins, who represents Fahey in a civil
action brought against the respondent, filed a referral with the Attorney
Discipline Office (ADO) on April 30, 2019. The ADO issued a notice of charges
on December 6, 2019. The ADO subsequently uncovered evidence of trust
account malfeasance and evidence of misconduct relating to the respondent’s
role as treasurer of a charity, prompting the ADO to move to amend the notice
of charges on January 7, 2021. In addition, the respondent’s behavior
following notification of the disciplinary investigation into the Fahey matter led
to additional charges that the respondent failed to preserve evidence, falsified
evidence provided to the ADO, and failed to comply with discovery and pre-trial
orders.
Following a seven-day evidentiary hearing, a panel of the Hearings
Committee issued a 96-page report on January 4, 2022, finding that the
respondent violated nine New Hampshire Rules of Professional Conduct
(Rules). Following a two-day sanction hearing, the hearing panel issued a
report recommending disbarment. In October 2022, the PCC held oral
argument on both the findings of Rules violations and the recommended
sanction.
The PCC concluded that the record supported by clear and convincing
evidence the factual findings set forth in the hearing panel report. See Sup. Ct.
R. 37A(III)(d)(2)(c). The PCC also found, by clear and convincing evidence, that
the respondent had violated Rules 1.5, 1.7, 1.8, 1.15, 3.3, 3.4, 5.3, 8.1, and
8.4. After considering the duties violated, the respondent’s mental state, and
the actual or potential harm caused by his conduct, the PCC found that the
baseline sanction was disbarment and, after considering the aggravating and
mitigating factors, concluded that the mitigating factors did not warrant a
downward departure to a lesser sanction. The PCC filed its recommendation
with this court, as required for any recommended sanction greater than a
suspension of six months. See Sup. Ct. R. 37(16)(b). Thereafter, the PCC filed
the record of its proceedings.
II. Analysis
The respondent asserts that: (1) the PCC’s findings of Rules violations
are not supported by clear and convincing evidence; (2) the recommended
sanction is disproportionate and does not serve the purposes of attorney
discipline; and (3) the recommended sanction is not in keeping with this court’s
prior cases. In attorney discipline cases, we defer to the PCC’s factual findings
if supported by the record, but retain ultimate authority to determine whether,
on the facts found, a violation of the rules governing attorney conduct has
occurred and, if so, the sanction. Salomon’s Case, 171 N.H. 694, 700 (2019).
A. Rules Violations
We first consider the PCC’s finding by clear and convincing evidence that
the respondent violated the Rules. See Sup. Ct. R. 37A(III)(d)(2)(c). The PCC
found that the respondent violated Rules 1.5, 1.7, 1.8, 1.15, 3.3, 3.4, 5.3, 8.1,
and 8.4. These violations were based upon clear and convincing evidence that
the respondent
engag[ed] in a business transaction with a client after establishing
an attorney-client relationship[,] fail[ed] to obtain a written,
informed waiver of conflicts of interest, . . . fail[ed] to provide a
written statement to the client of the division of fees resulting from
settlement of a contingent-fee litigation matter[,] . . . commingl[ed]
personal funds with client funds and [was] out of trust in multiple
client matters[,] . . . submitt[ed] false Trust Account Compliance
Certificates for multiple reporting periods stating he was never out
of trust in his client trust account[,] . . . fail[ed] to supervise the
conduct of his bookkeeper with respect to the transfer of funds in
and out of client trust accounts[,] . . . sign[ed] his wife’s name to a
legal instrument without her authorization, and . . . through
multiple acts of fraud, deceit, and misrepresentation[,] [and,]
[f]ollowing notice of the disciplinary investigation, . . . fail[ed] to
preserve evidence, falsif[ied] evidence provided to the ADO, and
fail[ed] to comply with discovery and pre-trial orders.
Because we agree with the PCC that the record supports — by clear and
convincing evidence — that the respondent violated Rules 3.4(b) and 8.1(a),
2
and because we find that these violations warrant disbarment, we need not
address the other violations. See Budnitz’ Case, 139 N.H. 489, 490 (1995).
1. Rules 3.4(b) and 8.1(a)
Rule 3.4(b) provides that a lawyer “shall not . . . falsify evidence.” N.H. R.
Prof. Conduct 3.4(b). Rule 8.1(a) provides that a lawyer “in connection with a
disciplinary matter, shall not . . . knowingly make a false statement of material
fact.” N.H. R. Prof. Conduct 8.1(a).
After the disciplinary matter was initiated, the respondent twice agreed to
preserve electronic data relating to Fahey’s representation. The first time he
did so was in a May 8, 2019 letter to Hawkins. The second time was
approximately one year later, in an email to disciplinary counsel. During the
course of this disciplinary matter, the respondent produced paper files
including three conflict of interest letters dated October 24, November 29, and
December 13, 2018, that the respondent purportedly sent to Fahey. The
respondent later produced a letter dated January 15, 2019, enclosing a
“settlement summary,” and a March 13, 2019 letter attaching an
“Acknowled[]gment and Agreement” dated March 12, 2019 (collectively “the
disputed documents”). (Capitalization and underlining omitted.)
The ADO four times requested that the respondent produce these
documents in their native electronic formats, which is the original source
format of a document, in this case, the Microsoft Word document. Ultimately,
the ADO moved to compel production of the disputed documents in their native
format. For the first time, the respondent informed the ADO that the
documents were produced in the form of a Portable Document Format (PDF),
rather than Word format, because it was his “office practice” to delete the Word
versions of client letters after they were printed, mailed, and saved as PDFs.
The hearing panel granted the ADO’s motion to compel on January 21, 2021.
In response, in lieu of producing the native electronic files, the
respondent produced PDF files purporting to show screenshots of the metadata
associated with the disputed documents. These showed “created” and
“modified” dates for each PDF that matched the face date of the document.
They also included a screenshot of Word metadata for one document, but the
underlying PDF files and Word file from which the metadata screenshots were
taken were not produced. This prompted the ADO to move to compel the
production of the respondent’s computers so that they could be forensically
examined for evidence regarding the disputed documents. The motion was
granted.
Because the respondent had disposed of his law office computer, the
paralegal computer and the Nadeau fileserver were delivered to the offices of
James Berriman, who had been engaged as an expert by the ADO to determine
3