THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. LD-2021-0012, In the Matter of Robert M. Fojo,
Esquire, the court on February 25, 2022, issued the following
order:
On December 17, 2021, the Attorney Discipline Office (ADO) filed a
petition in this court for Attorney Robert M. Fojo’s immediate interim
suspension from the practice of law. In its petition, the ADO relied upon
Supreme Court Rules 37(16)(f) and 37(9-A). On the same day, the ADO served
a copy of the petition on Attorney Fojo and his counsel by email. Attorney
Fojo’s counsel was simultaneously notified of the petition through the court’s
electronic filing system. Neither Attorney Fojo nor his counsel immediately
responded to the petition.
On December 21, the court issued an order imposing an interim
suspension under Supreme Court Rule 37(16)(d) and (f) and notifying Attorney
Fojo of his right to request a prompt hearing on whether the suspension should
be lifted. That same day, Attorney Fojo requested an immediate hearing and
moved to stay the suspension. On December 22, we granted his request for a
hearing and stayed his interim suspension for the limited purpose of allowing
him to represent a client at a criminal sentencing hearing that day. His
suspension otherwise remained in effect.
On December 23, we appointed retired Superior Court Justice Larry M.
Smukler as referee to conduct a hearing on the issue of whether Attorney Fojo’s
interim suspension from the practice of law is necessary for the protection of the
public and the preservation of the integrity of the legal profession. See Sup. Ct.
R. 37(16)(d), (f); Gallant’s Case, 170 N.H. 528, 533-34 (2017). The hearing was
held at the Supreme Court on January 4, 2022, and proceeded by offers of proof.
In support of its proffer, the ADO submitted over 100 documentary exhibits.
Attorney Fojo, represented by counsel, submitted a hearing memorandum and
several exhibits. He did not request an evidentiary hearing.
On January 12, the referee submitted a fourteen-page report to the court.
In the Referee’s Recommendations, Judge Smukler stated as follows:
The evidence clearly supports the ADO’s petition, and demonstrates
that Fojo’s conduct violated Supreme Court Rule 50, as well as Rules
of Professional Conduct 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.15, 3.3, and 8.4(a) and (c).
Among other things, Fojo failed to perform monthly reconciliations of
his IOLTA account, failed to maintain client ledgers, was significantly
“out of trust” in at least three client matters, and regularly left
earned fees in his IOLTA account for extended periods of time,
resulting in commingling. . . . Nonetheless, Fojo annually certified
to the New Hampshire Bar Association that he performed such
monthly reconciliations, that he was not “out of trust” at any point,
and that he was otherwise compliant with Rules 50 and 1.15.
In addition, Fojo failed to keep his clients reasonably informed
about the status of their cases and failed to act with reasonable
diligence by not promptly disbursing funds due to them or their
creditors. More important, Fojo misappropriated client funds and
then lied about it to his clients and to the ADO. . . .
. . . .
Simply put, Fojo’s conduct is not the conduct of an attorney
who has made unintentional bookkeeping errors and who has
earnestly sought to prevent harm to his clients by correcting those
errors. Nonetheless, even if Fojo’s conduct could fairly be construed
as a series of negligent bookkeeping errors, a suspension would still
be appropriate.
See Sup. Ct. R. 50(1) (explaining that “IOLTA” stands for “Interest on Lawyers
Trust Accounts program” and that IOLTA accounts are “for clients’ funds”). The
referee made this recommendation to the court: “Because the ADO has sustained
its burden of demonstrating by a preponderance of the evidence that an interim
suspension is necessary for the protection of the public and the preservation of
the integrity of the legal profession, I recommend that the interim suspension
remain in place.”
Attorney Fojo challenged the referee’s findings, rulings, and
recommendation, and, on January 26, we ordered the parties to file briefs by
February 10. On February 7, we scheduled oral argument for February 15. Both
parties filed briefs, and Attorney Fojo, relying upon Supreme Court Rule 37(9-
B)(g), filed a petition for reinstatement. We heard oral argument on February 15.
Ordinarily, we defer to the factual findings of a referee in a lawyer
discipline case, reviewing only whether a reasonable person could have reached
the same decision as the referee. Gallant’s Case, 170 N.H. at 534. However, we
may give less than ordinary deference to the factual findings of the referee in this
case because he decided the issues on offers of proof, based upon a paper record,
2
and all of the documents and proffers upon which he based his decision are
available for our review. Id.; see Lawrence v. Philip Morris USA, 164 N.H. 93, 96-
97 (2012). As to the referee’s legal rulings, our review is de novo and we “retain
the ultimate authority to determine whether suspension is necessary under Rule
37(16)(f).” Gallant’s Case, 170 N.H. at 534.
We first address Attorney Fojo’s argument that his due process rights were
violated because the procedures employed in imposing the interim suspension
did not comport with Supreme Court Rule 37. Central to this argument is his
contention that Rule 37(16) is not a stand-alone, independent basis for an
immediate interim suspension but, rather, must be read as supplementary to
suspension procedures outlined in other provisions of Rule 37.
Rule 37 provides specific procedures for immediate suspension under
certain circumstances. See, e.g., Sup. Ct. R. 37(9)(a), (i) (providing for immediate
suspension upon proof that attorney has been convicted of a serious crime or has
been indicted for any felony); Sup. Ct. R. 37(9-A)(a) (authorizing interim
suspension of an attorney alleged to have “engaged in conduct that poses a
substantial threat of serious harm to the public”); Sup. Ct. R. 37(9-B)(a)
(authorizing summary suspension of an attorney who fails to cooperate with the
ADO’s investigation of a matter “alleging serious misconduct”). Attorney Fojo
argues that, when the circumstances fall within one of these rules, the specific
procedures set forth in the applicable rule must be followed because they
constitute the due process required. We disagree. These specific procedures do
not supplant our authority to take immediate disciplinary action against an
attorney who is credibly alleged to have engaged in conduct that poses a
substantial threat of serious harm to the public, yet may have cooperated with
the ADO investigation, and who has not been convicted of a serious crime or
indicted for a felony. Attorney Fojo overlooks the true sources of our authority to
discipline attorneys — the common law, statutes, and the State Constitution —
from which Rule 37 is derived.
We have inherent and statutory authority to discipline attorneys. Petition
of Brooks, 140 N.H. 813, 817 (1996); see also RSA 311:8 (2015); RSA 490:4
(2010). Moreover, Part II, Article 73-a of the State Constitution provides that the
court shall “make rules governing the administration of all courts in the state
and the practice and procedure to be followed in all such courts.” N.H. CONST.
pt. II, art. 73-a; see Petition of Tocci, 137 N.H. 131, 135 (1993) (“[T]he judicial
branch possesses all the authority necessary to perform its judicial functions
. . . .”). Because the judicial branch requires a qualified and ethical bar to
perform its functions, we have the inherent authority to establish procedures to
ensure that members of the bar meet those standards. Tocci, 137 N.H. at 135;
3