THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
Rockingham
Nos. 2006-257
2006-773
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
CARLOS LOPEZ
GUILLERMO RIVERA
v.
WARDEN, NEW HAMPSHIRE STATE PRISON
Argued: June 7, 2007
Opinion Issued: September 21, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Stephen D. Fuller, senior assistant
attorney general, on the memorandum of law and orally), for the State.
Theodore Lothstein, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the
briefs and orally, for defendant Carlos Lopez and petitioner Guillermo Rivera.
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, Carlos Lopez, appeals the Superior Court’s
(Coffey, J.) denial of his post-conviction motion for a new trial, which sought to
withdraw his guilty pleas to two drug-related charges on the grounds that they
were not knowingly or voluntarily made. The petitioner, Guillermo Rivera,
appeals the Superior Court’s (Nadeau, J.) denial of a post-conviction claim that
he received ineffective assistance of counsel when he pled guilty to sexual
assault because his then-counsel had a conflict of interest. We shall refer to
Lopez and Rivera hereafter as the defendants. Both defendants applied for
court-appointed counsel on appeal. We accepted both appeals and appointed
the Appellate Defender for the limited purpose of addressing the question
whether, in light of the Supreme Court’s holding in Halbert v. Michigan, 545
U.S. 605 (2005), an indigent defendant who seeks to appeal the denial of a
motion to withdraw a guilty plea is entitled to court-appointed counsel. The
State and the defendants agree that if an appeal from a denial of a motion to
withdraw a plea is part of the direct appeal from the conviction and sentence,
then under the Federal Constitution, a defendant is entitled to court-appointed
counsel. They also agree that Halbert does not afford a defendant a federal
constitutional right to counsel when the defendant appeals a collateral
challenge to a guilty plea. We agree with those principles.
The defendants, however, urge us to find a right to court-appointed
counsel on appeal of a collateral challenge to a guilty plea under Part I, Article
15 of the New Hampshire Constitution. We conclude that there is no such
entitlement, but hold that under certain circumstances, we may appoint
counsel in such cases.
I. Right to Counsel Under the Federal Constitution
In Halbert v. Michigan, the United States Supreme Court held that the
Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution requires that an
indigent defendant be provided with court-appointed counsel when he files a
direct appeal from a plea-based conviction to a first-tier court that conducts
discretionary, but merits-based, review. Halbert, 545 U.S. at 623-24. We
begin our discussion of Halbert’s application in New Hampshire by reviewing
the antecedents to Halbert that articulate an indigent criminal defendant’s
right under the Federal Constitution to court-appointed appellate counsel.
In Douglas v. California, 372 U.S. 353, 356-57 (1963), the United States
Supreme Court held that an appellate court undertaking review of first
appeals-as-of-right from criminal convictions is required to provide court-
appointed counsel to indigent defendants. The Court reasoned that for most
lay people, an appeal without the benefit of organization and argument by
counsel is a “meaningless ritual.” Id. at 358. It concluded that “where the
merits of the one and only appeal an indigent has as of right are decided
without benefit of counsel . . . an unconstitutional line has been drawn
between rich and poor.” Id. at 357.
2
In Ross v. Moffitt, the Court held that the right articulated in Douglas
does not extend to discretionary appeals when the discretion to review is not
based upon the merits of the appeal. Ross v. Moffitt, 417 U.S. 600, 610-11
(1974). There, the North Carolina Supreme Court provided discretionary
review of convictions after mandatory review by an intermediate appellate
court, accepting cases based upon their public importance and other criteria
unrelated to the merits of the appeal. Id. at 612-14. Holding that the Federal
Constitution does not require the appointment of counsel for an indigent
defendant seeking review in the North Carolina Supreme Court, the United
States Supreme Court noted that a state need not provide any appeal at all,
but when an appeal is provided, the state does not necessarily act unfairly by
refusing to provide counsel to indigent defendants “at every stage of the way.”
Id. at 611. It was sufficient that the defendant’s claims were “once . . .
presented by a lawyer and passed upon by an appellate court.” Id. at 614
(quotation omitted). In addition to having had the benefit of counsel in his
appeal to the intermediate appellate court, the defendant had the record,
arguments and opinion from that appeal, and these materials, concluded the
Court, “supplemented by whatever submission respondent may make pro se,
would appear to provide the Supreme Court of North Carolina with an
adequate basis for its decision to grant or deny review.” Id. at 615. The Court
emphasized that this conclusion was fortified by its “understanding of the
function served by discretionary review in the North Carolina Supreme Court.
The critical issue in that court, as we perceive it, is not whether there has been
a correct adjudication of guilt in every individual case, but rather whether the
subject matter of the appeal has significant public interest” or the case involves
significant legal principles or a conflict with precedent. Id. (quotations and
citation omitted).
In Pennsylvania v. Finley, 481 U.S. 551, 555 (1987), the Court held that
there is no federal constitutional right to court-appointed counsel in an appeal
of a collateral attack on a criminal conviction. The Court wrote, “Our cases
establish that the right to appointed counsel extends to the first appeal of right,
and no further.” Id. “We think that since a defendant has no federal
constitutional right to counsel when pursuing a discretionary appeal on direct
review of his conviction, a fortiori, he has no such right when attacking a
conviction that has long since become final upon exhaustion of the appellate
process.” Id.
In Halbert, the question was whether an indigent defendant is entitled to
court-appointed counsel when he files a first, direct appeal from a plea-based
conviction to a court that conducts discretionary but merits-based review.
Halbert, 545 U.S. at 616-17. Halbert was convicted on a plea for two counts of
criminal sexual conduct. Id. at 614. At sentencing, the trial court denied
defense counsel’s request that the sentences run concurrently. Id. at 615. The
3
next day, Halbert, pro se, moved unsuccessfully to withdraw his plea, and was
instructed by the trial court to appeal to the Michigan Court of Appeals, which,
as the State’s intermediate appellate court, provided discretionary review. Id.
at 612, 615. Halbert’s requests that the trial court appoint counsel to help him
prepare an application for leave to appeal, which were accompanied by
information that Halbert had learning disabilities and was “mentally impaired,”
were denied by the trial court, which ruled that he did “not have a
constitutional . . . right to appointment of appellate counsel to pursue a
discretionary appeal.” Id. at 615-16 (quotation omitted). Again acting pro se,
Halbert filed an application for leave to appeal, claiming sentencing error and
ineffective assistance of counsel, and seeking remand for appointment of
appellate counsel and resentencing. Id. at 516. In a standard form order, the
court of appeals denied Halbert’s application “‘for lack of merit in the grounds
presented.’” Id. The Michigan Supreme Court denied Halbert’s application for
leave to appeal and Halbert then appealed to the United States Supreme Court.
Id.
The question before the United States Supreme Court was whether
Halbert’s asserted right to court-appointed counsel was more properly aligned
with Douglas v. California or Ross v. Moffitt. Halbert, 545 U.S. at 609-10, 616-
17. The Court decided that Douglas was controlling primarily for two reasons.
First, unlike the North Carolina Supreme Court and the Michigan
Supreme Court, which sit to decide “matters of larger public import,” Halbert,
545 U.S. at 618, the Michigan Court of Appeals necessarily looked to the merits
of an applicant’s claims when deciding whether to grant leave for discretionary
appeals. Id. at 617-19. Thus, although Halbert’s appeal to the Michigan Court
of Appeals was discretionary, the error-correcting function of that intermediate
appellate court more closely resembled the first-tier review as of right in
Douglas. Id. The distinction between types of review, for the purposes of
applying Douglas and Ross, hinges not upon whether the review is mandatory
or discretionary, but rather upon whether or not it is merits-based. Id.
Second, “indigent defendants pursuing first-tier review in the Court of
Appeals are generally ill equipped to represent themselves.” Id. at 617. The
Court noted that whether it is “formally categorized as the decision of an appeal
or the disposal of a leave application, the Court of Appeals’ ruling on a plea-
convicted defendant’s claims provides the first, and likely the only, direct
review the defendant’s conviction and sentence will receive.” Id. at 619.
Appeals from guilty pleas, like appeals after trial, can involve complex or
technical issues. Id. at 621-22. Many indigent defendants are “particularly
handicapped as self-representatives,” id. at 620, due to factors such as
incarceration, lack of formal education, illiteracy, learning disabilities and
mental impairments, id. at 621. Accordingly, Halbert was entitled to counsel
when seeking first-tier review of his conviction and sentence in the Michigan
4
Court of Appeals, even though the appeal was discretionary rather than
mandatory. Id. at 616-17.
Applying these principles to appeals in New Hampshire, we note first that
the federal constitutional right established in Halbert has not been questioned
in this State. The New Hampshire Supreme Court is the only appellate court in
this State, and we provide mandatory review of every direct appeal from a
criminal conviction. Sup. Ct. R. 3. The review is merits-based. Id. Based
upon the language of Supreme Court Rule 3, such review applies whether the
appeal follows a conviction arising out of a trial, or from a guilty or nolo
contendere plea. See Sup. Ct. R. 3 (“Mandatory appeal” includes “an appeal
from a final decision on the merits issued by a superior court [or] district court
. . . .”). The issues that might be raised by a person appealing directly from a
guilty plea include, inter alia, whether an on-the-record colloquy demonstrates
that the plea was knowing, voluntary and intelligent, State v. Arsenault, 153
N.H. 413, 415 (2006); whether the defendant should have been allowed to
retract a plea prior to sentencing, State v. Sarette, 134 N.H. 133, 134 (1991);
and the legality of the defendant’s sentence, State v. Armstrong, 151 N.H. 686
(2005). If these or other issues are raised in a motion for new trial filed after
the acceptance of a plea but prior to sentencing, or a motion filed within ten
days of sentencing, then a defendant filing a direct appeal of an adverse ruling
upon the motion is, under Halbert and its predecessors, entitled to court-
appointed counsel. See Sup. Ct. R. 7(1)(C) (deadline for filing appeal from
criminal conviction is thirty days after sentencing or thirty days after clerk’s
notice of disposition of post-trial motion filed within ten days after sentencing).
The contrary result obtains when a defendant collaterally challenges a
guilty plea after the period for direct appeal has expired, and then seeks
discretionary review in this court under Supreme Court Rules 3 and 7(1)(B).
The United States Supreme Court has never held that the right to counsel on
appeal extends beyond first-tier, direct review of a conviction. In concluding
that a plea-convicted defendant has a right to counsel when directly appealing
his conviction to a first-tier court of error correction, Halbert did not question
the authority of the Finley decision establishing that there is no right to
counsel in an appeal of a collateral attack on a criminal conviction. We decline
to read such a requirement into the United States Constitution when the
United States Supreme Court has not done so itself.
There are factors present in New Hampshire which, at first blush,
suggest that the result might be otherwise. First, our Rule 7 notice of
discretionary appeal form asks, among other things, whether the decision that
is being appealed conflicts with the law or is “erroneous, illegal, unreasonable
or was an unsustainable exercise of discretion.” Sup. Ct. R. Forms. In this
sense, our error-correcting function even in discretionary appeals is equivalent
to the first-tier review performed by Michigan’s intermediate court of appeals.
5
Second, we have no reason to believe that indigent defendants pursuing review
in this court are better equipped to represent themselves than the defendants
described in the Halbert opinion. However, there is a critical difference
between a defendant who collaterally challenges a plea-based conviction in New
Hampshire and the defendant in Halbert. Unlike the review at issue in Halbert,
discretionary review of a collateral challenge to a criminal conviction is not the
only review of the defendant’s conviction and sentence in New Hampshire,
because, as discussed above, the defendant has an opportunity for mandatory
direct review under Rule 7(1)(A). Put another way, a defendant making
Halbert’s claim in New Hampshire would have an opportunity for first-tier
review through mandatory appeal to this Court. We believe this distinction is
critical, and supports our conclusion that the federal right to counsel
articulated in Halbert does not extend to an appeal from the denial of a
collateral challenge to a plea-based conviction.
II. Right to Counsel Under the State Constitution
Halbert requires the appointment of counsel for an indigent defendant
appealing a challenge to a plea-based conviction through a direct appeal-as-of-
right to this court. Since we are bound by Halbert’s narrow holding, we need
not perform a separate analysis under Part I, Article 15 of the New Hampshire
Constitution and we express no opinion whether there exists a state
constitutional right to counsel under these circumstances. What remains is
the question whether Part I, Article 15 of the New Hampshire Constitution
provides a right not afforded by the United States Constitution; namely, the
right to counsel when appealing a collateral attack on a plea-based conviction.
In State v. Hall, 154 N.H. 180, 184 (2006), we held that a defendant has
no right to counsel when collaterally challenging his conviction based upon a
claim of ineffective assistance of counsel. We explained that a collateral attack
is civil in nature; accordingly, “the due process considerations that require
appointment of counsel to criminal defendants are not present.” Id. at 182.
Instead, we employed the three-prong test of Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S.
319, 335 (1976), balancing: (1) the private interest affected by the official
action; (2) the risk of an erroneous deprivation of such interest through the
procedures used, and the probable value, if any, of additional or substitute
procedural safeguards; and (3) the government’s interest, considering the
function involved and the fiscal and administrative burdens that additional or
substitute procedural requirements would entail. Hall, 154 N.H. at 182. While
Hall did not address whether such a defendant would have a right to counsel
on appeal from the denial of his motion for new trial, that possibility is
foreclosed by our decision in State v. Westover, 140 N.H. 375, 378 (1995),
where we held that a defendant who does not have a right to appointed counsel
6
at trial does not have such a right at the appellate level, where “the
constitutional concerns are lessened.”
To determine whether Part I, Article 15 mandates that counsel be
appointed for a defendant who appeals an unsuccessful collateral challenge to
a plea-based conviction, we begin by determining whether it requires the
appointment of counsel at the trial court level, since if it does not provide such
right in the trial court, then there is certainly no such right on appeal.
Balancing the Eldridge factors, we find that it does not, although for slightly
different reasons than in Hall.
When we considered the Eldridge factors in Hall, we found first that the
petitioner’s liberty interest in a collateral attack was less substantial than his
liberty interest at trial or on direct appeal. Hall, 154 N.H. at 183. The second
factor was also attenuated, because even without counsel, the defendant had
materials to assist him in preparing his collateral attack, including the
“transcripts, motions and briefs from the trial and direct appeal.” Id. at 184.
Moreover, “the reliability of the defendant’s conviction ha[d] been tested
through both trial and appellate review.” Id. Finally, we determined that
although appointment of counsel would assist the petitioner and the court,
“the automatic appointment of counsel would . . . impose a significant fiscal
and administrative burden on the State.” Id.
The defendants in this case concede that their liberty interests are
similar to Hall’s, since they are incarcerated upon facially-valid convictions,
and concede that the government interests in their cases are similar to those in
Hall. They argue, however, that the second Eldridge factor weighs more heavily
in their favor and we should therefore distinguish Hall and find a right to
counsel in their appeals. Specifically, Rivera argues that because he had no
direct appeal, he does not have transcripts, motions or briefs prepared by
counsel, and the reliability of his conviction has not been tested through
appellate review. Although Lopez has a transcript of his plea hearing, his claim
is otherwise identical to Rivera’s.
We agree that the factors which insured the reliability of Hall’s conviction
are not present for a defendant whose conviction is plea-based, unless the
defendant has mounted a direct appeal. However, there are other factors
which sufficiently minimize the risk of the erroneous deprivation of liberty
when a defendant challenges a plea-based conviction in a collateral attack.
These begin with the requirements of the plea itself. Under Boykin v.
Alabama, 395 U.S. 238, 242-44 (1969), and its progeny, the court must
ensure, and the record must demonstrate, that a defendant who pleads guilty
does so knowingly, voluntarily and intelligently. Boykin, 395 U.S. at 242-44.
The court must ensure that the defendant fully understands the elements of
7
the offense to which he is pleading, the direct consequences of the plea, and
the rights he is forfeiting, and ensure that the defendant’s waiver of rights is
voluntary. Id.; see also Henderson v. Morgan, 426 U.S. 637, 645-46 (1976);
Arsenault, 153 N.H. at 416; State v. Allard, 116 N.H. 240, 242 (1976).
Significantly, if in a collateral challenge to a guilty plea a defendant claims that
his plea was involuntary or without understanding and produces evidence that
presents a genuine issue for adjudication, then the burden shifts to the State
to prove by clear and convincing evidence that the plea was voluntary and
intelligent unless the record of the plea affirmatively demonstrates a plea
colloquy that satisfies Boykin’s requirements. Arsenault, 153 N.H. at 416.
This burden-shifting stands in marked contrast to the burden in an ineffective
assistance of counsel claim, which rests entirely upon the defendant, who must
show that there is a reasonable probability of a different outcome absent
counsel’s deficient performance. State v. Gonzalez, 143 N.H. 693, 702 (1999).
The Boykin requirements and the burden-shifting that occurs when the record
fails to show that those requirements have been met ensure the plea’s
reliability and reduce the risk of the erroneous deprivation of liberty.
Accordingly, the Eldridge factors weigh against finding a right to counsel in a
collateral challenge to a guilty plea. Since there is no right to counsel in the
first instance, there is no such right on appeal. Westover, 140 N.H. at 378.
In Duval v. Duval, 114 N.H. 422, 426 (1974), we recognized that in some
non-support civil contempt cases “there may be issues of sufficient complexity
so as to require the defendant to be assisted by counsel for a competent
presentation of their merits,” and thus found that trial courts have the
discretion to appoint counsel for an indigent defendant in a complicated non-
support case. In Hall, we recognized that some collateral challenges based
upon ineffective assistance of counsel may be similarly complicated, and that
both types of proceedings “involve a potential or ongoing restriction of one’s
liberty.” Hall, 154 N.H. at 185. Accordingly, we held that in cases where
complicating factors exist, the trial court may in its discretion appoint counsel.
Id. Complicating factors might include: the defendant’s capability to speak for
himself, the character of the proceeding, the complexity of the issues, and
other circumstances which show that the defendant would be treated unfairly
if no counsel is appointed. Id. There is no reason why the rule should be
different when a defendant collaterally challenges a conviction that is based
upon a guilty plea, or when he appeals such a challenge. Accordingly, when a
defendant appeals a collateral challenge to a plea, we may appoint counsel if
complicating factors such as those identified in Hall are present.
Both Lopez and Rivera proceeded pro se when challenging their guilty
pleas in the trial court, and it is unclear from the record whether they
requested court-appointed counsel at that level. Although both requested
court-appointed counsel on appeal, we did not direct the parties to address the
applicability of Hall to their particular cases. Accordingly, if either defendant
8
wishes to have counsel appointed on appeal, he may file a motion for the
appointment of counsel in this court specifying the complicating factors that
indicate counsel should be appointed.
Lopez argues that a procedural error in his case may have led him to
pursue a collateral attack rather than a direct appeal and that counsel should
therefore be appointed. Specifically, he argues that the trial court and trial
counsel incorrectly advised him that he had no right to directly appeal his
conviction. When he pled guilty, Lopez signed a standard acknowledgment and
waiver of rights form stating that he was giving up, among other things, his
right to appeal if convicted. The sentencing court similarly indicated that
Lopez was giving up this right. However, simply because a defendant’s
conviction is based upon a plea rather than a judge or jury verdict, a defendant
does not waive his right to appeal. Lopez argues that because the advice he
received from counsel and the court was misleading and could have
discouraged him from pursuing a direct appeal where he would have been
entitled to court-appointed counsel, the incorrect advice, standing alone,
entitles him to counsel. We disagree. The record does not contain any
evidence that the defendant would have directly appealed his plea had he been
correctly advised. Thus, the incorrect advice, standing alone, does not
complicate the defendant’s challenge to his plea-conviction to the extent that
counsel is required. Accordingly, the defendants’ requests for the appointment
of counsel are denied, without prejudice to either defendant filing a motion, as
indicated above.
So ordered.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
9