THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
Nos. 2004-886
2006-111
MALACHY GLEN ASSOCIATES, INC.
v.
TOWN OF CHICHESTER
Argued: January 5, 2007
Opinion Issued: March 20, 2007
Tarbell Professional Association, of Concord (Friedrich K. Moeckel on the
brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
Upton & Hatfield, LLP, of Concord (Matthew R. Serge on the brief and
orally), for the defendant.
HICKS, J. In these consolidated land use appeals, the defendant, Town
of Chichester (town), appeals a ruling of the Superior Court (McGuire, J.)
reversing a decision by the Chichester Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) to
deny a variance to the plaintiff, Malachy Glen Associates, Inc. Because we
affirm this ruling, we need not address the other issues raised on appeal.
The record reflects the following facts. In March 2000, the Chichester
Planning Board approved a site plan submitted by the plaintiff to construct a
self-storage facility on property located on Dover Road in Chichester. The site
plan depicted structures and paved surfaces within one hundred feet of a
wetland located on the property. The plaintiff recorded the site plan at the
Merrimack County Registry of Deeds on September 20, 2000, when the town
did not have a wetlands ordinance. On March 15, 2003, the town enacted a
wetlands ordinance requiring a one-hundred-foot buffer around all wetlands.
The plaintiff had not yet begun development of the site.
On September 9, 2003, the plaintiff applied for a variance from the
wetlands ordinance. The ZBA denied the variance. After its motion for
rehearing was denied, the plaintiff appealed the denial to the trial court,
alleging, among other things, that “[t]he ZBA failed to consider [the] variance
request under the standard articulated by the New Hampshire Supreme
Court.” The trial court agreed, and remanded the matter to the ZBA.
Upon remand, the plaintiff filed a new variance application which the
ZBA bifurcated, sua sponte, into two separate requests. In May 2005, the ZBA
granted a variance to “provide access only” to the property but denied the area
variance request to build the storage unit structures within the one-hundred-
foot buffer zone. The plaintiff filed a motion for rehearing, which was denied by
the ZBA.
The plaintiff again appealed to the trial court arguing, among other
things, that “the ZBA’s decision is unlawful and unreasonable.” The court
again agreed, and ordered the ZBA to grant the variance, holding that although
“the ZBA applied the correct legal standard in making it[s] determination,” it
“failed to consider evidence placed before it.” The town appealed this ruling.
The superior court’s review in zoning cases is
limited. Factual findings of the ZBA are deemed prima
facie lawful and reasonable and will not be set aside by
the superior court absent errors of law, unless the
court is persuaded by a balance of probabilities on the
evidence before it that the ZBA decision is
unreasonable. The party seeking to set aside the ZBA
decision bears the burden of proof in the superior
court.
Garrison v. Town of Henniker, 154 N.H. ___, ___, 907 A.2d 948, 950 (2006)
(citations omitted). Where the ZBA has not addressed a factual issue, the trial
court ordinarily must remand the issue to the ZBA. Chester Rod & Gun Club
v. Town of Chester, 152 N.H. 577, 583 (2005). However, remand is
unnecessary when the record reveals that a reasonable fact finder necessarily
would have reached a certain conclusion. Simpson v. Young, 153 N.H. 471,
474 (2006).
2
We will uphold the trial court’s decision unless the evidence does not
support it or it is legally erroneous. Chester, 152 N.H. at 580.
The town argues that the trial court erred when it reversed the ZBA’s
denial of the variance application because the plaintiff failed to establish four of
the criteria required for the variance. We disagree.
An applicant seeking a variance must demonstrate that: (1) the variance
will not be contrary to the public interest; (2) special conditions exist such that
a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will result in
unnecessary hardship; (3) the variance is consistent with the spirit of the
ordinance; (4) substantial justice is done; and (5) granting the variance will not
diminish the value of surrounding properties. Garrison, 154 N.H. at ___, 907
A.2d at 950. Because the ZBA found that granting the variance would not
result in a diminution of surrounding property values, this factor is not raised
on appeal.
I. Public Interest & Spirit of the Ordinance
The requirement that the variance not be contrary to the public interest
is “related to the requirement that the variance be consistent with the spirit of
the ordinance.” Chester, 152 N.H. at 580.
[T]o be contrary to the public interest . . . the variance
must unduly, and in a marked degree conflict with the
ordinance such that it violates the ordinance’s basic
zoning objectives.
One way to ascertain whether granting the
variance would violate basic zoning objectives is to
examine whether it would alter the essential character
of the locality. . . .
Another approach to [determine] whether
granting the variance would violate basic zoning
objectives is to examine whether granting the variance
would threaten the public health, safety or welfare.
Id. at 581 (quotations and citation omitted).
The ZBA found that the variance would be contrary to the public interest
and to the spirit of the ordinance because the project would “encroach on the
wetland buffer” that was “put in place three years ago and reaffirmed in March
2005.” The trial court found the ZBA’s conclusion to be unreasonable. Noting
3
that the ZBA found the project to be a “conforming commercial project in a
commercial area,” the trial court found that the project did not violate the
“ordinance’s basic objectives by altering the essential character of the locality.”
The court further found that the project will not injure the health, safety or
welfare of the public because: (1) the ZBA granted a variance for access to the
property, which encroaches closer to the wetlands; and (2) the ZBA had before
it “credible and uncontroverted evidence” from the plaintiff’s consultant “that
this project will not injure the wetlands.” We agree with the trial court that a
reasonable fact finder could not have found otherwise.
The record shows that the properties in the area consist of a fire station,
a gas station, and a telephone company. The project would consist of eight
storage unit buildings of various sizes, with access to the property from Main
Street. Therefore, the evidence was sufficient for the trial court to have found,
as a matter of law, that granting the variance would not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood.
Moreover, the proposed project includes a closed drainage system, a
detention pond, and an open drainage system – all designed to protect the
wetlands. In addition, the plaintiff’s expert submitted a letter stating that the
various detention ponds will work to ensure that the nearby wetland is not
adversely affected. Thus, the evidence was sufficient for the trial court to have
found, as a matter of law, that granting the variance would not threaten the
public health, safety or welfare.
The town argues that the ZBA is not bound by the conclusions of the
expert, and is entitled to consider its own knowledge of the area and conduct
its own fact-finding, Vannah v. Bedford, 111 N.H. 105, 112 (1971), overruled
on other grounds by Cook v. Town of Sanbornton, 118 N.H. 668, 671 (1978).
The town points to the minutes of the ZBA meeting where one of the members
of the ZBA voiced a concern about flooding in nearby Marsh Pond: “We have
had troubles with wetlands that feed Marsh Pond and the overflowing of the
pond. If there is a large area that is paved it will diminish the absorption of
rainwater.” However, no discussion resulted from this comment, there was no
evidence before the ZBA to support it, and, most tellingly, this was not listed in
the ZBA’s “Statement of Reasons” for finding that the plaintiff had failed to
satisfy the public interest and spirit of the ordinance requirements nor in its
Notice of Decision denying the variance. To the contrary, the ZBA’s discussion
on these factors centered around the infringement on the buffer: “it would be
contrary because it infringes into the state wetland buffer;” “[it] would be
contrary to the spirit because the wetland ordinance was put in place 3 years
ago and reaffirmed in March 2005.” However, the mere fact that the project
encroaches on the buffer, which is the reason for the variance request, cannot
be used by the ZBA to deny the variance.
4
We agree with the trial court that no reasonable fact finder could have
found that the proposed project did not satisfy the public interest and spirit of
the ordinance factors.
II. Unnecessary Hardship
In Boccia v. City of Portsmouth, 151 N.H. 85, 94 (2004), we stated that
an applicant seeking an area variance must satisfy the following two
requirements to establish hardship: (1) an area variance is needed to enable
the applicant’s proposed use of the property given the special conditions of the
property; and (2) the benefit sought by the applicant cannot be achieved by
some other method reasonably feasible for the applicant to pursue, other than
an area variance.
A. Special Conditions of the Property
“Special conditions” requires that the applicant demonstrate that its
property is unique in its surroundings. Garrison, 154 N.H. at ___, 907 A.2d at
954. In addition, “the proposed project is presumed to be reasonable if it is a
permitted use under the Town’s applicable zoning ordinance. . . . If the use is
allowed, an area variance may not be denied because the ZBA disagrees with
the proposed use of the property.” Vigeant v. Town of Hudson, 151 N.H. 747,
752-53 (2005). Recognizing that “[n]early 65% of the property is made up of
wetlands or the 100-foot wetlands buffer” and the “configuration of the
wetlands further reduces the buildable area,” the trial court held that special
conditions exist such that a variance is required to enable the plaintiff’s
proposed use of the property. See 3 K. Young, Anderson’s American Law of
Zoning § 20.36, at 535 (4th ed. 1996) (“Satisfaction of the requirement that the
circumstances which result in unnecessary hardship be peculiar to the
applicant’s property is most clearly established where the hardship relates to
the physical characteristics of the land.”). We agree that the evidence before
the ZBA would compel a reasonable fact finder to so find.
The town argues that the trial court incorrectly applied this factor by
considering the “property in isolation, and not in relation to surrounding
properties.” The town points to the fact that the trial court denied the town’s
requested “ruling of law” on this issue. However, the requested ruling took
specific language from a case that espoused a legal standard which has since
changed. Further, the record reveals that the trial court did apply the correct
standard; it quoted the Vigeant and Boccia standards in its order and found
that “special conditions” exist on the property.
5
B. Other Reasonably Feasible Method
Under the second factor, the ZBA must look at the project as proposed
by the applicant, and may not weigh the utility of alternate uses in its
consideration of the variance application. Vigeant, 151 N.H. at 753 (“In the
context of an area variance . . . the question [of] whether the property can be
used differently from what the applicant has proposed is not material.”). The
applicant must show that there are no reasonably feasible alternative methods
available to implement the proposed use. Boccia, 151 N.H. at 93.
We also consider whether an area variance is required to avoid an undue
financial burden on the landowner, which includes examination of the relative
expense of alternative methods. Id. If the proposed project could be
constructed such that an area variance would not be required, the burden is
on the applicant to show that these alternatives are cost-prohibitive. See id.
Under this factor, the ZBA may consider the feasibility of a scaled down version
of the proposed use, but must be sure to also consider whether the scaled
down version would impose a financial burden on the landowner. See id.
(“[T]his factor examines whether there is a reasonably feasible method or
methods of effectuating the proposed use without the need for variances.”
(emphasis added)).
The trial court recognized that “in order to comply with the zoning
ordinances,” the plaintiff would have to “reduce its project by more than 50%”
and that this “would result in financial hardship.” No reasonable trier of fact
could have found otherwise. Such a reduction is the only alternative to the
project given the configuration of the property. Therefore, we conclude the
record was sufficient for the trial court to find, as a matter of law, that there
was no other reasonably feasible method of effectuating the proposed use
without obtaining an area variance.
III. Substantial Justice
“‘Perhaps the only guiding rule [on this factor] is that any loss to the
individual that is not outweighed by a gain to the general public is an
injustice.’” 15 P. Loughlin, New Hampshire Practice, Land Use Planning and
Zoning § 24.11, at 308 (2000) (quoting New Hampshire Office of State Planning,
The Board of Adjustment in New Hampshire, A Handbook for Local Officials
(1997)). In Labrecque v. Town of Salem, 128 N.H. 455, 459 (1986), we also
looked at whether the proposed development was consistent with the area’s
present use.
The ZBA found that the plaintiff did not meet this factor because there
was “no evidence that scaling the project down would make it economically
6
unviable.” However, this is not the proper analysis under the “substantial
justice” factor. Therefore, since the ZBA applied the wrong standard on this
factor, the trial court could order the ZBA to grant the variance if it could find
that the record showed, as a matter of law, that this requirement was met.
Chester, 152 N.H. at 583.
The trial court found that
the project is a storage facility in a commercial area
that poses no further threat to the wetlands in the
area. Since the project is appropriate for the area and
does not harm its abutters, or the nearby wetlands,
the general public will realize no appreciable gain from
denying this variance.
The record supports the trial court’s conclusion, and we hold that no
reasonable fact finder could find otherwise. There was uncontroverted
evidence that the project will not harm the wetlands, no abutters came forward
against the project, and the project is an otherwise permitted use in the
district. Accordingly, the trial court did not err in finding the plaintiff had
established this factor.
Accordingly, we affirm the trial court’s order requiring the ZBA to grant
the plaintiff’s “area variance as requested in its April 7, 2005 application.”
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
7