THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Public Employee Labor Relations Board
No. 2005-264
APPEAL OF THE CITY OF MANCHESTER
(New Hampshire Public Employee Labor Relations Board)
Argued: January 11, 2006
Opinion Issued: February 24, 2006
City Solicitor's Office, of Manchester (Daniel D. Muller, Jr. on the brief
and orally), for the petitioner.
McKittrick Law Offices, of North Hampton (J. Joseph McKittrick on the
brief and orally), for the respondent.
GALWAY, J. The petitioner, the City of Manchester (City), appeals a New
Hampshire Public Employee Labor Relations Board (PELRB) ruling that the
City committed unfair labor practices (ULPs) in violation of RSA 273-A:5, I(a)
and (g) (1999). We reverse.
The record supports the following facts. The respondent-appellee, Marc
J. Desilets, was employed by the Manchester Police Department (Department)
as a regular full-time police officer from January 10, 1988, until November 10,
2003. The Manchester Police Patrolman’s Association (Union) is the exclusive
bargaining representative for all regular full-time police officers employed by
the City. The City and the Union were parties to a collective bargaining
agreement (CBA) in effect from July 1, 2002, to June 30, 2004.
In response to a citizen complaint made against Desilets on or about
October 23, 2002, the Department initiated an internal affairs investigation. In
the course of that investigation, Desilets was interviewed by investigating
officers on October 30 and 31, 2002. Desilets alleges that the Department
either interfered with or denied him the opportunity to obtain Union
representation during both interviews.
On November 3, 2003, the Department issued a letter of disciplinary
intent charging Desilets with two counts of untruthfulness arising from the
October interviews, one count of conduct unbecoming an officer, and one count
of unlawful conduct. The letter recommended that Desilets’ employment be
terminated. After a disciplinary hearing on November 10, 2003, Desilets’
employment was terminated.
On December 20, 2003, Desilets initiated a grievance pursuant to article
7 of the CBA, alleging he was terminated without just cause in violation of
section 3.1 of the CBA. The grievance was processed and the Union filed for
arbitration. The arbitration hearing was scheduled for June 25, 2004.
On December 22, 2003, Desilets filed a ULP complaint with the PELRB
against the City, alleging that the Department violated RSA 273-A:5, I (a) & (g)
by obstructing or interfering with his Union representation during the October
investigative interviews. On January 28, 2004, Desilets also filed a ULP
complaint against the Union. The City moved to dismiss the complaint against
it, asserting that the PELRB lacked jurisdiction because the CBA provides for
final and binding arbitration, and Desilets had raised the same issues in his
grievance.
The PELRB conducted a hearing in May 2004, at which it considered the
City’s motion to dismiss and Desilets’ ULP complaints against both the City
and the Union. By order dated October 22, 2004, the hearing officer denied the
City’s motion to dismiss, finding that: (1) the PELRB has primary jurisdiction
of all violations of RSA 273-A:5, pursuant to RSA 273-A:6, I; and (2) the denial
of an employee’s Weingarten rights, see NLRB v. Weingarten, Inc., 420 U.S. 251
(1975), or, more specifically, the denial of the right to a union representative
during an investigative interview, constitutes a ULP and violates RSA 273-A:5, I
(a). While acknowledging that Weingarten rights are often litigated in a just
cause grievance arbitration proceeding, the hearing officer concluded that the
PELRB has the authority to determine “on a case-by-case basis . . . whether or
not a matter is appropriate for arbitration.”
Having concluded that it had jurisdiction to consider Desilets’ ULP
complaint, the hearing officer determined that the City violated Desilets’
Weingarten rights during both investigative interviews, and that the Union
2
violated its duty of fair representation during the October 30 interview. The
Union did not appeal the ruling against it.
On November 19, 2004, the City timely requested that the PELRB review
the hearing officer’s decision, asserting that the decision was: (1) unlawful,
unjust, and unreasonable; and (2) based upon factual misrepresentations,
and/or omissions. By order dated January 6, 2005, the PELRB sustained the
hearing officer’s decision. After the PELRB denied the City’s motion for
rehearing, the instant appeal followed. The arbitration hearing on Desilets’ just
cause grievance has been postponed, at the City’s request pending the outcome
of this appeal.
“When reviewing a decision of the PELRB, we defer to its findings of fact,
and, absent an erroneous ruling of law, we will not set aside its decision unless
the appealing party demonstrates by a clear preponderance of the evidence that
the order is unjust or unreasonable.” Appeal of Laconia Sch. Dist., 150 N.H.
495, 496 (2004); see RSA 541:13 (1997).
As a preliminary matter, we note that both parties and the PELRB refer
to “Weingarten rights” in the context of this appeal. In NLRB v. Weingarten,
Inc., the United States Supreme Court held that the language of section 7 of
the National Labor Relations Act accords employees the right to union
representation during an investigatory interview that the employee reasonably
believes might result in disciplinary action. Weingarten, 420 U.S. at 267. The
Court held that a denial of union representation during such an interview
constitutes an unfair labor practice in violation of section 8(a)(1) of the National
Labor Relations Act. Id. at 252. No party argues that Desilets was not entitled
to this right. Therefore, for the purposes of this appeal, we will assume,
without deciding, that Desilets had a right to union representation during the
October investigatory interviews under Weingarten.
On appeal, the City first argues that the PELRB lacked jurisdiction to
consider Desilets’ ULP complaint because Desilets had already initiated a
grievance encompassing the same claims that was subject to final and binding
arbitration under the CBA. Desilets counters that the PELRB properly
determined that it had jurisdiction to consider the alleged violations of his
Weingarten rights because his ULP complaint alleged violations of RSA 273-A:5
and was not based upon provisions in the CBA.
“A CBA is a contract between a public employer and a union over the
terms and conditions of employment.” Appeal of Hillsboro-Deering School
Dist., 144 N.H. 27, 30 (1999) (citations omitted). When parties enter into a
CBA, they are obligated to adhere to its terms, which are the product of their
collective bargaining. Id. Every CBA must contain a workable grievance
procedure. RSA 273-A:4 (Supp. 2005). The extent of the parties’ agreement to
3
arbitrate determines the arbitrator’s jurisdiction, and “[t]he overriding concern
is whether the contracting parties have agreed to arbitrate a particular
dispute.” Appeal of Police Comm’n of City of Rochester, 149 N.H. 528, 534
(2003) (quotations and citations omitted). In the context of a just cause
grievance, the arbitrator also has the authority to consider the underlying
issues and surrounding circumstances necessary to interpret and apply the
express provisions of the CBA and reach a final decision. See Paperworkers v.
Misco, Inc., 484 U.S. 29, 34 (1987) (identifying seven criteria considered in the
context of a just cause grievance).
While the PELRB has primary jurisdiction of all ULP claims alleging
violations of RSA 273-A:5, see RSA 273-A:6, I, it does not generally have
jurisdiction to interpret the CBA when the CBA provides for final binding
arbitration. Appeal of State of N.H., 147 N.H. 106, 108 (2001). Absent specific
language to the contrary in the CBA, however, the PELRB is empowered to
determine as a threshold matter whether a specific dispute falls within the
scope of the CBA. Appeal of Police Comm’n of City of Rochester, 149 N.H. at
533. Thus, as a threshold matter, the PELRB is empowered to interpret the
CBA to the extent necessary to determine whether a dispute is arbitrable.
Appeal of State, 147 N.H. at 109.
We first consider whether the just cause grievance and the ULP
complaint encompass the same substantive issue. In his demand for
arbitration, Desilets alleged that the Department: (1) had terminated his
employment without just cause; and (2) had violated his “right to be
represented during a disciplinary interview.” Similarly, his ULP complaint
alleged that the Department denied or interfered with his Union representation
during both October 2002 investigative interviews. Thus, both the just cause
grievance and the ULP complaint alleged substantively identical violations of
Desilets’ Weingarten rights. Furthermore, they both arose during an
investigation that ultimately resulted in Desilets’ termination from the
Department.
In ruling that it had jurisdiction to consider Desilets’ ULP claim while the
just cause grievance was awaiting arbitration, the PELRB, in essence, was
deciding the threshold issue regarding the arbitrability of the alleged violations
of Desilets’ Weingarten rights. In this case, the CBA is silent regarding the
arbitrator’s authority to determine the arbitrability of a disputed issue.
Therefore, the PELRB had the authority to determine, as a threshold matter,
whether an alleged violation of Desilets’ Weingarten rights fell within the scope
of the CBA and was appropriate for arbitration. See Appeal of Police Comm’n
of City of Rochester, 149 N.H. at 533.
We are not persuaded by Desilets’ assertion that alleging a violation of
RSA 273-A:5 is sufficient, in and of itself, to preclude a determination that the
4
issue falls within the scope of the CBA. RSA 273-A:6, I, grants the PELRB
jurisdiction of all violations of RSA 273-A:5. However, when a grievance
initiated under a CBA and a ULP complaint allege substantively identical
claims, authority rests with the PELRB to determine the threshold matter of
arbitrability of the claim. See Appeal of Laconia Sch. Dist., 150 N.H. at 496
(upholding PELRB ruling to proceed to arbitration when the substance of an
arbitration demand and a ULP complaint were identical). This determination
requires the PELRB to interpret the CBA to the extent necessary to determine
whether the alleged violation of Desilets’ Weingarten rights was arbitrable. See
Appeal of State, 147 N.H. at 109. Because the parties’ agreement determines
the arbitrator’s jurisdiction over the subject matter of a dispute, we look to the
relevant portions of the CBA to determine whether the PELRB determination of
arbitrability was correct. Our review is de novo. Appeal of City of Nashua, 132
N.H. 699, 703 (1990).
Here, the underlying allegations regarding Desilets’ Weingarten rights
arose in the context of the investigation of a “disciplinary action” under section
3.1 of the CBA. Section 3.1 states that “no disciplinary action shall be taken
against an employee except for just cause.” The CBA sets forth a multi-step
grievance procedure to be followed for claims “arising out of the application or
interpretation” of the CBA. See Agreement Between the City of Manchester,
N.H. and the Manchester Police Patrolman’s Association, Article 7, Section 7.1
(A) (July 1, 2002- June 30, 2004). Pursuant to article 7, section 7.6, the CBA
provides for final and binding arbitration of grievances arising under the terms
of the CBA. The express language of section 7.6 allows the arbitrator to
consider and decide “what is necessary for the interpretation and application of
express provisions of this agreement.” Therefore, Desilets’ just cause grievance
proceeding necessarily encompasses issues pertaining to the propriety of the
underlying investigation. See Misco, 484 U.S. at 34 (specifically identifying
seven criteria an arbitrator may consider during just cause discipline cases,
including the timing and fairness of the investigation). To conclude otherwise
would unreasonably limit the arbitrator’s ability to interpret and apply the just
cause provision in section 3.1 of the CBA. Therefore, we conclude that the CBA
provides for final and binding arbitration of alleged violations of Desilets’
Weingarten rights in the context of his just cause grievance.
In ruling that it had jurisdiction to consider Desilets’ ULP complaint
while the just clause grievance was proceeding to arbitration, the PELRB
incorrectly concluded that “it is not necessary . . . to interpret the parties’
CBA.” Furthermore, instead of considering and interpreting the language of
the CBA, the PELRB incorrectly concluded that arbitration would not be
appropriate in this instance because: (1) “there is no evidence at this stage
that the Weingarten claim has been raised within the context of the arbitration
proceeding, nor is there any concrete assurance that the issue would be fully
addressed in that forum;” (2) an inherent conflict existed since the Union would
5
be required to arbitrate Desilets’ Weingarten issue based upon its own actions
or inactions; and (3) Desilets’ Weingarten claim was statutory, pursuant to RSA
273-A:5, I (a) & (g), and did not require an interpretation of the just clause
provision of the CBA.
For reasons previously stated, we find no merit to these conclusions. In
order to determine the threshold matter of the arbitrability of Desilets’
Weingarten rights, the PELRB was required to interpret the CBA. See Appeal of
State, 147 N.H. at 109. In the context of the just cause grievance, the CBA
encompassed the dispute regarding alleged violations of Desilets’ Weingarten
rights during the two October 2002 interviews. Furthermore, in its
determination, the PELRB acknowledged that Weingarten rights are often
adjudicated in arbitration within the context of just cause grievances. Thus,
we conclude the PELRB erred when it determined that the Weingarten rights
were not arbitrable in the instant case.
Furthermore, we are also not persuaded that the Union’s representation
of Desilets in the just cause grievance presents such an inherent conflict that it
precludes arbitration of this issue. At this juncture, Desilets does not have a
pending claim against the Union and the Union has complied with all the
requirements of the grievance procedure. Moreover, by initiating the just cause
grievance, Desilets indicated his intent to be bound by the terms of the CBA,
including union representation during the arbitration proceeding.
The primary purpose of the arbitration process is expeditious and
economical dispute resolution. Appeal of Police Comm’n of City of Rochester,
149 N.H. at 535. The legislative purpose behind RSA chapter 273-A is to foster
harmonious and cooperative relations between public employers and their
employees by, among other things, establishing a PELRB “vested with broad
powers to assist in resolving disputes between government and its employees.”
Laws 1975, 490:1, III (emphasis added). Allowing Desilets to contravene the
underlying purpose of arbitration, by raising a substantive issue before the
PELRB after agreeing to submit it to final and binding arbitration under the
CBA, would not be in accord with the legislative purpose of RSA chapter 273-A.
See Appeal of Police Comm’n of City of Rochester, 149 N.H. at 535.
Accordingly, we conclude as a matter of law that the PELRB erred by
determining that Desilets’ ULP complaint in this case was not arbitrable and by
exercising jurisdiction over the ULP complaint while the just cause grievance
was proceeding to arbitration. In light of our ruling, we need not address the
City’s remaining arguments.
Reversed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
6