THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Personnel Appeals Board
Nos. 2008-105
2008-107
APPEAL OF VICKY MORTON
(New Hampshire Personnel Appeals Board)
Argued: October 8, 2008
Opinion Issued: November 7, 2008
State Employees’ Association of New Hampshire, Inc., of Concord
(Michael C. Reynolds, general counsel, on the brief and orally) for the
petitioner.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Laura E. B. Lombardi, assistant
attorney general, on the memorandum of law and orally), for the State.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner, Vicky Morton, appeals two decisions of the
New Hampshire Personnel Appeals Board (PAB) ruling that: (1) the proper
remedy for her layoff did not include reinstatement to her previous position;
and (2) that she did not meet the minimum qualifications for the position of
Associate Vice President of Academic Affairs. We consolidated the two appeals
and affirm.
The record supports the following relevant facts. In July 2007, the New
Hampshire Community Technical College System (NHCTCS) notified Morton of
her layoff from employment with NHCTCS because it had abolished her
position of Program Coordinator, classified as Program Specialist II, at the
Keene Center. At the time NHCTCS abolished the position of Program
Coordinator and laid her off, there were two other full time Program Specialist
II positions within NHCTCS. The position in Littleton was held by an individual
with more seniority than Morton. The position in Stratham, though held by an
individual with less seniority than Morton, was, as determined by NHCTCS, not
actually a Program Specialist II position because it involved grant management.
NHCTCS did not offer Morton either position in lieu of layoff. Morton appealed
her layoff to the PAB, pointing out that seven part-time employees within her
classification had not been laid off.
While the PAB appeal was pending, Morton applied for the position of
Associate Vice President of Academic Affairs. The position has two sets of
qualifications. First, the position is classified as “Administrator III,” which
requires seven years of “relevant experience.” Second, a supplemental job
description (SJD) for the position requires that four of the required seven years
of relevant experience be “in a management level position involving
administrative or supervisory duties concerned with program administration,
program planning and evaluation or related management experience.”
The NHCTCS Human Resources (HR) Coordinator informed Morton that
her application had been disqualified because she did not meet the minimum
requirements. Morton asked for her application to be reconsidered. The HR
Coordinator, as well as a Classification Specialist within the Division of
Personnel, reviewed the application. They both found that Morton’s experience
was not the management level experience required for the position. Morton
appealed that decision to the PAB as well.
The PAB held one hearing to decide both appeals and issued separate
decisions for each. In its first decision, the PAB ruled that Morton should not
have been laid off if there were any positions within the same class filled by
less senior employees. The PAB ordered NHCTCS to reevaluate the Program
Specialist II position in Stratham, and assign it to Morton if she met the
minimum requirements because she was more senior than the current holder.
In its second decision, the PAB found that Morton did not meet the minimum
work experience requirements to qualify as a candidate for the Associate Vice
President of Academic Affairs position. Morton filed motions for
reconsideration, which the PAB denied. She then appealed to this court.
On appeal, Morton makes two principal arguments. First, she argues
that the PAB erred in determining the remedy for her layoff. She argues the
proper remedy under RSA 21-I:58, I (2000) is reinstatement to her prior
position as opposed to reassignment to a different position. Second, she
argues that the PAB erred in finding she was not qualified for the Associate
Vice President of Academic Affairs position because NHCTCS is not permitted
to create additional minimum requirements in the SJD.
2
Our review in this case is governed by RSA 541:13 (2007). As the
appealing party, Morton has the burden of proof to show that the PAB decision
is clearly unreasonable or unlawful. RSA 541:13. The PAB decision will not be
set aside or vacated except for errors of law, unless we are satisfied, by a clear
preponderance of the evidence before us, that such order is unjust or
unreasonable. Id.
We review the PAB’s interpretation of statutes and administrative rules
de novo. N.H. Dep’t of Envtl. Servs. v. Marino, 155 N.H. 709, 713 (2007); State
v. Elementis Chem., 152 N.H. 794, 803 (2005). In both instances, we ascribe
the plain and ordinary meanings to words used, Appeal of Flynn, 145 N.H. 422,
423 (2000), looking at the rule or statutory scheme as a whole, and not
piecemeal. See Appeal of Alley, 137 N.H. 40, 42 (1993). Although we accord
deference to the PAB’s interpretation, that deference is not absolute. We still
examine its interpretation to determine if it is consistent with the language of
the regulation and with the purpose the regulation is intended to serve. Id.
I
As to the proper remedy for her layoff, Morton makes two arguments.
First, she argues that NHCTCS could not abolish her position or lay her off
while there were seven part time Program Specialist II positions within
NHCTCS. Second, she argues that the proper remedy for her layoff is to be
reinstated to her prior position rather than reassigned to another.
As to her first argument, although Morton challenged the authority of
NHCTCS to lay her off, she did not challenge the authority of NHCTCS to
abolish her former position until she filed her motion for reconsideration.
Thus, the issue has not been preserved for our review. See Mt. Valley Mall
Assocs. v. Municipality of Conway, 144 N.H. 642, 654−55 (2000) (party cannot
raise an issue for the first time in motion for reconsideration when the issue
was readily apparent at the time the party initially filed for relief); Sklar Realty
v. Town of Merrimack, 125 N.H. 321, 328 (1984) (a party may not be entitled to
judicial review of matters not raised at the earliest possible time). Thus, the
only question before us is whether the PAB ascribed the proper remedy for
Morton’s layoff.
Morton’s remaining argument breaks into two parts: (1) that the rules do
not permit her layoff; and (2) that RSA 21-I:58, I, requires she be reinstated to
the abolished position of Program Coordinator. The State responds that even if
her layoff was a violation of the personnel rules, the proper remedy is not
reinstatement because that position no longer exists. Rather, the State argues,
the personnel rules govern only which employee is laid off, not which position
is abolished. The State points out that the PAB prescribed the proper remedy
3
in not reinstating Morton to her prior position, but rather ordering a
reevaluation of the position in Stratham and whether she could be reassigned
there.
We first address the distinction between abolition of a position and the
resulting layoff. Layoff is defined as “the complete separation of an employee
from the state classified service for an indefinite period by reason of abolition of
position, change in organization, lack of work, insufficient funds, or other
reasons outside the employee’s control . . . .” N.H. Admin. Rules, Per 102.34.
Thus, under the Personnel Rules, abolition of a position is an event specifically
listed in the rules that in turn necessitates a layoff. See id. 1101.01(a). Once a
position is abolished, the agency must then decide which employee will be
separated from the state classified service. In deciding who will be laid off, the
agency must follow the procedures of Per 1101.02. That rule states that, once
a layoff becomes necessary, “[e]xcept in instances of an individual possessing
unique credentials that are necessary for the agency to carry out a legislated
mandate, seniority shall govern the order of layoff.” Id. 1101.02(e). Thus the
employee who is eventually laid off is not necessarily the employee who held
the abolished position.
Morton argues that under the rules her position could not be abolished
and she could not be laid off if there were part time positions within NHCTCS.
She relies on Per 1101.02(d), which states that “[n]o permanent employee shall
be laid off from any position while there are . . . part time . . . employees
serving in the same class of position within the same division of the agency.”
This conflates the abolition and the later layoff, and we address only the latter.
The regulation states that so long as there are part time positions within her
class, she cannot undergo a “complete separation . . . from the state classified
service.” See id. 102.34, 1101.02(d). It says nothing about NHCTCS abolishing
her position. Thus, once her position was abolished, NHCTCS was required to
examine the other Program Specialist II positions and offer Morton one of those
positions in lieu of layoff if she is qualified and more senior than its present
holder. Id. 1101.02(e). This is what the PAB found NHCTCS failed to do, and
in turn ordered NHCTCS to make such a determination.
As to the proper remedy for the layoff, Morton argues that RSA 21-I:58, I,
requires that she be reinstated to the abolished position of Program
Coordinator rather than be reassigned. RSA 21-I:58, I, states:
If the personnel appeals board finds that the action complained of
was taken by the appointing authority . . . in violation of a statute
or of rules adopted by the director, the employee shall be
reinstated to the employee’s former position or a position of like
seniority, status, and pay.
4
At the time of her layoff, Morton’s position no longer existed. Rather, she was
an employee awaiting the NHCTCS decision who would be laid off as a result of
the position’s abolition. Restoring her to her previous position does not mean
reinstatement as Program Coordinator. Rather, it requires a determination of
the proper remedy from the moment of the abolition forward. This is what the
PAB did. The PAB correctly ordered NHCTCS to evaluate the Program
Specialist II position in Stratham and determine whether Morton was qualified,
and if so, to offer her that position. Because Morton does not argue that she
could be reassigned to one of the seven part time positions in lieu of layoff, and
because the PAB did not reach the issue, we need not address it here.
II
We now turn to whether the PAB erred in finding that Morton did not
meet the minimum requirements for the Associate Vice President of Academic
Affairs position.
RSA 21-I:42, II (Supp. 2008) requires the Division of Personnel to create
a classification scheme “based upon similarity of duties performed and
responsibilities assumed so that the same qualifications may reasonably be
required for . . . all positions in the same classification.” The Division of
Personnel gives each position a class specification, which is a “written
document containing the official title, basic purpose, characteristic duties,
distinguishing factors, and the minimum qualifications of a specific class.”
N.H. Admin. Rules, Per 102.16. The SJD, in turn, “identif[ies] the scope of
work, duties, and accountabilities of an agency-level position falling within a
specific class.” Id. 102.59.
Morton argues that state agencies are not permitted to set forth
minimum qualifications for a position in the SJD. Morton relies upon the
phrase “the same” in RSA 21-I:42, II, which she argues requires all positions
within a classification to have the exact same minimum qualifications. The
State argues that the SJD in this case does not add minimum requirements,
but rather explains what satisfies the minimum requirements set forth in the
general classification for the position.
We disagree with Morton that RSA 21-I:42, II, mandates that SJD
minimum requirements be the exact same as those in the generic class
specification. The language of RSA 21-I:42, II, states that classes are created
so that the “same qualifications may reasonably be required” for all positions.
The statute’s plain meaning suggests that not all positions within a class will
have the exact same qualifications, but rather reasonably similar
qualifications. This allows state agencies to group reasonably similar jobs into
5
the same class, but require specific skills for each to ensure the best candidate
is hired.
To hold that positions within a classification can require the minimum
experience qualification to be tailored for the position is consistent with the
statutory framework. To interpret the statute and rules otherwise would lead
to an absurd result; we will not interpret a statute to lead to such a result. See
Appeal of N.H. Troopers Assoc., 145 N.H. 288, 290 (2000) (“We interpret
statutes to lead to a reasonable result.”). Various positions within state
agencies may have the same classifications and general qualifications, as well
as the same basic duties, but the specific nature of those positions can require
specialized knowledge or experience.
The education sector provides a good example of why this is necessary.
If a college wishes to hire two new professors to teach mathematics and
Russian literature, under Morton’s reasoning, the college would not be able to
create SJD qualifications for the positions requiring a degree and teaching
experience in each respective field. The same might be true in creating an SJD
for administrators in the New Hampshire Fish and Game Department and the
New Hampshire Banking Department. We cannot interpret the applicable rules
and statutes to require such an absurd result. See Great Traditions Home
Builders v. O’Connor, 157 N.H. 387, 388 (2008) (“[W]e will not interpret
statutory language in a literal manner when such a reading would lead to an
absurd result.”).
We therefore hold that “the same” in RSA 21-I:42, II, does not require the
exact same requirements in the SJD and class specification. Rather, the SJD
must contain substantially and reasonably similar qualifications as those in
the class specification. Morton has not shown such a rule to be unjust or
unreasonable. Because the SJD in this case contains substantially the same
qualifications as the class specification, we affirm the PAB’s determination that
it was valid and that Morton did not meet the requirements.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6