THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2004-895
IN THE MATTER OF LUCILLE J. ROSSINO AND JOSEPH A. ROSSINO
Argued: November 16, 2005
Opinion Issued: February 24, 2006
Gawryl & MacAllister, of Nashua (Janine Gawryl on the brief and orally),
for the respondent.
Lucille Rossino, on the brief and orally, pro se.
BRODERICK, C.J. The respondent, Joseph A. Rossino, appeals an order
of the Superior Court (Hicks, J.) approving a decree of divorce. The respondent
argues that the court erred in applying Noddin v. Noddin, 123 N.H. 73 (1983),
to the facts of this case and in denying joint legal custody of his minor
children. We reverse in part, vacate in part, and remand.
The respondent and the petitioner, Lucille Rossino, were married in
1994. Together they have three children, born in 1996, 1999 and 2002. In
March 2003, the respondent involuntarily resigned from his employment as a
police officer in the Hudson Police Department following allegations that he had
had sexual relations with another woman while on duty during the previous
year. The respondent denied that he had sexual relations on duty but did not
deny that he had sexual relations with another woman in 2002. Shortly
thereafter, the petitioner filed for divorce alleging adultery and irreconcilable
differences.
Following a two-day hearing, the court ruled that the Noddin decision
applied to this case and that the respondent’s earnings of $66,992 from the
Hudson Police Department should be attributed to him. The court stated that
“[i]n light of the [husband’s] abandonment of responsibility during the past
year, the Court concurs that the [wife’s] request [to impute income of $5,582
gross monthly income based upon the case of [Noddin v. Noddin] is equitable.”
We do not agree.
In Noddin, two years after a divorce, the defendant husband requested
that his support obligations be reduced because of a change in his financial
condition in that he had been arrested for stealing trade secrets from his
employer, was fired from the position and was receiving considerably less
income. Noddin, 123 N.H. at 74. The master agreed that the defendant’s
earning capacity had been substantially reduced so that he was no longer able
to meet his obligations contained in the divorce decree and recommended a
reduction in the child support payments. Id. at 75. We disagreed, holding that
because “the defendant was engaged in criminal activity at his own peril, and
his reduced financial ability was due to his own fault,” his child support
obligations “should not be reduced where his own conduct has resulted in his
loss of high-earning employment.” Id. at 76.
Noddin applied to a post-divorce case in which a child support order had
been made. In the case before us, however, the parties were still married when
the respondent involuntarily resigned from his employment, and there was no
existing child support order. Noddin does not apply where the reduced
financial condition occasioned by a party’s alleged wrongdoing occurred before
the filing for divorce. Therefore, the superior court erred in imputing income to
the respondent based upon that case, and we reverse that ruling.
Subsequent to Noddin, the legislature passed RSA 458-C:2, IV(a) (2004),
which provides: “The court, in its discretion, may consider as gross income the
difference between the amount a parent is earning and the amount a parent
has earned in cases where the parent voluntarily becomes unemployed or
underemployed, unless the parent is physically or mentally incapacitated.” We
remand to the superior court for a determination as to whether RSA 458-C:2,
IV(a) (2004) applies and, if so, whether under the terms of the statute, the
respondent voluntarily became “unemployed or underemployed” for purposes of
calculating child support.
The respondent next argues that the superior court erred in awarding
sole legal custody of the children to the petitioner. Except in cases involving
abuse, “there shall be a presumption, affecting the burden of proof, that joint
legal custody is in the best interest of minor children.” RSA 458:17, II (2004)
(repealed Oct. 1, 2005). “If the court declines to enter an order awarding joint
legal custody, the court shall state in its decision the reasons for denial of an
2
award of joint legal custody.” RSA 458:17, II(b). The court’s decision states
that “[j]oint legal custody is not in the best interest of the children at this time,
due to the father’s unwarranted insignificant involvement with the children
over the past year and his willingness to surrender total responsibility to
mother during a year long financial crisis.”
The record supports that during the divorce process, the petitioner
brought no less than four additional legal actions against the respondent.
Shortly before filing for divorce, the petitioner filed a domestic violence petition.
The petition was subsequently dismissed. The petitioner then filed a stalking
petition that was also dismissed. The petitioner then brought a criminal
complaint against the respondent for sending flowers from the children on
Mother’s Day. The petition was subsequently dismissed. Finally, the petitioner
caused a felony charge to be brought for alleged theft of her property.
Approximately eight months later, after at least ten appearances in court by
the respondent, the prosecution dismissed the charges. While the criminal
charges were pending, bail conditions prohibited the respondent from having
any communication or contact with the petitioner.
The court’s determination on the award of legal custody apparently did
not take into account the actions of the petitioner as set forth above, and thus
was legally erroneous. Accordingly, we vacate the award and remand for
consideration of the impact of the petitioner’s repeated lawsuits on the
respondent’s ability to maintain contact and sustain involvement with his
children during the divorce process in determining the award of legal custody.
Reversed in part; vacated in
part; and remanded.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
3