THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2004-689
RYAN JAMES REALTY, LLC
v.
VILLAGES AT CHESTER CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION & a.
Argued: November 16, 2005
Opinion Issued: January 27, 2006
Cronin & Bisson, P.C., of Manchester (John G. Cronin and John F.
Bisson on the brief, and Mr. Cronin orally), for the plaintiff.
Mark E. Connelly, of Concord, by brief and orally, for defendant Villages
at Chester Condominium Association
Wadleigh, Starr & Peters, P.L.L.C., of Manchester (Dean B. Eggert on the
memorandum of law, for defendant Town of Chester.
GALWAY, J. The plaintiff, Ryan James Realty, LLC (Ryan), appeals the
order of the Superior Court (Morrill, J.) granting summary judgment to the
defendants, Villages of Chester Condominium Association (Association) and the
Town of Chester (Town). The court ruled that the unit owners of the Villages of
Chester Condominium own the disputed land. We reverse and remand.
The record supports the following facts. On March 11, 1987, the Villages
of Chester, Limited Partnership (Declarant) recorded a declaration of
condominium (Declaration) in the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds. This
Declaration established the Villages at Chester Condominium and stated its
desire to build a one-hundred-unit condominium on 209.93 acres. The
Declaration provided for initial development of ten two-unit buildings, along
with infrastructure such as roads and sewerage, all within the “submitted
land.” Exhibit A of the Declaration, entitled “Description of Submitted Land for
Chester,” states the metes and bounds of the submitted land, summarizing the
description by reference to a parcel labeled “Phase I” on a site plan map
attached to the Declaration. The map shows that Phase I occupied
approximately twenty-two and one-half acres. The Declaration reserved the
right to expand development of the condominium on “expandable land.”
Exhibit B of the Declaration, entitled “Description of Expandable Land for
Chester,” describes by metes and bounds the 209.93 acres excluding the land
identified in Exhibit A.
The Declaration states that any development beyond Phase I would
require an amendment to the Declaration, and that the Declarant could record
such an amendment no later than seven years from the date of the Declaration.
On October 22, 1987, the Declarant recorded an amendment to initiate Phase
II, which provided for construction of ten additional units and submission of
approximately seven acres of the expandable land to the condominium. On
May 18, 1988, the Declarant recorded an amendment to initiate Phase III,
which provided for construction of ten additional units and submission of
approximately seven and one-half acres from the expandable land to the
condominium. Phases I, II, and III totaled approximately thirty-seven acres,
leaving approximately 172.9 acres remaining in land designated as
“expandable” on the site plan map.
First New Hampshire Mortgage Corporation held a mortgage on the
property. After the Declarant submitted Phase III, First New Hampshire
Mortgage foreclosed on its mortgage and deeded the remaining 172.9 acres to
another developer. The property was conveyed multiple times, ending with a
conveyance to Ryan in 1995.
In 2003, Ryan petitioned the superior court for a declaratory judgment
regarding its right to further develop the 172.9 acres. The court first ordered
the parties to submit motions for summary judgment on the issue of title.
After considering the parties’ motions, the court ruled that the Association, on
behalf of the unit owners of the condominium, had title to the 172.9 acres. The
court found that the Declarant had submitted all 209.93 acres to the
condominium in the Declaration. The court stated that Ryan might have
received title to the 172.9 acres if the Declarant had obtained approval from the
Chester Zoning Board of Appeals to subdivide the property.
2
The sole question on appeal is who has title to the “disputed land,” i.e.,
the 172.9 acres remaining of the parcel after exclusion of Phases I, II, and III.
Ryan argues that the trial court erroneously found that the Declarant
submitted all 209.93 acres to the condominium. Secondly, Ryan argues that
the trial court erred by indicating that subdivision approval was required to
separate the land submitted to the condominium from the disputed land.
The defendants agree with the trial court that the Declarant submitted
the entire parcel in the Declaration. They also argue that, because the
Declarant did not formally subdivide the parcel, the Declarant did not create an
expandable condominium, and, therefore, submitted the entire parcel in the
Declaration.
Since both parties moved for summary judgment and neither contends
that there are any genuine issues of material fact, we review the trial court’s
application of law to the facts de novo. See Hughes v. N.H. Div. of Aeronautics,
152 N.H. 30, 35 (2005).
Entitled the “Condominium Act,” RSA chapter 356-B (1995) (the Act)
governs all condominiums and condominium projects. RSA 356-B:2; Neumann
v. Village of Winnipesaukee Timeshare Owners’ Assoc., 147 N.H. 111, 113
(2001). The Act provides that a condominium is created by recording
condominium instruments in the local registry of deeds. RSA 356-B:7, :11;
Town of Windham v. Lawrence Sav. Bank, 146 N.H. 517, 520 (2001). The
condominium instruments include a declaration of condominium, which
defines the rights as among the condominium owners, the condominium
association, and the developer. Town of Windham, 146 N.H. at 520. If the
condominium is an “expandable condominium,” the declaration must contain
an explicit reservation of the option to add land to the condominium, a legal
description of the “additional land,” which is the land that may be added to the
condominium, and numerous other provisions. RSA 356-B:16, III. “By
declaring an expandable condominium, a developer may submit land to the
condominium while reserving the right to expand the condominium by later
adding more land.” Town of Windham, 146 N.H. at 520. When a developer
amends a condominium declaration to submit portions of the additional land to
the condominium, the developer transfers ownership of those portions of land
to the condominium. Id. at 522.
I. Submission
In the instant case, the trial court ruled that the Declarant submitted all
209.93 acres to the condominium. To support this assertion, the defendants
cite the first page of the Declaration, which states:
3
The Villages at Chester Limited Partnership is the sole owner of the
land submitted herein . . . by virtue of a deed [which transferred
the entire 209.93 acres] . . . . The Declarant hereby submits the
above land and buildings to the condominium form of ownership
and use, in the manner provided by RSA Chapter 356-B.
The interpretation of a written document is a question of law, which we
review de novo. Frederick v. Frederick, 141 N.H. 530, 531 (1996).
When interpreting a written agreement, we give the language used
by the parties its reasonable meaning, considering the
circumstances and the context in which the agreement was
negotiated, and reading the document as a whole. Absent
ambiguity, however, the parties’ intent will be determined from the
plain meaning of the language used in the contract.
Lawyers Title Ins. Corp. v. Groff, 148 N.H. 333, 336-37 (2002) (citations and
quotations omitted); cf. RSA 356-B:13 (“a construction conformable with the
statute shall in all cases control over any construction inconsistent therewith”).
The language that the trial court and the defendants reference comes
only from one page of the Declaration. This first page states that the Declarant
“submits the above land,” which refers to the “land submitted herein.” Though
this language does not explicitly refer to the entire 209.93-acre parcel, and
refers only to land submitted “herein,” the defendants argue that this language
submitted the entire parcel to the condominium. We disagree.
What the trial court and the defendants failed to consider in their
interpretation is that the “land submitted herein” is defined in Exhibit A of the
Declaration. Entitled “Description of Submitted Land for Chester,” Exhibit A
describes by metes and bounds an area that Exhibit A summarizes as “the
parcel shown as Phase I” on the site plan map. Exhibit A, therefore, defines
the term “submitted land” as used throughout the Declaration as the land
designated as “Phase I.” In contrast, Exhibit B, entitled “Description of
Expandable Land for Chester,” describes by metes and bounds the entire
209.93-acre parcel, excluding the parcel described in Exhibit A. Exhibits A
and B clearly distinguish between the submitted land and the additional land.
We note that the Declarant filed two amendments to the Declaration,
submitting the land designated as “Phase II” and “Phase III” to the
condominium from the additional land. Had the Declarant submitted the
entire 209.93 acres to the condominium in the Declaration, these subsequent
amendments would have been unnecessary because the condominium owners
would already have had title to the entire 209.93 acres. Interpreting the
4
Declaration as a whole, we conclude that the land originally submitted in the
Declaration was only that land designated as “Phase I,” not the entire 209.93-
acre parcel. The subsequent amendments submitted Phases II and III to the
condominium. The remaining 172.9 acres were not submitted to the
condominium.
II. Subdivision
Next, the defendants contend that, because the Declarant did not gain
subdivision approval before submitting land to the condominium, the
Declarant failed to create an expandable condominium and, therefore,
submitted the entire 209.93-acre parcel in the Declaration. To support their
argument, the defendants rely on Town of Windham. In that case, a bank held
a mortgage on a parcel of land being developed as an expandable
condominium. Town of Windham, 146 N.H. at 518-19. After the developer
submitted portions of the parcel to the condominium, the bank foreclosed on
its mortgage and acquired title to the portion of the parcel that had not been
submitted. Id. at 519. The bank then conveyed part of the remaining land to a
third party, without obtaining subdivision approval. Id. at 519. We held that
the local planning board’s initial subdivision approval for an expandable
condominium did not authorize the bank to further subdivide the property for
uses unrelated to that of an expandable condominium. Id. at 522. We stated:
We do not interpret the Condominium Act as providing an
alternative procedure for subdivision approval. . . . The fact that
the Condominium Act allowed the developer to reserve the right to
transfer property to the condominium association from the
expandable land did not relieve the developer of the obligation to
obtain subdivision approval from the planning board. Moreover,
the planning board’s approval of a site plan showing a portion of
the lot as “expandable land” did not relieve the developer of the
obligation to obtain approval for further subdivision of that
expandable land.
Id. at 521-22. The defendants argue that our holding in Town of Windham
means that the Declarant was required to obtain subdivision approval to create
an expandable condominium.
Ryan argues that whether or not the Declarant should have subdivided
the parcel before submitting part of it to the condominium does not determine
ownership of the remaining acreage. The penalty for violating subdivision
regulations is a fine pursuant to RSA 676:16 (1996), Ryan asserts, not a
divestment of title to the property.
5
Our standard of review for interpretation of a statute is as follows:
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we
review de novo. We are the final arbiters of the legislature’s intent
as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole. We
first examine the language of the statute, and, where possible,
ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used. When
a statute’s language is plain and unambiguous, we need not look
beyond it for further indication of legislative intent, and we will not
consider what the legislature might have said or add language that
the legislature did not see fit to include.
Woodview Dev. Corp. v. Town of Pelham, 152 N.H. 114, 116 (2005) (citations
omitted).
RSA 676:16, entitled “Penalties for Transferring Lots in Unapproved
Subdivisions,” states:
Any owner . . . of any land located within a subdivision in a
municipality that has adopted subdivision regulations who
transfers or sells any land before a plat of the subdivision has been
approved by the planning board . . . shall forfeit and pay a civil
penalty of $1,000 for each lot or parcel so transferred or sold . . . .
The municipality may enjoin a transfer or sale which violates the
provisions of this section . . . .”
RSA 676:16 (Supp. 2005).
The above statutory language clearly states that a municipality’s remedy
against one who transfers land without first obtaining the necessary
subdivision approval is a fine or an injunction, neither of which the Town has
sought in this case. In relying upon Town of Windham, the defendants failed to
consider our discussion of the municipality’s remedy in that case. We stated:
“When a property owner transfers or sells land before a subdivision has been
approved by the planning board, RSA 676:16 provides that the owner shall pay
a $500 civil penalty for each lot or parcel transferred or sold without approval.”
Town of Windham, 146 N.H. at 520. Rather than voiding the bank’s transfer to
the third party, we affirmed the trial court’s conclusion that the bank violated
RSA 676:16 and was subject to a fine. Id. at 523.
The same reasoning applies to the instant case. Whether the Declarant
was required to obtain subdivision approval before creating an expandable
condominium does not affect title to the disputed land. RSA 676:16 provides
that the penalty for failure to obtain appropriate subdivision approval is a civil
fine for each parcel transferred or an injunction. Assuming without deciding
6
that the Declarant needed subdivision approval to transfer its land in
accordance with the creation of an expandable condominium, Ryan would still
have title to the disputed land.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
7