THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
U.S. District Court
No. 2005-290
ROBERT THERRIEN
v.
MARK F. SULLIVAN
Argued: October 20, 2005
Opinion Issued: January 27, 2006
Desfosses Law Firm, of Portsmouth (Sven D. Wiberg on the brief and
orally), for the plaintiff.
Nelson, Kinder, Mosseau & Saturley, P.C., of Manchester (John C.
Kissinger, Jr. and Richard C. Bell, Jr. on the brief, and Mr. Kissinger orally), for
the defendant.
BRODERICK, C.J. Pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 34, the United
States District Court for the District of New Hampshire (McAuliffe, C.J.)
certified to us the following questions of law:
1. In the context of a civil action for criminal legal malpractice,
see, e.g., Mahoney v. Shaheen, Cappiello, Stein & Gordon, P.A.,
143 N.H. 491 (1999), when does a criminal defendant’s cause of
action against his or her defense counsel accrue?
2. If the cause of action for criminal legal malpractice accrues
upon the criminal defendant’s discovery of the attorney’s alleged
negligence and the resulting harm, is the pertinent state
limitations period tolled until the criminal defendant obtains
collateral relief from his or her underlying criminal conviction
(thereby avoiding estoppel bars to proving actual innocence)?
For the reasons stated below, we answer the first question that New
Hampshire follows the “bright-line” or “one track” approach with respect to
criminal legal malpractice claims; thus the limitation period would not accrue
until the defendant obtained direct or collateral relief from his or her
underlying criminal conviction. In light of our response to the first question,
we need not address the second question.
The district court’s order provides the following facts. While living in
Portsmouth, Robert Therrien allegedly forced the six-year-old victim to perform
fellatio on him. Soon thereafter, the family moved to Maine. In 1995, the
victim informed her mother about the alleged assault. Therrien was charged
with that assault, but before he was brought to trial in New Hampshire, he was
tried for other alleged sexual assaults committed against the victim while the
family was living in Maine. Therrien was acquitted of the Maine charges.
At Therrien’s later trial in New Hampshire, the jury was allowed to hear
evidence of the alleged sexual assaults that occurred in Maine. Defense
counsel was not, however, permitted to introduce evidence that Therrien was
acquitted of those charges. In addition, over defense counsel’s objection, the
jury was allowed to hear testimony from the victim’s social worker, who
testified that Therrien had abused the victim until she was thirteen years old.
In March of 1997, Therrien was convicted of aggravated felonious sexual
assault and was sentenced to serve seven and one-half to fifteen years in
prison.
On direct appeal to this court, Therrien, represented by different counsel,
asserted that the trial court erred in admitting evidence of other bad acts,
including the alleged sexual assaults that occurred in Maine, without
permitting him to introduce evidence that he had been acquitted of those
charges. State v. Therrien, 144 N.H. 433, 434 (1999). He also argued on
appeal that the trial court erred in allowing the victim’s therapist to testify
about multiple incidents of uncharged abuse. Id. We affirmed Therrien’s
conviction, concluding that the victim’s testimony about the previous sexual
assaults in Maine amounted to harmless error. Id. at 436. In addition, we
concluded that Therrien failed to preserve for appeal his objections to: (1) the
trial court’s ruling precluding the introduction of evidence of his acquittal on
2
the Maine charges; and (2) the introduction of the social worker’s testimony.
Id. at 437-38.
Following our decision, Therrien sought collateral relief in the State trial
court, claiming that he had been denied effective assistance of counsel during
his first trial. Therrien’s motion for a new trial was denied by the trial court
based upon its finding that he had been provided constitutionally adequate
representation. We vacated that holding because the trial court failed to
conduct an evidentiary hearing on the matter prior to its ruling. State v.
Robert Therrien, No. 2000-579 (N.H. Oct. 1, 2001). The case was then
transferred to a second judge, an evidentiary hearing was held, and the court
found that counsel provided constitutionally deficient representation. State v.
Therrien, No. 96-S-541 (N.H. Super. Ct. May 7, 2002). Accordingly, the court
vacated Therrien’s conviction and granted his motion for a new trial. The
State, however, declined to reprosecute. By that time, Therrien had already
served approximately five years in prison.
On January 28, 2004, Therrien filed his diversity action against his
former attorney, Mark Sullivan, claiming that he is actually innocent of the
charges brought against him and that Sullivan’s deficient representation
proximately caused his allegedly wrongful conviction and incarceration.
Sullivan moved to dismiss on the grounds that Therrien’s action is barred by
the applicable limitation period.
In this State, a civil malpractice action requires proof of (1) an attorney-
client relationship, which triggers a duty on the part of the attorney to exercise
reasonable professional care, skill and knowledge in providing legal services to
that client, (2) a breach of that duty, and (3) resultant harm legally caused by
the breach. Mahoney v. Shaheen, Cappiello, Stein & Gordon, P.A., 143 N.H.
491, 495-96 (1999). A criminal malpractice action alleging false conviction
requires identical proof and, in addition, requires the claimant to prove, by a
preponderance of the evidence, actual innocence. Id. at 496. It is not
sufficient for a claimant to prove that if counsel had acted differently, legal guilt
would not have been established. Id. As a matter of law, the gateway to
damages will remain closed unless a claimant can establish that he or she is,
in fact, innocent of the conduct underlying the criminal charge. Id.
An action for malpractice is governed by RSA 508:4 (1997), which
establishes a three-year limitation period for all personal injury actions.
Furbush v. McKittrick, 149 N.H. 426, 430 (2003). A cause of action arises,
thereby triggering the running of the three-year statute, once all the elements
necessary for such a claim are present. See Shaheen, Cappiello, Stein &
Gordon v. Home Ins. Co., 143 N.H. 35, 40 (1998). A cause of action for legal
malpractice in a civil proceeding accrues when an attorney breaches a
professional duty, damages occur as a result, and the claimant knows or
3
should know of the injury and its cause. See id; Conrad v. Hazen, 140 N.H.
249, 251-52 (1995).
We have not yet addressed when a cause of action for legal malpractice
in a criminal proceeding accrues. Among those jurisdictions which have
considered it, there is a decided lack of agreement. Many jurisdictions follow
the so-called “bright-line” or “one-track” approach that requires a convicted
criminal defendant to obtain post-conviction relief before a cause of action for
legal malpractice accrues. See, e.g., Shaw v. State, Dept. of Admin., PDA, 816
P.2d 1358, 1360 (Alaska 1991); Steele v. Kehoe, 747 So. 2d 931, 933 (Fla.
1999). Other courts, however, have adopted a “two-track approach,” holding
that a cause of action for malpractice accrues as soon as a defendant becomes
aware of his or her attorney’s negligence and the resulting injury. See, e.g.,
Morrison v. Goff, 91 P.3d 1050, 1055-58 (Colo. 2004); Ereth v. Cascade
County, 81 P.3d 463, 469-70 (Mont. 2003). After considering our decision in
Mahoney, which sets out the elements for criminal legal malpractice, including
actual innocence, and reviewing case law from other jurisdictions, we adopt the
reasoning of the “bright-line” or “one track” approach. Because the elements
as defined in Mahoney would be present at the time of the defendant’s
conviction, we further hold that post-conviction relief is also required as an
element of criminal legal malpractice.
We are persuaded by the reasoning of the Supreme Court of Minnesota,
which held that until appellate or collateral relief is obtained with regard to the
underlying conviction, a claim for criminal malpractice cannot survive a motion
to dismiss. See Noske v. Friedberg, 670 N.W.2d 740, 744-45 (Minn. 2003).
The Minnesota Court reasoned that
as long as a valid criminal conviction is in place a legal malpractice
cause of action based on a defense counsel’s ineffective assistance
cannot withstand a Rule 12.02(e) motion to dismiss.
. . . .
. . . [B]y precluding claims from proceeding in which a
plaintiff’s criminal conviction has not been overturned and will
likely never be overturned, our decision comports with another
fundamental policy of the statute of limitations, which is to permit
the judicial system to husband its limited resources. Therefore, in
this case, the policy against allowing a defendant to collaterally
attack a valid criminal conviction in a subsequent civil proceeding
outweighs the policy of preventing stale claims.
Id. at 745-46 (citation and quotation omitted); see Canaan v. Bartee, 72 P.3d
911, 921 (Kan.) (“We hold that before [a criminal defendant] may sue his
attorneys for legal malpractice he must obtain post-conviction relief.”), cert.
denied, 540 U.S. 1090, 1090 (2003); Adkins v. Dixon, 482 S.E.2d 797, 801 (Va.
4
1997) (“Since successful termination of [post-conviction collateral challenges to
the conviction] is part of [plaintiff’s] cause of action, he has no right of action
until that time and, thus, the statute of limitations does not begin to run until
termination of the post-conviction proceeding.”); Stevens v. Bispham, 851 P.2d
556, 566 (Or. 1993) (“We hold that, in order for one convicted of a criminal
offense to bring an action for professional negligence against that person’s
criminal defense counsel, the person must, in addition to alleging a duty, its
breach, and causation, allege ‘harm’ in that the person has been exonerated of
the criminal offense through reversal on direct appeal, through post-conviction
relief proceedings, or otherwise.”). Among the justifications for this approach,
the court in Noske also noted: “equitable principles; the difficulties of proving
causation and damages in a criminal malpractice case where the plaintiff has
not yet been exonerated; the existence of comprehensive post-conviction
review; and collateral estoppel.” Noske, 670 N.W.2d at 745 (quotation, ellipsis,
and brackets omitted).
The defendant contends that even when a plaintiff’s attempts to obtain
post-conviction relief “outlast the statute of limitations, the plaintiff is not
without a remedy.” He argues that “there is nothing prohibiting the plaintiff in
such circumstances from filing the action within the statute of limitations, and
simultaneously moving to stay the malpractice action while the plaintiff seeks
post-conviction relief.” We reject this argument. As the court in Noske
observed:
[A]llowing a criminal defendant-plaintiff to commence a legal
malpractice action before obtaining post-conviction relief in the
criminal matter and then staying the malpractice action until the
issue of post-conviction relief in the criminal matter is settled
would squander scarce judicial resources.
Id. at 744 n.3.
We recognize, as the defendant argues, that one of the fundamental
principles of the statute of limitations is to “eliminate stale claims and grant
repose to liability that otherwise would linger on indefinitely.” Id. at 746.
However, in cases such as this, “where [the] attorney’s malpractice occurs
during litigation, the dangers associated with delay are lessened because a
record will have been made of the actions which form the substance of the later
malpractice action.” Amfac Distribution Corp. v. Miller, 673 P.2d 795, 798
(Ariz. Ct. App. 1983). Accordingly, the policy against allowing a defendant to
collaterally attack a valid criminal conviction in a subsequent civil proceeding
outweighs the policy of preventing stale claims.
Our holding today is a recognition that as long as a valid criminal
conviction is in place, a legal malpractice cause of action based on a defense
5
counsel’s ineffective assistance resulting in that conviction cannot withstand a
motion to dismiss. Accordingly, we conclude that an action for criminal legal
malpractice does not accrue until a criminal defendant receives post-conviction
relief.
Remanded.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
6