HOW TO ORDER A TRANSCRIPT
The New Hampshire Supreme Court has approved eScribers, a company located in Phoenix,
Arizona, as the transcriber of all transcripts for all New Hampshire courts. A copy of the order
designating eScribers as the transcriber and approving the rates that it may charge for preparing
transcripts can be found here.
(NOTE: If your case is an appeal to the Supreme Court you will receive an order from
the Supreme Court explaining how to request a transcript.)
1. YOU MAY BUY AN OFFICIAL TRANSCRIPT OF YOUR CASE. The transcript will be made
from the recording taken during your hearing. All transcripts must be prepared by eScribers, the
court approved transcriber.
You may request a portion of the hearing to be transcribed, however, the entire testimony of
one witness must be transcribed, not simply selected responses to a few questions.
2. To order a transcript, go to https://escribers.net or contact eScribers at (800) 257-0885. The
website or phone contact will provide instructions on how to order the transcript. You will be
required to pay the estimated cost of the transcript before the record will be requested from the
court. Instructions for determining the estimated cost of the transcript will be provided by the
website or phone contact. If the calculated estimate is too low, you may be required to pay an
additional deposit and this may delay your request. It is also possible that the actual cost of the
transcript will be lower than your deposit in which case you will receive a refund of the
overpayment.
3. Unless other arrangements have been made, when your transcript is completed, you will
receive one digitally signed copy of the transcript in PDF-A format by email. You can print out the
transcript on paper but you cannot change any of the information. The official version of the
transcript will be sent to the court. Your copy is a certified version of the official transcript.
4. YOU MAY BUY A COPY OF A TRANSCRIPT THAT HAS ALREADY BEEN PREPARED. You
may make your request directly to eScribers at (800) 257-0885 or sales@escribers.net or to the
court where the hearing was held.
5. When ordering a transcript please be prepared to provide the correct name of the case,
docket number, name of the court where the hearing took place, and date(s) of hearing.
6. If you would like to purchase a copy of the audio only, please call eScribers at (800) 257-0885.
If you have any questions about the preparation of your transcript contact, please contact
eScribers by:
Phone at (800) 257-0885; or
E-mail at sales@escribers.net
You should also refer to NH Supreme Court Rule 59 regarding the preparation of transcripts in
non- appeal cases.
(11/15/2023)