THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
Nos. 2006-305
2008-312
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
KEVIN C. WHITTAKER
Argued: April 16, 2009
Opinion Issued: June 3, 2009
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Susan P. McGinnis, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Douglas, Leonard & Garvey, P.C., of Concord (Richard J. Lehmann on
the brief and orally), for the defendant.
DALIANIS, J. The defendant, Kevin C. Whittaker, appeals his conviction
by a jury for negligent homicide. See RSA 630:3, II (2007). On appeal, he
contends that the Superior Court (Fauver, J.) erred by: (1) denying his motion
in limine to exclude the testimony of the State’s accident reconstruction expert;
(2) granting the State’s motion in limine to exclude certain portions of the
testimony of a state trooper; and (3) denying his motion for new trial based
upon ineffective assistance of counsel. We reverse and remand.
I. Background
The jury could have found the following facts. At approximately 12:50
a.m. on Sunday, November 21, 2004, a rainy and foggy night, the Durham
police received a call telling them that a person was lying on Main Street. The
man, later identified as Richard Hegerich, was lying parallel to the fog line,
near the sidewalk curb. He was dressed in dark clothing. His face was covered
with blood, and he was missing his shoes and socks. One of his shoes, a sock
and his hat were in the roadway, some distance away from his body.
The police determined that Hegerich, who was twenty years old, was
dead. A medical examiner later concluded that Hegerich died of multiple blunt
trauma to the head caused by a motor vehicle accident. It was also determined
that Hegerich had a blood alcohol content of .14. Based upon the position of
his body, and the positions of his shoe, sock and hat, the police concluded that
he had not been in the crosswalk when he was hit. The police found no
evidence of skid marks.
At approximately 12:48 a.m., the defendant, then a nineteen-year-old
student at the University of New Hampshire (UNH), called his girlfriend,
Whitney Sawin, also a UNH student, and told her to meet him. Although she
initially refused, Sawin eventually agreed to meet the defendant behind his
fraternity house because he insisted. As Sawin walked towards the defendant’s
vehicle, she could see that the passenger side windshield was “completely
shattered” and that “part of it was swinging inside.” Sawin asked the
defendant what had happened, and he told her that he had hit someone. The
defendant seemed nervous and shaky. He asked Sawin to “go with” him.
Sawin declined and told him to return to where he had hit the person; the
defendant drove off.
At approximately 1:07 a.m., a UNH police officer stopped the defendant’s
car because one of its headlights was not working. The officer noticed that the
car’s passenger side windshield looked smashed. The defendant told the officer
that a friend had been driving his car, but he could not name the friend, telling
the officer instead that “it was some guy” whom he did not know very well.
While speaking to the defendant, the officer noticed that his eyes were
glassy and bloodshot, he smelled of alcohol and his hands were shaking. She
further observed that there were shards of glass all over the passenger seat.
The defendant told the officer that he was on his way to see his girlfriend.
When the officer asked the defendant if he had been drinking, he said,
“[N]o. . . . [Y]ou only asked about alcohol, right?” He told the officer that he
had taken illegal substances a couple of weeks earlier.
2
The officer then administered field sobriety tests to the defendant, and,
based upon his performance, arrested him for driving while intoxicated. The
officer transported the defendant to the UNH police station, where he agreed to
a breathalyzer test. While waiting for the test, the defendant made several
comments about wishing that “[he] could be a rat” or a “snitch.” The
breathalyzer test results showed that the defendant’s blood alcohol content was
.16.
After additional breathalyzer tests, the defendant was taken to the
Durham police station to be interviewed. The defendant told the police that he
wanted “to talk to his girlfriend and get his story straight.” He told police that
he had been asleep at his fraternity house when someone woke him because
his phone was ringing. He said that he then spoke to his girlfriend and was
driving his car to meet her when the police stopped him. He was very evasive
about whether he had been driving the car earlier in the evening.
At 8:30 a.m. the defendant volunteered that he had hit a pedestrian. He
asked the booking officer, “[D]id I kill the man I hit[?]” After he was told that he
had, the defendant said: “[W]hat have I done? What have I done to the victim’s
family? How am I going to live the rest of my life knowing I killed someone?”
He then told the police that he had been drinking in Dover with his girlfriend
that night and had then gone to his fraternity, where he had continued to
drink. He said that the accident occurred when he was heading south on Main
Street up a hill, driving under the speed limit, and that he never saw the victim
until he “felt a thump.” He then said, “[I]f my headlight wasn’t out, I might not
have killed him. Six inches, that’s it. Six inches and the guy would have made
it across the road and would be alive. He almost made it across the road. I
saw him bounce off the corner of my car at the right . . . headlight area.”
The grand jury returned three indictments against the defendant: two
alternative counts of negligent homicide, see RSA 630:3; and one felony count
of conduct after an accident, see RSA 264:25, :29 (2004). The trial court
dismissed one of the negligent homicide indictments before trial.
At trial, the defendant stipulated that: (1) Hegerich died as a result of
the injuries he sustained in the accident; (2) the defendant was driving the car
that struck Hegerich; and (3) the defendant was impaired when he was driving.
The issue for the jury on the negligent homicide charge, therefore, was whether
the defendant’s impairment had caused the accident. See RSA 630:3, II; State
v. Wong, 125 N.H. 610, 620 (1984) (to sustain a conviction under RSA 630:3,
II, the State must establish a causal connection between the person’s driving
under the influence, the subsequent collision and the resulting death).
To establish causation, the State relied, in part, upon the testimony of
Joseph DiGregorio, then a deputy sheriff for Strafford County and a consultant
3
for Collision Forensics in Somersworth, whom the court certified as an expert
in traffic accident reconstruction. Based upon his review of the accident report
prepared by a state trooper, reports prepared by the Durham and UNH police,
the medical examiner’s report, his own view of the collision site and the vehicle,
and certain research and data, DiGregorio testified that: (1) the defendant was
driving thirty-five miles per hour when the accident occurred, which is ten
miles over the posted speed limit; (2) the defendant did not see Hegerich before
hitting him; (3) Hegerich was in the roadway, not in the crosswalk, when the
defendant hit him; (4) Hegerich was walking, not running, when he was hit;
(5) because Hegerich was wearing blue jeans and a dark fleece jacket, it was
difficult to see him on the roadway; (6) the rain and fog also made it difficult to
see on the night of the accident; (7) alcohol slows down perception and reaction
time; (8) although a precise point of impact could not be calculated, the area of
impact was approximately twenty feet to the east of where Hegerich’s hat and
sock were located; (9) after hitting Hegerich, the defendant applied normal
braking and came to a stop approximately 167 feet from the area of impact;
and (10) Hegerich came to rest approximately 160 feet from the area of impact.
Following a five-day trial, which included an early evening view, the jury
convicted the defendant of both negligent homicide and conduct after an
accident. He later moved for a new trial on the negligent homicide charge on
the ground that his trial counsel was ineffective because he failed to consult
with an accident reconstruction expert. The trial court denied the motion, and
this appeal followed.
II. Defendant’s Arguments
A. Trial Court’s In Limine Rulings
The defendant first challenges certain of the trial court’s in limine
rulings. Specifically, he argues that by granting the State’s motion in limine to
exclude portions of Trooper William Graham’s testimony, the trial court
violated his constitutional right to present all proofs favorable. See N.H.
CONST. pt. I, art. 15; U.S. CONST. amends. V, XIV. The defendant also argues
that the trial court erred when it denied his motion in limine to exclude
DiGregorio’s testimony because it was inadmissible under RSA 516:29-a
(2007).
The defendant, however, has failed to demonstrate that he preserved
these arguments by raising them in the trial court. As the appealing party, the
defendant has the burden of providing this court with a record sufficient to
demonstrate that he raised all of his appeal issues before the trial court. Bean
v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004); see Sup. Ct. R. 13, 16(3)(b).
The record provided on appeal fails to demonstrate that the defendant ever
4
raised the same arguments that he raises here with respect to the trial court’s
in limine rulings. We, therefore, decline to address them.
B. Motion for New Trial
The defendant next contends that the trial court erred when it denied his
motion for a new trial based upon ineffective assistance of counsel. He asserts
that his trial counsel was ineffective because he failed to consult an accident
reconstruction expert.
The defendant’s claim of ineffective assistance of counsel rests upon Part
I, Article 15 of the State Constitution and the Sixth and Fourteenth
Amendments to the Federal Constitution. We first examine the constitutional
competency of counsel’s performance under the State Constitution, and rely
upon federal case law only for guidance. State v. Kepple, 155 N.H. 267, 269
(2007). Because the standard for determining whether a defendant has
received ineffective assistance of counsel is the same under both constitutions,
necessarily, we reach the same result under the Federal Constitution as we do
under the State Constitution. Id.
The State and Federal Constitutions guarantee a criminal defendant
reasonably competent assistance of counsel. State v. Sharkey, 155 N.H. 638,
640 (2007). To prevail upon a claim for ineffective assistance of counsel, a
defendant must show, first, that counsel’s representation was constitutionally
deficient and, second, that counsel’s deficient performance actually prejudiced
the outcome of the case. Id. at 640-41. To meet the first prong of this test, the
defendant “must show that counsel’s representation fell below an objective
standard of reasonableness.” Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 688
(1984). To meet the second prong, the defendant “must show that there is a
reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s unprofessional errors, the result
of the proceeding would have been different. A reasonable probability is a
probability sufficient to undermine confidence in the outcome.” Id. at 694.
“[B]oth the performance and prejudice components of the ineffectiveness
inquiry are mixed questions of law and fact.” Id. at 698; Dugas v. Coplan, 428
F.3d 317, 327 (1st Cir. 2005). Therefore, we will not disturb the trial court’s
factual findings unless they are not supported by the evidence or are erroneous
as a matter of law, Kepple, 155 N.H. at 270, and we review the ultimate
determination of whether each prong is met de novo, see State v. Jennings, 155
N.H. 768, 772 (2007).
5
1. Deficient Performance
a. Relevant Law
We first address the deficient performance prong of the Strickland test,
which turns upon a determination of whether “counsel’s assistance was
reasonable considering all the circumstances.” Strickland, 466 U.S. at 688.
We must judge the reasonableness of counsel’s conduct on the facts of the
particular case, viewed as of the time of that conduct. Id. at 690.
“[T]he proper measure of attorney performance remains simply
reasonableness under prevailing professional norms.” Wiggins v. Smith, 539
U.S. 510, 521 (2003) (quotation omitted). To establish that his trial attorney’s
performance fell below this standard, the defendant “has to show that no
competent lawyer” would have failed to consult with an accident reconstruction
expert. Lynch v. Ficco, 438 F.3d 35, 49 (1st Cir.), cert. denied, 549 U.S. 892
(2006).
“Judicial scrutiny of counsel’s performance must be highly deferential.”
Strickland, 466 U.S. at 689. “A fair assessment of attorney performance
requires that every effort be made to eliminate the distorting effects of
hindsight, to reconstruct the circumstances of counsel’s challenged conduct,
and to evaluate the conduct from counsel’s perspective at the time.” Id.
“Because of the difficulties inherent in making the evaluation, a court must
indulge a strong presumption that counsel’s conduct falls within the wide
range of reasonable professional assistance; that is, the defendant must
overcome the presumption that, under the circumstances, the challenged
action might be considered sound trial strategy.” Id. (quotation omitted); see
Sharkey, 155 N.H. at 641.
“We apply the Strickland standard to evaluate an attorney’s strategic
choices in light of the investigation that led to those choices.” Dugas, 428 F.3d
at 327.
[S]trategic choices made after less than complete investigation are
reasonable precisely to the extent that reasonable professional
judgments support the limitations on investigation. In other
words, counsel has a duty to make reasonable investigations or to
make a reasonable decision that makes particular investigations
unnecessary. In any ineffectiveness case, a particular decision not
to investigate must be directly assessed for reasonableness in all
the circumstances, applying a heavy measure of deference to
counsel’s judgments.
6
Strickland, 466 U.S. 690-91. Thus, the issue in this case is whether the
decision of the defendant’s trial counsel not to consult with an accident
reconstruction expert was supported by investigation that was itself
reasonable. See Dugas, 428 F.3d at 328.
In assessing the reasonableness of trial counsel’s decision not to consult
with an expert, we “recognize that reasonably diligent counsel are not always
required to consult an expert as part of pretrial investigation in a case involving
the use of expert witnesses by the state.” Id. A defendant’s attorney is not
required, in every case, to consult experts even if the State will be putting on
expert witnesses. Id. at 329. A defense attorney may have no duty to consult
with an expert, for instance, when there is “no need to question the validity of
the government’s proposed evidence or the evidence may be so weak that it can
be demolished on cross-examination.” Id.
In Dugas, the First Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that defense counsel’s
failure to consult with an arson expert so as to investigate thoroughly a “not
arson” defense was constitutionally deficient. Id. The court reached this
conclusion, in part, because creating reasonable doubt that the fire was arson
was one of the only defenses available to the defendant. Id. The only other
defense was that someone else committed the arson, which, the court
observed, was a difficult defense to mount. Id. Additionally, the court noted,
the arson evidence “was the cornerstone of the state’s case.” Id. Further, the
defendant’s attorney admitted that he lacked any knowledge about arson
investigation and had never before tried an arson case. Id. Defense counsel
also admitted that he was aware that there were inconsistencies in the
testimony of the State’s arson experts. Id. at 330. All of these circumstances
together, the court ruled, “demonstrate the inescapable need for expert
consultation in this case.” Id. at 331. The court also rejected the State’s claim
that defense counsel’s failure to consult with an expert was an informed,
tactical decision entitled to deference. Id. at 331-32.
Courts in other jurisdictions have ruled that the failure to consult with
an expert may be ineffective assistance under similar circumstances. In Richey
v. Bradshaw, 498 F.3d 344, 362-64 (6th Cir. 2007), for instance, the court
concluded that defense counsel’s performance was constitutionally infirm
because the scientific evidence was fundamental to the prosecution and
counsel knew that there were gaps in the State’s proof of arson. Under those
circumstances, the court ruled that defense counsel’s strategy merely to “poke
holes in the State’s arson case” was insufficient and that counsel had an
affirmative duty to investigate the scientific bases for the State’s expert’s
opinion. Richey, 498 F.3d at 363.
In Duncan v. Ornoski, 528 F.3d 1222, 1235 (9th Cir. 2008), cert. denied,
129 S. Ct. 1614 (2009), the issue was whether defense counsel’s performance
7
was constitutionally deficient because he failed to consult a serologist even
though the police report indicated that there were antigens in the blood sample
that were inconsistent with the victim’s blood type. The court ruled that
counsel’s performance was deficient because: (1) the opinion of the State’s
expert was crucial to the prosecution; (2) defense counsel had no knowledge or
expertise in the field; and (3) the potentially exculpatory evidence could have
played a central role in the defense. Duncan, 528 F.3d at 1235-36.
In Gersten v. Senkowski, 426 F.3d 588, 608 (2d Cir. 2005), cert. denied,
547 U.S. 1191 (2006), a sexual abuse case, the court ruled that defense
counsel’s performance was constitutionally defective because he conceded the
validity of the prosecution’s medical evidence without first having made any
attempt to investigate whether that evidence could have been challenged. Had
he consulted with an expert, the expert would have explained that there was no
physical evidence of penetration. Id. at 608. He, therefore, could have
presented a strong affirmative case that the charged crime simply did not occur
and that the victim’s story was incredible. Id. The court observed that,
although defense counsel thought that challenging the prosecution’s medical
evidence would have been futile, this was not an informed decision based upon
reasonable investigation and, thus, was not entitled to deference. Id. at 609-
11.
By contrast, the court in Bower v. Quarterman, 497 F.3d 459, 472 (5th
Cir. 2007), cert. denied, 128 S. Ct. 2051 (2008), ruled that failing to consult
with an expert was not constitutionally defective performance when the
attorney was “well aware of the issues concerning the state’s ballistic evidence”
and there was “little, in terms of the state’s ballistic evidence,” for the
defendant’s expert to rebut. The court held that “[u]nless a critical and
important legal issue rests on the reliability of scientific evidence, . . . counsel
is not constitutionally required to seek a contradictory expert so long as the
decision not to call an expert is informed and based on a strategic decision.”
Bower, 497 F.3d at 472.
We have found only a handful of cases involving an attorney’s decision
whether to consult with an accident reconstruction expert. In Lien v. Class,
574 N.W.2d 601, 605 (S.D. 1998), whether the defendant was the driver of the
car that had killed the victim was a disputed issue. There was an eyewitness
to the accident who said that the defendant was driving. Lien, 574 N.W.2d at
605. Defense counsel found the eyewitness to be credible and did not believe
that he could impeach the witness successfully. Id. at 608-09. Other
witnesses confirmed that the defendant had been driving the car before the
accident. Id. at 610. Additionally, the defendant had told his attorney that
when he drank, which he admitted to doing before the accident, he would not
let others drive his car. Id. The court ruled that defense counsel’s decision not
to consult with an accident reconstruction expert was constitutionally
8
sufficient performance because: (1) the attorney was an experienced criminal
trial lawyer; (2) he was familiar with the area and with the type of jurors who
would be on the panel; and (3) he knew that if he went to trial on an “expert”
defense, the State had substantial evidence to overcome it. Id. at 609
(quotation omitted).
In Strandlien v. State, 156 P.3d 986, 993 (Wyo. 2007), on the other hand,
the court ruled that there was “a clear need . . . for [the defendant’s] trial
counsel to consult with an independent accident reconstruction expert,”
because “the exact nature of how the collision occurred was vital to [the]
defense.” In that case, the issue was whether the defendant’s impairment had
proximately caused the accident that killed the victim. Strandlien, 156 P.3d at
993. The defendant contended at trial that the accident was unavoidable
because the victim had turned into his lane. Id. The prosecution presented
the testimony of police officers who had attempted to reconstruct the accident
and who testified that, but for the defendant’s impairment, it would not have
occurred. Id.
Relying upon the above cases for guidance, we now turn to whether it
was constitutionally deficient performance in this case not to consult with an
expert in accident reconstruction, keeping in mind that in so doing, we must
“indulge a strong presumption that counsel’s conduct falls within the wide
range of reasonable professional assistance.” Strickland, 466 U.S. at 689; see
Sharkey, 155 N.H. at 641.
b. Analysis
The trial court found that the defendant’s trial counsel is a seasoned
criminal trial attorney, and the record amply supports this finding. At the
hearing on the motion for new trial, trial counsel testified that he has been a
criminal trial lawyer for approximately thirty years. He also testified that he
had previously tried approximately six driving while impaired cases involving
pedestrian injuries or death.
The trial court also found that the defendant’s trial counsel understood
the issues in the case, and rather than hire an expert, chose, instead, to cross-
examine the State’s expert. The record supports these findings as well. Trial
counsel testified that he understood everything in DiGregorio’s report, except
the final paragraph, and that he understood his testimony. The defendant’s
trial counsel never explained why or what he did not understand in the final
paragraph of DiGregorio’s report. Trial counsel also testified that while he
considered retaining an accident reconstruction expert, he decided not to do so
because he believed that any testimony from such an expert would be
speculative, and, therefore, inadmissible. He testified that because of the lack
9
of physical evidence from the accident, he believed that the accident could not
be reconstructed.
Thus, at least with respect to these factors, this case is distinguishable
from Dugas. While the defense attorney in Dugas had never before tried an
arson case, the defendant’s trial counsel had previously tried cases that were
similar to this one. Dugas, 428 F.3d at 329; see Duncan, 528 F.3d at 1235-36.
Like defense counsel in Lien, 574 N.W.2d at 609, the defendant’s trial counsel
is an experienced criminal trial attorney. While defense counsel in Dugas
needed expert assistance to understand and challenge the State’s case, the
defendant’s trial counsel did not. Dugas, 428 F.3d at 329.
Dugas is distinguishable as well because in Dugas, “the arson evidence
was the cornerstone of the state’s case,” id.; see Richey, 498 F.3d at 362;
Duncan, 528 F.3d at 1235-36, while in this case, DiGregorio’s testimony was
not especially probative of the central question before the jury: whether the
defendant’s impairment had caused the accident. Although DiGregorio
testified that, in his opinion, the defendant was driving his car ten miles over
the posted speed limit, DiGregorio did not testify that the defendant was so
doing because he was impaired. His testimony, at best, only allowed the jury
to infer that the defendant exceeded the speed limit because he was impaired.
Therefore, there was little in terms of the State’s evidence of causation for a
defense expert to rebut. See Bower, 497 F.3d at 472.
Additionally, the record demonstrates that had trial counsel consulted
the expert whom the defendant presented at the hearing on his motion for a
new trial, this expert would have agreed with DiGregorio that the defendant’s
car was traveling ten miles over the speed limit, and would have confirmed trial
counsel’s suspicion that the accident could not be reconstructed because of the
lack of physical evidence.
At the motion for a new trial, the defendant presented the report and
testimony of Carl Lakowicz, a partner in Northpoint Collision Consultants in
Gilmanton. Lakowicz admitted that because of insufficient physical evidence,
it was impossible to complete “a technical accident reconstruction.” Lakowicz
testified that had the defendant’s trial counsel contacted him, he would have
told him, “We can’t help you with this case. It can’t be reconstructed. We’re
missing evidence.” (Quotation omitted.) He would have explained to
defendant’s trial counsel that the only analysis he could conduct would require
him to “assume[] certain factors that were not in evidence.”
This case is, therefore, unlike Strandlien. Whereas in Strandlien, 156
P.3d at 993, the accident could be reconstructed and the court found defense
counsel ineffective for failing to consult with an expert in such reconstruction,
10
here, “the exact nature of how the collision occurred” was impossible to
determine.
On the other hand, trial counsel’s belief that the testimony of an expert,
such as Lakowicz, would have been inadmissible because it would be
speculative, was not an informed one. See Gersten, 426 F.3d at 609-11.
Generally, under New Hampshire law, the assumptions upon which an expert
bases an opinion “are matters which affect the weight of the evidence but do
not [necessarily] . . . preclude its admissibility.” State v. Lavoie, 152 N.H. 542,
546 (2005). Provided that the trial court finds that the expert’s methodology is
reliable, it is up to the fact finder to determine the weight and credibility to be
accorded the expert’s testimony. Baker Valley Lumber v. Ingersoll-Rand, 148
N.H. 609, 615-16 (2002). Once the trial court has determined that the expert’s
methodology is reliable, “[t]he appropriate method of testing the basis of an
expert’s opinion is by cross-examination of the expert.” State v. Fernandez,
152 N.H. 233, 244-45 (2005) (quotation omitted). Accordingly, the fact that the
testimony of an expert, such as Lakowicz, is based upon certain assumptions,
does not necessarily mean that it is inadmissible. Therefore, trial counsel’s
belief that it would have been futile to consult with an expert because any
expert’s opinion that is based upon assumptions is inadmissible was not an
informed one.
Further, had trial counsel consulted an expert, such as Lakowicz, he
could have learned that another defense was available to him – that the
accident was unavoidable, regardless of the driver’s impairment. Had trial
counsel consulted an expert, such as Lakowicz, he could have been able to
present an affirmative case that the defendant’s impairment did not cause the
accident. See Gersten, 426 F.3d at 608.
Based upon certain calculations, Lakowicz opined that under optimum
night conditions, a driver of a vehicle in good working order, going up a wet hill
at thirty-five miles per hour, would need 192 feet to perceive a pedestrian and
come to a safe, controlled stop. Lakowicz termed this point--the 192 feet
needed to stop safely--the “point of no escape.” He explained that the “point of
no escape” is the point at which an accident is unavoidable, regardless of the
driver’s level of impairment. Based upon an experiment he conducted,
Lakowicz opined that an exemplar pedestrian was not detectable at the point of
no escape.
Lakowicz further opined that based upon the speed of the defendant’s
vehicle and the presumed speed at which Hegerich walked, the first
opportunity that a driver would have had to see Hegerich, even if the incident
occurred during daylight, was when they were approximately 205 feet away
from one another. Lakowicz opined that at a 205-foot distance, a driver would
be only two seconds away from the point of no escape (192 feet), and that the
11
reaction time for a non-impaired person driving in daylight would be
approximately two and one-half seconds. Thus, from the driver’s perspective,
Lakowicz opined that there was no way for the accident to have been avoided
regardless of the driver’s impairment.
Based upon all of these factors, even with the presumption that his
performance was constitutionally sufficient, we conclude that the decision of
the defendant’s trial counsel not to consult with an accident reconstruction
expert was constitutionally defective performance. Contrary to trial counsel’s
conjecture, the testimony of an expert, such as Lakowicz, could have been
admissible, even if it was based upon assumptions. Under the unique
circumstances of this case, it was not sufficient for trial counsel merely to
“poke holes” in the State’s case. Rather, because he knew that the State’s case
relied upon expert testimony that used certain assumptions, it was
constitutionally deficient performance for trial counsel not to consult with an
expert to learn what the expert could conclude based upon these same or
similar assumptions. Had he done so, he might have been able to present an
affirmative case that the defendant’s impairment did not cause Hegerich’s
death. Under the circumstances of this case, it was constitutionally infirm
performance for trial counsel to fail, at the very least, to explore this possibility
with an expert in accident reconstruction.
“Defense counsel may not fail to conduct an investigation and then rely
on the resulting ignorance to excuse his failure to explore a strategy that would
likely have yielded exculpatory evidence.” Gersten, 426 F.3d at 610. “[F]ailing
to present exculpatory evidence is not a reasonable trial strategy.” Id. at 611.
We do not intend to imply that defense counsel is constitutionally
required to hire a consulting expert in all cases in which the prosecution calls
an expert to prove an element of its case. See Dugas, 428 F.3d at 344
(Howard, J., dissenting). “[A]n attorney’s performance is never per se
constitutionally deficient for failing to call an expert as a result of an
incomplete (or inadequate) investigation.” United States v. Mitchell, Nos. 05-
cv-823, 96-cr-401 1, 2007 WL 1521212, at *7 (E.D. Pa. May 21, 2007); see
Miller v. Anderson, 255 F.3d 455, 459, remand order modified by stipulation,
268 F.3d 485 (7th Cir. 2001). Our decision today “is grounded in the specifics
of this case.” Dugas, 428 F.3d at 332 n.21.
2. Prejudice
Because the trial court concluded that trial counsel’s performance was
not constitutionally infirm, it did not reach the prejudice prong of the
Strickland test. The parties urge us to reach it in the first instance. We
decline to do so. The trial court heard the testimony at the hearing on the
motion for a new trial, and had an opportunity to assess the credibility of the
12
witnesses presented in light of all of the evidence presented in support of and
in opposition to the motion, and, therefore, is in a better position than we are
to assess whether trial counsel’s performance prejudiced the defendant. See
Dugas v. Warden, No. 03-cv-736-JD, 2006 WL 2463670, at *15 (D.N.H. Aug.
24, 2006), aff’d, 506 F.3d 1 (1st Cir. 2007). In particular, the trial court is in a
better position than we are to assess whether Lakowicz’s testimony would have
been admissible under RSA 516:29-a, New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 702
and Baker Valley Lumber, 148 N.H. at 616. Accordingly, we remand to the
trial court for it to determine whether there is a reasonable probability that,
but for trial counsel’s errors, the result of the proceeding would have been
different. See Strickland, 466 U.S. at 694.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
13