All right, the first case up is State of New Hampshire versus Jeffrey Gray.

This is case 220663, State of New Hampshire versus Jeffrey Gray.

Good morning, May it please the court. My name is Thomas Barnard. I represent Jeffrey Gray. Plain to focus on the mistrial issue this morning.

Brousseau establishes that in criminal cases, courts will not permit defendants to poison juries by blurting out inflammatory information that they know is inadmissible.

The question here is whether courts may permit complainants to poison juries by blurting out inflammatory information that they know is inadmissible.

The answer should be no for three reasons. First, the evidence here was much more inflammatory than in Brousseau.

Brousseau involved teenage marijuana use, hardly shocking. Here we're talking about the death of a two month old baby.

If the death of a two month old baby isn't sufficient to require a mistrial, it's difficult to imagine what is.

Isn't the situation here, to the extent that you're saying, and I don't in any way mean to belittle this, the idea that a jury might think that having sex when you're seven months pregnant could be harmful to the baby.

But to the extent that you draw from that, well, the jury would have blamed him for this. Isn't that undercut here with the idea that even under the defendant's view that this didn't happen.

The jury could not have thought that she didn't decide to come to New Hampshire to have a romantic relationship with this guy when she was seven months pregnant.

So even if it was consensual sex, they might have just as easily thought that that was what was causing, that she was as much at fault as he was.

That's possible. The jury might have believed that they were both blame worthy, but Gray was the only one they could punish.

And they might have said, well, we can only punish members.

Well, except that they found him guilty. I mean, I know you tried to twist it the other way, but the fact that if the jury was really outraged at him, the idea that they would have acquitted him of everything but one.

Well, they convicted of two charges.

And I mean, if they were outraged at him because they believed he engaged in conduct that although legal was still unwise and harmful to this unborn baby, then it's entirely imaginable that they may come back with a one guilty verdict on a felony to punish him for that conduct.

But not a complete slate of guilty verdicts because he's not guilty of sexually assaulting the complainant.

Should it matter to us that it appears that this was inadvertent from the prosecutor's perspective?

No, it shouldn't. Courts don't declare mistrials to punish lawyers. They declare mistrials to protect the right to a fair trial.

And although I agree this was, the prosecutor was not at fault in the witness blurting out this information, the effect on the fair trial was still substantial.

And Woodbury and Lebranche are two cases I can point to where there's no evidence that the lawyer was at fault, but this court still held that the trial court erred and not declared.

What should we think about the fact that apparently pre-trial when there was a motion made on this issue?

The judge made some comment, apparently, I assume from that that the judge had seen the victim before as a witness or something.

The judge made some comment about this victim or this witness is likely to be hard to control.

And so I guess what I'm wondering there is, you know, is this a situation where, I know you characterize it as sort of she deliberately blurted this out,

but is this a situation where, you know, the witness is sort of one of those kinds of people that kind of can't keep their mouth shut and it's not.

And so in terms of attributing, attributing fault, it's, you know, it's not the kind of, it doesn't portray itself as sort of a really deliberate,

this is just somebody that, you know, sort of habitually talks too much.

No, I would disagree with that characterization. It's clear that the witness was formed by the prosecutor, not to mention the baby's death.

And the witness did it, not once, but twice.

Both in situations where the witness was posed a yes or no question that in no way called for the information about her baby's death.

The second reference, though, was the hospitalization, right, due to concerns over the baby, not baby's death,

but concerns over the baby. So if that testimony was okay that she went to the hospital with concerns over the health of the baby,

isn't the issue already there, already before the jury?

You're talking about the second time she disclosed that her baby, it wasn't about the hospitalization.

It was about a post, an online post that she had posted three weeks after the baby was born where she was looking for housing.

And the dispute was, the question was, was she, did she need to move out of her mother's apartment because of Section 8 or because her mother didn't want her there?

Right, wasn't there testimony that she was in the hospital and she feared for the baby's health and that fear lasted till the baby died?

That testimony came in.

Right, well that was the first reference and that was the prosecutor questioning her and she had testified that she felt these negative emotions after Gray dropped her off at Logan Airport

and the prosecutor said, did those feelings stay with you for a while?

Right, yes or no question.

At most called for a time frame.

It didn't call for the disclosure of this information about her.

I mean, I agree with you.

I don't get me wrong, I agree with you.

But isn't it, I mean, this is a little bit different, is it not as I think the trial court sort of recognized here?

This is a little bit, this answer was not sort of completely, you know, out in left field.

I mean, she was talking about, you can understand that why the death of her child would be something that would have an effect on her emotion.

It's not as if she said, you know, she answered the question and then said, you know, and I'm going to Italy next week or something that was just completely out, you know, out in left field.

Well, she had been told unequivocally not to mention this.

So she felt that something in trial made it appropriate to mention it.

She should have asked somebody, she should have talked to somebody.

And I would say it's not dissimilar to the situation in Brussels where the defendant was asked about the behaviors of his son six months before the alleged assault.

And he came out with this information, this allegation that the son was using marijuana.

Well, that's, you know, could be loosely tied to the question.

But the court still held that it was improper and that it justified him.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Ms. Woodcock.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Elizabeth Woodcock for the state of New Hampshire.

Referring to this first issue, the trial court instructed the jury.

And since juries are presumed to follow instructions, then there was no basis to grant a mistrial because the woman mentioned her dead baby.

But isn't that, wouldn't that always be the trump card then?

So that would just end our inquiry under all circumstances if there was a limiting instruction or a curative instruction?

Well, I think that the court can always consider whether the curative instruction could have cured the issue.

There is always that level.

But this doesn't rise to that level.

It's not a situation in which it affects the outcome of the trial or the fairness of the trial.

And I think that in this particular case where the court actually took the extra step of saying, can you all abide by this?

And all of the jurors said, yes, we can abide by this instruction. We'll follow it.

That should be enough.

In the situation of the father who blurts out that his son is smoking marijuana, that goes directly to one of the major issues in the case.

In this case, it doesn't.

Is that distinction because here the complainant isn't really the party in interest, the state is?

Is there a distinction there?

There is a distinction there in the way that the cases proceed.

And I'm not sure that if the victim had been on the stand and said, and it was because of all this that my baby died,

that that would be, then I'm not so sure that the difference would be one that you could really cut very clearly, Your Honor.

Can I just ask you, the jury convicted, am I correct on one of the AFSA?

That's correct.

Is there any basis in the evidence?

I mean, can you tell us, is there some basis in the evidence that we can say, you know, this is why they could have done this?

Because I guess what I'm wondering is to the extent that the way this was presented to the jury, this was sort of an all or nothing case.

Then when they come back with just one guilty, I mean, it does somewhat support what your opponent is saying, that this was really a compromise verdict,

and then you have to kind of, that may add some fuel to the idea that they really were affected by the evidence of the baby's death.

I can't say that for certain, Your Honor. I'm trying to think that the court dismissed a number of the charges.

I think that they were left with, originally it was nine, and I think that they were left with six.

So I'm not certain, I would love to tell you that I can remember exactly which ones they acquitted him on.

But I'm not so sure that looking at this and saying, well, this is obviously a compromise verdict.

I mean, I think that a lot of verdicts probably are compromises, and there really isn't anything wrong with that.

I think that what the victim had said had happened, and then you combine that with the defendant's testimony, which I frankly do not think helped him.

He made himself sound like he was Sir Gala had, bringing this woman up to New Hampshire and giving her a safe place to live and everything else,

and then he says, oh, and then we had consensual sex, and then I said, yeah, it isn't working out, go home.

Well, that probably when the jury listened to all that, they probably thought to themselves, well, he doesn't seem like a very,

he doesn't seem as if he's being very forthcoming, it looks to us as if something more happened.

I'd like to turn to the second issue, a plain error.

Do you agree that the court aired in letting that argument go forward?

I'm not so sure if I had been the trial judge sitting on the bench that I would have noticed it, because the argument was fairly long.

If there had been an objection, the court would have committed error.

To find plain error, we would have to say in effect that the court should have suesponte interrupted the closing argument.

Courts generally don't do that. They try to let the lawyers argue as they will.

If there had been an objection, it's absolutely clear that this was improper argument.

I mean, there's nothing that this court has ever said that would give a prosecutor the idea to say, oh, put yourself in her position,

and that that would be appropriate. It's never been appropriate.

I see my red light is on. I'd ask that the case be submitted if there are no further questions.

Thank you.
