This is case 2013, 0031, state of New Hampshire versus Ronald Borden.

Morning, May it please the court? My name is David Rothstein. I represent Ronald Borden.

The brief raises two issues. I plan to focus on the second issue, which concerns the criminal restraint issue.

Criminal restraint statute requires that the defendant actually confine the victim.

The issue is whether the defendant's threat here actually confined S.D.

And the threat was the only way you leave here is with a knife in your chest.

Correct. There's clear evidence that there was a threat.

There is also clear evidence that there was a stabbing that followed the threat.

Not every threat affects confinement.

In order for a verbal threat to affect confinement, the target has to hear it, has to process it, has to understand it.

And the threat, in order to affect confinement, the threat is constructive force under this statute.

So the threat has to restrain the victim to a degree and in a manner tantamount to that in a restraint achieved by force or by physical confinement.

For example, in Sapusa, the court found that restraint was achieved by virtue of showing of a gun and tight quarters on a stew.

So that's the confinement that the threat has to effectuate.

The relevant facts in the record here in two places are very brief.

I think both sides agree that these are the two relevant parts of the record.

S.D.'s testimony about these advances at pages 93 to 95.

D.F.'s testimony is pages 223 to 225.

Their accounts were similar.

Each account alleged the threat.

Each account alleged that after the threat, that burden got a knife in it.

He stabbed S.D.'s.

Each account also alleged that all of these acts occurred extremely quickly.

Is there a minimum temporal requirement?

There is not a minimum temporal requirement, but there is a requirement that the threat effectuate a confinement.

These facts are fairly...

So there's a geography involved here from your standpoint.

There was a geography involved in Sapusa.

The geography here, as I understand it, is you've got...

If the bench is a kitchen counter where the knife was located,

the table here is a table where people were sitting and having a normal discussion that kind of escalated over time

into some threats that weren't taken very seriously initially.

And then the threat, you know, no one's leaving here because it's without a knife in their chest or whatever.

And then a very quick getting of the knife and an action.

Here, if anything, the stabbing resulted from sheer surprise.

One moment, this is an old man who's just kind of blowing smoke.

I'm going to call the cops. I'm going to punch you.

The next moment, he gets a knife and stabs someone.

So it more results from the fact that having no idea that such a thing would happen than confinement.

As I understand it, they're sitting at the kitchen table.

There's a door behind there.

So when we analyze this, we've got to think about what is going through the mind of the victim.

Is that what you're saying?

That they weren't taking him seriously under all the circumstances.

So they weren't...

That their perception of this threat didn't, under all the circumstances, lead them to believe it.

Until he actually did the stabbing.

Well, it's not a matter of... believing the threat is potentially part of it,

but you have to look at these facts.

You look at these facts, criminal threatening check, attempted murder, first degree assault check.

That doesn't prove that there's an actual confinement that occurs as an intermediate step.

I mean, you have to find...

The statute says that the defendant knowingly confined the victim under circumstances,

causing an exposure to a risk of serious bodily injury.

If, as a practical matter, there's a threat and a stabbing,

but it doesn't... you can't find an actual confinement.

You have to speculate about, well, maybe they felt like they were confined,

and I suppose you could speculate and look into someone's mind and say,

geez, a person might feel...

Okay, so you're not making that argument.

It's not particularly relevant.

About how they felt?

Yes.

Particularly, as I understand the statute, it derives from a confinement,

a hemming in, a constraining as defined in Gibbs,

and I think both sides quote the definition,

under circumstances that exposes to the risk of serious bodily injury.

Here, you definitely had a threat

and you definitely had more than a risk of serious bodily injury.

You had a very terrible life-threatening injury.

There's no question about it,

but that doesn't mean that there was a confinement.

The court can look at these facts,

and then the light most favorable to the state

without speculating about how someone may have felt,

find actual confinement, then it should uphold the conviction,

but I would submit that the record lacks proof of an actual confinement,

which the statute requires.

It doesn't require possible confinement

or creating a risk that someone might have felt that they were confined.

It's knowingly confined.

And it just, on these facts,

given partly a geographical layout,

partly the manner in which the sequence of events unfolded,

and maybe partly that the initial threats weren't taken particularly seriously

and this kind of reached a flash point very quickly,

you just don't have the crime of criminal restraint.

Presumably, all those arguments were made to the jury?

I presume that those arguments were made to the jury,

but this court has an important obligation here,

in a case like this, to look at the facts

and the light most favorable to the state,

look at what the statute requires,

and to, we would submit reverse

because this record does not support a conviction for criminal restraint.

Thank you. Thank you.

May it please the court, Nicholas Court, for the state?

I'll take questions anytime.

Like defense, I will stand on my brief on the double jeopardy issue

and focus on the sufficiency issue.

The evidence, and the best evidence is actually on page 228

of the transcript, the testimony of DF,

it would have allowed the jury to find that SD

could have run out of the house with his brother,

unless he was confined,

either by the defendant's threat or the actual attack

or the combination of the two.

The brother's testimony, DF's testimony,

was that the defendant was holding the victim's shoulder

with the right hand and trying to stab him with the left.

And what was the relationship between that act and the threat?

That was after the threat.

After the threat?

He said, you're not leaving here without a knife in your chest,

and then he ran at SD.

It was not clear from the testimony

just which of the attempts to stab SD was successful.

Obviously one of them was,

but DF said he was trying several times

to do this and that SD was trying to stop him.

We would submit that in any case,

he was holding him tightly enough

that when he did try to run away,

his shirt was ripped and they both,

the victim and the defendant, fell to the ground.

That was sufficient to show confinement.

So you're arguing on the physical contact between them

rather than the words from a distance?

I'm relying on the combination of the two.

I think the jury could have found that the threat was sufficient,

that that was the reason why SD didn't run away

because he heard the threat.

And it was also, I mean, DF said he was too close

to run away and get away clean.

So as I said in my brief,

the implication was that he felt it would be safer

to stay there and try to hold off the defendant

rather than to turn his back and run away

in any case he got stabbed.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Make one point, Your Honor.

The indictment does not allege a physical confinement.

It alleges a confinement by threat

and that's what the jury would have to find it.

If the indictment alleged that he was confined by force,

I can see we have a different case.

That's not what the indictment alleged.

Thank you, Counselor.

Case submitted.

Yes.
