Thank you, Chief Justice Delanus, and may it please the court. My name is David Frederick,

and I'll represent the state with respect to the issues that Exxon has raised on appeal,

and then Allen Brooks will address the issues of the trust. And we divided our time 50 minutes

for me and 10 minutes for Mr. Brooks. I'll be happy to answer your questions at any time.

On Exxon's issue, the judgment should be affirmed in all respects. In its appeal to

this court, Exxon basically no longer contests that it knew of the risks of MTBE before it marketed

and sold MTBE gasoline in the state, that it knew that MTBE would migrate further than other

gasoline components because of its special chemical properties. It knew that cleaning up MTBE

contamination incidents would cost as much as three times more than cleaning up normal

contamination from incidents from gasoline spills. And it hid those risks from state officials

and other distributors and storage facilities with whom it did business. Even though its internal

assessments were that from an environmental risk point of view, quote, MTBE should not be considered

additive to Exxon gasoline on a blanket basis throughout the United States. We quote that in

a red brief at page five. And yet Exxon expanded its production of MTBE gasoline even though it knew

that leaks occurred frequently at gasoline storage tanks. This is a leaky industry. Everybody knows

that it's a leaky industry, and they accommodate the fact that there will be leaks in and

releases in storage tanks. And they account for that. And the evidence showed that Exxon knew in

the early 80s that as many as 25% of its own tanks leaked to the ones that it had control over

and 30-some percent of tanks with which it did business leaked. So it was no secret in the

industry that leaks are going to happen. And yet the evidence showed that Exxon didn't tell

anybody that MTBE gasoline had special chemical properties that were going to create special

problems. Now trial, the state proved that MTBE gasoline was fungible among gasoline suppliers.

Different suppliers bought and sold gas and marketed under their own brands. And from the

terminal, it's important to kind of get the full terminal space. So terminals would operate

and they would receive from the refiners gas through a pipeline that they all shared.

The colonial pipeline that came up from Texas went to New Jersey. All of the refiners would put

their MTBE gas in this pipeline. So it became commingled there. When it arrived at the terminal

in New Jersey, it would all be put in these huge storage tankers. And it would all get mixed

up, whether it's BP gas or Shell gas or Exxon gas. And it would then get taken out and put into

tanker trucks or barges and brought up here to New Hampshire. And it would come to different

terminal facilities in Boston or Portsmouth or Portland, Maine for ultimate shipment to New

Hampshire. And then it would get mixed in again. With all of that being said,

why should this court adopt what I think Mr. Clement would say a bird's eye view of

tort liability? Well, the problem, it's not a bird's eye view of tort liability at all.

In fact, if you would think about the problem from a different perspective,

suppose this were 100 years ago and we were in the days of standard oil and it was basically an

oil monopoly, there's no question I think in anybody's mind that if there was an MTBE problem

that one oil company caused, you can meet all the elements of tort. You know exactly who

introduced the problem. You know what their negligence is. You know how to do causation

traceability. But you say that because of all of this co-mingling and fungibility,

there's no way on earth to do that. And therefore the market share standard is the only one that

could be used. That's correct. And what the jury found, and let's keep our focus on what the

jury found. The jury found that it wasn't traceable, that any MTBE molecule was not

traceable back, not just to the refiner where Exxon wants to try to limit its liability,

but even to the supplier chain. And that's because every gas station in New Hampshire had Exxon gas in

it at one time or another. And every storage tank presumably also had Exxon gas. Is this in the

record? Yes. Mr. Burke testified to that effect. And he testified further that the MTBE gasoline

was not only in the reformulated gas counties, the four counties that the EPA had suggested needed

to have an oxygenate requirement, but also all the non-RFG counties as well. And so

if you look at a map, there are MTBE contaminated sites all throughout the state.

But the evidence was that you could trace into local areas. But once MTBE got in the ground,

it had no trace element to that particular chemical which made it impossible to trace.

That's correct. But you could trace it into various locations.

No, you couldn't even do that by supplier, Judge Vaughn, because if you take a gas station on the

corner, it's going to have gas and sell it over a period of time from any number of different

refiner sources. But if they all get mixed up, you don't know when the leak occurs.

That's part of the problem that we're dealing with here. So you don't know which gas from

which supplier is leaking in ground at a particular time. Well, you do know.

Mr. Frederick, even if all of that's true, it strikes me that Mr. Clement has laid

a few landmines in this case. How would you guide us safely through them?

Well, let me start with this. That what the judge was doing at the directed verdict stage was he

was rejecting Exxon's argument that there was no evidence by which Exxon could be found to

have been a substantial factor in the MTBE contamination. And so the question then for

the jury where it had all this evidence of impossible to trace, commingling, fungibility,

was how do you identify the link between general causation, which is that MTBE contamination

was the state's harm, and specific causation where you can say, aha, this site is caused by Exxon.

And that the evidence showed was impossible. And so a straightforward application of this

court's trial decision would lead inexorably to the conclusion that where the state can prove

fungibility, commingling, impossibility to trace, and Exxon's gas being everywhere,

is it reasonable to suppose that the law would allow a limitation on Exxon's liability

to the level of its market share and that that would be a fair way as opposed to joint

and several liability for the whole. That's correct. Now, would you answer for me the question of

whether the so-called de Benedetto rights were preserved or not? Yes, I'd be happy to address

that. The court below addressed the de Benedetto issue in at least four different rulings because

Exxon would repeatedly raise the issue. And so the judge handled it in a number of different

ways. And what they really like to focus on is the last pretrial ruling without focusing on what

Judge Fauver did at trial. And let me illustrate for you what a big gap that was. Because at trial,

their key de Benedetto witness was a man named Mr. Kleiber. And Mr. Kleiber, he was allowed to

testify that there were more than a thousand potential non-parties. He was allowed to

testify that they had the care custody control over the sites. He was allowed to testify

about different categories of representative non-parties. And they all agreed that these are

tanks without whole tanks with whole service stations above ground releases junkyards. He

testified about all of those. He was allowed to testify about the tankers that were at fault.

He was allowed to testify about specific releases at specific sites. He was allowed to

testify that above ground releases would be identified by 40 parties. What he couldn't do,

what he had no information about was to say whether a single one of those knew anything

about the special risks associated with handling MTBE gasoline. And so the problem I think for the

judge was confronted with the fact that this is a leaky industry and Exxon knew it and yet

failed to give any special instruction or any other non-negligent behavior contact with

respect to these so-called non-parties, were they at fault? And the instruction that was given to

the jury went to the question of whether the jury could find that these other entities were at fault.

I assume it was part of the closing argument that they were at, in fact, at fault.

Indeed. In fact, the argument made today was repeated in large measure in the closing

argument. But they had no evidence because they couldn't show a link between the additional

spillage of or mishandling and MTBE. And that's the crucial link here. It's the special qualities

of the MTBE gasoline that Exxon did not disclose. And why do you say it was not

error to give a waiver instruction? The waiver instruction, and let me handle that by addressing

directly what instruction was given. Because the instruction that was given, and this is at

the addendum on page 1388, it was very expansive and broad. And what it said was misconduct was

defined as including voluntarily proceeding to encounter a known danger and failing to mitigate

damages, including the state voluntarily opting into the RFG program instead of pursuing

other options knowing all about MTBE. And so that instruction very broadly framed covered

not only the 1991 problem, Judge Juan, that you mentioned in your colloquy, but also the 2004

issue that Mr. Clement raises as somehow the state not mitigating its damages. The jury had

before it a generally worded instruction and the evidence that Exxon was not foreclosed from

advancing its various theories that it repeats here. And the jury rejected them. The judge in his

final pretrial said he rejected the argument for a new waiver instruction because it says basically

it's encompassed within the misconduct instruction. And I think if you go back to look at the

wording of it, you'll see that it fairly encompasses. I'm trying to race to the

finish here, and I apologize if I've cut you off, but how does a duty to warn a sovereign

rather arise? Well, the duty to warn is a general claim. And let's just start with basic

principles. We're, excuse me, I'm losing my voice as you can hear. I am too. We're an

industry operator has a duty of due care. That duty arises to everybody. And I think it's

well settled in the restatement section two that that failure to warn a duty to warn applies

to the end entity that would be in the best position to undertake prophylactic measures to

prevent the harm from arising. Here, what the evidence showed was that when the state entered

into the MTB into the RFG program, it didn't even know that MTB was going to be the gasoline

additive. That was not information that it assumed was up to the manufacturer to decide

a voluntary choice. And of course, Commissioner Varney testified that had he known about these

problems and specifically he was shocked to learn that in 1984, Ms. Mickelson had written

a memo explaining why MTB gasoline should not be done on a blanket basis and specifically

highlighted the kinds of geological features that are present here in New Hampshire. We're

talking about fractured red rock and shallow aquifers where MTB gasoline is going to spread

much farther, much faster, and more comprehensively. And so the question I think if you step back

from it and look at it through normal torque principles, I think you would view it from

a couple of different lenses. One is where the evidence showed that Exxon did not warn

anyone. The question is what does the failure to warn the sovereign add to the equation?

I would submit the answer is nothing because the court also concluded below that the

state is also an end user in a limited degree.

So the argument would be it's consumed in the user portion of the need to warn.

That's correct. The whole concept behind torque law is to ensure that responsible people act

reasonably and responsibly. And so the state was in the best position to be able to prevent

the harm from happening because had the state decided not to enter the RFG program,

this problem wouldn't have happened. Do you agree that Prince Patre is a standing doctrine

or is it more than that? I do agree it's a standing doctrine but before I leave the

failure to warn the sovereign, can I just point out if you don't agree with us

for some reason, they have not addressed or foreclosed the other two bases on which

liability was determined here, design defect and negligence. And so you could

disagree with the state argument about failure to warn the sovereign and still

uphold the verdict as an independent basis. Now on Parents' Factory I'll let me address that.

The question is whether or not the evidence was sufficient for standing. Now standing is

classically a question for the court to decide. And the courts can decide that on the basis

of evidence that's induced at trial just as surely as they can do it on the papers and

preliminary submissions. What I think Exxon has sought to do with your decisions is to take

one snippet in one part of the opinion and a different snippet in a different part of the

opinion and sort of knit them together five pages apart. It's sort of a leap across the Grand Canyon

of judicial reasoning. Isn't that what good lawyers are supposed to do? Well, and my friend

is a good lawyer. But I don't respectfully think that that's the right way to view the

standing question here because the evidence amply demonstrated that there was contamination

throughout the state. And I think if you're just looking at this on a basis of a record

you can look at Dr. Fogg's testimony, Mr. Burke's testimony, and you could conclude that this was

a statewide problem. Moreover, because of the state's decision in entering into the RFG program was

a statewide decision, you can conclude that there was a statewide problem that had to be

addressed. But initially it went in for the four lower counties. That was the general, the

original Governor Greg Request was a lower four county, I think. That's correct. But what the

evidence showed in Mr. Burke testified to this was that every gas station in New Hampshire

ended up having MTBE gasoline in it. And even the counties that had what's so called conventional

gas simply had about half the amount of MTBE additive, not the same amount as the reformulated

gas program. So from a question of standing, Your Honor, I don't think that there's any

doubt that if you looked at this record de novo, you would conclude that the state had standing

on the basis of all of the evidence that showed every county in the state being affected by the

MTBE contamination problem. So then the question becomes, was it really necessary for it to be

a jury question where classically standing is a mixed question of law and fact decide

within the entrusted to judges who are basically doing subject matter jurisdiction

determinations. And I would submit that as dramatic as my friend has emphasized you're

making new law, that would actually be quite a dramatic change from normal practice of

determining standing by courts rather than having juries decide fact questions that

underlying standing questions. So I think that if you look at it from those perspectives

that the fact that the judge did not put the facts underlying standing to the jury is

really not a correct statement of the law. Now, I would like to turn to the preemption

question momentarily. And I would note that in their reply brief, they basically abandoned

every theory of preemption other than obstacle preemption, which is the theory that state

law somehow creating an obstacle to the accomplishment of the federal purpose. It's

by far the weakest form of preemption that there is. And it's only been found

in one case, the Geyer case by the US Supreme Court in like circumstances, which was

significantly cut back in the Williamson case decided about 10 or 12 years later.

But the basic core of it is the question of whether or not there was any obstacle created.

And here the courts are uniform. It's a phalanx of judicial decisions that say states can ban

MTBE without creating a preemption problem. So it I think stands to reason that the lesser

offense of having a negligence theory or design defect theory or failure to warrant theory is

subsumed within the state's ability and power to ban without running a foul of the supremacy

clause. I haven't read all of those cases yet. So could you explain to me the rationale

for that? Yes, the Second Circuit leading case on this point. There's also a Ninth Circuit case

involving California's ban. But the rationale is that the RFG program never mandated MTBE.

It always gave manufacturers a choice. Well, yes, but Mr. Clement

argues fairly persuasively that there really wasn't any choice because ethanol just

couldn't be done up here. And the evidence on that was quite comprehensive and rejected at trial.

There was evidence that a TOSCO witness testified that there were circumstances where it sold MTBE,

sorry, it sold gasoline with ethanol in New Hampshire. Getty testified to the same.

Mr. Burke testified that ethanol was available. And the business decision, Judge Von,

that you highlighted was formulated in the 1980s. Why? Because Exxon produced MTBE. It was a byproduct

of its other refining activity. It didn't produce ethanol. And so it viewed this as a profit

opportunity. If we use MTBE, we can kill tuppers with one stone and make a lot of money to boot.

And that's what they did. They used their Baytown refinery to take the MTBE product and then

put it into their gasoline as the additive when Chief Justice Delaney, they didn't have to do that.

They had a choice and other manufacturers were deciding to use ethanol instead. And the evidence

was clear on that point. So the jury decided this feasibility question or did Judge Fauver?

Judge Fauver decided that it was not put to the jury in that form, although part of the

design defect instruction was whether or not the jury could take into account the factor

of whether a safer alternative existed. And so one way to interpret the jury verdict on the design

defect claim was that the jury concluded that ethanol was a safer alternative. But that point

had already been decisively concluded against, adjudicated against Exxon in multiple cases,

including the Second Circuit case on which Judge Fauver relied. And I think Judge Fauver,

you know, by this point had done just herculean efforts to adjudicate this case and relied on

the Second Circuit decision on preemption. And I think quite properly so. And there was no basis

on the evidence to conclude that that was factually an incorrect way to view the

weight of the evidence. Now, I would further point out that the instruction that they had

asked for on preemption misstated the law. And it's Bedrock law that if you don't

accurately state the instruction and state the law, you're not entitled to the instruction.

And what they had, what is correctly done below was to reject the instructions about

considering the costs associated with rejecting MTB. That's not the standard for determining

preemption. And the idea that introducing the concept of imposing significant delays and

increase costs on federal programs creating conflict preemption does not accurately state the law.

So what they've done is changed their argument now in this court, but what they did below was not

to ask for the correct instruction. And so it was properly rejected for that reason as well.

And I think you can very well hold that their question of preemption in terms of what should

have gone to the jury was properly rejected and not properly preserved in this court. Now,

I've addressed the failure to warn theory and if I could just say a few more points about

market share liability. The theory of liability that once untraceability is found, your

Judge Fawver recognized implicitly that it was a choice between giving X on a complete pass,

no liability because if you can't trace you can't identify specific causation and that's game over.

And the state recognized that. And so when the question went to the jury and there was a

specific instruction about traceability that the jury found it was not traceable to the

manufacturer or the supplier and said that it was not. Then the question is what do you do about that?

And what the judge did here was to take the troll case and to use it as a means of shifting the

burden of proof so that effects on could prove that it was not responsible for a

particular site and there were 1500 sites that were specifically litigated in the case below.

Then that would be in their favor. Exxon could not do that. And the reason it couldn't do that is

because it could never show that it had told anybody about the specific problems associated

with MTB gasoline and handling. And so all of these specific sites, all the thousands of people,

the responsible parties that it wants to tell had no knowledge that they were supposed to

do something different with this MTB gasoline. And so I think the conundrum that you are

faced with is are you going to allow the company to be exonerated completely or do you view the cap

on their liability at their market share as a reasonable accommodation, not to causation

because causation was shown, but to identifying the tort freezer. And as we go back to my

analogy to standard oil, if standard oil had been the one to introduce the MTB gasoline and it was

the only supplier of gas, we would know who the wrongdoer was. Here the only reason we can't

identify the wrongdoer is because of testimony that Mr. Burke gave that MTB does not have a

chemical traceability. There's no chemical footprint for that chemical. And so we do

believe this is an appropriate case in which to handle. And if you look at the jury

instructions, I think Justice Six, you're quite right that you can read the jury instructions

as kind of a normal tort case, although wrapped up in quite a large and significant matter for

the state. If I could go to the statewide basis issue that has been raised here,

there are a couple of problems with the way that Exxon has framed its challenge to the

trial court ruling here. One is they have sort of overlooked how this came into this

court and in this issue. They first challenged the statewide evidence that was introduced

through Dr. Fogg on Dobbert grounds. They've abandoned that. They then have argued that

it's somehow not relevant evidence. And relevance, I think we can all agree, is

about as low a standard as you can get in the law in terms of what is appropriate. And given

the fact that they're now having to overcome what is a very low threshold for determining

relevance for statewide, I think that they simply can't meet the burden there. So if you

look at it in terms of procedural posture, that issue should not detain you for very long.

If you look at it from the perspective of the untraceability and the difficulty of proving

the identity of the specific tort fissure with respect to a specific site,

the evidence made it clear that there was really no other way but to proceed on a statewide basis.

Once the fulcrum of the problem was the state's agreement to enter into the RFG program

from which the original sin of MTBE sprung. Now, if I could go now to the dip,

there are a couple of other day Benedetto questions that my friend raised that I want to address.

And one is this question about how 146A applies. That statute is a without regard to fault statute.

So their basic ask here was that the court should be instructed to have the jury allocate

to these other entities that didn't know anything about MTBE whether or not they should bear the

responsibility for the handling of the gas even though they didn't know that there was anything

different that they should be doing with it. And I think Judge Farver quite rightly rejected

that because if you go back to the original Benedetto case itself, that was a case that

applied for 5077. And that is a fault statute where you are going to have fault that is

going to be shown. You have to allocate it where the defendant stands in the shoes of the plaintiff.

Now, there is a big point about whether or not that meant that Exxon had to prove all the same

elements that the state did. Well, that is not how it was instructed. It was instructed basically

as a fault-based regime where negligence, the most basic form of negligence instruction

was given to the jury. Could it find that there had been negligence on the part of these

non-parties, the thousands that they were allowed to put into evidence as to four categories that

everybody agreed those are the correct categories of potential non-parties. And so, I think that

it sounds good rhetorically to say that somehow these non-parties were cloaked from the jury,

but that is not really what happened. If you look at the basic standard form of warnings

and negligence, the jury was basically asked a pretty simple question, were these folks at

fault too? And the jury said no. And that jury finding is entitled, I think, to the utmost respect

in light of the evidence and their own witness's failure to show what the fault lack of fault on

the basis of the other parties. Now, let me talk first just a second about the future damages

issue because that was highlighted here in a way that was not raised in the-

Before you do, was there any effort made to reduce the number to present value?

The number of future damages?

I- Actually, I don't- Standing here today, I don't know whether it was done is-

I think it was net present value dollars, if that's what you're asking.

That's basically what I'm asking.

Yeah. What happened, though, was that we were dealing with extrapolations of known

contamination sites. And I think the law is clear that if there is a present harm,

you can project into the future what compensation needs to arise from that.

There certainly was no real argument that Exxon's been making about the cleanup costs for past

contaminated sites. Those are real dollars involving real sites,

litigated hammer and tongs over every single site that we're talking about.

And so the real question is, does Exxon get to be relieved of its responsibility for the

future harm? Simply because those are done based on reasonable extrapolations with expert

evidence on the basis of known contamination sites and what the reasonable prospects are

going to be. And with respect to the, we don't know that their wells are going to be dug

there. Those are all based on reasonable extrapolations based on projections that are,

I think, routinely accepted in cases where you have an expert say there's a high

probability that this is going to happen. Here are the projections and the basis of

my testimony. They're not challenging that on Dobbert grounds here. And so to that extent,

it's been waived. And presumably there were experts on both sides of the problem arguing

with each other. That's correct. And these were jury questions that ultimately got resolved

against Exxon. And so I think ultimately, if you view this from the perspective of

are these classical problems that arise in cases, I don't think that that should detain you for

very long because what we were dealing with was a problem that is going to be in the ground in

New Hampshire for 30 to 50 years. And the question of whether we accept Exxon's invitation

to be litigating this issue well by well for the next century is one respectfully the state

asks you to reject because we were able to prove that this is a problem that requires

monitoring. It is going to require cleanup. There is an absolute certainty to that the

questions about where that's done was all based on what the contamination level was that was

set by this court and by the state. And so the damages were not for the amounts below

the contamination levels. And so there was a scrupulous adherence to this course instructions

in the case as it had gone back down. There was a question in a manner that arose about how this

was done over a 17 year period. But even as to the market share liability, our expert Ms. Hastings

was able to identify every single gallon of MTBE gasoline sold over the period because the

records have been kept in a way that allowed that to happen. So there was really no challenge

that 28.94% is the proper number for Exxon's market share because the calculation had been

done in a way that was recorded properly. Exxon's position in their briefs is their number should

have been 6 to 9%, I think, 6% I think, maybe 6.9 as opposed to 28.94. How do you square that?

So what Exxon did, what they want to do to reduce their liabilities is to say we were

at most only responsible for the amount that we refined. What they did though was they bought

other refiner's gas and they sold it under the Exxon brand and that's how they got to the 29%

because this was maybe BP had refined it, Exxon bought it. Remember this is all fungible gas

and they sold it under the Exxon brand knowing that it contained MTBE and that MTBE

has a contamination problem and issue associated with it and didn't warn people about that and I

think the jury quite rightly was instructed and concluded that where Exxon had the knowledge,

it had the information, it had the capability to act in a responsible, reasonable way and did

not do so, it should be as culpable for the amount that it supplied as the amount that it

refined because it could never show that somehow because it had refined a lesser amount even

though it sold other refiner's MTBE gasoline that that somehow should give it a pass for the

23%. Well it's clear that the jury had both of those numbers and had both testimony and argument

on that issue. That's right and Judge Vaughn the jury was specifically argued too about the

difference between refiner liability and supplier liability. That's a classic jury question

and I think the evidence showed that because of its special knowledge from its refining

capability Exxon knew that MTBE gas had a special special problem that needed to be addressed.

Now let me just say one thing about the first amendment argument that has been advanced here

and this is sort of tied into the failure to warn the sovereign. Was that ruled upon by the

trial judge? It was not. It was completely waived below and it's a new creative concoction

by Exxon in this court so you can conclude that it is waived under state law and that

will be the end of that matter. But I would further point out that under their theory every

time a state court decides a failure to warn case their state action that is coming to criticism

in some fashion of what a company's commercial speech is. It can't be the rule that failure

to warn cases which have existed probably in this state for 100 years if not more have been

violating the constitution free speech clause every time a court has rendered a failure

to warn verdict against a company. That can't be the law and that's the fulcrum of their argument

that is somehow this is different because the state is acting through the attorney general

through a state court that that somehow super sizes the first amendment challenge. I don't think

that that really passes muster. The due process claim not mentioned today also was waived

and so the really the only questions there are a number of questions and that have been

waived and we've highlighted them in our brief and I'm happy to address any of them as you like.

I believe I've covered all of the points that I wanted to cover if there are any other

questions I'm happy to do so. I thank the court for its attention and Mr.

Brook now will address the trust issue. May it please the court. My name is Allen Brooks

and I will address the trust issue. We are here in the trust issue because after four months of

trial Judge Fawver recognized what we had known for a long time and that is MTV is a significant

problem in New Hampshire and it needs to be cleaned up. But a trust is not the answer and a trust

is not the answer for two reasons. First Exxon should not be involved in any way in requesting

a trust in the formation of a trust and certainly not in the administration of a trust.

For a decade Exxon did its best to make sure that the people of New Hampshire got nothing.

To this day they will say MTV is not a problem. Other cases where they have been given the

ability to participate in some kind of trust or payment program it has resulted in what

other courts have called a judicial trainer. That is what we need first and foremost in

this case if nothing else to avoid here. People of New Hampshire are not served by having the wrong

doer have control over the money and that is a very unusual situation.

Did Judge Fawver order that?

Judge Fawver as he has done throughout the case I think carefully listened to both sides and

originally he issued an order and then was a little bit more circumspect after he very

respectfully listened to both arguments. What he has actually done at this point is merely say

well Exxon can submit and there is a subsequent order on this. Exxon can submit a plan for how a

trust should be administered and they can submit some reasons why they may have an interest.

So the doors only open a crack but with that crack Exxon has kicked the door down.

If you look at page 12 of their brief even with the court's rulings that are again

circumspect Exxon says it meaning Exxon has an interest in obtaining a trust that

would effectively limit the state's recovery that's what they want to do they want to limit

the state's recovery and even allowing them just to suggest what the formation of a trust should

look like has allowed them to argue this point and they will continue to argue it even if the

judge says well you don't have standing we anticipate they will say well we must have

something because you allowed us to participate. But Exxon says that the state has entered

into other settlement agreements with other parties involved in this problem that require

those funds to be used for MTBE remediation and claims that what it's looking for is nothing

different from that. That's correct we have entered into those agreements that restrict

the use of MTBE funds. How do those agreements actually work? I mean that money has been

paid on the cases that settled I assume. Yes. And there's some reference to some portion of those

funds have already been allocated 81 million dollars I think under some current appropriation

towards remediation. So how do those funds stay segregated from the general fund that otherwise

under 611 they would go in? How do you do that? Well right now under the way the

settlements were structured and again to answer the Chief Justice's question. I'm sorry my

apologies Chief Justice. But they're both wrapped into one another so I think we can address them

at the same time. The first is that we could do it because as the executive branch as the

Attorney General we have the authority to reach settlements and so we respected the

General Court's authority to do what it needs to do. We don't have the ability to

take jury verdicts and redirect them but the way that the mechanism actually works is

the money came into a different account did not come into the general fund. It ended up

being 90 million dollars or so after you take away attorney's fees and you take away the

costs which were about 10 million dollars by the way that Exxon has already caused us

to incur in this case I assume a lot more if this is allowed to go forward. So you end

up with 90. An administrative cost was taken off the 90. 81 million dollars was left to use for

MTBE cleanup in a separate account. And was this with the legislature's approval or not?

Fiscal committee has allowed the 81 million dollars to be essentially budgeted for the

or accepted by the Department of Justice and then has allowed the Department of Justice

in the last biennium to give 22 million dollars to DES with the understanding that we will

continue to do so in future requests either to the fiscal committee or through the budget process.

So if if we were to agree with the state on this issue it would be the state's proposal to do

even though it's not a settlement to do something similar with fiscal approval

and keep the funds segregated for the purpose of remediation.

Our argument is that we could do that if it were a settlement and if Exxon came in and

settled that would be something that we could look at. All right but that presents another

problem if it's a jury verdict and it is upheld and there's this additional large sum of money

don't you think that the legislature might want to put that into the general fund?

I think in fact it will go into the general fund by statute originally. Well isn't that a

legitimate concern on the part of Exxon? They claim I don't know that this is true but

they claim that other settlement funds have been used for non-settlement purposes in the past and

that there's a fear that that could occur here. Yeah there were some argument about the tobacco

litigation funds and you know I would dispute the fact that there was anything untoward or

anything wrong with the way the state used the money that was for pass costs which the

judge recognized in this case also were a different category. There were a couple

op-ed pieces maybe from the telegraph and other sources and one statement from Senator

D'Alessandro all of which goes in a very amorphous way to say what you just said which is well might

someone think that the legislature might not clean up MTV or do it as well as they should

maybe but the thought that they might not do it. And then in the future if they were not

we all know that perennially the legislature claims that we have a revenue problem for

all sorts of reasons and this is a nice chunk of revenue and one might expect that they would

use it for purposes unrelated to this litigation. I think that's exactly what Judge

Favre was thinking and it might be what a lot of people might think who are rational people.

However it's a much bigger step for a court to say because I think the legislature a

different branch of government might use the money for something that I don't think they

should I'm going to preemptively without any request from a party actually withstanding

and without anything from the legislature that actually indicates that they're going to do it

I'm going to preemptively issue essentially an order that controls a jury's verdict that goes to

this. You find a separation of powers issue there? It does and in fact this court after

the Judge Favre actually issued both of his decisions in this case took up the taxpayer

standing case of Duncan v. State and the language that you use in there says that

no matter how high the stakes if you don't require an actual personal injury it has separation of

power significance and we would say it's the same thing here. There's no injury there's no

controversy. What if we imposed a trust and made the director of charitable trust the trustee?

Well again you would be giving the executive branch authority that the legislature didn't

already give to it and it would have the same separation of powers consequences in the same

scheme. So it's a problem either way and again in that case and I read it a few times in it

obviously Judge Favre didn't have the benefit of this case when he actually made his decisions but

you end up as a general superintendent of the legislature and you end up with the judicial

branch and I don't think doing it for any bad reason and I don't think doing it for anything

other than the best reason which is that he recognized just how dire the MTB situation is

but again the quote no matter how high the stakes that is not the job of the judge in this case

and specifically that case as vindicating the public interest is the function of the legislative

and executive branches and so that ought to be respected and again completely understand why

the judge did that but it's not something that you'd ever see it's certainly not something

that you'd see with a private litigant and an unfortunate situation indeed

where somehow the wronged and the wrongdoer are now forever wed together and will forever go

through life in some kind of companionship I mean that's it would be one thing to be wronged

by someone it's another thing to say for the end of time you will have some sort of

relationship with this party who wronged you and that's not something that you ever see

in other cases it's not something that you ever see trust being issued other than when you have

a minor or incompetent or medical monitoring cases that they've cited to other than those

you just don't see them and you don't see it in New Hampshire really there's no case law that

says that they reference a couple cases one case is Dunlap E. Daigle which is a nuisance case

there's another case where the party actually requested equitable relief so clearly it was

an equity case it's it would be highly unusual and not something that was appropriate and so we

ask you to respect that the separation of power significance that such a ruling would have

so in conclusion I ask that you find that Exxon first and foremost may have no role

whatsoever in the formation of or the administration of any trust and that's

second an additional court and post trust of any kind is neither warranted nor available

under these circumstances thank you Mr. Clement thank you your honors just a few points in

rebuttal as you've just heard it's very difficult to award damages for the cleanup of 287 wells

that don't yet exist and then expect that money to sit there and not be spent by some other

purpose the one way to address that I suppose is a trust but a more fundamental way to address

that is to recognize that those are not the kind of remedies that are produced by traditional

tort law remedies that you in a traditional tort law you don't anticipate the 287 wells that

haven't yet been dug will someday be injured you wait until there's been an actual spill

you adjudicate that spill and it's not impossible to do that now I want to go through a couple

of issues in particular and respond to a few points Mr. Frederick made first

on market share liability before you get to the jury verdict you have to look at the

ruling that judge father made in the context of the directed verdict motion because that

question should have never gone to the jury as part of the market share instruction because

he held and I'll quote again and this is at appendix page 330 if you want to look at it

quote a reasonable jury could conclude that Exxon was the proximate cause of the state's

alleged injury under a traditional causation theory end quote once he made that determination

for him to allow the state simply to elect to go to the jury with a market share liability

theory put him not just in the vanguard of tort law as the seventh state to adopt market

share liability but put them all by himself on an island because even the states that recognize

market share liability recognize that if you can prove something by traditional causation

that's the way you do it and so it's no accident that judge Shindlin in the station

six case even though she was applying New York law one of the states that's adopted market share

liability she did not apply market share liability there and sent the case there to the jury on

traditional causation now Exxon lost that case which is why I'm not arguing for a get out

of jail free card I'm not arguing that there should be no possibility of holding Exxon liable

for these spills on a product liability theory but any effort to do that would have to take

into account the reality that the the MTB gets in the ground water because of spills

Mr. Fredwick said well sometimes it's a it's it's a leaking tank and that takes place over a period

of time well even then you can identify the period of the leak and you can use the same records

that they used to get to twenty eight point nine four percent market share to determine which

producer got that gas to that station that's the way it's done in every other MTB case

but not all of them are the same some of it's it's it's a terrible spill

from the tanker to the to the to the tank or something and you know what it happened on

July 22nd I mean there's a specific date and then it's even easier but the point is these

are not insurmountable the obstacles traditional causation is up to the task now when we get

to the debended a issue a couple of interesting things Mr. Fredwick as I heard him barely

wanted to defend the trial judge is debended at a rulings he said well you gotta look at

the way that it went to the jury don't worry about those pretrial rulings that we want to

focus on the reason we want to focus on those pretrial rulings is the effect of those rulings

was we lost over two thousand of our potential debended at our parties based on those

pretrial rulings so the idea that they weren't prejudicial is simply wrong interest

you still have about two thousand left we eventually we're had had that those were cut

down further in additional rulings I think by the time we were done we had a couple

hundred still left but the point is we weren't able to present them in any way that focused

on particular sites and of course the one thing I didn't hear Mr. Fredwick say is

how we could have possibly exonerated or used our debended a rights with the 287

wells that haven't yet been dug it's simply an impossibility there's no way to affirm

this verdict without recognizing that our debended debended a rights would be

sacrificed in the process now another point on this as he says well you know

we're wrong about this 146 a thing and that's a no fault statute the argument

we're asking you to accept is the exact same argument the court's already

accepted in the context of the Bowen case there you had the next provision

of the statute 507 7d compared to fault the question is it says fault does

that apply when the plaintiff's theory is a strict liability theory answer yes

very next provision 507 7d the several liability provision it uses the word

fault does it apply when one of the parties fault is they violated a

they violated this kind of strict liability duty

absolutely same answer to the same basic question

now the last thing Mr. Fredwick said about this is the reason we really

fell down on the job is because we couldn't show

that all of these other debended eddo parties had the full knowledge of the

mtbe risks but that just highlights the error that's

not our burden if they were negligent in dumping gasoline

that is that that gives them some degree of fault even if they didn't know it

was mtbe gasoline which they probably knew but even if they didn't fully

know the risk it is negligent to dump gasoline

and the problem is we didn't get to show that somebody who just grossly

negligently dumped gasoline for any responsibility for the mtbe getting into

the groundwater which is simply to cut off our rights

at at at at the at the at the at the pass so with all due respect we think that

the verdict cannot stand thank you for your attention

thank you very much on behalf of the court i would like to thank

both parties to this case for the exceptionally high quality

of the advocacy it's for us this is a real pleasure

court is adjourned
