This is case 2013, 0623, State of New Hampshire versus Vincent Cooper.

Attorney Houseman.

May it please the court, Stephanie Hausman on behalf of Vincent Cooper.

It is unquestionable that David McLeod's testimony was critical in this case.

He was the only witness who said Mr. Cooper was involved in the crime.

And McLeod's testimony was the only evidence that Mr. Cooper had a purpose that McLeod robbed Mr.

Enos, an element of both offenses, or even that he knew McLeod intended to commit a robbery.

The errors in this case require reversal because each affected the jury's consideration of McLeod's testimony.

First, the admission of the 911 call.

The prosecutor started her opening argument by reciting the facts from the 911 call.

The call was so significant because Enos' narrative of the event perfectly mirrored

McLeod's testimony about the incident.

The 911 call was the most significant corroboration of McLeod's testimony and

was, for that reason, not harmless.

And the trial court admitted the 911 call as an excited utterance?

That's correct.

And your position is that it wasn't the least bit excited?

That's correct.

This court has the recording of the 911 call and in listening to it the court will hear

that there is no descriptor that can be used to describe Mr.

Enos' tone or content of his statements that convey excitement.

I hadn't listened to it yet, but I read the transcript and I have to say it didn't look terribly excited on the paper.

Exactly.

The content does not convey that he is in need of assistance, that he is calling to,

because he needs the police to come, that he senses danger at all.

He said, I need to go because he was pepper sprayed in the face.

Yes.

So query, although maybe his voice didn't sound distressed,

don't the circumstances of being pepper sprayed convey some sense of urgency

along with his statement that he didn't know who it was?

He beat him off.

Well, the state admitted testimony, I believe, from Detective Calza who had been pepper sprayed

and didn't through in that manner indicate that being pepper sprayed and having some irritation

in your eyes is an exciting occurrence.

And the state also admitted the testimony of police officers who spoke to Mr.

Enos, his girlfriend at the time, who had spoken to him.

None of that conveyed that Mr. Enos was in any sense excited or upset by this.

Well, couldn't the court, you know, sort of take into account that the whole purpose

of pepper spray is to have somebody back off, make them uncomfortable?

I mean, isn't that, can't the court just sort of say, well, if somebody's pepper sprayed,

what would be the purpose of this if it was just, you know, sort of a walk in the park?

But the reason excited utterances are admitted, whereas most hearsay is not,

is that it is the state of excitement that stills the capacity for fabrication

and that is what ensures the trustworthiness.

Sure, but doesn't that, I mean, doesn't the fact that somebody is saying,

as Justice Conway pointed out, you know, I've got to go, I've got to go watch my face off,

suggest that the person is under some, you know, that this, under some distress

that they need to, they need to take care of that.

It certainly indicates that he's in discomfort, but being in discomfort

and being excited to the point where it stills your capacity for reflection

and fabrication are not the same thing.

So it would make a difference in your view if we had a hypothetical case

of an 85-year-old woman who had been pepper sprayed, if she's screaming

into the phone, I've just been pepper sprayed, I need to go wash my face off,

you say that presents a different circumstance from someone who says,

I've just been pepper sprayed in a very calm, unflappable manner.

You say the analysis changes then even though, even though in both cases

there was clearly an immediate response to being pepper sprayed,

both individuals have just been pepper sprayed, both individuals say,

I don't know who did it, and both, let's assume the 85-year-old

could have beaten him off with a stick, all circumstances being equal

except that one demonstrates more excitement in her voice.

I think that the court looks, in its prior excited under its cases,

looks at the totality of the circumstances.

And so one of the circumstances is the tone.

Another circumstance is the declarance demeanor.

You know, there are several circumstances to look at.

And in this case, the only circumstance is that Mr. Enos is experiencing

some discomfort from having been pepper sprayed.

But he doesn't indicate that his discomfort or the effects are such

that he can't see, that he's immobilized.

He can function, he found the phone, he called 911.

So it seems that the level of distress that he's experienced

is just that of discomfort, that he'd prefer to get off the phone

and go wash his eyes out and stay on the line with the discomfort.

What do you say about the state's argument that you conceded

in opening statement that the robbery occurred

and that all that since this wasn't a case about was there a robbery

but simply was your client the robber that the evidence of the fact

that there was a robbery was not particularly important?

It appears that at the time of opening parties or at least

the defense expected that Mr. Enos would testify

because he was on the state's witness list.

And it becomes apparent during trial that the defense learns

that Mr. Enos, the state was unable to locate him.

And so the state would just be admitting the 911 call.

And so the treatment of the 911 call

is much different in closing.

And in fact, the defense doesn't dwell on the fact

that there was a robbery.

It's just that that's something

that should factor into our determination.

In other words, for example, in light of what happened there,

couldn't the state have gotten up and it's closing?

I don't know what it did, but couldn't have gotten up

and said, well, isn't it interesting, ladies and gentlemen,

that in opening statement, the prosecutor

conceded that there was a robbery and now

is sort of backing off that?

What's going on here?

As the state relies on in issue two,

the jury is instructed that any evidence that comes out

in the arguments or statements of counsel

are not evidence in the case.

Two things I would say is, one,

that the 911 call in Enos's description

is the strongest corroboration of McLeod's testimony.

And for that reason, it's harmful.

In addition, Enos's statement that the robber left

in a tan sedan made all of Ms. Pitcher's testimony relevant.

Pitcher did not observe any criminal activity.

So it's only through Enos's description of the robber's

getaway car that it makes Pitcher's observations

of the car relevant and it's through that connection

that the jury understands the suspect

is an African-American man in a tan sedan

with temporary plates.

Who turned out to be your client?

Who that evidence does point to my client not conclusively,

but yes, those aspects match his description.

Were there other witnesses and other corroborative evidence?

No, not as to the Enos robbery with which Mr. Cooper

was charged.

So tell me again why this isn't simply reporting a crime?

Why Mr. Enos is-

And it's not really hearsay?

Well, the state relied on it for its truth,

the statements in the 911 call.

In closing, the state argued, well,

you know it's a tan sedan because Mr. Enos said it

and Ms. Pitcher said it.

And so let's look at what Ms. Pitcher said

about the description of the person

she saw in the tan sedan and other details

about that sedan that point to Mr. Cooper.

The theory behind whether statements are testimonial

or not goes to whether there is some assurance

that the statements are not made

in preparation for prosecution, essentially.

So can we not consider that a 911 call

made by someone who is still at least

under the influence of pepper spray,

who then says, I, you know, I beat off a burglar.

Why is, was it error for the trial court to say,

I don't think these were testimonial?

Because as the Supreme, US Supreme Court has acknowledged,

911 calls can be both not testimonial and testimonial.

And what, how it differs is,

is the caller seeking aid from the police

or emergency response,

which is not something that a witness does,

or is the caller reporting past acts

as a witness would do in court?

And in this particular circumstance,

the recording contains no request for assistance

from the police.

And it, Mr. Enos is relaying the past actions

of the person who tried to break into his house.

We look at it as implicit that he was requesting aid

because he said, I beat off a burglar just now,

or recent, very recently,

so recently that I got to go run

and get the pepper spray off my face.

Isn't, doesn't all of that imply a request

for the police to get on the case?

As opposed to, gee, I saw this incident

four months ago, thought you might be interested.

I think in this particular case,

Mr. Enos volunteers the robber left in a tan sedan.

So it's clear that Mr. Enos is providing information

for the police to use prosecutorially.

So here's what happened.

Here's what I know about the incident.

I'm gonna tell you the direction that the person left in,

the kind of car the person left in,

so that you can apprehend and prosecute this person.

Do we know how long after the incident,

the 911 call occurred?

What's the evidence on that?

The record is unclear,

but we assume that it is pretty quickly after,

within a few minutes.

Could you turn to the other issue?

Yes, thank you.

The prosecutor's improper closing arguments

also affected the jury's consideration

of McLeod's testimony.

The prosecutor urged the jury to believe McLeod

because the evidence corroborated his testimony.

She then argued a fact, not an evidence,

that Griffin's fingerprints were found

in the backpack with the gun.

This fact was the kind of impartial forensic evidence

that a jury would rely on

in determining whether to believe McLeod.

Particularly because in this case,

there was no forensic evidence admitted

that corroborated McLeod's testimony.

The state also misstated the burden of proof

in responding to the defendant's argument,

cataloging the reasons to doubt McLeod's testimony.

The prosecutor told the jury

that the beyond a reasonable doubt standard

certainly doesn't mean you give the defendant

the benefit of the doubt.

This argument turns the beyond a reasonable doubt standard

on its head.

Was an objection a contemporaneous objection made?

No, these issues are raised as plain error.

And while the judge later gave the Wentworth instruction,

that instruction focused on the legal phrase

beyond a reasonable doubt in its meaning.

This instruction didn't counter the improper argument

because the prosecutor took a phrase

that the jury is familiar with

and uses in common parlance.

That is giving somebody the reason,

the benefit of the doubt.

And told the jury that what you're familiar with

that concept, that's not the equivalent

of the legal standard you're gonna be given.

Now the trial court also told the jury

any statements made by the lawyers,

you are not to consider as a statement of the law,

you take the law from me, right?

That's right.

The judge said that any statements

about the law from the lawyers

that was inconsistent or different from what I give you.

And I would argue that this particular statement

isn't necessarily inconsistent.

The prosecutor as lawyers often do

is explaining to the jury

this legal phrase that you're gonna be given.

I'm gonna talk to you about it

in terms that are more familiar to you.

And so saying, giving the person the benefit of the doubt

isn't the same as the beyond a reasonable doubt standard

isn't necessarily inconsistent,

particularly in a lay person's mind.

When you say that you make the point in your argument

that this is somewhat different than what we have said

in other contexts that maybe the defense counsel

was this was a strategic decision.

But I mean, isn't it possible

that isn't it a reasonable likelihood here

that this was a strategic decision also

because contrary to what you just said,

I mean, it seems to me that it would be pretty hard

to hear the court's instruction

on what beyond a reasonable doubt means,

which really does say if you have a reasonable doubt

that the tie goes to the runner, at least,

and maybe more than that,

went to hear that in contrast

with what the prosecutor said,

that defense counsel would be saying,

you know, this is gonna make the prosecutor look bad

because the judge is, I don't have to say anything

because the judge is gonna give an instruction

and the jury's gonna think, you know,

what the hell was the prosecutor saying?

That's gonna hurt the state.

If that's the defense lawyer's strategic thinking,

then there's no reason not to object

and not to get a contemporary,

a security of instruction

because the jury's much more likely to think

what's the prosecutor saying or thinking

if they're immediately told by the judge,

actually what the prosecutor just told you

is improper or incorrect.

The correct standard you are to use

is you must be convinced beyond a reasonable doubt.

That means...

But isn't there, isn't there,

I mean, isn't it often the case with defense counsel

that there's sort of a general perception

that you don't, you know,

the defense counsel always has to be thinking,

how many times am I gonna get up

and interrupt the proceedings?

Because even if I'm, you know,

even if I'm sort of winning maybe on some points,

the jury, how is the jury gonna be reacting to this?

Are they gonna sort of think, you know,

here's this nitpicking attorney getting up

every five minutes to interrupt the proceedings

and that's at least some factor

that counsel has to take into account

in deciding when to object and when not.

I disagree because this court has said

an objection at the conclusion

of opposing counsel's argument

is sufficient to preserve the issue

and so there is no reason why

a defense lawyer would not,

if they had heard this argument

and comprehended it,

not asked to approach at the end of the state's argument

and then the jury, if the defense lawyer loses the objection,

the jury doesn't have that perception

that there's an objection that the defense lawyer lost

so there is no strategic reason

to withhold an objection for this type of an error.

Thank you.

Thank you, Attorney Wolford.

Good morning and may it please the court.

My name is Lisa Wolford

and I appear on behalf of the state.

Neither of the defendant's claims of error can prevail

since the evidence of the defendant's guilt

at trial was overwhelming.

Why wasn't it hearsay when the 911 call was played

and the evidence came out

that it was a black man in a tan sedan?

Why wasn't it hearsay when the 911 call was played?

Well, our position is that the trial court

properly made the decision that the 911 statements

were admissible as excited utterance

given the circumstances.

How excited do they have to be?

Not as excited as the defendant claims.

But don't they have to be excited somewhat?

Well, no.

As I said, I haven't listened to it yet,

but if it comes across orically,

if that's the right word,

in the same way that it does on paper,

I don't think that this would qualify as an excited utterance

and you suggest the same

because you argue that even if it was an error,

it was harmless.

I don't suggest that that wasn't the intention of...

Well, at least you're allowing for the possibility

that it was.

Sure, there is that possibility.

I think this court should decide this case

on harmless error grounds for the first issue

and for the second issue.

Which is a little unusual.

I mean, you suggest that we don't even have

to cross the 911 bridge at all.

You shouldn't.

I mean, you'd have to decide a constitutional issue,

which is a matter of federal law,

when there'd be no reason to do so in this case.

McLeod's testimony was corroborated not only by Ms. Pitcher,

but by Detective Calza,

who was the responding officer to the scene,

who also testified about the tan getaway vehicle,

as did the defendant in his own incriminating statements

to the police.

There was no dispute that the defendant

owned a recently purchased tan sedan.

But how did Detective Calza get to that?

Only through Pitcher, through Enos, right?

I mean, he didn't have firsthand knowledge

that a tan sedan was used in this burglary.

Detective Calza got it presumably from the 911 call,

but that's my point.

He didn't have firsthand knowledge.

But that's not relevant to this court's inquiry

about whether there's corroborating evidence

other than the...

It subsequently became good evidence.

It was good evidence.

It wasn't objected to.

So in other words, even if,

in other words what you're saying is even if Dina,

even if the officer was testifying as to hearsay,

there was no objection to that.

There was no objection.

I mean, the 911 call ultimately,

with the benefit of hindsight, was irrelevant.

That evidence came in through three other witnesses

and the defendant in his opening and in closing

throughout the trial embraced the fact

that the robbery had occurred

and that it had occurred,

that it had been committed by McLeod and Griffin.

Even if you are right, the prosecutor said

that the reasonable doubt standard means

that you don't have to give

the defendant the benefit of the doubt.

I think that's wrong.

Talk me out of that.

That is absolutely wrong.

The whole process is you do have given

the benefit of the doubt.

Asked to be reasonable, whatever else,

but he gets the benefit of the doubt

in the United States and state constitutions.

Yes, we agree that that statement is incorrect

and this court frequently asked

the Attorney General's Office

when it appears here what they might do to discourage.

Evidently, it hasn't worked.

Well, I can tell you that yesterday

we did advise all of the county attorneys

and the prosecutors on the listserv

that the argument was improper.

It appears that the intent of the statement

was to say you don't give the defendant a pass.

Well, even that is not accurate

because you do give the defendant a pass,

but that seems to be the struggle

to this prosecutor struggle

to explain what the burden meant.

So why shouldn't we reverse on the grounds

that Justice Hicks suggests?

Really, if that was a flat wrong statement

of the burden of proof,

shouldn't the defendant get the benefit of the doubt here?

Not under plain error, absolutely not.

Why?

Because the evidence of the defendant's guilt

was overwhelming and this is a single sentence

innocuous enough to have eluded both

the defense attorney and the trial court

as to its impropriety.

It was not repeated and because there was no objection,

we don't know why the prosecutor said it.

When, in cases in which there is an objection

to improper commentary,

there are conferences at the bench

where the prosecutor can explain

why he or she said what she said.

Sometimes they express confusion,

sometimes they express remorse,

sometimes they say I think I'm right

and I'd do it again if I had the chance.

Well, I suppose you are relying on our law

that says the jury is presumed

to follow the court's instructions

and the court gave two instructions at the end,

the correct reasonable doubt instruction

and an instruction that any law given to them by a counsel

isn't the law, something along that line

and they should take the law from the court.

That's right.

So you say those two in combination

cured any issue about the comment by the prosecutor.

I think that's right.

I mean, what those two instructions say is

ignore what the lawyers say,

if any of what they say conflicts

with anything the judge says

or with what the jury remembers as evidence in the case.

I mean, there will be very rare cases

in which improper comment by a prosecutor

during closing argument should result in reversal

even if preserved and the cases in which that occurs

are cases in which the improper conduct

is so egregious and the evidence of guilt is underwhelming.

We don't have that in this case.

Even the case cited in the defendant's reply brief,

United States versus Young,

the United States Supreme Court there said

that very rarely will improper prosecutorial comment

result in reversal.

Plain error is reserved for miscarriages of justice.

That is not what happened in this case.

That is not what that sole misstatement of law amounted to.

Particularly when the instructions were given,

the final instructions were given.

And of course, we don't have the opportunity

to discuss a curative instruction

because there's no objection.

So you have to rely, I think,

on the instructions given by the court

during the final charge

and those you should find negated whenever.

To the extent that we have concerns

about, I tend to agree with you

on the sort of harmless error or the plain error.

But to the extent we have concerns

about prosecutors' conduct is the appropriate thing.

And I'm not saying necessarily in this case,

but is the appropriate thing

that we refer to that to the professional conduct committee?

To have a sort of, to put the blame where it belongs

as opposed to sort of upsetting a conviction

where there's very strong evidence of guilt

and very little likelihood, it seems to me,

that this affected the jury's decision.

You could do that, but I think you'd have to have

a record to support it.

I mean, are you saying that,

so here we don't know why the prosecutor said it.

I think my impression would be

that the prosecutor believed

that what she said was correct.

So it wasn't an attempt to,

and I can tell you anecdotally

with no bearing on this case whatsoever,

that in the wake of advising prosecutors yesterday

that this was the case, the pushback was,

well, but why isn't it correct?

I mean, there is a sense that

what they are saying is correct.

So they need some further training.

I can think of one way that that message

would land very clearly arising out of this case.

You could certainly, well,

but I don't think you reverse to send that message.

I mean, you could certainly issue an opinion

where you say, and this is the first,

not the first time, by the way,

that this particular statement has been made

by this particular prosecutorial office,

and you can say it was error.

Albert Wheat was the other case

in which this court issued a non-published opinion

and said it was error largely

because we conceded that it was,

but you can send that message by saying it's wrong.

There isn't any further message.

So you're telling us it's just ignorance by counsel?

Sure, I think that's the case.

And frankly, as I said, I think it was innocuous enough,

and at first blush sort of reads as an attempt

to kind of explain,

try to accurately explain what this concept means

that neither defense counsel nor the judge took issue with it.

One point about the Confrontation Clause issue,

which I encourage the court, again,

not to reach the defense counsel,

answered a question about that issue

in which she said that it was the declarance purpose

that, I'm paraphrasing,

but the declarance purpose,

the 911 callers purpose which the court must focus on,

that is not the law after Michigan versus Bryant.

Michigan versus Bryant requires courts

to look at the intent not only of the declarant,

but also of the 911 caller.

And here it was clear from the questions asked

that the purpose was to find out what had happened

in order to know whether an unknown perpetrator

who had a gun and was at large at the community

where that person was in order

to neutralize the possibility of a threat to the danger,

to the safety of responding officers

and the public at large.

How do the two concepts interact?

In other words, do we have to find excited utterance

before we deal with whether the statement

was testimonial or not,

or can we jump right to whether it was testimonial?

Well, if it's hearsay, it doesn't come in.

So that's the first level of analysis.

I think that's right.

So if we say it wasn't an excited utterance,

we don't get to whether it was testimonial or not.

That's right.

Okay.

You know, I think I've made our position clear,

but our position with regard to hearsay is that the court

did, the trial court here did what the trial court

was supposed to do.

It followed the analysis put forth in this court's cases

about the spontaneity of the comment

and its proximity in time to when the crime occurred.

What sort of deference do we owe the trial court?

Can we, on this excited utterance issue,

if we listen to the tape,

are we free to draw our own conclusions?

And if we just take a vote on whether it's excited or not,

or do we owe some deference to the trial court?

Yes, the standard of review is whether the court

exercises sustainably exercised its discretion.

So you do owe deference to the trial court

on findings of fact.

I mean, there is nothing in the law

that says the tone of a declarant's voice is dispositive.

It is certainly relevant.

Why isn't an excited utterance finding

a conclusion of the law?

Well, I took the question to mean only with regard

to the way the voice sounded.

Oh, I see what you're saying.

I think Justice Bassett is pointing out

that we're going to hear the tape.

I'll tell you why.

Because it's a decision about whether evidence

should be admitted or not.

And those evidentiary decisions are subject

to the sustainable discretion standard.

If the court has no further questions, thank you.

Thank you, case submitted.

Council may come forward in the matter of.
