Good morning.

This is case 2013, 0670, State of New Hampshire versus Richard Cooley III.

All set, Claire?

Oh, thank you.

Good morning.

David Hendricks for the appellant, Richard Cooley III.

I have two, may it please the court,

I have two points to talk about with regard to this case.

The first is that the evidence in this case

is insufficient as a matter of law

to support a finding that Mr. Cooley consented

to the search of his truck.

And the second point is that whether or not Mr. Cooley

was in fact going to open the door to his truck himself

is quite irrelevant to the question of whether Mr. Cooley

indeed consented for the police to do that act for him.

As to the first point, Mr. Cooley's actions

were to walk to the door.

The record shows that there was some conversation

about the police investigating vandalism

to Mr. Cooley's car or truck, I should say,

suspected vandalism.

So let me just ask you this question.

Suppose that what happens is the police come to my house.

They want to talk to me.

And I see that the police car is pulling up.

And I walk outside and say, you know,

hi, officer, what's going on?

And he says, well, can I talk to you?

And I start walking back towards my house.

I don't specifically invite him in,

but I start walking back towards my house.

And he opens the outer door for me.

And lo and behold, between the outer door and the inner door,

there's a pound of heroin.

Have he searched without consent?

I think the answer is yes.

I think there are two.

He has.

Yes.

OK.

Yes, I believe he has.

And I think that for two reasons.

First, again, the exception to the warrant requirement

of consent, I don't believe would exist there.

And I think that the case of state versus Sawyer

is very instructive on that point.

The fact is.

So in other words, normal, sort of normal,

suppose it's justice convoy and the police officer is a man

and the police officer opens the door.

I mean, it's a normal, sort of, you know, social courtesy

or whatever has now become a search.

I think the question of etiquette

is an important one in this case.

And I agree that there are certain behaviors

that I think everyone in society implicitly consents to.

I would note the fact that I'm not familiar with a similar

convention that, for instance, that a person

would expect a stranger to open their car door for them

without any type of other additional facts.

Even when the person has expressed concern

that there's been something in the vehicle that's been stolen

and that from, as I understand it,

from his looking in the vehicle from the outside,

he couldn't see it.

So we're supposed to think that when he then

goes around to the other side, he didn't.

The officer is supposed to anticipate

that he wasn't intending to go inside and look for it?

Well, I mean, the trial court found

that it was reasonable for the officer

to assume he may have been indeed about to enter the truck.

I would note that Mr. Cooley expressed

that he believed that the phone was on the seat.

So I don't know that the record would necessarily

reflect that there was no other way

that Mr. Cooley could have been deciding to look for his.

Didn't somebody say either Cooley himself or the officer

that it wasn't that they had looked from outside

and that it wasn't on the seat?

The officer did say he had not seen it

when Mr. Cooley inquired that of him.

I think the problem with speculating

as to what Mr. Cooley was about to do again

is that that is not a stand-in for consent.

I think that that would be more similar to an argument

about somehow inevitable discovery.

Cooley is about to take an action.

The police officers are anticipating.

Did the officers say anything along the lines of,

this is a crime scene.

We want you to be careful.

We don't want to contaminate whatever,

affecting your client's understanding

of what was happening.

My understanding of the record is that the statement

about the crime scene occurred

after the officer had opened the door.

And I would note that the officer never said

that he believed Mr. Cooley had consented by doing this.

The officer's action was, in fact,

to preserve that crime scene.

That's what he said he was doing.

But that's irrelevant to our analysis

because the trial court made its decision

on implied consent.

Correct.

And again, I think that if you apply the standard

that is required for that legal finding on a de novo basis,

the question really becomes, did Mr. Cooley's actions,

as they took place, manifest unambiguously

that he implicitly would have consented?

Well, given that it's a totality of the circumstances test,

what sort of deference do we owe the trial court in terms

of it having heard the testimony?

I think deferring to the facts

that were found by the trial court is appropriate.

But the conclusion that is based on that application

of the unambiguous manifestation test

to that constellation of facts that were found

is a legal determination that implied consent existed

that would be contrasted with a finding, say,

that he had, in fact, said, yes, go ahead.

I think that's a fact that he explicitly consented.

But in the case of implied consent,

that's a conclusion or an inference that is being made.

It is based on a legal judgment.

And the standard of review would be de novo

for that judgment.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

May it please the court, Nicholas's court for the state,

I'll take questions anytime.

The standard is whether the court's finding of consent

was supported by the record.

And the question, as formulated by this court

in the gray case, is whether the state objectively showed

that the totality of the circumstances

would cause a reasonable police officer

to believe that he was authorized

to open the truck's driver door when the defendant approached

it after expressing his concern about the cell phone.

I think that the crucial fact here

is that the police were not investigating the defendant.

They were investigating the vandalism of the truck

that he had borrowed from his parents.

And he knew and they knew that both he and they

were concerned with what the vandals had done.

Could you just clarify, the passenger's side

was the side that was broken into?

Right.

Glass in the door was broken.

Right.

Was it broken completely?

I mean, nobody could look in and see through the broken glass.

So they could, yes.

And there was broken glass in the window itself.

But what they could see was that there was glass

on the seat and that there were items

on top of the glass, which later turned out

were from the glove box and from the pocket

on the passenger's side door.

So obviously, the vandals had been inside

and had taken some things out.

So did the defendant at first look in the passenger's side

or not?

Was it just the police who looked in the passenger's side?

That's not clear from the record.

It's not clear.

OK.

Was it clear from the record that the defendant

was sort of making a beeline to the driver's side

because he wanted to find his cell phone?

Well, it's clear that he was approaching

the driver's side and that he had said,

is my cell phone there?

I don't think it's any.

There was any testimony as to what the police actually

told him.

We know that they had looked through both the passenger

side and the driver's side and had not seen the cell phone.

And they told him we didn't see it?

That's not clear.

We don't know what they told.

We just know that he approached the door

and Officer Palmer opened it.

The issue is whether the finding of consent

under these facts is supported by the record?

How significant is it that the defendant

was not under investigation?

Oh, I think it's significant.

If he had been, just assume if he had been under investigation,

would the analysis be any different?

Oh, I think it would be because that

would make it less reasonable for the police

to think he had consented.

But because they were investigating the vandal and not him,

and he had said.

He was the victim.

He was the victim.

And where's my cell phone?

So it was reasonable for the police

to conclude when he approached the door

that he was consending to them assisting him

in his investigation.

And of course, when Officer Palmer opened the door,

he said, don't touch anything.

But it was the facts before that event told the defendant

the police are investigating the vandalism.

Was there any evidence that the police were suspicious

that maybe the defendant was trying to hide something?

Only in the defense counsel's mind, as far as we can tell.

That was his argument at the Superior Court.

He maintained the police were lying,

that they had been inside the truck

before the defendant showed up.

And the judge implicitly rejected that argument.

And this court should defer to that.

Let me ask you, it's Mr. Hendrick's position

that the issue of whether the conduct was unambiguously

unambiguously manifested consent

is ultimately illegal determination,

which we should review de novo rather than giving

deference to the trial court.

No, I think it's a deference standard.

The Johnstone case says the court's finding of consent

should be upheld if it is supported by the record.

The underlying facts or the conclusion or both?

I think the conclusion of consent,

if it's supported by the record, this court deferred.

If there's nothing further?

Thank you.
