This is case 2013, 0411, and 2014, 0503 in the matter of Diana Walters and John Walters.

The record should reflect the fact that Justice Hicks is disqualified from this case.

Council?

May I please the Court, Patrick Sheehan representing the petitioner, Diana Walters.

As I've stated in our brief, the fundamental injustice which has occurred in this case

at the trial level below is that if the court orders that have been issued remain in place,

that in this long term marriage which has now exceeded 20 years,

the division of assets in favor of Mr. Walters will be at least $3.3 million more than what's being awarded to my client.

And that's because of the allocation of certain capital gains, potential liabilities?

Well, the $3.3 million that I've calculated in the chart does not include the capital gains.

The Telegener decision which was issued by this Court, I think 2002,

adopted the majority rule that stated that when a divorce court is dealing with an asset,

it is not allowed to deduct potential taxes unless it's very clear that those potential taxes

are going to be required to be paid by the court or are certain to occur shortly thereafter.

So you would say that that should not have been done to the detriment of your client in the first place?

Correct. There was $2.1 million taken off the top of the marital estate in this case.

Approximately $1,640,000 was lopped off from the assets awarded to Mr. Walters.

That was strictly lopped off, pardon me, for anticipated capital gains or because the parties

through their marriage had regularly borrowed against these assets.

And the trial court characterized it as tax slash debts, I think.

Yeah, they tried to... So to what extent? I just need a clarification on that.

The policy rationale for that would be that it would be unfair to apply the Telegener decision

for that reason because when depreciation... You take advantage of depreciation during the marriage

and then it gets recaptured at the end that somehow it would be unfair to...

But your client benefited from the treatment of those assets during the marriage, no?

You could look at it that way but that's not what the Telegener case says

because the inequity on the opposite side of that is now the court is speculating as to what is going

to happen with an asset going future. Didn't... Wasn't there expert testimony

that changed pure speculation to some fairly concrete estimates?

If the properties were sold, the court... The expert testified that if the properties were

sold, this is what the taxes would be. However, the expert also testified when I asked him,

I said, is this money that is owed by the parties? And he said no, not currently no.

It's money that is, it's taxes that would have to be paid if the properties are sold

or foreclosed on. Now if you look at the Telegener decision when the court adopted

the majority view, if you look at the other states that it cited to, one of the cases

I believe was with the North Dakota case, it was also a Pennsylvania case dealt with this

exact question and said were the capital gains and the recaptured depreciation

were argued and the court said we're not going to allow that in this case.

And Telegener does not provide any exception for this thing.

And the potential recapture of the depreciation and the capital gain

doesn't affect the fair market value of the property if it's sold to a third party, right?

Doesn't affect it at all because if I'm a buyer of a property, I'm going to pay for it.

Who cares? I don't care what the basis is of the sell.

And I would point out that if in the Telegener decision, the Mr. Telegener was asking the court

to deduct the future income taxes that would be paid on as 401k.

I mean that's as certain as it gets in the tax code that when you have an IRA that when you

come to retirement, you're going to have to pay those taxes. And I guess the parties did

benefit during that marriage as well because they were able to take deductions from their income

taxes because of the 401k or the retirement. But this court said we're not going to get

into the business of speculating about what somebody's going to do with an asset because

once you do that, once you go down that road, now in every case the trial court is

going to have to figure out what are the potential costs associated with the sale

of this asset. Every asset has a cost when you sell it.

It may be a tax, it may be a commission, it may be something else.

Are all of these LLCs on Exhibit JJ, are they all pieces of property without an operating

business per se? I believe all of them are. There might be on the capital gains,

I don't have JJ in front of me, but I believe they all are yet.

Yeah, I mean it's a big spreadsheet with... There are a couple of LLCs that

were operating entities, but I'm not sure if the... I don't believe that capital gains

were dealt in those particular assets. So it's our position that the case has to be

remanded at a minimum back to address the significant lobbing off of assets.

Can I just ask you, I appreciate maybe you don't have JJ in front of you,

but where it says at the bottom line, recapture tax on sale. If you go across

those lines, is that how you get to the 1.6 million or 2.1?

The 2.1 is the total that was taken off the entire marital estate.

Some taxes were taken off the assets awarded to my client, but it was a substantially

lesser portion. So the disparity between what was lobbed off from one party versus the other

was about 1.2 million approximately. So he benefited significantly because the assets

he was awarded supposedly had a higher basis. Did you raise this issue with

Master Foley when he took responsibility for the case on the cross motions for reconsideration?

No, I did not. At the time we filed the cross motions for... The motion for reconsideration,

Judge Sather was still on the case. And I, at that point, I had filed a

memorandum of law with the court. We had argued this at the trial.

And so when I filed the motion for reconsideration, I was under the impression at that point that

Judge Sather would be hearing it. I had no reason to believe that she was going to change

her mind. We argued this. We provided memorandum of law.

You did have argument on the cross motions for reconsideration, though.

We did, yes, yes.

So why didn't you bring to Master Foley's attention your position on this issue,

since he had to go back and essentially analyze this case from the beginning because he was

new to the case? Well, again, at that point, when I... The motion for reconsideration that

he was dealing with had been filed prior to his becoming involved in the case.

That wouldn't have prevented... No, it wouldn't have prevented me.

Identifying the issue because now you've presented us with this issue, and I appreciate

the basis for doing so, but Master Foley never had a shot at it. And that's the basis

for our rules that require that you give the trial court a shot at dealing with an issue that

you're going to rely on on appeal. Well, I understand that you...

Did you rely on... I'm sorry, did you raise this issue of the tax thing with the...

before the original final order? Tell the court, you know, don't reduce any of the assets by the

tax, by capital gains, the perspective of capital gains taxes.

Yeah, we did. We argued at the hearing, at the trial, and I provided a memorandum of law in the court.

Don't... So you raised it before Judge Sadler, before her final order?

Absolutely. I gave her a memorandum of law on it, and we argued it, and she points it out

in her... It's very clear from her narrative order that she was aware of what the issue was.

But, you know... And so in the motion for... But in the motion for reconsideration,

all right, did you explain to either Orally or writing to Judge Master Foley,

Judge Sadler made a mistake in handling this issue. And so on reconsideration,

I would like you to correct the mistake. I did not address that on the

reconsideration, because, again, it had been filed at a time when he was not involved in the case.

Can we change to a different issue, please? How do you respond to your opponent's argument that

the family court had no jurisdiction to reallocate the eminent domain award

since your client had apparently given it up at some point in time, and the change in

circumstances arose while the case was pending on appeal?

Well, I think that... I think the jurisdictional argument, I think, is that I asked this court to

remand this case at the time back to the trial court so that it could hear this particular issue.

And the Nayan case says that the court has jurisdiction to amend its final decree

any time up until the date of final judgment. And so the reading of the case law is that the

court maintains discretion to get the decision right any time up to the date of final judgment.

So you would say that there's nothing to the jurisdiction argument?

No, the case was... this court had jurisdiction, it was remanded back,

a final judgment had not been issued by the divorce court, and the court

issued an order which amended its prior property division. My client did not give it up, okay? She

argued for it at the final hearing. The court awarded it to...

She argued for... she wanted a piece of the eminent domain?

Absolutely. She asked for 50% of the eminent domain and the divorce case.

I had the impression, could be wrong, that because at that point in time was regarded as

more of a drain than a potential benefit, she really didn't want any part of it.

That's not true. If you look at her proposed order, she asked for 50% of the net proceeds.

At what point? At the trial. She asked for 50% of the net proceeds at the trial.

The part about the drain, that's the narrative of Judge Sadler in her final order. And then she

said, she made the finding that she was finding... she didn't say no value, she said the value

was unknown. So the court makes a finding that the value of an asset is unknown.

Before the case goes to final judgment, the value of the asset becomes known.

Well, but when you say... I mean, this is a little different than the Nye situation,

in that this went to final judgment in the trial court before the asset was... before the

value of this was known. And then there was an appeal taken in which that issue was not

originally raised. Isn't that the situation? Well, yeah. It was not raised in particular

in the first appeal. However, I think the imperative date to get the decision right

is that because it didn't go to final judgment, if you look at the McSherry opinion,

Mr. Walters had no vested right to the asset until it went to final judgment.

Now, he's argued that, hey, she didn't appeal it, so I thought it was mine.

However, he told the court in the eminent domain case, he filed a motion where he

requested to continue the eminent domain case, and he specifically said that he had received

the final orders, but he was waiting. He wanted to continue the eminent domain case

because he had not received a final decree of divorce, and he wanted to make sure that his

ownership of the cause of action was certain. So he told the Rockingham County

Superior Court after Judge Sadler's order came down that I don't have a final decree yet.

Sure, but isn't the important point, I mean, even if we were to say, okay,

there is technically jurisdiction here for the trial, I mean, don't the equities

really weigh significantly against your client? The court makes a decision,

explains its reason that it sort of views that this is likely to be a drain, and I'm

going to award it. Maybe it'll be some kind of an offset to the husband here.

Then there's an appeal and the issue is not raised, and then now all of a sudden the court

comes out with a decision, and your client says, wait a minute, there's a pot of gold out here,

now I want to raise the issue. That seems to me to be... Well, I think she raised the issue at

the trial level. She said she wanted a piece of it. She did request that the entire case be set aside

or remanded for a new trial. So he was on notice that she was requesting that the judgment be

set aside, and I don't agree with the equities argument. The facts here show that my client

was at risk during the entire appeal. The piece of property she's been awarded in this case,

the big piece, was used as collateral to finance the litigation, and she remained at risk during the

entire appeal. Sure, but then why didn't she raise this issue in the appeal originally?

I mean, if that's all true, why not raise this issue in the original appeal?

Again, she asked that the entire property settlement be set aside, so I think

that he was on notice. And at the time when the court made the decision, they made the finding

that the value was unknown. There would have had been an unsustainable exercise of discretion

or an error of law at that point. But then the value comes in and the court

corrects... The court made a finding it's unknown, and then a value came in that it's

known. To me, that's where the equity should be. The equity should be on getting it right

before the case goes to final judgment. Because once it goes to final judgment,

then I understand he owns this property, he can sell it, he can encumber it, he can rely on that

final judgment. But until the case goes to final judgment on a 20-year marriage, I think if the

court gets the decision right and makes sure the equity is consistent with its own finding

in the original decree, where Judge Sadler said this should be an equal division of marital assets.

And he had control over this asset from the time the party separated. He had control over all

the party's capital. So he's in a much better position than my client under the equities to

manage and maintain these properties. And now my client's being penalized because she was the one

under the temporary orders that was on the outside looking in. And I think the court here,

by reopening it and getting the decision right before there's a final judgment,

did the right thing. And that's what I think a court should do. And I think that's what

the case law expects the court to do. Thank you. May it please the court. Along with Attorney Murphy,

I'm Doreen Connor and I represent John Walters. We raise one issue on appeal, and that's whether

Mrs. Walters waived her right to challenge the family court's 2013 decision on the merits,

which awarded Mr. Walters sole ownership of the eminent domain litigation he initiated

after they separated when Supreme Court rule 7 and 21 required that all appeals

to a decision on the merits be made within 30 days and untimely appeals are specifically

discouraged absent exceptional circumstances which were not pled here. I will take questions

at any time. So you're not challenging the foley order that revisited the saddler decree,

is that right? I am broader. What I am saying is because he did not preserve,

I find it interesting that the position is we didn't give up this asset. This asset,

yes. Let me make myself clear. It probably was not. You are challenging the foley order

to the extent that it awards part of the eminent domain recovery to Mrs. Walters. Yes. But

not otherwise. I am challenging that on the merits it shouldn't that the allocation was

impermissible, but I'm also challenging whether the trial court should have done that and we

even filed the motion. We filed the motion to dismiss it. Yeah, so two prongs. Correct your

honor. The trial court aired and even entertaining the wife's request, but that the award of the

20% is not supportable. Correct. But you're not otherwise challenging the any reallocation

that master foley made of other assets to the extent there was any correct master foley

on the remand only address this one issue. But what is interesting here is in the motion to

reconsider, which was filed at the same time as a motion to recuse the first trial judge,

they did not raise not only did they not raise the tax issue, they did not raise the

allocation of this issue. So they never gave the trial judge a chance to correct it.

Then in June 30 days later when they have to file their notice of appeal,

they do not include the eminent domain case. It is only after this case has been scheduled for

oral argument. No cross appeals have been filed based on the original notice of appeal. Briefs

have been filed. It is only after the eminent domain case goes to trial and it turns out to

have been a successful gamble. Do they then say, wait, we want to amend our June 2013 notice

of appeal. We want to raise this issue eight months too late. This court has said in repeated

cases that that is just not allowed. You didn't allow it in germane. You didn't allow it in Petition

of Ellis. You didn't allow it in Patton versus Silly or State B. Ryan. What about your opponent's

argument that it isn't final until the appeal is disposed of so that everything is still live

until there has been a ruling on appeal of the lower court's rule? That's inconsistent

with both Supreme Court rule 7 and 21. If that's the case, then I'm filing a motion of a remand

tomorrow because the case isn't quite final and things have changed. The property that was awarded

to her was found by the same jury to be worth $2.1 million more. The state's appraisal suggests

it's worth $10 million, three times the value that the divorce court put. This court has

certain rules in terms of how a case processes through the system. The time for filing

issues on appeal is your original notice of appeal. Is that affected at all by the

reality that we sent the case back down? No, Your Honor, because there was no decision on the

merits. That's why we're here and it's for you to decide on the merits today.

I'd also like to talk about the dicta that's in Nyon because that's what the trial court

relied upon. Nyon was my case. It involved an untimely motion with respect to interest.

We were still at the trial court. I challenged that issue on appeal and this court said the trial

court retains authority to modify its orders as it sees fit and although it said until the

case goes to final judgment, those words were dicta because that wasn't the situation there.

There was no appeal and it quoted from a suppression case, state versus haycock,

the same thing. We're talking about a trial court's authority to correct issues

before appeal. I was not able to find and my opponent was not able to find a single case,

not only from this court, but from any court that has allowed a remand to reopen a divorced

property distribution when that issue was not preserved for appeal and there's a reason for

that. Cases have to be litigated on a date certain. In this case, the assets were valued

as of the end of calendar year 2011 and now because of this remand, one asset out of the

whole marital estate has been appraised at a different date as of the taking in June of 2008.

So you say the logic is if we were to agree that this issue is still in play,

your position is then all the valuation issues are still in play.

Correct and that would be the only fair thing to remand it and have a new trial on everything

but then a divorce case will never ever become final.

Can you address the capital gains debt on these LLCs and corporations?

I will, your honor. The lower court concluded and it is within her discretion to determine

the fair market value of these various assets. She determined that the tax debt that had accrued

over time based on the manner in which these parties lived was relevant to the overall

value and she applied it across the board. This case is completely different from Telgener

because there was undisputed expert testimony from the party's accountant, CPA Jeff Perron,

and he testified to the penny what the amount was and that's an exhibit JJ.

So there was no speculation about what the amount was.

And he was able to do that based on what?

Based on the depreciation and the borrowings that have been taken out of the assets over the

course of time. Your opponent says well all of that is fine but unless there's an imminent sale

it's not relevant to the court's consideration.

Correct and I point a discord to the ratty case which dealt with the valuation of businesses

and what in that case a similar argument was made with respect to discounting for

minority interest which courts do all the time and the challenging party said that's only relevant

if there's going to be an imminent sale and this court said no that reflects the overall value

it's something that the trial court can take into consideration as part of its discretion

when valuing the assets. So you say the fulcrum is the fact that these

entities were closely held is that no I'm just making the same argument

they are closely held right but the argument is that a sale does not have to be imminent

for the court to be able to take this into consideration do you agree do you agree with

the principle that the amount of depreciation or the amount of debt on the property doesn't

affect the fair market value of the property for valuation in the marital estate it doesn't

affect what the buyer will pay it affects what the seller can accept knowing that he's going to

have to have enough to pay that tax bill and that's what Jeff Perone tested by. Well the fair market

values set by the marketplace not by what a what a seller under duress who might have

borrowed too much money for it whether they can cover their loan or not is irrelevant to

calculation of market value isn't it. No because you have to turn that asset into cash

somebody has to pay the tax and one of these LLCs sort of funded all of the others and therefore

it's underwater more than the others so it's simply not equitable to treat them without

considering that and you know what you said intelligent or is we wouldn't consider it

because you didn't know how much Mr. Telgner was going to take out our liquidity there was no

testimony on pawn which to address that in this case there was undisputed testimony and

furthermore if this court when this court addresses the issue you should look about at the case law

you cited and relied upon intelligent or because it has changed the Pennsylvania court decision

that you relied upon has been overruled by the Pennsylvania legislature who is considered

that whether the imminency of a sale occurs is not relevant to that factor the South Dakota

Supreme Court decision which you relied upon has been changed and what the South Dakota court said is

if the tax is reasonably certain it is a factor of many that you can consider in this case the tax

was calculated to the penny and never disputed but is that reasonably certain if if the asset

is held to the owner's death doesn't the basis step up and the tax isn't captured it will not

be paid but it is it affects that asset's value and it will be disclosed for purposes of refinancing

and borrowing and I guess what do you say about your opponent's position that they that in some sense

they did raise the issue by by this you know motion for recusal well first of all the

motion to recusal is per se untimely this court said very strongly in the appeal of

government cases that it will look suspect with suspect upon cases that motions for recusal filed

after the hearing judge Sadler could not understand why attorney she and did not file this motion

before the eight day trial before the 19 day trial when in fact the conflict the alleged conflict

was the fact that his colleague his partner had represented her spouse in an uncontested matter

that was filed before she sat on the walters matter so I think it's extremely unlikely that this court

would ever find due to the timeliness in the merits of that that due to judicial recusal was required

and if it's not required then the issue is in fact not raised there's another problem with that

even if this court were to find that recusal allowed a whole new trial at a whole new trial

all of the assets will be valued as of 2016 as opposed to what's happened here we have one

asset being valued as of 2008 before the worst real estate depression all of the other assets

were valued as of 2011 so you say on the recusal issue that even assuming that there was a requirement

that the court recuse counsel is charged with knowing what his partner's legal work is in

case there might be a potential conflict and that should end the inquiry there that's correct and

that's under professional rule of conduct 1.9 and 1.10 well doesn't a judge have an independent

responsibility to assess whether or not there's a conflict the judge does in this case the judge

had no way of knowing interestingly enough the paperwork that is in your appendix was not

presented to judge saddler but even if it had been she signed the uncontested divorce

before her spouse signed it and that's when attorney wise signed and attorney wise did not

sign us as counsel she crossed out the word counsel and wrote consultant so unless judge

saddler was presented with that again there was no way for her to know that a sulla way attorney

had appeared as a council as a account consultant or witness was was there was no there were no

I'm sorry there were no proceedings then before where where where attorney wise would have been

there or something like that not she she never filed an appearance there were no proceedings

because it was not an acrimonious separation it was uncontested what was there any evidence taken

on this issue or facts developed about who knew what when because you're making representations

about it now I'm making representations based upon what has been presented in your appendix for

the first time on appeal it was not presented to judge saddler and in fact it is the moving

party who bears the burden when they file an untimely motion of for recusal to explain

why it's untimely to explain good cause for it being untimely none of that was explained

we don't know to this day when or how attorney she and learned of attorney wise's role as a

witness for judge saddler's spouse well just to clarify where you were saying that

the sequence of signing of this settlement what's what's the basis for that that's the

actual uncontested document for legal separation which attorney she and provided to this court

but not to judge saddler so that's in the record but you're saying it wasn't before anybody

below it's in your record but it's not properly in the record below I'm sorry that key document

the separate the legal separation signed by attorney wise that that was never subject to

discussion argument before judge saddler it was not presented to judge saddler correct and there

was and it was and the motion that was filed before judge saddler didn't say and and the reason

that I'm filing this now when I after this case is over is because here are the circumstances

that show I was not I was not doing this for tactical reasons correct nothing like that no

offer of proof your honor well and judge saddler dealt with the motion to recuse and and detailed

findings concerning herself in that issue she did and again whether or not this court

were to when this court reviews that issue it reviews it under an unsustainable exercise of

discretion and defers to to judge saddler and certainly in the merits this court has said that

even if a judge has some hostility towards counsel that does not mean that the judge is hostile or

will be biased towards that attorney's client in this case we've got it several times removed

because we go from attorney wise to attorney she and to his client and there was simply

no objective basis for a reasonable outsider to believe that there would be bias and because

there was no reason for bias and because the judicial recuse of motion was untimely then in

fact the issue of the eminent domain award to my client was not preserved because it was not

in the notice of appeal can I circle back to the the capital gains tax debt issue

that was raised in the trial before judge saddler there was a motion for reconsideration

filed heard by master foley but in the motion for reconsideration was there an argument by wife

that the saddler's treatment of the capital gains and tax debt was that raised it was not

your honor they picked their battles they got rid of the two dues of 1.6 million dollars they

required security for her property and they had alimony recharacterized so that would it would

not be a charge against the property they chose which issues to appeal and they did not so when

judge foley was acting on the motion for reconsideration from his standpoint that

issue was not in play that issue was not play the allocation and the award of the eminent domain

litigation was not in play and therefore in another argument that it was not preserved

thank you thank you case submitted and the court is in recess
