This is case 2013-0800, State of New Hampshire versus Jose Scruton.

May it please the Court, Stephanie Hausmann, on behalf of Jose Scruton, I want to focus on the first issue.

This case is governed by McKenna and I have three points to make.

One, the detectives conveyed that they would determine how long the interrogation would last,

even though they told Mr. Scruton that he was not under arrest and would be going home at the end of the interview.

Two, the Court recognized in McKenna that even an implicit restraint on freedom as happened here

can influence the custody question.

And three, the purpose of the interview was to confront Mr. Scruton with incriminating evidence,

and thus the tone was accusatory.

With each point, I want to highlight how these factors are influenced by comparing Mr. Scruton's

second police station interview with his first.

In McKenna, the Court recognized that telling someone that they were not under arrest is not the same

as telling someone that they are free to leave at any time.

And that's because the gist of the determination is whether a reasonable person would feel free to leave

or to terminate the questioning.

Here, the detectives conveyed by word and by their actions that they would determine when the interview was over,

not Mr. Scruton.

Of course, we do have to look at what led up to it.

And he was invited to the first interview and went home.

Yes.

And then invited to the second interview that those circumstances are very different than those in McKenna.

No?

They are, but I think that they influence a determination that there was custody here

because then during the first interview Mr. Scruton was at the police station for 12 minutes

and then was released.

During the second interview, he began by recounting the same thing he had said before.

And instead of being promptly released, instead the detectives confront him with the incriminating evidence

that they had gathered since his first interview and challenged his version of what had occurred

and did not end the interview as the first interview had ended.

In addition, the detectives never told Mr. Scruton that he was free to leave

or free to stop answering questions.

And in telling Mr. Scruton that he would be going home at the end of the interview,

the detectives conveyed, and I've quoted their testimony on page 14,

that they would determine the interview's length.

And a couple of other factors of the second interview are important.

The detectives left him in the interview room for 10 to 15 minutes before the interview even began.

And all of these factors together communicated to a reasonable person

that Mr. Scruton was not free to leave until the detectives concluded the interrogation.

Do we have the video or audio of the interview?

I believe I transferred up the exhibits that contained, I believe it was videotaped,

and also attached to my brief or in the appendix.

So for us to accept your proposition, we have to accept the proposition

that what the defendant believed was that he was free, he was, you know, at liberty,

up until he gets to the police station, then his liberty is now, he's arrested, in effect,

that he's in custody for a period of time and then he's free again.

That's what a reasonable person would think you would say under all those circumstances.

Yes, and the Miranda Court recognized that detention for interrogation is a concept

where people would feel the same sort of pressure that a full custodial arrest would entail.

And that's the situation that occurred here.

He's at the police station, he knows that he can't move freely about the police station from both of his visits there.

He understands that he needs to be brought from the interview room back to the lobby.

And the detectives are conveying that this interrogation is going to last until they're satisfied with the answers

or until they...

Well, but is that different than, I mean, if somebody, you know, kind of comes into,

for example, if somebody comes back to our chambers to talk with us,

generally they would feel they're not at liberty to simply walk around the building

that if they're coming to meet with Justice Bassett, he's going to meet him at the door

and kind of walk back with him.

I mean, it would be...wouldn't it be pretty unusual for somebody and, you know,

if they're coming, let's say, to meet Justice Bassett to just decide,

well, I'm just going to...I'm going to on my own take a little tour of the building,

but we wouldn't say that person's in custody, would we?

No, but this Court recognized in McKenna that even restraints or implicit restraints that have a good purpose,

safety purpose, that sort of thing can still be experienced by a layperson

as being a restraint on freedom unless there's an explanation that, you know,

there could be a dangerous person in custody.

So maybe somebody would feel that he's in custody if he's going to see Justice Bassett.

In other words, unless Justice Bassett...

Listen, you know, you can leave anytime you want.

I think the courts have recognized that a police station has an inherent coercive atmosphere

that isn't experienced by laypeople in other types of places.

I know you said this earlier, but can you just explain again why you think that

the fact that there was a first interview makes the perceptions

and the second interview supportive of your client rather than vice versa,

which is how I would tend to look at it?

Both of the interviews began the exact same way,

and if both had ended the same way,

then I wouldn't have an argument that he would have perceived himself to be in custody.

But instead of his experience in the first interview that I give my version of events

and then I'm shown out the door,

here he gives the same version of events that he had given at the first interview,

and then instead of the interview being concluded,

the detectives continue questioning him, challenging him,

and confronting him with the evidence that they have gathered that incriminated him.

They didn't say to him as in McKenna that we think you did it, did they?

They said that he matched the victim's description of the assailant

and that his friends had said he brought a knife to this confrontation.

And so by confronting him with that incriminating information,

which was the purpose of the interview, the interview had an accusatory tone.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Good morning, ma'am.

Please, the Court.

Susan McGinnis for the State.

Before I take questions on the custody issue,

I would like to make one point about the expert instruction issue.

Just to make it clear to the Court,

the defense expert testified during the State's case in chief.

They took the defense expert out of order.

The State requested a contemporaneous expert instruction,

and the Court gave one.

The following day, the State's expert testified and no instruction was given,

and that's because the defendant never asked the Court to give an expert instruction

during the State's expert's testimony.

So the defense cannot claim prejudice from the fact that it was given

during his expert's testimony, but not during the State's expert's testimony,

because he didn't preserve that argument and didn't request the instruction.

On the custody issue, this is completely different than McKenna.

In McKenna, the defendant was told he could not walk into the woods.

He was actually restrained by the police by telling him he couldn't enter the woods

or leave the sight of a third officer sitting in a cruiser.

Here, the defendant was asked to go to the station.

He agreed to do it.

He asked if his mom could drive him.

The officer said yes.

They left and went to the station.

He arrived with his mother 20 minutes later,

was signed in as a visitor just as he had been the day before,

was told his mother could wait for him,

and that he would be leaving when they were done.

So he knew it was a temporary restraint on him,

and the defense says the question is whether he felt free to leave.

That is not the question.

That's the question when you're talking about a seizure or a brief detention.

The question is whether he felt like he was under arrest,

the functional equivalent of arrest.

And he obviously didn't.

He was told he was not under arrest.

He was told he was not under arrest,

and he was also told he would be leaving

and that his mother could wait for him to finish.

That doesn't mean that they said that the interview

will be terminated when we decide you've given the answers we want.

They said, when we're done, you can go.

They may have been done when he said he didn't want to answer questions.

And the type of accusatory questions asked here

are nothing like McKenna or Jennings.

They didn't accuse him of committing the crime

or tell him they didn't believe his excuses

or that they believed the other side.

They just said, he told them the same story,

and they said, well, we've talked to some other people,

and they've told us you brought weapons with you to this fight,

and you seem to match the description by the victim.

They never told him they thought he did it,

that they didn't believe his answers,

except at one point where he was saying

that when he was running away,

he may have been pumping his arms

and stabbed somebody accidentally,

and they said, well, that doesn't really make sense,

because if someone was behind you

and you were pumping your right arm with a knife in it,

you'd hit the person in the right side of, you know,

in the same side of their body if they're behind you,

and that's not what happened.

And the defendant then said that he hooked the knife around,

meaning that he stabbed him in the left side.

So this was not like McKenna.

It's also not like Jennings.

In Jennings, the officers,

there were three officers and a prosecutor there.

They confiscated the defendant's keys.

They told him he could not drive himself.

They confiscated his cell phones.

They took him to the station

and went through what we call the Sally Port,

the closed garage door.

They didn't sign him in as a visitor.

They never told him he was free to leave,

but he really wasn't.

And they did accuse him

and told him that they believed the victim

and didn't believe him.

So the circumstances here are completely different

in the cases where this court has found custody

for Miranda purposes.

You know, I think you make sound arguments,

but one thing that you said in your brief

did catch my attention.

It may not be related at all to the arguments,

but I would like to have your response.

Okay.

The police did not record

in the second interview the beginning

of the interview.

They purposely didn't do that,

but then they did record the second part of the interview.

And you tell us that,

you report to us that we have said

that we are not going to require

recording of all interviews.

But the police's reason

for not recording the first hour

of the second interview you tell us is

they said they didn't know

he would change his testimony,

which I find bizarre.

Their rule for recording

is they didn't know

he might change his testimony

at a point when they knew

that the victim's description matched

the defendant's description.

It matched it as closer

than anyone else they had talked to.

But is that the standard?

I mean, should we just acquiesce to that kind?

Frankly, it makes no sense to me at all.

Well, we don't record unless we think

he might change his testimony.

Well, actually,

they recorded all the initial interviews,

the people that would allow them,

because they had no idea what anyone would say,

and they had no idea who the suspect was.

So why doesn't that argue for them

recording the entire second interview

when they zeroed in on him?

I don't know. I don't think the explanation makes sense.

But this court, quite frankly, has said

that you don't have to record the entire thing

unless it's an incustody

mirandized.

Well, I know what we said.

I'm still not impressed with the explanation given.

Maybe in the right case, we will change that.

And as soon as he said something different

than he had before,

they stopped the interview and started recording.

Can you just remind me how long

in total was the second interview

and then how long was the recorded portion?

The second interview,

they spoke to him,

he was alone in the room for a few minutes,

then they spoke to him for approximately an hour

before he changed his story,

and then when he changed his story,

the recorded part I believe was another 25 minutes,

if I remember correctly.

But they spoke to him about an hour

before they turned the tape on at the second interview.

Thank you.
