This is case number 2013-0480, 2013-0635, and 2015-0429, state of New Hampshire versus Scott Robinson.

Mr. Barnard.

Good morning. May it please the court? My name is Thomas Barnard. I represent Scott Robinson.

I have requested to reserve one minute for rebuttal, and I'd like to focus on two issues this morning.

First, the law of the case, and second, the exclusionary rule.

I'd be happy to take the court's questions about any issue in the case at any time.

In the first appeal, this court held that the trial court's denial of Robinson's motion to suppress was clearly erroneous and reversed that denial.

There is an inherent difference between the word reversed and the word vacant. Reverse.

So what happened was that at the trial level, the state had argued that the motion to suppress should be denied, not only because there were no exigent circumstances,

but also because there was probable cause. Right? To get the search warrant?

That's correct.

Okay. Comes up to us on appeal, excuse me, the trial judge says no exigent circumstances.

Then there's an appeal to us, and we're focused on the exigent circumstances argument.

The state does not tell us that it had argued below that there was another basis to deny the motion to dismiss.

So the question is at bottom, did the state have an obligation to bring that to our attention so that we could deal with it all at one time, or not?

Because when we sent it back, of course, the defense says, or the state continues to assert that there was good reason not to deny the motion to suppress.

So essentially, the matter was bifurcated. So the question before us is, what do we do in those circumstances?

Because logically, the state, we might expect that all the potential issues should have been before us, and they weren't.

I think that's right, and I think that the state…

So your position is that by having failed to do that, the state essentially waived its right to make this argument.

Exactly. But isn't there a problem? If you're the winner, the state, if the state is the winner on some particular issue,

why do they have to, and there's an appeal taken by the other side, by the loser, why does the state have to take, in effect,

whether you call it a cross appeal or whatever, why does the state have to…

I mean, I could understand that they might want to do that, but if they don't, should there be a requirement that they do that when they are the winner on some issue?

Well, I mean, it's not a strict requirement, but if they don't do it, it's waived. They can't raise it when it's been remanded.

And the reason is that if this court looks at the rationale that the trial court relied on to reach the result and says,

that rationale does not justify the result, then this court has to decide what do we do with the case.

Let's try to follow that through. If we said that that was true, let's take this case as an example.

The court made no findings on inevitable discovery in its original order, right?

That's correct.

So wouldn't the logical implication of the rule you ask us to apply be to say to the trial court,

listen, when there are multiple issues raised in a case, even if you can dispose of the case on some of the issues,

but not all of them, you need to resolve all of them?

Well, no, I'm not saying that the trial court is required to resolve alternative arguments.

The state could have, in the first appeal, raised the issue of the exclusionary rule, inevitable discovery or independent source.

And this court, if it had, there would have been three possible outcomes.

This court would have looked at the record to see whether the record compelled a conclusion either way.

If it found that the record compelled a conclusion that those doctrines did not apply, it would have reversed what it in fact did in this case.

If it found that the record compelled a conclusion that those doctrines did apply and that the exclusionary rule did not apply,

then it would have affirmed on that alternative ground.

And if this court looked at the record and said the record isn't enough, we need a factual finding by the trial court,

then this court would have vacated, rather than remanded, the court's denial of the motion to suppress.

And then the trial court would have been free to revisit that.

But I guess what I'm saying, if the situation here is that there would have needed to be some further factual finding,

what is the utility, I guess, other than sort of you win, I can understand that.

But what is the utility of saying to the state you are precluded

because you didn't raise this issue that would have required the case to be returned to the trial court when it's going to be returned to the trial court anyway?

Well, the utility is that it provides an incentive for the state to raise alternative grounds in support of a ruling.

But you're asking us essentially to punish the state for our choice of mandate.

I'm saying that this court's choice of mandate was a direct result of the state's failure to raise this alternative ground.

And you say they should not get two bites of an apple.

We shouldn't be addressing cases in a bifurcated way or even worse.

If there are several issues, I suppose theoretically, the state could hold close to its vest alternative arguments

and say, well, let's see how the first appeal goes because we can always address the issue on a different ground.

That's what you're complaining about.

Exactly.

But it didn't hold it close to the vest because it argued it below, right?

It argued it below, but it did not argue it on appeal to this court.

But I guess I still am coming back to it.

If we were going to adopt that rule for the reasons that you say, isn't the logical, you know, what logically would follow from that?

Because, I mean, assuming that the idea is to have some efficiency prevent needless appeals, wouldn't logically what follows from that be for us to say to the trial court, listen,

if they raise issues A, B, and C, it doesn't matter if you think you can dispose of it on issue A. You've got to decide B and C also.

No, not at all.

I'm not saying that the trial court aired before the first appeal by not addressing the alternative ground once it found for the state on the primary ground.

I'm saying it was the state's obligation to raise that on appeal.

The alternative, if the state is permitted to do what it did here, is piecemeal litigation.

The state will raise issues one at a time.

The case would never end.

Exactly.

This was going on for 10 years.

Yeah.

And there could be as many retrials and appeals as there are exceptions to the warrant requirement, plus exceptions to the exclusion.

Well, except they had to play that card the first time.

I mean, you don't just to keep, it doesn't just keep going back and you can make up new reasons.

Here, it did put that argument forward the first time around.

So it's not like there was an unlimited re-new opportunities to come up with new ideas and new theories.

It did, but it doesn't matter that the state raised it below because the state did not raise it in this court.

I think what the trial court did here, prior to the first appeal, address the primary issue.

And then having found for the state refrained from addressing the state's alternative argument, I think that's common.

That's what trial courts are doing.

Oh, no question.

You're absolutely right.

You're absolutely right.

So if the state has five arguments and the trial court finds for the state on argument number one, and the state can do what it did here

and just defend argument number one on appeal.

But you seem to be saying the state, when the state wins on something, the state still has to appeal.

They have to, in effect, I mean, whether it would be across appeal or not, you're saying if the state wins on argument A,

let's say, which the court addressed, and you appeal, the state has got the obligation to in effect appeal,

whether by across appeal or at least by addressing the argument in a responsive brief to every argument that they made below.

If this was a civil case, I mean, is that the law generally in other areas that the winner has to appeal?

I have two responses to the court's question.

I'm not saying that the state had to appeal.

It's not an appeal or cross appeal because it's not an argument that the trial court below aired.

The trial court didn't reach the issue below.

But the issue on appeal is the broad issue of whether the result was correct or wrong.

And if the state has an argument that the result was correct for some other reason, then that's part of the issue on appeal

and the state has an obligation to raise this.

The trial court has found consistent with that position in a civil case in the second Ross v. Eichmann case.

That establishes that if an appellate does not raise an alternative ground in this court and the ruling is reversed on the primary ground,

the appellate cannot then go back to the trial court on remand and raise that issue.

Was I right in that case?

I'm sorry?

Was I right?

You were right.

If memory serves, I think you were the trial court judge.

I was.

This wasn't raised on the first appeal.

It wasn't addressed in the first appeal.

It's too late.

And I think you were affirmed.

So you say it's not a question of the state having to cross appeal,

but simply to bring to the court's attention that there was an alternative basis to support the trial court's ruling.

And if further evidence needed to be induced on that alternative issue,

then we would know about that and presumably when we remanded it,

we would have said wrong on one ground,

but we don't have enough evidence before us on the alternative ground and that needs to be litigated.

Right.

And the court would have vacated rather than remanded,

which is one, I think one of the primary problems with the state's position is under the state's argument.

There's no difference between those two words.

They mean exactly the same.

It would seem there's some merit to your position,

but it would seem that if we were to find that, it wouldn't be fair to apply it here.

I disagree.

I think it would be.

Because once everybody's on notice that that's the way we're going to do the game,

then that's one thing.

But here, this would be a new twist on our practice.

I don't think it would be new at all.

I think it is established by the court's prior case law.

Ross v. Eichmann is one case and Saunders v. Town of Nottingham is another case

that establishes the basis for the law of the case doctrine.

So your position is, I suppose, analogous to when the defense raises an issue

and the state will say no, there's no merit to that issue,

and oh, by the way, any error was harmless, which they regularly do.

So they, in fact, make a separate argument that wasn't dealt with below.

They tell us harmless error.

They do. Exactly.

I mean, the state, if the state on appeal did not raise harmless error

and the conviction and the trial court's ruling were reversed,

it would be unimaginable that the state on remand could then say,

well, we should just reinstate that ruling because the error was harmless.

That's an argument the state has to raise here.

The state should have raised the exclusionary rule argument in this court.

Having failed to do so, they waived it.

It was the trial court's obligation to follow this court's ruling,

and even if it wasn't, it was trial counsel's obligation

to make the law of the case and waiver argument.

And that goes to your ineffective assistance of counsel argument

because these two cases are consolidated, right?

It does.

Ineffective assistance and the underlying case.

It does.

I only have a couple of minutes left,

but I do want to address the exclusionary rule argument.

The purpose of the exclusionary rule

is to deter unconstitutional warrantless searches.

But under the state's argument, as long as the police have probable cause,

then they can always search first and get a warrant later.

So that deterrence factor of the exclusionary rule would be eliminated.

This court should hold that under the New Hampshire Constitution,

the police must be in the process of obtaining a warrant

and observations from the unconstitutional search

must not be included in the warrant application.

Here, neither requirement was satisfied

unless this court should reverse.

Even under the federal constitution, as interpreted by Murray,

the trial court, in order to find

inevitable discovery or independent source,

still must find that the initial entry

did not influence either A, the police's decision to obtain the warrant,

or B, the magistrate's decision to issue it.

Here, the trial court made no such findings,

so at the very least, this court must vacate and remand.

The court has no further questions.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Ms. McGinnis?

May it please the court?

I'm Susan McGinnis,

and I'm here today representing the state of New Hampshire.

The defendant's argument that he just made

on the exclusionary rule,

that is not preserved in any way.

The defendant never made any of those arguments

in the trial court and never even cited the Murray case,

never argued that it was wrongly decided,

never said anything that would have put the court on notice

that that was in fact his argument.

In fact, the defense counsel in the trial court,

everyone agreed that the X size and ignore test applied,

so the defendant waived that argument in the trial court

and didn't preserve it for this court's review.

But he's saying that after we decided,

the prior case,

USV Jones was decided.

Oh, that's a different issue.

Jones is on the keys test.

The issue he was just talking about with the exclusionary rule

is his argument about whether the independent source document

doctrine applied,

because this court has held that when there's an affidavit

that contains inadmissible evidence that was obtained,

evidence obtained inadmissibly, facts about it,

you X size that information and the question is,

would the remaining information in the warrant

support probable cause?

This court has been applying this test for years.

In the trial court defense counsel never argued

that test shouldn't apply or that the court should.

Was that ineffective assistance?

I don't believe so because under this court's law,

that is the test.

The X size and ignore test is what this court has always applied.

So if trial defense counsel agreed that that's the test

and everybody made their argument based on that test,

that's not ineffective assistance.

No, relying on clearly established law.

I mean, there are interesting arguments you can make,

but the US Supreme Court has not required that

and neither has this court.

So if we X size and ignore, why is the warrant sustainable?

Because if you X size everything in there

that was derived from the unlawful entry,

there is still probable cause that the defendant committed

the offense and that the items connected to it

would be in his apartment.

And that's why, and therefore the warrant is considered

an independent source because it independently established

probable cause and the items were seized

pursuant to that warrant.

They were not seized during the illegal entry,

which brings me to the second question,

the derivative evidence question.

The defendant says that the state has to cover all of its basis.

Every possible argument.

We do harmless error analysis because that's something

you can decide based on the trial record.

Deciding whether evidence is derivative

is completely different.

That required development of a factual record

about whether certain evidence was derived from the illegality.

Has that determination been made?

That determination has never been made.

It has been made in this case.

It was made on remand because in his initial,

we only briefed the issues the defendant raises.

Sometimes a motion to suppress will raise eight or 10 issues.

Eight or 10 reasons why things should be suppressed.

Different pieces of evidence or all of the evidence.

On appeal, the trial court may decide all of them

or only some of them because its decision on one piece

means that it doesn't have to decide the second piece.

So you say the state had no obligation

on the first appeal to us to say

regardless of how you rule on the exigent circumstances basis,

there's another basis to sustain the trial court's ruling.

Because, well, first of all, the defendant...

So your answer is that your position is the state

has no obligation to make that argument.

If the defendant had made that argument

and presented the court with a sufficient...

had made the argument because it was clear

that independent source was at issue in the trial court,

the trial court never got to that

or made any factual findings about it

because it decided there was exigency.

On appeal, the defendant argued there was no exigency

and then said because there's no exigency,

everything gets suppressed.

Or otherwise you should vacate and remand for a new hearing

to decide what needs to be suppressed.

But he never even gave this court

a copy of the search warrant affidavit.

And the record without it was insufficient for this court

to decide whether the jacket and sweatshirt seas pursuant

to the warrant were derived from the illegality

or an independent source.

And he never argued, made any arguments about Dunn's statements

which that required some factual development

and a complete analysis of whether they were derived

from the illegality.

But if we were made aware of the alternative argument

then we could have made the decision

as to whether it should go back or not.

And it was the obligation is on the appellant

to bring the issues to this court's attention

and to provide the court with a sufficient record

to decide them.

The defendant just made, didn't make any argument

on derivative evidence.

Plus it's not just independent source.

The defendant has the burden to raise the issue of

this was illegal and therefore these things must be suppressed

because they are derived from that illegality.

That burden is on the defendant

to show which evidence needs to be suppressed.

Now sometimes it's easy.

If a defendant's illegally seized

and they search his pockets and find drugs in him,

obviously that's derived from the illegality.

But in the case where they seize evidence

that they've just seen or heard about later pursuant to a warrant

then you have to do a whole analysis

of whether it's an independent source.

This woman, Ms. Dunn, was there when the illegal search happened

but there's a whole separate analysis that has to be done

about whether her statements are independent of that illegality,

whether they're derived from it.

So it's the burdens on the defendant to show

that certain evidence was derived from the illegality

and then once he does it, the state says,

well no it wasn't for this reason.

What do we do with the case, the civil case of Ross versus Eichmann?

I don't think that case is clear enough for you to do anything with it

because nowhere in the record that I could find

is it clear why the trial court held that the argument was irrelevant.

Now here the trial court said it didn't have to decide

which evidence was derivative because there was exigency.

There was no illegality.

In Ross, I don't know why the second argument was irrelevant.

I must have had a reason.

You must have and there's nothing in the record to show why.

So it may have been irrelevant on similar circumstances as here

because one issue was decided favorably to one party.

It didn't matter anymore or it may have been irrelevant

because even if the defendants were right

or the plaintiffs, I'm not sure which party it was,

even if the party was right,

it didn't matter to specific performance.

So without a better factual record in Ross,

I don't think you can rely on that case.

And if you look at the federal case, Ducci,

the defendant says it's the same,

but in Ducci the state had never raised independent source

or inevitable discovery until remand.

And the reason the court said they couldn't do it

is you can't wait until remand to raise a brand new issue.

So you say the state was covered

because it did raise the issue the first time around?

It did.

It was covered because it raised the first issue

before the first appeal.

The defendant never fully briefed the issue

of derivative evidence or fruits in the appeal,

so it had no obligation to answer an argument that wasn't made.

I would also point out that courts applying the law,

the case rule had said it should not be applied punitively

against appellees because otherwise we would be forced

to brief every possible issue.

For instance, in this case, the trial court made a finding

that this police didn't rely on the key search.

The defendant never, the defendant briefed that issue.

This court didn't really decide the issue,

but it had been teed up by the defendant so the state answered it.

But if he doesn't make a derivative evidence argument,

then we're under no obligation to brief things.

Can I ask you, what do you say about the defendant's argument

that even if we agree with you on sort of everything else,

there should be a remand here on the issue

that one of the components of inevitable discovery

is not simply that the state could have gotten a warrant,

but that the state would have gotten a warrant

without what happened earlier?

Well, I don't agree that that's what the court meant

because as I point out in my brief,

other courts that have held that the issue

is whether the information changed,

would have changed the court's decision.

And so when you excise and ignore,

if the state has probable cause to get a warrant,

and here they did, so it's a lot different

than where you're having them,

well, would you have gotten the warrant

without this information?

Well, here it's clear they had probable cause

that the defendant was the burglar

that the burglar had a knife and had stolen money

and that it was his car.

But what do you say about, I mean,

isn't there some interest, you know,

that if we impose that kind of a restriction,

isn't there, you know, doesn't that guard against

the possibility which your opponent says,

and it seems to me there's some validity to this,

that, you know, the police will decide

if they've got probable cause, you know,

it's a pain in the neck to go get a warrant.

And after it's going to take a while,

even with electronic stuff and all,

it's still going to take a while, it's a pain in the neck.

Let's go find out if there's anything there.

And if we find out that there's something there,

then we'll get a warrant.

Well, the problem with that is they better

have probable cause before they get in

and anything that happens when they're in there,

such as a defendant making statements,

I don't think the police would do that

because if they get in there

and while they're in the middle of this illegal thing,

somebody blurts something out,

they're just going to get suppressed.

They'll lose all statements here.

They lost the defendant's statements,

their observations of him with blood on his hand,

and their observations of him having stabbed himself

when they arrived.

Let me ask you, what is the problem?

Let's assume that that, you know, there is that risk.

What's the problem with requiring the, you know,

the would-have test to be answered

as opposed to simply could-have?

Because then you're looking again

at a subjective intent of the officers,

subjective intent of the trial court.

How are you going to find out

if what it was influenced the trial court?

Are you going to make the, not the trial court,

the issuing judge who issued the warrant?

What are you going to call them as a witness

and cross-examine them

on whether the information changed their outlook

on whether it was the warrant?

Well, the test wouldn't have to be would the magistrate

have issued the warrant,

but would the officer have sought the warrant?

I don't know.

Of course the officers would have sought the warrant.

They had probable cause,

even if they hadn't seen anything.

In fact, it was clear here that they weren't

looking to confirm whether they should

search or not, because they opened

only one closet door

to see if someone was inside.

This court's decided they didn't have exigency.

But it was clear

from the officer's testimony

that the reason they opened that closet door

is they were concerned that the defendant

would be in there with a knife

and pose a threat to them.

They didn't search anywhere else in the apartment.

They simply opened that closet door

and then went straight back to the bedroom

and got the defendant

in large part because

the Mrs. Dunn said

that he was in the bedroom

with a knife to his chest.

They didn't question him in there.

They didn't look under the bed covers.

They didn't seize any evidence.

They just went in,

insured their own safety

and then took him.

He was out of the apartment less than a minute

after they went into the apartment.

It was clear they not just searching for evidence

to see if it's worthwhile

to get a warrant.

There's no basis to conclude that.

Am I correct that

the evidence

at issue

after the

excision

were the statements of the girlfriend?

That was suppressed.

Right?

No.

It's the jacket and the sweatshirt

seized pursuant to the warrant

plus Dunn's statements

whether those were derived.

And then there was another issue

the defendant had raised

about material misrepresentations

in the warrant had raised

in the original motion to suppress

the supplement to it.

Didn't brief that issue

on remand.

The defendant says

she could have had no strategic reasons

for not raising procedural bars.

But she could have

because

appellate counsel had not briefed

that particular issue

and had also not briefed the issue

of whether in fact Dunn's statements

were derived from the illegality.

So she may have had strategic reasons

for not raising procedural bars

because if she had

law court may have found that she was

barred from re-raising those issues too

because they had been

waived on appeal.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Did you reserve time, Mr. Barnard?

You did. I'm sorry, I forgot.

Just briefly on the state's preservation argument

Murray establishes

I think quite clearly that

for the state to show independent

source they have to show not only that the police

could have obtained a warrant

but that they would have obtained a warrant

but both of those questions are relevant.

And in the

Robinson's objection

to the state's so-called motion to clarify

this page A

130 to 134

of the appendix, he makes

both arguments. He argues first

that the state

would not have obtained a warrant. He says

quote, it is speculative to assume when

or if the police would have obtained a search warrant.

Those are the words directly

from the lower court pleading.

And then second that in a

separately captioned argument

he also argued that the excise and ignore test

was not satisfied. So for these reasons

the independent source argument that we

make here on appeal was preserved.

Thank you.

Case submitted.
