Good morning.

This is case 2013, 0653, state of New Hampshire versus Benjamin L.

Dooling, senior.

May it please the court?

Michael Hulser on behalf of Benjamin Dooling, senior.

And with the court's permission, I

have observed one minute for rebuttal.

I'd like to focus on the first prong

of the first issue in our brief, competency.

And the state's burden on that prong,

dusky champagne, ability to assist and consult,

provide counsel with the necessary information with which

to construct the defense.

And I think the question that begs is, why isn't this concave?

Why not girly?

What's different from this in your recent decadal?

And the ABA's mental health standards,

I think, lay out the theme of our answer.

And that ABA warrants, that ABA mental health standard

warrants, if the primary purpose for not trying

incompetent defendants is the preservation of facts

in fact finding, then they cannot be brought to trial,

minus that information.

That is our theme here today.

The theme, I hope you will find,

is borne out in this case by the state's experts

and in your case law, especially Decado.

So why isn't this concave?

First, Mr. Dooling comes to you with a diagnosed, court

credited, unfamed mental disease or defect,

traumatic dissociative amnesia from his,

Dr. Kinsler from his reports and from his testimony

at the conference.

The hearing says, this is a very fragile man,

severe anxiety, moderate depression, chronic suicidality,

severe PTSD, severe dissociative amnesia,

strongly in need of psychiatric hospitalization,

which he's now been at spew for seven years.

Dr. Kinsler goes on to say, on the record,

What was he doing?

Can I just ask, what was he doing before the time?

Can you just tell us a little bit about his life

before the crime?

The computer programmer for a school district.

OK, and was he working all the time?

All the time.

So the thing that really troubles me about this

is, how can we say that somebody who can live in the world,

they can go to work every day, they can drive a car,

they can go to the grocery store and buy groceries,

they can live in the world every day,

but they're not competent to stand trial.

That seems to me, presumably, you

have to understand how to make change in order

to go to the grocery store or how to swipe your card

or how to do whatever you have to do with the computer to work.

But so the person can do all those things,

but we should say they can't stand trial.

But they cannot remember the time period

that the crime took place in.

Does it matter that the loss of memory here

is very discreet?

In other words, it covers only the period of the crime,

as opposed to someone who may have

had some sort of organic problem, injury,

where he lost memory of years of time.

Does it matter?

Let me answer that, Justice Convoy.

With the state's forensic psychiatrist, Dr. Duke Tynas,

he was asked at the competency hearing whose transcript comes

to you in supplement from the state

and is in the record here.

Dr. Duke Tynas, Opining, asked in the dual-income

competency hearing, asked about his testimony in Gurley,

where he opines at page 38, when asked

to explain why Mr. Gurley was incompetent for the sex charge,

yet competent for the murder charge.

Dr. Duke Tynas answers that question,

I believe, Justice Convoy, in that he would not

be surprised if he'd been found incompetent to stand trial.

That's Mr. Gurley in the first charge,

because he couldn't remember the event at all.

It would be very difficult for him to participate in a trial.

That's Dr. Duke Tynas, the state's expert,

speaking to that issue.

And that's our theme, and that is our.

We have decided already that the mere fact

that you can't remember does not

equate to being unable to consult properly

with your attorneys under the standard.

And as I read the materials, he

was able to do just that.

Dr. Duke Tynas also mentioned that he

is an intelligent man, and he could.

But that component that we argue in our theme

comes from the ABA.

If you can't remember, you cannot assist your attorneys

in the most critical, critical information

that we could possibly have wanted.

We list in our brief at Nosium things

that a defense attorney can think of that might be

exculpable that your client can't remember.

And that would be of no moment,

except for the fact that we have an eyewitness here.

What's different between this and Kincaid?

We have an eyewitness.

Do you say there is a difference between someone

who is culpable in the lack of memory

and someone who isn't?

So for example, someone who drinks to blackout,

we hold, we would say, presumably,

that that does not render him incompetent,

but in your case, where your clients, Amnesia,

apparently is not based on any kind of culpability,

does that make a difference?

That is a very large difference that we bring you here today.

That is why this case is different.

In our first argument that we made

a credited mental disease or defect much different

than alcohol, blackout, and self-prescribed

or self-diagnosed Amnesia after trial.

I'm not sure I understand the difference,

assuming for the moment that I'll

acute alcoholism is a disease.

What's the difference?

If it was a disease, and it was diagnosed

by someone other than the defendant,

perhaps that would be a ground for incompetency.

But it wasn't.

Mr. Dooling's was.

And this court in Decado, very important,

echoes our theme from the ABA standards, I believe,

where you wrote at 298, a defendant must suggest

a plausible explanation for his alleged conduct.

But do you know what to do?

I'm sorry, go ahead.

That the otherwise, this is an important part,

that the otherwise intact recollection

of the critical time period could supply your words.

But I guess my question is if the,

isn't it a bit circular to be asking

about whether or not the person's

engaged in some misconduct which caused their Amnesia?

Because that's, I mean, one of the,

the claim here is he's claiming Amnesia

as to being involved in a killing.

He's claiming that's what I have Amnesia about,

is being involved in a killing.

And if he was culpably involved in the killing,

and that's what caused him to have Amnesia,

I'm not quite sure that that's,

how does that really different

than you are culpably involved in, let's say, the killing,

and then you say, oh my God, look what I did,

and I start drinking and black out because of that.

This traumatic dissociative Amnesia

was a mental disease or defect that was caused by that trauma,

not by Mr. Dooling taking a drink or drinking too much

or shooting himself or any other thing.

That's his point, caused by the trauma of the murder?

That is correct.

I think that was his point.

Right, but that's, isn't that,

that, I mean, if that, that, that would be,

or it could be at least a culpable event, couldn't it not?

It could.

You killed somebody and now you don't remember.

Could.

Okay.

But I would echo.

You don't have any problem not remembering.

Dr. Dr. Drutinus' words that I just mentioned.

If you can't remember the crime,

you can't participate in a trial

with just the key to our theme and argument here today.

And I believe what you asked in Decado

when you cited Rinzhak, the very next line after,

can he remember the critical time period you asked?

Cites Rinzhak, well, we can never know for sure

what the defendant might be able to remember

if he did not suffer from amnesia.

It does not appear to the Rinzhak court

and to you in Decado any real possibility

that the amnesia is locking in any exculpatory information.

Here it is.

And again, that would be a hollow argument

without the eyewitness, Ben Doolin Jr.

who testified at trial and was videotaped

the day after the death of his mother.

Say it.

What did you see when you looked out there?

Saw them fighting over the knife.

Who had the knife?

Dad, mom pulled it away, dad's hand all blood.

Dad had his hand cut off.

What were they doing?

They were fighting over the knife.

Without that, we could not present any evidence at trial.

His hand was cut in five places,

bleeding profusely onto the floor,

onto the phone.

We had absolutely no evidence available to us

to present at trial to flesh that out.

And that, we feel, is the essence of the incompetency

that this court, Dr. Duke-Tinus and the ABA and our theme,

warns makes a person incompetent.

And additionally, Your Honor, State v. Hall type of defense.

We were completely precluded from that as well, mental state.

In Hall, you may recall, is a second degree murder

just like here where it was charged knowingly

and recklessly precisely what Mr. Doolin was convicted of

doing, we have no defense in that

due to emotional outburst of the Hall court

and the Hall defense, as we call it.

He was not aware his action could cause the death of another.

We couldn't plead that without that locked in

time period evidence that you otherwise refer to

as exculpatory information locked in and as does Rinchak.

Let me just go back to a point you made.

I'm not sure I follow the logic.

You said that your position is supported by the fact

that the son is testifying.

Why is that the case?

Without that, it becomes very hollow for me to speculate

as to what he might remember about the incident

that we're claiming he has no memory of

because it's credited in dissociative amnesia

with the testimony of the eyewitness

which is very different from the other cases that I asked

and you asked, why isn't this concave?

Why not?

Gurley, why isn't this Decado?

That's one of the main reasons why with that eyewitness

we have evidence that if he could,

which is what Wilson tells us.

The argument we advanced from Wilson

is if you could remember, it must be presumed

that you would have been able to do.

That is the Wilson argument that we advanced,

not a rigid test.

That eyewitness opens that door

without its pure speculation, your honor.

With it, it's what when I asked Ben

in Norton 20 visits to spew,

please, can't you remember

and I actually berated him repeatedly?

Give me something, never could, never did.

And we believe that is the core and theme

and basis of incompetence under the common law.

Again, if Ben could have remembered fear for his life,

fear of serious bodily injury, no.

Did she come back?

She cut you.

What happened?

She never was able to tell me.

How about feeling provoked?

We could have gone provocation,

absolutely unavailable to us

because of what was locked in.

Ben Dooling had every conceivable reason, your honors,

to give me every fact that you could possibly remember,

especially when we read and see the DVD of the.

Unless they were really bad.

Correct, but that is an interesting point.

Wilson does not call for inculpatory.

If inculpatory was in there

and unlocked in a trial court address this,

that is not what Wilson says.

Only because of constitutional dimension, your honor.

The protection is only for exculpatory.

If he had any exculp, locked in.

But Wilson is the DC case, DC circuit case from 1968,

is that right?

That is correct.

But we don't advance the regent test

from any case here or ever.

What we advance is that theory,

which is borne out, we believe by the ABA warning,

by the doctors, Dr. Dubtinas, this Court of Decadence.

So what your argument is, is that this case is unique

in that you say there is a witness who suggests

that there would be inculpatory testimony,

exculpatory testimony from your client.

You say because of that differentiation,

we need not fear going down a slippery slope

based on speculation.

That's what you're telling us.

That is correct, your honor.

The eyewitness is absolutely key.

So is a diagnosed mental disease or defect,

as Dr. Kinster writes.

This qualifies as such under the statute.

That's quite different than the Kincaid-Gurlay or Decado.

Self-diagnosis makes those cases,

I think, distinguishable from this.

And that Ben had every conceivable reason

to give me his recollection of those moments

if he possibly couldn't, he never did.

But you say he had every conceivable reason

to tell you that, why?

I mean, doesn't that sort of assume

that they are exculpatory?

Yes. As opposed to being inculpatory?

And that's the reason the eyewitness is so important,

because the eyewitness's testimony is exculpatory.

But let me ask, did the jury hear

the eyewitness's testimony?

Yes.

After some debate.

Apparently didn't, the jury didn't think

that the eyewitness's testimony was exculpatory.

Very interesting point, of course, Justice Lin.

And that's because we didn't have a full arsenal

to refute the irrefutable inferences of guilt.

We were, I would say, hamstrung by what was locked in,

what he couldn't tell me to corroborate with the eyewitness.

Isn't that just a matter of degree?

I see your lights on.

But isn't that just a matter of degree?

You can answer the question.

A matter of degree, Your Honor?

I don't know of a defendant who ever says

he has a full arsenal.

By this defendant, none.

Thank you.

Thank you.

I did reserve a minute.

Yes, you did.

And you shall have it.

Good morning.

May it please the court, Jamie McCormick, for the state.

And I'll take questions at any time.

Is it true?

Is my recollection correct that, in fact,

Mr. Dooling at the trial did consult with his attorneys?

That is correct, Chief Justice Linus.

The trial court, in its second competency determination

after trial, relied, in part, on the forensic information

which prevented at the first competency hearing,

as well as the court's pre-trial review of the discovery,

extensive review, as the trial court noted.

So that may have been a tactical error

on the part of the defense, because do you

agree that this might be a harder case

if there hadn't been the post trial competency hearing?

Could you repeat that, Your Honor?

Do you agree that this might be a harder case

if there had not been a post trial competency review?

Potentially, Your Honor.

And as this court is aware, the standard on appeal

is highly deferential to the trial court.

And the fact that the trial court made two competency

determinations, I think this court should give the trial

court even more deference in that circumstance.

Now, the defendant started with.

But of course, what I think what the defense is arguing

is the standard should be tweaked, changed in some way.

Because he's saying that regardless of whether

the defendant is perfectly competent,

outside of that critical time frame,

he's telling us it doesn't matter.

The case law suggests otherwise, and you've

pointed it all out to us.

But I think I understand his argument

to mean that we need to change the standard

under circumstances such as this.

And your position on that is?

Our position, Your Honor, the defense

is asking for a per se rule that incompetence, I'm sorry,

amnesia equals incompetence.

And as this court has made clear and Kincaid recently

in Decado, that's not the law in this jurisdiction

as well as, I'm aware, any other jurisdiction.

Well, he's not asking for a per se rule.

He's saying because of the unique circumstances

here with this other witness, a new rule

or a particular rule would be justified here.

It's not a per se rule, he's advocating.

And Justice Bassett, with regard to that other witness,

Ben Jr. also testified to inculcatory statements

that daddy stabbed mom with a knife.

And then Ben Jr. saw the knife on the counter

when his mother was deceased on the ground, which

goes to the evidence that the defendant manipulated

the crime scene.

So the child also had inculcatory statements

as well as the ex-culcatory statements

they were arguing over the night.

Are you saying that Wilson is no longer

a good law in the DC Circuit?

I'm saying, Your Honor, that Wilson is rarely cited to.

It's been rarely followed.

As recently as 2013, this court in Decado

refused to adopt a rigid analysis from other jurisdictions

as was presented on appeal in Decado.

And I think what's important in this case

is not the fact that the defendant had no memory.

As evidence in the 911 call, which

was recorded and provided to the defendant in discovery,

as well as the first 911 call from his house

and the second 911 call from the neighbor's house,

the defendant's statements are captured.

And what he says is, my wife came at me with a knife.

I took it and I stabbed her with it.

So there's an argument to be made.

He has a memory of the events.

And with that statement, the defendant

did in fact raise defenses.

He raised self-defense, provocation man slaughter,

as well as men's rape.

This argument is.

Based on his memory at the time,

so that the jury had, in fact, a current memory

based on the 911 calls.

But yes, Your Honor, and coupled with his statements

and the discovery, which was quite voluminous,

1,700 pages of which, pictures of the scene,

videos of the scene, forensic reports,

the defendant had enough to raise defenses.

And he did raise defenses.

He raised three.

This argument that a men's rape defense was not presented

is not supported by the record.

And I draw your attention to pages 734 to 736

in the defendant's closing argument

when he argued men's rape.

And a quote he says, it's absurd to say

this man ever formed a mental state necessary

for the charges of murder.

That's on page 736.

So this argument that a men's rape defense never

occurred is not supported by the record.

And furthermore, given the discovery,

coupled with the defendant's memories up and to the point,

if you credit the defendant's lack of memory,

the gap that he testified, that he discussed,

as well as the forensic examiners evaluated,

was his gap in memory was from the moment he saw

Shelly come at him with a knife down by her side

to the moment it was in her back.

A small gap there.

So we're talking about a partial memory.

Is that the second stab wound or the first?

In terms of sequencing, it was the state's belief

that would be the second stab wound.

The second stab wound was more fatal.

And when the knife was removed, she

would have died very quickly.

So it was the state's belief that was the second stab wound.

And as the court trial court noted,

he did have a memory of their relationship,

the history, her character for violence.

He had a distinct memory of all the details from that day.

It was a Walmart.

He picked up his dog.

And he had a memory of the moments leading up to the homicide

itself.

So he had more of a memory than Kincaid,

where the defendant had no recollection of the car accident

and no recollection of the circumstances thereafter,

as well as in Decado, where the defendant

had a five-hour blackout.

So this defendant had a much smaller lapse of memory.

And with the discovery and his admissions,

he was able to fill those gaps and create these defenses

as trial courts.

You don't challenge the trial court's acceptance

of the expert opinion that this was not feigned.

And so we start with that proposition in our analysis.

For purposes of appeal, I do not.

But I would just like to point out the defendant's statements

that he did recall the events as they transpired.

You mean on the 911?

On the 911 fall from his house,

as well as statements to neighbors and the first responder

of which statements were captured in the background?

And although you personally remain

skeptical for purposes of this appeal,

it's not challenged by the state.

No.

So we do credit the court's decision,

but I just wanted to make that aware as part of my argument

that there's evidence that the defendant had a full memory.

And what he could not recall, he

was able to bolster with the discovery

as evidenced by the defendant put on a case.

He called witnesses.

He called Shelly's friends to talk

about her state of mind regarding the trip

and her believed homosexual potential relationship

between the defendant and this man, Mr. Bertrand.

The defendant also called Ben Jr., as my opponent has discussed.

And in furtherance of his defenses

at trial on cross-examination of the state's witnesses,

the defendant focused on the defendant's emotional state

after the fact, which is also encapsulated

in the 9-1-1 fall, you can hear what's going on in his voice.

So in terms of this provocation manslaughter defense,

there's evidence in the record which

would support his defenses at trial.

And he was distraught.

Exactly.

And the defense counsel did bring out.

He was crying.

He was upset.

All these types of observations.

And you would say that all of this evidence

adds up to a showing that Mr. Dueling definitely

could assist his attorneys in his defense.

And he did, Your Honor.

As the trial court found, the trial court

observed during trial he was attentive.

He wrote notes.

He communicated with his attorney.

He was able to work with his attorney.

He appeared to be actively involved

as the evidence unfolded.

He was able to review and evaluate evidence

as evidenced by defense counsel's pretrial motions

to exclude evidence.

So the inference was that the trial court made

that there were discussions.

But there doesn't appear to be any doubt as to that.

The narrow issue is whether he could

be of help in regard to this particular narrow time frame,

not the broader proposition.

And his memory was up into the very moments when, I'm sorry,

when he saw the knife in Ms. McGrath's right hand,

but coupled with his credited lack of memory

with his statements on the 9-1-1 defense counsel

was able to generate three defenses at trial.

What do you say about a question that's of interest to me?

That at least three of the defendant's arguments

are not sufficiently developed to warrant consideration.

And one isn't preserved.

And as to one or more of these, there's no adequate record.

Well, Your Honor, my response is in particular regarding

the argument, regarding the closing argument,

the jury instructions, and the photos, the defense counsel

has not provided any law to support his position.

Therefore, this court has made clear.

Insufficiently developed.

It's been insufficiently developed, insufficiently

reached on appeal.

There's no law, in particular with regarding

to the issue regarding photos.

The defense counsel has not provided a transcript or a ruling.

So this court is not able to do any meaningful appellate

review without a trial court's order.

Insufficient record.

Yes, Your Honor.

So your position is there are only three live issues here.

The competency issue, the exclusion of character evidence,

and the exclusion of Dr. Harper's testimony.

Yes, Justice Conway.

Those are the three issues you say are properly before us.

Yes.

Those were issues where legal argument was developed

and were preserved on appeal.

If there's no other questions.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Would you like your minutes, sir?

Just very briefly, we did raise defenses.

And I asked this court to imagine the law prescribes

what we could have done if we had that critical time

period from my defendant, very likely

have raised far more superior defenses.

And I would repeat, as I do to my colleagues,

all the defenses we raised failed.

They failed because I believe I did not

have that critical time period information that

was locked in, that was exculpatory, as the eyewitness.

How would you have explained the second stab wound?

Lashing out.

First of all, basically after she's dead.

There was no evidence, I don't believe.

The evidence did not present that at all.

Close to it, let's say.

In fact, the evidence at trial was,

I'm going to lose, the evidence at trials

was she was standing during that, unfortunately,

and bled on the counter.

So it was not after disease, we do believe.

OK, go ahead.

Assist?

If he could have assisted me with all that we did not have,

we would have had a much, much different case

as to why this rises to constitutional dimension.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Council may come forward in the matter of.
