This is case 2013, 0882, State of New Hampshire versus Craig Michael Sanborn.

The record should reflect the fact that Justice Bassett is disqualified from this case.

He just realized that in his former life, he had some connection to a related civil case.

I say, okay. I didn't notice that. I didn't notice that.

Well, it just, we just figured it out this morning.

Ah, okay.

Go ahead, Mr. Sisti.

Thank you very much. And Chief Justice Delinus, may it please the court.

Just to make sure that the record is clear, I have reserved with the permission of the monitor two minutes of rebuttal.

So the key, let me see if I can get right into this.

The key issue here is, in your mind, I would guess, that because no cause for the explosion could be identified,

then that must of necessity have left reasonable doubt as to whether your client,

and or his actions, caused the explosion, which led to the deaths.

Well, I mean, that's part of it. And that's really the crux of the argument.

What we're dealing with is Mr. Sanborn being over 800 miles away on May 14th, 2010.

He had not been at that plant on the two preceding days either.

And it was left in the control of his plant supervisor, a gentleman by the name of Oldham.

Mr. Oldham had basically the keys to the operation he opened up that morning.

He started machines up, he loaded machines, and he directed two employees, Mr. Kendall, with regard to their job.

We are now 1,856 days away from that explosion, and we still do not know what the genesis of that explosion was.

But aren't there some dots that could be connected here?

In other words, the state is telling us that there was all kinds of evidence that

your client was either instructed, encouraged, or he agreed to take precautions against powder explosions.

And we do know that the accident resulted from a powder explosion.

And so I'm just asking myself the question, is that enough for the jury to say,

look, he was warned, he violated all kinds of regulations, recommendations,

that were specifically meant to prevent powder explosions.

And what happened?

There was a powder explosion.

And I understand the court's position on that.

It was not my position.

I'm just trying to understand the analysis.

We should do them.

We should embrace every one of those safety violations.

Let's embrace them for a moment.

Let's still have the actors where they are.

And let's also inject into this particular decision, and when we make it,

the testimony of a Mr. Hearn and a Colonel Parker, Mr. Hearn, a witness who testified about a facility

that was Department of Defense authorized with regard to explosives in an area called Perry, Florida.

It's called Martin Electronics.

Martin Electronics is set out, and I'll give you the citations on transcript page number 1295.

That would be Mr. Hearn.

Through 1298, 1266, all the way up through 2095 when we actually deal with Mr. Parker.

Martin Electronics was a certified state of the art, perfect engineering facility that was used

by the Department of Defense for the creation of explosives and flares and so forth.

Did it conduct its operations remotely?

Yes, it did.

It conducted its operations remotely.

Everything was properly spaced and bunkered.

An explosion took place in 1998.

In 1998, after the explosion, they discovered that two of the employees were found dead at the scene.

It was up to specs with regard to its remote operations,

up to specs with regard to its spacing of powder,

up to specs with regard to bunkering,

up to specs with regard to spacing the particular buildings on that facility.

So what you're saying is, I mean, I guess what we're really sort of wondering is,

are you saying that nobody, for example, in our case,

did anybody say that if there had not been some negligence or recklessness,

this explosion could not have happened?

Did anybody say that?

Obviously, there had to be negligence or recklessness in some way, shape, or form,

but to attribute the act to Mr. Sandborn is another thing altogether.

What I think what is concerning is that if you look at page 41 of the state's brief,

it's boldly entitled, the trial court properly denied the motions to dismiss

because the evidence demonstrated beyond a reasonable doubt

that the victims would not have died if they had been remotely operating the equipment.

I don't know where in the world that came from.

Now, I know they cite to a page and it's page 2073 to the transcript,

and that's Mr. Parker, that's an expert that came on.

Unfortunately, sometimes you have to keep reading

because on 2096, Colonel Parker, the expert for the state of New Hampshire,

says in essence that he's familiar with the Martin Electronics plant.

He was unaware that there was an explosion there.

It was a state-of-the-art facility.

It was up the specs with regard to spacing and every other precaution,

and that he didn't know that there were two deaths.

Now, he spoke 20 pages earlier with a great deal of confidence

that no injury would take place if there was proper spacing.

The only problem is that in 1998 there was an explosion.

Dr. Hearn knows that.

In our case, did anybody say, for example, on this remote explosion,

did anybody say, for example, that this explosion was of such intensity

or lack of intensity that if somebody had been 30 feet away,

they wouldn't have died?

I don't think it ever came to that specificity whatsoever.

It came to a generalization by Colonel Parker

who didn't even know about the state-of-the-art explosion in 1998

at Martin Electronics.

That's where it came from.

The other interesting thing is this powder that we're talking about

had been the subject of explosions before, and that was not at all.

That's what I'm really sort of getting at.

It would seem to me that unless somebody could say

this kind of explosion could not have happened without...

Let's take it in two stages.

First, without somebody's negligence, and if I'm understanding from the record,

nobody really said that, that you couldn't have had...

That this couldn't have been like a motor vehicle accident.

Presumably there are some motor vehicle accidents that happen

where nobody's at fault. They just happen.

Let me hold back on that, because the experts were unable

and there was no proof to the contrary.

They were unable to determine whether or not it was a machinery malfunction

because the investigation by our state fire marshal and the ATF

didn't go far enough to dismantle machinery to determine whether or not

there was an internal flaw in any of the machinery, the grinders,

the so-called CADMAC machine, the compressing machinery, and so forth.

This was a lousy investigation.

I mean, in any motor vehicle, negligent homicide,

you do an automobile autopsy, in essence.

In this particular case, none of the machinery was seized

and autopsyed by the federal government or the state,

just for starters.

Thirty days after this particular accident,

evidence was still showing up on that scene.

I think that I cited to a speed control on the compactor, the CADMAC machine.

It was turned to a speed that was two and a half times greater

than that which was safe.

And who would have done that?

It would have had to have been one of the operators

and that's all it could have been.

And we also know with regard to at least one of the operators,

he was in that room operating machinery at a 1.1 BAC level

on the very date of that particular explosion.

Toxicology and the autopsy report by Jenny Duvall lays out that she can't rule out,

of course, that he was intoxicated.

And so all of this leads you to the inexorable conclusion

that there must have been a reasonable doubt as to whether your client caused the explosion

which led to the death.

Absolutely.

And of course, you know, even in civil cases, you can't, you know,

you just can't lay the blame on somebody as remote as Mr. Sanborn was.

And again, even if you take all of the warnings, all of them,

take them, embrace them, every warning from everybody throughout the whole trial,

you know, this would be the perfect setup.

This is what you're supposed to do.

How in the world can you ever anticipate your machine operator walking in after lunch

with a 1.1 BAC going into a gunpowder grinding room and going to work?

I mean, you can't.

And do you have control over that?

You don't.

You're over 800 miles away.

If you had control over that and you noticed that your employee was a 1.1

and you let him go in and work on that machinery,

I would say there's a problem there.

There's a major problem there.

If you were there and you saw your employee wearing loose jewelry going

into a grinding area in a facility manufacturing machinery, you got a problem.

But, you know, those facts aren't coming together.

You're saying this is the equivalent of a day of dand.

Yeah, there's a problem here.

I mean, what you have here is in essence a man that's at a trade fair,

800 and actually, it's 826 miles away from Colbrook.

He didn't know what was going on up there.

He had a supervisor up there to make sure that people weren't drunk in the machine room.

He had a supervisor there to make sure the machines were being run at the proper speeds.

He was away.

Now, all of those things that are, you know, a great detail laid out in the state's brief

with regard to screens and all kinds of other things, distances, bunkering,

that's all wonderful in the real world.

But at some point in time, the real world has to collide with reality.

Well, if not reality, causation, test of action.

Right, because I guess, you know, I think that the chief's question before, Mr. Sissy,

which I think you're sort of focusing on something a little different,

it, I mean, it seems to me that there was abundant evidence.

I mean, probably overwhelming evidence that your client was negligent.

I don't really think that there's a fair issue here that your client was negligent.

That's different.

And whether he was there or not, I don't think that really changes the negligence analysis.

The real issue is, did that, let's assume, you know, the state draws this analogy

about somebody that, if you know a construction company is going to blow

up a building and you lock the door, you may be, you might be able to be held liable.

But that assumes that the evidence is that the person that's killed knows

that the building is going to be blown up,

tried to get to the door to get out.

If they don't know any, if there's no evidence of any of that, it's a causation issue.

So that's why what I'm really asking, and I think the chief was asking about before is,

what is the evidence that any of the negligence that the state proved caused this explosion?

I would have to say that we are writing a question mark right now.

There is no definite evidence.

And that's my point.

If you've got a number of possibilities, then that would lead to reasonable doubt.

Correct.

There were three experts that testified, none of them could posit what the exact

mechanism of the explosion was, what caused that particular event.

Did they connect any of the peripheral negligence to the event?

I think that there was an explanation, a theoretical explanation as to what could have happened.

Tramp steel in the grinder, but they couldn't exclude the possibility

that it was an internal defect itself in the grinder or the CADMAC machine.

Interestingly enough, the day before this accident, when Mr. Sanborn was away,

there was a repair on one of the grinders.

The repair on the grinder was electrical in nature.

In fact, the grinder went down because of a short.

It blew out of fuse, and there was a repair.

I mean, he had no control over the repair.

He didn't do the repair.

Again, he was 800 miles away.

There's a million different things that were cited as possibilities.

We had smoking materials in the area as well.

That's in the record.

You have the alcohol in the record.

You have the machine running at a higher speed than was authorized in the record.

You have a watch band that was found on the top of the building that would

have been blown off one of the operators.

You're not supposed to be wearing jewelry.

I mean, we can just go on and on and on.

Again, like I analogize sometimes in negligent homicide cases,

you can have a car with four ball tires.

You can have a car that's uninspectable.

But it may not be the cause of the accident with the four ball tires and

the uninspected motor vehicle.

It could be the guy behind the wheel speeding with a 2L BAC that causes

the accident.

And again, this is, oh, I'm sorry.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Good afternoon.

My name is Susan McGinnis.

I'm here today representing the state.

Before I take questions, I'd like to make a couple of points.

The defendant's been hammering on this 1.1 BAC and that it's in the record.

The court actually excluded the 1.1 BAC.

And the only thing the medical examiner was allowed to testify to is

that she could not rule out impairment.

So this 1.1 BAC was never before the jury or any of the evidence.

Was it just impairment or impairment due to the ingestion of alcohol?

All she said is she couldn't rule out impairment.

That's all the judge allowed to be testified to.

Well, impairment by alcohol.

She could not rule out impairment by alcohol.

But here's the real problem with that argument.

The defendant essentially set up a bomb here.

Everyone told him that it had the potential to explode or catch fire.

He admitted he knew it was explosive and could catch fire once the powder was mixed.

So what is the evidence that, for example, you make a big point that

if the victims had been working remotely, this would have been different.

But was there evidence?

Did somebody testify if the victims had been working, however many feet away,

they wouldn't have died?

Okay.

Here is a quote from my brief that is a quote from the transcript, the state expert.

The state asked its expert, to a degree of scientific certainty,

had the men been operating according to the diagram,

a safe distance away from the machines,

according to the remote operation requirements of the DoD

and generally accepted industry safe standards.

Would they have been, in your opinion, to a great degree of scientific certainty,

exposed to that violent explosive event on May 14, 2010?

The expert's answer was no, sir.

Those distances are calculated precisely to prevent that type of injury.

He also testified that had this been set up appropriately,

there probably would not have been an explosion.

And we do sort of know what caused the explosion.

The experts testified that there was an initial ignition of the dust cloud.

The way the defendant set this up is he put tarps around this area.

Each machine was supposed to be bunkered, 30 feet from any other machine

and then turned on and off and operated remotely

from 150 feet away in a different bunker.

Instead, he set them all up in a tarp which made all the dust from them

collect in the tarp.

Can I just ask you back to the testimony that you quoted before?

Yes.

Is that, I mean, it strikes me that that's a conclusion.

Yes.

And what I'm kind of wondering is, are there facts behind it?

In other words, for example, did somebody

say this explosion was of such a character?

It was of such a, for lack of a better term, a level of intensity

that somebody that was however many feet, 30 feet away, 50 feet away,

or whatever, would not have died?

Or how do we know that the intensity of the explosion was not such

that even if they had been 30 foot away, they would have died?

I mean, was there some analysis of how strong the explosion was?

Yes.

In fact, we have evidence they wouldn't have died

if they'd been away because Mr. Oldham was in an office

approximately 30 or so feet away from the area where

the explosion occurred.

And he was thrown up against a wall.

But he lived and escaped the building.

So we know absolutely if they had not been in that room.

They would not have died.

Is it your position that the state did not

have to prove the cause of the explosion?

No, they didn't.

OK, let me just follow through with this.

All right, so your position is,

it doesn't matter what caused the explosion.

We know there was an explosion.

We also know that the defendant took actions or inactions

which created the situation, which

would allow anyone being where he wasn't supposed to be hurt.

In some circumstances, it might matter.

For instance, if he had set up remote operation

and somebody had violated that rule

and gone into that room and into one of the bunkers

and turned the machine on by hand,

but am I correct from your brief that the way the defendant had

things set up, the employees didn't really

have the choice to be in a remote operation.

Because the way it was set up, in order

to do this production run, which he was pushing them to do,

they had to be in there.

Yes, because he set it up so that they

had to be in there by the machines.

He instructed them to load the machines

while they were running, which is basically

what created the dust cloud.

He instructed them to turn the machines on and off

while they were standing there.

Say, for instance, that watch had gotten in the machine

when he was loading it.

The way this is supposed to happen

is they were supposed to have Kevlar's suits on when

they loaded the machines.

They were supposed to load the machine while it was off.

Then they go to the remote bunker

and they turn the machine on.

So it was not a question of the employees violating company

policy.

They were acting within the policy or the procedures

that the defendants set up.

Well, there were no actual safety policies or procedures

at all.

They were operating the way he had told them

to operate the machines.

There was a procedure that they were using.

OK, so the employees were operating drunk or not.

Drunk or not, they're operating as he instructed them

and as he arranged the situation.

Yes.

And so your position is it doesn't

matter what caused the explosion.

That's almost irrelevant.

It really is because he set up a bomb and put people

to the side.

But how can that, for example, I suppose you would agree

that let's assume that the employees violated

every rule in the book about what they're supposed to do.

But are you saying that it would have been impossible

for gunpowder to blow up, even if despite all,

even if none of those things had been true?

Isn't that sort of like saying, well, an accident,

it seems to me raising something along the lines of,

well, this is the only way it could have happened

is if there was some negligence.

And I guess what I'm troubled by

is just like there can be some car accidents where

nobody's at fault, when you're dealing with gunpowder

that's highly explosive anyway.

Can't there be explosions that, despite the fact

that everybody has done everything they're supposed to do,

it happened?

And so what I'm saying is, has that been sort of

sufficiently eliminated here?

Well, the problem with that is that you would have to,

that would be a case where everything was done right

and there's still an explosion.

There's always a possibility of explosion and fire with this.

Always.

But that's what the purpose of the bunkering is

and turning it on remotely is because there's always a chance.

But the way the defendant set it up here, as the expert said,

it was an explosion waiting to happen.

But regardless of what actually caused it,

what I understand your brief to say is, let's just,

you agree, we don't have an explanation of what caused it.

But what we do know is an initial fire.

OK, all right.

We do know that two employees were killed.

Yes.

And you're telling us the reason they got killed

was not necessarily because of the explosion itself,

but it was because of the procedures, lack of procedures,

the way the defendant required the employees

to do their job on this production

run that resulted in their death.

The bottom line, yes.

If they had not been there, even if the explosion had happened,

they wouldn't have died.

And the defendant put them there.

And I also want to make the point

that he really did cause the explosion.

So if it turns out that this is just one of those flukes

because gunpowder is so volatile,

you say it doesn't matter.

That's how I read your brief.

And you have to tell me, am I right or wrong?

Well, what the state had to show is he caused the death,

not he caused the explosion.

That's why I'm saying this to you

because I understood your argument.

He caused the death.

It doesn't necessarily have to mean he caused the explosion.

He caused the circumstances that

made it possible for there to be

an explosion of that magnitude.

There was over 1,000 pounds of finished powder

sitting in buckets next to these machines.

But apparently there was no expert testimony

that said having that amount of explosives where they were

would cause an explosion, or likely,

or more probably than not.

No, what they said is because it was there, it continued.

There was an initial fire and then

a series of explosions.

What do we know about the initial fire?

All they can tell is from the descriptions of Mr. Oldham

is that somehow the dust cloud ignited.

Now, it could have been a lot of things,

but the most likely source is the defendant

instructed his employees.

There was a metal chute on the CADMAC machine

they were using that would get things stuck in it.

The gunpowder would stick.

So he had them banging on the metal chute

with a wooden dowel.

Mr. Oldham heard one of the workers banging on that chute

right before he saw, heard the whoosh,

saw the orange glow, and the ripple in the ceiling.

So we know that the dust cloud ignited first,

and then things started exploding.

Well, dust clouds can ignite on their own.

How do we know anything about how thick the dust was

or what the ventilation was in those circumstances?

The employees, the employee who quit because of the conditions,

testified that the dust cloud was so thick

that it was coating his clothes.

It burned his eyes.

The people in the church, which was

on the other side of the warehouse,

were getting dust in the church that every day

that they had to clean up, acre dust.

There was dust all over everything in that warehouse,

even the things that were hundreds of feet away.

That dust was everywhere.

And it wouldn't have accumulated like that

if there had been proper ventilation.

In fact, Mr. Sandborn told the electrician

not to use any dust proof, static proof, or explosion proof

wiring because he wasn't going to need it because there wouldn't

be any dust.

There was dust everywhere.

It was bound to explode eventually,

and that's what happened.

The dust cloud lit on fire.

But the point again is, first of all,

if they hadn't been loading the machines while they're

running, there wouldn't have been so much dust.

If the area hadn't been surrounded by plastic tarps,

there wouldn't be so much dust.

If the room had been static proof,

it would have decreased the risk of explosion.

These are all things the experts tested on.

So basically what you're telling us

is that circumstantially, you can say,

although a jury could say beyond a reasonable doubt

that although it's possible, I suppose that this was

simply a fluke accident that would have happened anyway,

the circumstances are such that the explosion probably

beyond a reasonable doubt would not

have happened without the negligence that you pointed to.

And even if it did happen without that negligence,

these employees would not have died

if they had been further away as they were supposed to be.

If they had been properly bunkered,

the grinders that were making a lot of the dust

would have been in an enclosed area,

and there would have been an explosion ceiling or wall that

is designed to blow out in the case of an explosion

that experts testified to direct the explosion away

from people, away from other machines

so there is not this chain reaction.

That's the whole purpose of the safety measures,

because there may still be an explosion even

if you do everything right.

But it will be isolated to one machine.

The people won't be anywhere near it.

People won't get killed.

And I wanted to, before I run out of time,

that explosion in Florida, if I remember right,

that factory was also making, there was testimony

that they were also making grenades and bombs

and that it wasn't this powder that caused that explosion.

It was something else they were

making of a magnitude much greater than this powder.

The only reason this explosion was so bad

is because there was 1,000 pounds of powder sitting

next to the machine.

And expert testimony backs that up.

Yes, and 30,000 pounds of precursor chemicals sitting

right behind the tarps and five or six machines lined up

which exploded one right after the other.

There were explosions for several minutes.

I'm sorry, and there was testimony

about at least that much of how this explosion happened.

The dust cloud ignited, and then a few seconds later

there was an explosion, and then another explosion,

and then 25 seconds after that another big explosion.

So it was a series.

And the experts say that that could

have been avoided if the defendant had

done what he was supposed to do under safety standards.

Probably would not have been an explosion,

and the workers to a degree of scientific certainty

would not have died.

So any of these things that could have caused the explosion

it wouldn't have mattered because they would have been not

turned the machines on until they were another.

So the potential of an employee wearing jewelry,

the potential that we had an inebriated employee on the job,

you say, is irrelevant.

It would matter if the employee had actually

done something instead of being at the remote location,

had operated it from where it was,

had done something like that.

If the employee had violated safety standards.

Yes, but there was no rule about jewelry.

There was no rule about smoking material.

There was nothing to prevent that,

and they were never told not to do it.

And it was well known that smoking materials and jewelry

were going into that room, and nothing

was done to prevent it.

Thank you.

Do you need your reserve time, Mr. Sisti?

First of all, it was well known that there

shouldn't be smoking.

Oldham himself testifies to that.

And Mr. Scherrest, the building supervisor, in fact,

directly went to Oldham and said no smoking allowed

in this building.

So let's put that to rest.

With regard to these failsafe perfect buildings,

I suggest the court go to transcript page 1319

with regard to Mr. Hearn.

Question, you went out and you visited that facility.

And by that facility, we're talking about Martin electronics.

Answer, yes.

You described to the jury some kind of separation

or bunkering or something, right?

Yes.

And that this was the kind of facility and bunkering

that you were trying to explain in the future

to Mr. Sanborn, right?

Answer, yes.

Even before one ounce of MagCorp powder

was developed at that facility, there was an explosion.

Wasn't there?

Answer, there was an explosion at Martin electronics.

It didn't involve MagCorp or even the facility that

was set up, at least as far as I was informed.

It was some other operation that they were doing there

and resulted in an explosion.

And I think they were a couple of people killed

and they went bankrupt.

They shut down.

Question, so even in this Department of Defense facility

that you showed the picture to the jury of,

there was an explosion.

Answer, yes.

And there were fatalities, right?

That's my understanding, correct.

Did you sit down with Mr. Sanborn and explain

the dynamics of what took place at that facility?

And the answer is no, all right.

Then we go to Martin electronics again, 2096.

This is after, again, what's quoted in the state's brief

by the expert for the state.

Again, what facility is that?

We were talking about other facilities.

Answer, Martin electronics.

Question, Martin electronics, the one

we were just talking about, right?

Answer, yes.

OK, this was the state of the art place.

Answer, yes, sir.

Question, bunkered.

Answer, yes, sir.

Question, with the remote cameras in production.

Yes, sir, as far as I know.

Question, the one that a witness last week

testified to experiencing a devastating explosion.

And then it goes on.

He wasn't aware.

Was there testimony in the Martin case

that there was piled up material around the machines?

No, it's that.

And that the employees were clearing the machines

with poking them with sticks?

Well, we can get into the specifics of that

because the machine in the Coldbrook facility

was running at 2 and 1 half times of what

it was supposed to be running at, which was not authorized

by Mr. Sandborn.

And in fact, the testimony will be from Mr. Oldham

that he had warned the operators not

to run it at that speed before.

So they were banging around that machine

on their own, contrary to the policy,

and the speed dictated on that machine.

But with regard to Martin electronics,

think of it as the perfect, the most precise engineering

feat that was built to defend each and every employee

in that facility.

And two of them died during an explosion.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted, the court will take a brief recess.
