This is case 2013-0828, state of New Hampshire versus Mackenzie Thalusma.

May it please the court. Christopher Johnson on behalf of Mackenzie Thalusma.

I intend to focus this morning on the first issue, whether the statement was the product of interrogation or was a non-sequitur.

The law defines interrogation as any words or actions that are reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating statement.

So the inquiry is not about the defendant's choice or the police coercion or whether the statement took the grammatical form of a question.

It's about probabilities. The question is whether the conversation the police officer initiated was reasonably likely to produce the statement that it did in fact produce.

My plan is to make a point about each of three links in that conversational logic.

The first, the link between forfeiture and drug possession. The second, the link between forfeiture and bail.

And the third, the link between bail and drug possession. And I'm happy to take questions.

So to begin, the link between forfeiture and drug possession, forfeiture is based on an explicit accusation of drug possession.

We will take your money because you had a good chunk of drugs is what the police said to Thalusma.

A defendant is reasonably likely to respond to that accusation by saying something about the drugs.

The second one.

Well, what do you say about, I mean, isn't this in some ways like the sort of, I think in fact, I think you cited it, the Supreme Court case dealing with the

interrogation relating to the blood alcohol test. South Dakota, I think, the Neville.

Right.

If you ask somebody about, you know, I want you to take this alcohol test. I want you to do those kinds.

I mean, it's probably, you know, it seems to me it's reasonably likely to say the person may say, I'm not taking that test.

I had too much to drink or, you know, I couldn't possibly pass it or something like that.

And yet we say that that's okay.

I think, I read those cases slightly differently. I think that there is sort of an administrative question exception.

It's not so much an exception as an application of the principle.

The idea is that those administrative questions are not reasonably likely to lead to incriminating statements.

Because if they were, they would be interrogation.

And the reason they're generally not reasonably likely to lead to incriminating statements is because, I think when you look at those administrative

question cases, the questions tend to be highly scripted and they tend to call for more of, yes, no, will you take this test?

Yes.

Even if we agree with you on that, isn't there a break in the chain here?

The state is telling us that after the forfeiture discussion by the police officer, the defendant initiated a new conversation.

So the state is telling us about what the police were going to do with him and the bail process.

I read the state's position as saying that aside from the initial questioning about forfeiture, there's a new conversation initiated by the defendant.

Right.

No, I think that is their position.

And so here's my answer.

I think the state is wrong about that for two reasons.

First, as a matter of sheer chronology, Filuzma and Officer Goulet had not reached closure on the forfeiture issue at the time they went into bail.

But it was the next day, correct?

Well, the whole conversation is the next day after the arrest.

But the sequence within the conversation, it begins with forfeiture, but they're not done.

And in fact, Goulet comes back and finishes the forfeiture conversation after Filuzma makes the statement that we're complaining about.

And so the case would be different, and I think the state would be right, if they'd sort of reached conclusion, Filuzma signs the thing saying, I'm not going to agree.

And then the officer's leaving and Filuzma says, excuse me, sir, I have something else I want to ask you.

That would be different.

They would have then finished the conversation and he would have started a new one.

But they hadn't finished it.

They hadn't got to the end of whether Filuzma was going to agree to forfeit.

And secondly...

But that would have been a judgment made by the trial court looking at the conversation.

So if we look at the same conversation as reported in the record, as long as we conclude that the trial court was reasonable in its implied determination, I guess,

that a new conversation had been initiated by the defendant, don't we have to uphold the trial court?

Well, that gets to my second.

There is no factual dispute here.

We have the benefit and the court has it actually.

There's a videotape of the whole thing.

And so there's no real factual dispute about what was said in the sequence of anything that was said.

And so the trial court, I think, could not have found that they had finished and were done with and did not return to forfeit.

Is the requirement to finish in any case law that you've cited?

Well, I think that's the state's argument is that they finished forfeiture and then they went to this.

And you say we will look at it afresh and we can make our own determination as opposed to concluding whether the court was reasonable in its determination?

Well, I think you have to make a de novo ruling on the legal issue.

The trial court has, of course, this court gives deference to the trial court's factual findings.

But my point is there is no factual dispute about the content and the sequence.

But even if, I mean, let's assume that we agree with you that you're right that the conversation about the forfeiture wasn't over.

I'm not quite sure if let's assume that that's true.

But if the facts show that your client sort of interrupted that and said, you know, it set in effect, I want to talk about this, what's going to happen to my bail.

Why should that really make a difference?

Well, so here's, I mean, I think the court is right.

I mean, you're asking absolutely the right question.

If the police had initiated a conversation about lunch and my client interrupts that even though they hadn't finished the thing about lunch

and coming up with something totally unrelated, I would not win.

But so the question is, is the forfeiture conversation reasonably likely to provoke a discussion about bail?

And so I think there is a logical link between forfeiture and bail, and that link is the Luzma's money.

It is the target of the forfeiture proceeding.

And it is also, and he knows, within 30 minutes, is about to have a bail hearing.

So that money is also an obvious potential resource for him posting bail.

And so having this conversation about forfeiture in on the eve, you know, a short time before a bail hearing, it is reasonably likely that a forfeiture

conversation will segue into bail.

If it was not reasonably likely, if this had happened, you know, he'd already had his bail hearing and bail hearing was long done.

You know, then I'd have a bigger problem, I think.

But there's a connection, and it's the Luzma's money is the connection between forfeiture and bail.

The third point, and so just to finish that.

So the forfeiture discussion was reasonably likely to lead to a bail conversation, which is what it did.

And then my third point is, so what's the link between bail and drug possession?

The logical link there is that the officer's explanation of personal recognizance bail

raises the issue about how the Luzma stacks up as a candidate for the bail hearing that he's about to have.

And I think it's obvious that the question of how a person stacks up as a candidate for a bail hearing depends on the seriousness of the

offense. And here the offense was drug possession, admittedly marijuana, disputedly crack and heroin.

And so it is reasonably likely when you're talking to somebody about bail on the eve of a bail hearing that they're about to have,

that the person is going to say something about the seriousness of the offense, which is what the Luzma said.

So again, I think what would break the chain or would make this not interrogation is if, you know,

the conversation had ended, but it hadn't ended. If the Luzma had taken it in an unforeseeable direction.

But when you say the conversation hadn't ended, you're making that statement from the perspective of the officers, right?

Yes. Yes. Well, I think so.

And so, I mean, how does the defendant know or not know that that conversation is over because he's not driving that conversation?

So, when you argue that it hadn't ended from the defendant's position, there's no way to know whether the conversation ended.

I think it was obvious to both of them, and I think if you look at it, it was obvious to both of them,

because Officer Goulet had this form in his hand that he had showed the Luzma and they had talked about it

and there was the prospect of signing it or not signing it.

And that no decision had been reached yet or no decision had been communicated yet.

And they both knew that, which is why Goulet then came back to it and said,

all right, Mr. Luzma, you know, what do you, you know, are you going to sign it or are we going to put refuse?

And that happened after. And so I think they both knew that the forfeiture discussion was not over

because it hadn't reached the closure that they both would have anticipated one way or the other.

And those are the questions I ask the Court, Drivers. Thank you.

Thank you, Council.

Good morning, Your Honours. Stephen Fuller representing the State in this appeal.

Whether the officer was finished talking about the forfeiture forms or not, the defendant changes the subject.

He asks, what is going to happen to me?

At that point, the defendant starts asking the questions and the officer is answering the questions.

The officer explains that at the bail hearing, his bail could go up, his bail could go down,

or he could get a PR. And he says, PR, what's that?

And so he explains what personal reconnaissance is.

And then he starts talking about, in that context, he starts talking about the duffel bag.

There's nothing about the officer's initial conversation about the forfeiture forms

because he's giving him notice that he's giving him the seven-day letter.

He's explaining the form, whether he wants to agree to forfeiture or contest forfeiture.

And so that's what he came down there to talk to him about.

Forfeiture of the cash.

And so you say the subsequent conversation concerning the duffel bag, which has the drugs in it,

has nothing to do with what the officer came down to talk to him about.

And in that sense, the forfeiture forms are sort of like ALS forms.

So why isn't it true that it's likely to provoke a response related to the underlying offense?

In other words, why doesn't Mr. Johnson's chain work?

Because it's the defendant who changes the subject.

And you can see that, if you watch the video, this is very clear,

and the video has been made part of the record for this court,

that at a point after the conversation about finding the duffel bag

behind the Chinese restaurant and the parking lot,

the officer keeps trying to bring him back to the forfeiture forms,

because that's what he wants to do.

He says, are you going to sign the form?

Or do you want, or should I just say you're refused?

I mean, when the defendant starts talking about the duffel bag that he found

and put in his pocket, for a while, I didn't time it out exactly on the video,

but for a couple of minutes he just lets the defendant talk.

He does ask a question about the parking lot, like where did you find the bag?

At that point, the motion judge says, okay, after that, that's interrogation.

After that, those statements don't come in, because you asked a question about it.

But before that, the defendant's the one kind of deriving the conversation.

He's the one who changes the subject to bail, and he's the one who changes the subject.

If I'm a reasonable police officer, don't I anticipate that as a likelihood at this juncture?

Not if he came down to simply do the forfeiture paperwork.

Because, again, Defense Council talks about how sort of ALS questioning is formulaic,

because it's sort of scripted.

This is administrative paperwork that he's doing based on the fact that he had this cash on him,

and he's being charged with possession of heroin and cocaine.

He's not asking him any questions that have to do with where did you find the duffel bag,

or did you know what was in the duffel bag?

What's the legal implication?

Let's say the officer said, well, will you agree to forfeiture?

And a defendant says, okay, sure.

Is his okay sure in signing the form?

Is that admissible at trial, substantively, on his guilt?

No, I don't think it is.

And does it matter?

In other words, do we need to look at that?

Would a defendant who signed the form,

could that be interpreted as an admission?

And is that relevant to our analysis?

Signing the form simply means that he's not going to contest the forfeiture proceeding.

But as the analysis in this case has to be whether a reasonable police officer should know

that his questions or the conversation is likely to...

That's why I'm asking the question.

In other words, would a reasonable police officer...

And I don't know the answer to this question,

but would a reasonable police officer say, if he signs, this is a form of admission

which will come in against him at trial?

You see what my question is?

And I don't know the answer to it, because I haven't seen the form.

We've got it. I take it in the file.

It was an exhibit in evidence.

I don't know if it's in the appellate file.

But that is akin to sort of the ALS proceeding.

I mean, that is akin to whether the defendant is going to take tests after...

There's a difference.

There is no Fifth Amendment privilege about being intoxicated, essentially.

And so, I mean, isn't that the rationale for saying you can admit the failure

because you could presumably compel...

The state could have a law that would compel the person to submit to a blood test.

And so, isn't the rationale for not saying that this isn't the Fifth Amendment problem

is really saying if you can compel the blood test,

then you can do something short of that and admit the refusal to take it?

I guess what I'm saying is as far as whether it's interrogation for purposes of Miranda,

whether the ALS form is sort of like the forfeiture form,

whether going through the ALS rights is sort of the same thing

as going through the defendant's decision whether to contest forfeiture or not.

But that's sort of a side point because the defendant breaks the chain.

The defendant changes the subject.

But I mean, isn't Justice Conway...

I guess I sort of agree with Justice Conway in that in this sense,

if you have, if the defendant answering the question,

no, I don't contest forfeiture,

is an admission by the defendant that he's admitting that,

yes, these monies are connected to drugs

and there's not any allegation of drugs as I possessed drugs last night,

then the very asking of that question is designed to elicit an incriminating response, isn't it?

I mean, in other words, don't we have to be able to answer the question,

is the defendant's response to, yes, I agree to forfeiture or no, I don't, admissible against him?

But I think that then this would be a different case if the forfeiture discussion

led directly to the admissions that were admitted at trial.

That's really slicing this conversation pretty thin.

By the time he makes the statements that were admitted though,

like I said, he's asking the questions and the police officer is simply answering his questions.

He's saying, what's PR? Well, he explains what personal reconnaissance means.

And so, I mean, in Spencer, it's like showing her the photograph,

the incriminating evidence when she's attempting to break free,

when they're arresting her.

I mean, they're showing her incriminating evidence

and that's not interrogation because that's a response to her actions.

But isn't it all of a piece here where the discussion starts with forfeiture,

but it strikes me, again, I don't know the answer,

it strikes me that one could argue that if he agreed to forfeiture,

he was making some sort of an admission.

The defendant is weighing this in his head, presumably,

so he wants to know, well, what's going to happen here

before he agrees to sign the form?

What's happening to me? How does all this fit together?

So, I'm simply asking the question, maybe the defense is right

that all the dots are connected.

But even if we can say that he's admitting to something

by deciding to contest forfeiture or deciding on forfeiture either way,

a reasonable officer is not going to know

or know that there's a reasonable chance that that admission,

and I'm calling it admission just for purposes of this argument,

that that admission is going to lead to a confession,

that that admission is going to lead to the defendant

then sort of explaining all about the duffel bag and the drugs.

I mean, the two things are not close enough

that a reasonable officer is going to see that.

It might lead, I suppose, not to a confession so much,

but to responses.

I mean, wouldn't it be reasonable to assume that a defendant

who's trying to decide whether to sign the agreement to forfeiture form

is thinking about what the ramifications are of that

and so reasonably would say,

okay, so what's going to happen now to make a judgment

as to whether he should sign the forfeiture form

and by the officer continuing the conversation,

there's a risk that incriminating statements might be made,

and they were made here.

They were, but the question is,

is it reasonably foreseeable enough

that it constitutes interrogation?

I'm sorry.

I mean, if the statements of the two officers in the Seminole case

what I want to be in is, if those aren't interrogation,

if showing Mrs. Spencer the photograph is an interrogation,

there's much less nexus here than there was in those cases,

and so this can't be interrogation of the same type.

Is there something, does the form contain some,

will that help us out here?

Does the form contain some language saying,

by consenting to forfeiture,

I'm not admitting that I did anything wrong

or I'm not admitting that this can't be used against me

or is there anything on that?

Without having the form in front of me, I wouldn't want to...

I suppose your argument is if the Supreme Court doesn't know

whether it's admissible,

how would we expect the police officer

to know whether it's admissible?

But interesting question, obviously, we'll look at.

I'll put in the second issue.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you very much.

Case submitted.

The court wishes...
