Good morning.

Good morning.

For the benefit of counsel in the 5J slash actually a 3J case at 10,

we will follow right through without taking a break.

This is case 2014, 0755, State of New Hampshire versus John J. Parent.

May it please the court?

Stephanie Hausman on behalf of John Parent.

I want to focus on the first issue, and I have three points to make.

First, I want to discuss the excluded documents.

Second, I will address the trial court's error in excluding them.

And finally, a note on standard of review.

Can I just ask for a quick clarification?

Yes.

When the court decided to impose the sentence,

was it doing it on both the violation of the restitution order

as well as the Florida assault?

Yes.

Because the emphasis in the party's pleadings

have really been on the restitution, but query

if the court's imposition could have been justified on the assault,

does that not dispose of the restitution issue?

You understand what I'm saying?

I do.

If there was an error in the restitution issue,

the court should remand for resentencing

or for a new hearing on that aspect of it.

Because the trial court didn't say,

I'm giving this portion of the sentence

because of the violation of probation

and this portion of the sentence for the restitution.

In fact, in imposing sentence, the court

really focused on the restitution issue.

Thank you.

The documents Mr. Parent sought to introduce

showed that Mr. Parent was diagnosed

with a major mental illness in April at the time

he ran late with his payments.

The documents also showed that at this time Mr. Parent

was granted state benefits, that he

had sought care for this same diagnosis for a few months

prior to April, and that after a few more months

his doctor verified that this diagnosis rendered

him unable to work.

Didn't the court have a history with Mr. Parent, though?

The court had a history with Mr. Parent,

but not with the doctor that rendered these diagnoses.

And so whether the court had a history with Mr. Parent

doesn't preclude the fact that he has a mental illness.

A major mental illness has diagnosed by his doctor.

The trial court excluded the documents and Mr. Parent's

testimony about his mental health diagnosis

on the basis of untimeliness.

However, no court rule and no court order

required Mr. Parent to turn these documents over

prior to the hearing.

However, as I understood it from the record,

the records were excluded, and some of his testimony

was excluded.

But what exactly was he able to offer some testimony

about why he hadn't paid?

He offered some testimony about how his mental illness had

affected him and his ability to work.

However, the court excluded evidence

that would have corroborated that he suffered

from a major mental illness.

And that corroboration was critical here,

where the trial court clearly doubted Mr. Parent's

credibility.

If the court had admitted the documents,

it certainly would have been free to discount

the documents based on the late disclosure.

In other words, the lack of the opportunity

for the state to fully respond.

And you would have had no quarrel about that.

When there is no rule that requires disclosure

at any particular time, I don't know

how probative of the trustworthiness of the documents

is that the documents were disclosed three calendar

days prior to the hearing.

That could have been a strategic choice on counsel's point.

It could have been a matter of getting

the documents late in the game.

But no court rule or no court order

ordered him to disclose them at any particular time.

I appreciate that.

So what if we say that this was an abuse of discretion

in not admitting.

But in the end, even if the court had admitted them,

it could have discounted them for all of the reasons

that the court said in its order.

I don't trust you.

Your credibility is worthless as far as I'm concerned.

All of that.

And you're presenting me with documents with no backup support.

You raised the issue of standard of review.

And I just want to make a point that the parties agree

only that the unsustainable exercise of discretion

standard governs what sanction should

be given to a discovery violation.

However, whether a discovery violation has occurred

is a legal question and should be reviewed de novo.

The court or the state isn't arguing

that these documents went to a critical issue before the court,

finding that the court had to make,

whether Mr. Parent had an ability to make these payments.

Now, of course, they argue that the document themselves

at best only established that he had a doctor's opinion

that he couldn't work after September, something or other.

That didn't go to the April and May missed payments.

He was diagnosed.

He had the same diagnosis in April

that he had in September when his doctor verified

that that diagnosis rendered him unable to work.

Did the documents make that clear?

Yes.

They reached back?

Yes.

The diagnosis was first apparent in December,

but there was some records from a doctor's visit

with that diagnosis in April.

Thank you, count.

Thank you.

Ms. Woodcock.

Thank you.

May it please the court, Elizabeth Woodcock,

for the state of New Hampshire?

Why shouldn't the court have just admitted them?

Because it strikes me that for the reason stated by counsel,

there was no rule about when they

had to be admitted in this type of hearing.

Why couldn't the court have admitted them and then said,

OK, now I can accord them the weight I think is appropriate?

And there's no other.

The doctor isn't here.

We don't have an affidavit.

We don't have anything to support this document.

And the court could have ended up in the same place, no?

It could have, but that's a discretionary call

on the part of the court, Your Honor.

It was discretionary to say it's late,

even though there are no rules.

And apparently, at least the defendant's arguing,

there wasn't a discovery violation.

Well, I think that there are general rules

of what is fair play.

Well, one of the general rules

would have been that you could have asked.

The state could have sent out a request for discovery,

saying, if you're going to present anything,

turn it over.

And then, if they hadn't done that,

you would have been in a position to say,

they violated at least a court order.

Correct.

Bear in mind that if what the defendant was saying is correct,

he had sought this medical treatment at least

as late as April.

The state filed a motion to impose in May.

And then there was nothing coming forward

from the defense.

But all of that is, frankly, consistent with his diagnosis.

It's also consistent with the court's experience with him.

If you read the sentencing transcript,

the court basically said to him at the time,

I would put you in jail because you are so dishonest.

But doesn't the court have the responsibility, in this case,

to make a ruling today?

Not what happened two years ago,

but today, do you or do you not have the ability to work?

Now, he may not have been believable then,

but it seems to me the court was, frankly,

reacting to its assessment of credibility two years ago

instead of looking at the evidence today of whether he

could or couldn't work.

I think that the court was doing both.

And I don't think that the court should

be required to discredit its experience with the defendant.

Oh, I'm not saying that.

I'm not saying that.

But why could it?

It seems to me, since there was no rule against when

that had to be disclosed, the state never moved to continue

saying, wait a minute, we're being prejudice.

And then the court said, I'm not

going to consider those documents.

And by the way, I think you're a liar,

based on my assessment from two years ago.

Well, I think that the context is the late disclosure.

And the problem with that, Justice Convoy,

is that if the state had been aware

that this was the defendant's essentially defense,

it could have asked for discovery.

It could have asked for a release.

It could have asked for what?

Well, I'm concerned about the broader ramifications here.

The Superior Court does periodic payment hearings

all the time, dozens and dozens every week.

Would it be fair for a trial court

to say you, Mr. Defendant, are telling me

you do not have the ability to work and pay

off this judgment?

I'm not going to let you present any evidence today,

documentary evidence today, because I found you a liar

at the time I entered judgment against you two years ago.

Well, that just, the big picture,

presents a problem as far as I'm concerned.

Well, I think it should not.

Because I think that the court's experience

with the defendant, where if you look at the court.

But should that drive the admissibility decision?

I think you're a liar.

I'm not going to let you introduce documents

to make your case today.

Well, the court didn't make the ruling simply on the fact

that he thought that the man was a liar.

It came through that way in his order for heaven's sakes.

Well, it may have come through that way in his order.

But the grovement of the order was that the disclosure

to the state was so late that one of the.

So why didn't the state throw up his hands and say,

look, Judge, can we have a week here?

We'd like to continue this.

Well, obviously the state could have asked for that.

And the court could have decided whether or not

it wanted to grant it.

But the reality is that this was provided to the state

a few days before the hearing.

One of the ways that you determine whether.

And you know, the state does that a lot

on imposition hearings.

Based on my experience of 17 years on the court,

I would have an imposition hearing.

And the state would hand me a document.

And the defendant, a document all at the same time

at the hearing.

Well, I'm sure it happens.

And within the court's discretion,

the court can determine whether that is appropriate.

But the problem here.

But if it happened, isn't the problem that it has just

kind of been said that happens so often that then

to say for the court to then and most of the time,

I think in her experience and my experience,

the documents are let in.

And you say, all right, this isn't worth very much

because it's been.

But normally it's not on a sort of procedural ground

that, well, you didn't disclose it quickly enough.

Because as your opponent points out,

there's no rule that says they have to.

And everybody sort of does it without very much

advanced disclosure.

My red light is on.

Did you have anything you wanted to argue today?

I did have something I wanted to say just as six

with the court's permission.

One of the things that I think that the court has to bear in mind

is that the late disclosure, one of the ways

that you test the validity of any evidence

is through cross-examination.

The late disclosure did not allow the state to cross-examine.

The second thing is that the information,

essentially the impact of this diagnosis

was before the court through the defendant's testimony.

And at that stage of the game,

I think that the court's relationship with this defendant

becomes valuable because the court can then

assess the veracity of the defendant's testimony.

My red light has been on for a little bit longer

than it probably should have.

I appreciate the court's indulgence.

And I ask that the court be submitted.

Thank you, counsel.

Case submitted.
