This is case 2014-0504 Douglas Gibson versus Granite State Electric Company, Inc.

May I please record my name is Russ Hilliard. Excuse me.

I represent Doug Gibson, who was a farmer who sued the electric company because he believed his cattle had been harmed by stray voltage.

May seem like an unusual case to some of us, but it's not an unusual case to Aaron Tinson, who's a lawyer up in the Upper Valley, who's handled cases like this before.

In fact, one of his cases is in the annotation about this subject that I cited in my brief.

He made a mistake. Aaron Tinson.

He failed to calendar a revised expert disclosure deadline date that was, I'm going to use the word embedded, was a motion to continue and assented to one that in the motion had a series of dates for the various interim stages of the civil case.

The court, assented to. The court granted the motion. The order granting the motion said, okay, the new trial date is X and appended a notice of the new trial date and trial management conference and perhaps deadlines for motion to eliminate whatever.

It didn't expressly say in its order and therefore all of the discovery deadlines are.

Well, it's at page 52 of the appendix, Your Honor. It says the assented to motion to continue the trial trial management conference in interim deadlines is granted.

Right. So you have to go back to the body of the motion to then understand what the deadlines are.

The deadlines, the interim deadlines so-called, were in the body of the assented to motion to continue.

Attorney Tinson missed that. He was working on his expert reports.

There's a lengthy affidavit from him in the record when he asked that they be extended, which very candidly set out.

Does the record show that he had an expert lined up and he was in fact working with an expert? Sometimes we see these cases where there are no expert in sight.

The record reflects that he did and he was, Your Honor. His affidavit begins at page 47 of the appendix and goes for four or five pages.

And it talks about the work he was doing in the fall of 2013 and when he's, I don't mean overstated, sitting in his office working arrives in the mail a motion for summary judgment by the defendant saying,

the deadlines passed, you haven't disclosed, you need experts, the case should be dismissed. Within a week, he's got his disclosures.

I mean, that scenario is completely understandable and would sort of argue, at least in my view, would argue sort of in your favor.

But the difficulty I guess I have is when you then look at the disclosures, I mean it, you know, if the, if the, your client understood that the case was going to go to trial,

I think in September, or in the summer.

I think July.

All right, so the, so he understands that the case is going to go, even if he doesn't remember the exact deadlines, he understands that the case is going to go to trial in July.

And in March, or maybe it's April now, because of when the summer, when he actually makes the disclosure.

Mid-March.

Mid-March.

The motion came in, I think March 6th.

Right. I mean, when he makes the disclosure, it doesn't seem like much of a, I mean it really does seem like, you know,

this is pretty summery.

I mean, they, for example, I didn't see anything in there, you know, from a veterinarian who presumably would, if I understand correctly, the, the claim is that there were a number of cows that died.

And yet there's no, no evidence of a veterinarian who would testify about how they died or whatever.

I mean, well, I'm not an expert in the area, Your Honor.

I have to rely on his affidavit, his meeting, Attorney Tensen's affidavit that he put in, and he speaks about, and there's no dispute about this, that in what he was doing in late 2013 and what he did in the early part of 14.

And then yes, you'd have to say, he gets this motion in, he figures he better get, get something in pretty darn quickly, which he does.

I mean, if they required supplementation or clarification, that's another issue, I suppose.

But he receives the motion within a week, he puts together what he has and puts in a motion to extend the deadline.

And here we are.

What is your argument that the other side says that they were prejudiced by this?

Does that may be the fulcrum on which this balances?

Well, my argument is that they really aren't prejudiced.

You know, I included an order from Judge McHugh that went the other way where I was, the shoe was on the other foot.

The trial was in July. Do cases always get reached and grafted in county? I don't know.

Are you aware of Judge McHugh's reversal rate?

Well, yes, but not on that issue.

Okay. Thank you, counsel.

Well, no, I was on the other side there.

Your light's on.

I'm sorry.

My answer quickly, Justice Convoy, is that the degree of prejudice of any is a factor that needs to be taken into account when a judge is exercising his or her discretion on whether, on facts like this, to throw Mr. Gibson out of court or not.

And here, yes, there was a trial scheduled in July. Did it mean the trial needed to be put over the fall or something so that there was enough time for the various steps to take place? Sure.

But as weight against Doug Gibson's case being dismissed and the prejudice that that entails, the balance, I suggest, tips in his favor.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you very much.

Mr. Ramsdell.

May it please the court? My name is Michael Ramsdell. I'm here on behalf of Granite State Electric.

There is no area where a trial court has greater discretion than enforcing its own order. Here, you not only have an order issued by the trial court and make no mistake about this.

In that September 2013 order, that set a trial date for July of 2014 that not only was requested by plaintiff, but made the case three years old by the time it was going to be tried.

The interim trial dates, as you can tell from the appendix that was submitted to you, I sent a draft of the motion to plaintiff's counsel. After we agreed on the dates and the form of the motion, I sent the copy of the motion that was actually filed with the court.

And I wasn't even supposed to be filing the motion. The appendix also shows that plaintiff's counsel asked me to file the motion. And so there's no surprise here.

But the other thing that hasn't been mentioned yet, and I think is very important and distinguishes other circumstances and other cases, is that the court in September of 2013 put the parties on notice that because of the age of the case, there would be, quote, no further continuances.

When plaintiff failed to produce expert reports in January of 2014, that was a violation not just of the discovery order itself, but of the no further continuance order. It cannot be that the court, that that was an exercise, an unsustainable exercise of discretion.

How long were you supposed to disclose your experts? Was it within a period after the other side disclosed experts?

That gets to the prejudice part here, which this isn't an instance where the court failed to consider whether there was just cause and found that there wasn't.

And this court's decisions have upheld that where an attorney fails to calendar a date, that's not just cause. At least since 1977, that's been held in by decisions of this court.

Granted state electrics expert disclosure deadline was not until April 1 through the history of the discovery schedules in this case and going all the way back to plaintiff's summary statement.

So you had a date certain on your discovery.

We had, we expressly built in two and a half months from plaintiff's expert disclosure to granted state electrics expert disclosure because of the complexity.

And so presumably you were working with your expert. You had an expert and you were working with that expert?

I frankly wasn't.

Were you going to wait until, I mean, that was kind of risky to wait, right?

No, that's why we built in the two and a half months. Plaintiff had set forth seven causes of action that were still alive.

One of the causes of action had been dismissed earlier.

And frankly, I needed to find out what he was pursuing and what the basis of his claims were to decide whether I needed.

Certainly there was going to be was going to be necessary to have someone with knowledge of electricity transmission.

But whether or not, for example, a veterinarian was going to be necessary.

That's why we built that amount of time in there.

And that's where the prejudice comes in that once you get to March 14 and I still didn't have March 6 and I still didn't have expert disclosures.

And candidly, we never had a hearing to challenge exactly how much work had been done on these expert disclosures prior to Granite State Electric filing its motion for summary judgment.

But the idea that someone had worked and experienced attorney had worked for months to produce the expert disclosures that by any standards were deficient in this case.

Frankly, I suggest they may have been worked on for months.

They weren't worked very hard on for months, but the court didn't have to reach that issue.

So it wasn't.

What the failure to make the disclosures, even had they been adequate, put Granite State Electric in a position of by the time its deadline for expert disclosures was going to be met two and a half months from that,

when we passed the disclosure deadline, we're already passed the discovery deadline, we were passed the deadline for mediation, there was not going to be time to depose plaintiff's experts before trial.

There certainly wasn't going to be time to depose plaintiff's experts and prepare a case for trial.

So the question is, did the court exercise its discretion soundly or was it not a sustainable exercise of discretion?

The answer to that question, in light of how the deadlines came into effect, the fact that the court's order, there were separate orders that said the trial dates,

and one that said granting the motion to continue trial and interim deadlines.

Thank you, council.

Thank you.

The court stands adjourned.
