Good morning. Before we begin this morning, on behalf of the court, I would like to recognize the students who are here from New England College this morning to watch part of the oral arguments. And with them is their professor, our dear friend, Barbara Abbott. Where is she?

Way in the back.

There you are. Nice to have you all here.

This is case 2014-0744, State of New Hampshire v. Isaac Jayat.

Mr. Johnson.

May it please the court. Christopher Johnson on behalf of Isaac Gillette.

The issue in this appeal involves the standards governing in-camera review of confidential records.

My plan this morning is to focus on the first dispute relating to the role of counsel in that review,

while also making a point about the second dispute, which is whether general credibility information can ever meet that essential and reasonably necessary standard.

I'm happy to take questions at any time.

You really are asking us to retreat from State v. Gay and State v. Sargent, are you not?

Because we said pretty clearly that once the Gagne standard was established and the court reviewed confidential documents,

that the court would then determine whether those documents were reasonably necessary essential for the defense.

Right.

I have to tell you, I get your argument philosophically that there seems to be something missing between the Gagne standard

and what you argue to be the admissibility standard, but how do we do what you want us to do without overruling those two cases?

So I don't think the court has to overrule those cases.

I think when you look, for example, at Farrow, this court referred to this process as involving counsel,

and the later cases didn't overrule Farrow, I think when you look at your cases,

what you'll see is that this court has made some statements about the process,

but no case builds to a holding on the basis of an in-depth analysis that rejects the argument I've made.

So I think you used the right word initially.

I think I'm asking you to retreat from some statements,

but I wouldn't characterize it as having to overrule a prior holding

because I don't think this argument has been made in the way that I'm making it before.

So tell me again what you're asking us to do.

So with respect to the role of counsel, and I'd also emphasize this is not a constitutional argument.

It would be different if there was a New Hampshire statute.

But what we're left with is it has fallen to this court to establish the best balance

between the interest in confidentiality and the interest in justice.

And so I'm asking this court to articulate that protocol for the review of in-camera records

in such a way.

In what way? How would we articulate it?

So I think what happens is the beginning continues as this court has repeatedly articulated in the past.

There's a triggering phase where a defendant has to make a showing that there's a reasonable probability.

And ultimately, at the end, there is an analysis that the fact that there's relevant information

in confidential records doesn't mean it's essential and reasonably necessary information.

And so that part's the same.

But in the middle, you know, my position is that this court can adopt only a modest additional intrusion

on that confidentiality interest.

Which would be allowing counsel's eyes to produce the document?

Right. That's right.

And it wouldn't, you know, there could be protective orders.

There could be kind of modest half measures.

Like there could be a disclosure which says to counsel, you know,

there's a lot of stuff in here about the complainant's relationship with her grandfather.

I'm not going to necessarily reveal to you yet what it is, but, you know, talk to me.

If you've got a defense theory that's built on that.

Now, here's the irony.

The hole that you're trying to fill continues.

I looked at these documents, and I would not have turned them over either.

Well, precisely.

And that's why I think the involvement of counsel can greatly increase the quality of the review.

One thing, I guess, one of the things that strikes me would make, would advocate in favor of your position is this.

Under our case law, including some very recent case law, we've basically said that when, if there's a claim that all you can do now,

if, unless a trial judge says all the confidential, all the records I got, I'm turning over to you.

Unless the judge says that, you don't know what wasn't turned over.

So you say, Supreme Court, look at the records.

Right.

And, of course, we have to look at the records, even if there's, you know, even if, even if, if we knew in advance, for example,

that there was nothing, that your argument was, well, you know, 35 years ago, his teacher said that he was late in being potty trained,

and we want to see that, we'd say, we don't have to look at those records.

That's nonsense.

Right.

So, in one sense, by allowing counsel to, to have access, we could limit our ability to have to look at the records.

Right.

By saying, look, counsel hasn't made any, counsel who has seen them.

Right.

Hasn't made any kind of plausible argument.

Right.

Very much so.

And I think on appeal, then we would see them also.

And if we saw them and said, you know, are those part of them that the trial judge deemed relevant, we wouldn't be, you know,

we would be able to say, geez, I'm not going to raise that on appeal.

Well, let me ask you this question.

The other, the downside of that might be this.

What do we do?

Two, two issues.

Doesn't, if, if the records are disclosed to counsel in the way you suggest, would there,

should there be a, a protective order at that stage saying that counsel can't disclose them to his or her client?

I think that could happen.

And, and it has happened in other cases I'm aware of outside the context of confidential records.

But I know of cases, State v. Etienne was a case where the lawyer was given some information,

and I think because of a concern about witness tampering, instructed not to share that information with the client.

And then the next question is, what do we do if somebody, and I understand it's relatively rare cases,

but what about somebody who's, who's appearing pro se?

Who says I'm waiving counsel?

I mean, yeah, I, that is a difficult problem, and, um, you know, it may, you know,

maybe there would be solutions, uh, appointment of a counsel for a limited purpose.

Let's, let's look at it from the victim's standpoint.

I mean, these records can be, I'm not saying they are in this case, but as you know,

they can be very, very sensitive, and the mere prospect of disclosure could be traumatic.

Yes, yes, but by hypothesis, in the situation we're in, they're already being disclosed to the judge,

and maybe if a judge involves the law clerks, for example.

But the judge is, the judge is entirely different in concept here from the defendant,

who is, in most of these cases, an alleged sexual abuser.

Right, well, and that's why I said there could be a protective order,

to the extent that the judge says, I mean, the judge is in a very difficult position in these cases.

Well, because the judge doesn't know a lot at the point, usually, that the judge is reviewing the records.

Um, when I read your brief, I must confess, I thought back to what I did when I was a trial judge.

Gagne says, if the defendant, um, establishes a reasonable probability that there is relevant

and material information in the records, there's a review.

The logic, the meta, sort of the metaphysical approach suggests that if it turns out that counsel is right,

that there is relevant and material information, that should be turned over,

because that's a different question than when the question of ultimate admissibility,

at which time the stricter standard kicks in.

And I ask this question because I remember reading lots of records

where I might say, I think this is arguably relevant and material,

and I don't quite have enough information about how the trial is going to play out,

because I'm not at the admissibility stage yet.

I'm just looking at the records, and I'm asking myself the question,

in light of what was argued by counsel, at an early stage in the litigation,

are these relevant and arguably material?

And maybe I was too generous, because I would then allow counsel under a limiting order to look at them.

So I appreciate your point, because it's got to be a different standard for admissibility

than it is for allowing counsel, who may then launch off onto additional discovery,

because that's part of the reason the records are turned over.

So, for example, to be more concrete, let's say this is a sexual assault case against Mr. Defendant.

In the records, there is some disclosure that this victim had been sexually assaulted

by a different person around the same time period,

and perhaps the victim, who may be young, confused or conflated the very, unfortunately we see this,

the various assaults, query, even though that the other assaults may not ultimately come in at trial,

query, should counsel have the opportunity to explore that?

Right.

That's what you're getting at.

Precisely, precisely.

And this is, I mean, two thoughts in response to that.

And one is that there's a margin of error, because of the way the trial judge here applied the analysis,

the judge could well have looked at the records and said,

you know, there's a good bit here that strikes me as relevant,

but none of it meets essential and reasonably necessary, so I'm not disclosing any of it to counsel.

And the second point, and I've shared these cases with Ms. McGinnis,

I found that the Massachusetts courts addressing this issue in cases that are not cited in the briefs

have come out in favor of involving counsel.

The court can look at Dwyer, 859, Northeast 2nd, 400.

Trial counsel and appellate counsel?

Yes, it's about trial counsel.

It's about, there's a similarly structured where there's an initial triggering mechanism that has to be met,

and once the triggering mechanism is met, then there's some involvement of counsel.

Sorry, please continue to give your citations.

Oh, yes, so there's a series of cases.

It's Commonwealth v. Dwyer, 859, Northeast 2nd, 400, and that's a 2006 case, and it cites some other cases.

There's been a fairly long conversation within the SJC over the years about how to do this,

and that case will contain it.

What about other jurisdictions?

Well, there's different approaches.

In some of the cases, the states cite.

Some states, and I think Indiana is a case cited by the state,

Indiana by statute prohibits the disclosure of material in therapy records, period.

It doesn't get in-camera review.

It doesn't get anything by statute, and I think, you know,

so they have rejected efforts to have counsel involved in looking at those records.

New Hampshire doesn't have such a statute, and there might be constitutional challenges

if a statute such as that passed, but we're not there, and so there's a wide range,

all the way from Indiana, which says this is sacred and it doesn't get disclosed at all,

to Massachusetts, where I think there's a procedure that involves counsel

after a certain kind of showing is made.

So is Massachusetts on the extreme on that end of the continuum?

I don't, I mean, I haven't done a comprehensive search of the survey of the jurisdictions,

but I did see that Massachusetts, you know, adopted a protocol like the one I'm proposing.

What about the general credibility issue?

Yes, so the general credibility issue.

My point here is that it may very well often be true that general credibility information

will fail to meet the essential and reasonably necessary standard and then not be usable,

but my point is that it's not inevitably or categorically true.

It's possible that there could be general credibility information in records that would meet the standard.

For example, I suppose, I mean, it would seem to me it would be awfully hard.

Let's suppose that in, and this, I grant you it would be an unusual case,

but suppose in the counseling records, you know, there's evidence that the victim of the crime said to the counselor,

you know, made some comment about, you know, when I was convicted of perjury in Alabama three years ago,

and somehow the state hadn't found, you know, hadn't found that information.

I would assume we would all say, wait a minute.

Right, precisely.

This has got to be an exception.

Right, precisely.

And I think, but the way the trial court here construed it is that kind of information,

no matter how powerful, is categorically out of bounds.

And that's all I'm saying.

It's not that it will often be true that it meets the standards, but it might sometimes be true.

Can I just circle back to what you're wanting us to do here?

Am I correct that our cases, and I've looked, I took a quick look at Gay and Sargent again,

and I've also reviewed the records in dispute here.

Our case law seems to be generated from an after-the-fact analysis.

In other words, we get the case on appeal, and our remedy has been okay trial court,

you take a look at the records and decide whether they were necessary, reasonably necessary, essential.

So it's an after-the-fact determination as to whether they should have been presented at trial.

And it's simply because of the procedural posture that our statements about reasonably necessary and essential evolved.

They didn't evolve from a before-the-fact look.

Do you understand what I'm saying?

Yes, no, I think that's right.

The trial, you're in a better position than the trial judges are for this,

because you've got the benefit of the trial, which they don't have.

I think you're still in an imperfect position in the sense that you're not aware of the other possible defenses

that might have been launched on the basis of information that was contained.

But you're in a better position.

And I think it could be, well, that the legal analysis, again, because there isn't an opinion where the court has really gotten into depth,

the legal analysis may have created...

Because we always have a case where the trial is over, and now the question is,

were there documents that may have affected the outcome of the trial?

So we send it back, and we say, look, reasonably necessary and essential is the standard to decide whether there will be a new trial.

That's a different question from an initial look at the documents.

And we need to tell the trial judges what to look for, and we've kind of just created a mantra.

And I know Justice Lin would like to fix that part, but that's not reflected.

That's not before us in this case.

Can I just add, do you have a suggestion?

I mean, the idea of calling something essential and reasonably necessary seems to me, you know, it makes us just look.

People say, what?

Do you have a suggestion for what would be an alternative?

I understand that there's, I think in the brief, there's been some suggestion that maybe we would refer to it as unavailable from another source and reasonably necessary.

Right, right.

Because that seems to me it can make some sense.

That's right. I think that's right.

There's a measure, there's a part of that analysis which is designed to show unavailability from another source.

There's a part which I think gets at, this seems like it would have been pretty helpful to the defense, pretty significant and not sort of a side point.

And there's, maybe there's some way to craft a standard around those two.

How do we do that in this case?

You know, I agree with Judge Hicks.

I've reviewed the records.

If we use our standard, reasonably necessary and essential, those documents don't fit it, in my judgment.

My colleagues haven't seen them.

My other three colleagues I don't think have seen them yet.

But in any event, under that standard, you lose.

So, but this may be a situation where some cases got to tee the issue up.

Right.

So, even if we conclude that under, under that standard, these documents come in.

How do we set the course, assuming we're inclined to do that, in a different direction?

Well, my remedial suggestion in this case, in the first instance, is that you would remand rather than review them yourselves.

Because, as I was saying, in the trial court is in a slightly better position because they can receive argument from trial counsel.

Like, here's this whole thing that we didn't even do at trial because we didn't think we had any support for it.

But, lo and behold, in the records, there's something there.

And so, that might be, rather than just applying it yourself in the first instance.

I did want to say one other thing about a point you earlier made, which is, Farrow is the one case where this court addressed this issue pre-trial.

And that was the one case where the court referred to having counsel involved.

And so, I think that supports the idea that the standard has emerged or been articulated in a procedural context of post-trial.

Well, we'll take another crack at it.

I appreciate it.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Good morning.

May it please the court.

Susan McGinnis for the state of New Hampshire.

Before I take questions, I'd just like to make a couple of points.

This is all very interesting.

What standard?

The court has used contrary language.

It said relevant and material.

But you don't really need two words because anything material is necessarily relevant.

You have said essential and reasonably necessary, which anything that's reasonably necessary is not necessarily essential.

But if it's essential, it's necessarily reasonably necessary.

Someone should have stopped us.

But the problem with the defendant's arguments is they aren't preserved.

The defendant didn't make these arguments in his motion to dismiss.

He didn't make any argument about this is the standard the court should apply.

He just quoted the language this court has used.

And after the court issued the decision, there was no motion to reconsider filed.

The defendant never told the trial court, I think you used the wrong standard.

Here's what it should be.

And the defendant, even if it had been preserved, he's essentially asking you to overrule your prior cases.

Because in Hilton, this court said the standards, essential and reasonably necessary.

And defense made an argument that they should be able to see the records so they could make more informed arguments about whether they were and that the court needed defense counsel's help.

And this court said, no, we don't need your help, and neither does the trial court.

Judges are capable of deciding what's discoverable.

But that's a different argument.

It's a different argument.

When you put yourself in the trial judge's shoes, the trial judge has already made a Gagney finding.

I find the defendant has demonstrated a reasonable probability that these records contained relevant and material information.

Now I've got the records in front of me.

I'm looking at the records.

And arguably, there could be documents that are relevant and material.

So in other words, defense counsel was correct.

He or she made the right projection.

I think there may be relevant material documents.

It turns out, yep, there are relevant material documents.

But then we say, but we're not going to give you those relevant material documents.

We're only going to give you documents that we, before trial, conclude using an admissibility standard that they're reasonably necessary or essential.

Is there not a missing link here?

There's a dot that hasn't been connected, it seems to me.

Well, the court has essentially said that you only turn over documents that are essential and reasonably necessary.

How do I know, given the fact that we're pre-trial, I'm the trial judge, we're pre-trial, Gagney showing has been made, I look at the documents, counsel, voila, counsel's right.

I don't know the discovery issues yet.

I don't know where those material and relevant documents could lead defense counsel to in order to eventually make an argument that those documents or the information in them may be admissible.

How can I, as the trial judge, make an admissibility ruling early on in the litigation?

They're not being asked to make an admissibility.

They could be potentially essential and reasonably necessary.

That's not what we've said, though.

We haven't said potentially.

I'd be, I'd be, I think that that would be a more viable approach if we said the standard is potentially,

and therefore we're going to release them to defense counsel to look at.

Okay.

That's my problem with this.

Isn't that requiring more foresight than any normal judge could ever have?

You won't know.

All pre-trial rulings require some foresight.

I mean, that's what judges do.

You won't know until the victim testifies.

You are all lawyers.

You can recognize when something could lead, you know, when you're talking a material standard,

for something to be material.

I don't know that material is different, really, than essential.

Can I just ask you this question, though?

Have we, I mean, we've all, we've had the Gagne standard in effect for a long, since Gagne was decided,

what was it, early 90s or something like that, for a long time, probably over 20 years.

And so I'm wondering, I think all of the trial judge, certainly all the former trial judge on this court,

I think whenever we've ordered that material be disclosed to defense counsel,

have always issued a protective order saying it can only be used in connection with this case and no further disclosure.

Is there any evidence that any of that has ever, you know, that there's ever been a problem with that,

that the, that some defense attorney, you know, turned something over improperly or disclosed it improperly,

that we should be worried that if we, you know, if we make this sort of, it seems to me,

not particularly significant expansion that your, your opponent is asking for,

that we would be creating a, you know, a, a huge potential for breach of confidentiality.

Well, I do know of one case in the federal court where a defendant got his hands on an attorney's therapy records

and disclosed them not only to the court but to the press.

I do know of a case.

The problem with what the defense is asking you to do is they're asking you to turn these things over

that may never be admissible because there are differences in what's admissible and what's disclosable.

So in Faro, they weren't talking about what should be disclosed.

You were only talking about what the defendant could use at trial.

There was nothing about the disclosure standard.

They must have already been disclosed.

But what defense is saying is that you can give him a protective order where the defendant can't see it.

I don't think that's a whole lot of a comfort to a victim.

And quite frankly, it puts defense counsel in a terrible position

because you can't discuss this information with your client, ever.

In Etienne, the only information defense counsel was not allowed to share with his client

was where the victim, where these witnesses lived.

That is the only information.

He was allowed to discuss their statements.

So you put defense counsel in a terrible position where he can't talk to his client about the information.

And then what happens if his client says,

the reason I didn't get the records is you didn't make a good enough showing for essential and reasonably necessary,

so now I have to have the records so I can make an intelligent argument about where your arguments were wrong.

It's a slippery slope.

And quite frankly, I don't think I would hate to have to explain to a victim,

don't worry, your abuser's attorney is going to get these records,

but your client, your abuser's not going to see them.

They're not going to hear about them.

It's a terrible position to put everyone in.

I, too, have the concerns that you're expressing.

How often is that type of wall constructed in your experience in the cases that are in your analysis?

Where a defense attorney can't talk to his client?

Right.

I think they're ethical issues.

I don't know of any cases.

I know cases where a defendant, for instance, in Etienne, we had a jury issue,

and it involved tampering with the jury by friends of the defendant,

so we excluded the defendant when we were voir-dearing the jury,

but there was no order that defense counsel couldn't discuss it with the defendant afterwards.

Doesn't that kind of thing happen with some regularity in sort of, you know,

mostly in federal court and national security kind of cases

where defense counsel gets access to information under a protective order

but can't disclose it to the client?

I don't really know, but, I mean, you're talking national security there.

Here you're talking about this could very well,

having a ruling that defense counsel can see these records,

and the standard the defense is asking for is relevant and helpful.

Helpful is not material.

This court has said there has to be a compelling justification.

Well, it strikes me that at the very least it has to be consistent with the Gagne standard.

It at least has to be material.

Maybe it doesn't have to be, I mean, essential and material to me mean pretty much the same thing.

The defense is also arguing if you find records that are essential, that weren't disclosed,

that he's entitled to a new trial.

Well, that's not the standard.

He's entitled to a new trial unless the error in not admitting them was harmless.

And here I would say it is.

This isn't a he said, she said situation.

There were witnesses.

I and your witnesses.

You're not conceding error here.

No, I'm not conceding error.

I don't think the court erred.

Obviously, this court has found nothing relevant and material, essential, reasonably necessary.

Well, the trial court here cited state versus gay.

Yes.

And that's what we said.

So the trial court did what we told him to do.

Yes, the court didn't err.

What the defense is asking you to do is change your standards.

And I agree you need to clarify them.

There are three steps.

There's the showing you have to make to get the in-camera review.

Yes.

There's a standard that the records have to meet for them to be disclosed.

And then there's either the same or a different standard for admissibility.

So what are you saying the standard for disclosure should be?

I didn't read in your brief that you suggested one.

Essential and reasonably necessary.

The same one for admissibility.

There's nothing original about that, Ms. McGinnis.

No, that's what this court has said, that when they talk about disclosure, essential and reasonably necessary.

But the problem, I guess, I have with that is that that really says, in a pretrial context, and, you know, I mean, we've all done a million of these things as trial judges.

You don't know what the defense is, what the theory is going to be, anything like that.

So to say, you know, well, this is reasonable, this is essential and reasonably necessary.

Forget about the, you know, the, whether those things are in contradiction to each other.

But, but let's assume, let's take the broader one, reasonably necessary.

How do you know?

How do you know what the defense theory is going to be?

I mean, it, you know, you may have, obviously, if, if something is really obvious, you know, my, my example before about, you know, I was convicted and purged, sure, I think any judge is going to say that comes over.

Or if it's, or if the, if the witness has said something to the counselor about the offense, like, you know, as Judge Convoy's example, I, suggesting that I really didn't know, there were, there were two people involved and I really didn't know, you know, which, which one committed the, sure, that's going to be turned over.

But what about if it's things that are more, it's something about the family dynamic, let's say, that the judge, it would not seem particularly unusual to the judge, but defense counsel may know that this, that this has, you know, this does have some, some importance.

Well, that's what defense counsel is supposed to do in the motion asking for the in-camera review is point out the types of information they're looking for.

And any statements about the crime itself would certainly be essential.

I'm going to leave out reasonably necessary because it's kind of redundant.

That would be essential.

Anything about a sexual encounter with someone else around the same time.

Well, let me give you an example.

We frequently, my experience, I'll just speak from my experience, counseling records of victims

often, often, often involve a young woman who's having disputes with her mother.

And she tells the counselor, you know, my mother really doesn't want me to say anything because it might end up with an ouster of her boyfriend from our house,

and he's the one who's charged.

And, you know, my mother's accused me of lying.

And true, I have lied about other things, but I'm not lying about it.

There's a whole unraveling in the counseling records of the family dynamics, as Justice Lynn pointed out.

It may not be immediately obvious to the trial judge whether any of that stuff will ultimately be admissible,

but might be material and relevant because there may be all kinds of other stuff involving the victim and her mother,

not the victim and the defendant, it's so common that there's an overlay of dysfunctional family relationships.

And that sounds like exactly the type of stuff that gets admitted in these cases.

And when you're talking essential in the context of what to disclose,

I think you're talking essential to preparation of the defense.

That is different than essential as far as admissible because a lot of things that are material.

I know, but you just told us the same standard ought to apply for disclosure as for admissibility.

Well, I think I'm saying something.

I think essential at trial means admissible, would have made a difference at trial and admissible.

Essential in pretrial context is really talking about essential to preparation of a defense.

And that's limited, but anything like inconsistent statements, things that may go to bias or motive to lie,

that sounds, what you were talking about, my mom doesn't want me to say anything about this,

that sounds like something that may be essential to the state.

So you're talking about using the same word but in a different context that sets the bar at a different place.

Yes, because I think you have to use the word essential because there has to be a compelling justification to break the privilege,

that you only pierce the privilege if there's a compelling justification.

Words like relevant, helpful, of assistance aren't compelling.

So are you arguing then that there should only be two steps?

So you're saying, well, there ought to be a third step.

No, I agree there are three steps.

There's a step to getting the review and the review.

There's a step of what gets disclosed.

And then there's a step of what part of the disclosed evidence is actually admissible.

And admissibility involves other things, like what is the defense actually,

not what it could potentially be, but what is it actually.

So essential for preparation of trial is going to be a lesser standard

than essential for admissibility at trial.

Yes, and I don't think you have to meet the standard for admissibility at trial at that point

because, again, that depends on how the case is being presented, what charges are still around.

Of course, we've fuzzed it up because we've said essential to the defense's case.

But you have, okay, but that's because you have always done an after-the-fact review.

I think the step missing is I think if you're going to automatically re-review these records,

which you've indicated you will, then maybe this needs to be done in an interlocutory appeal

where there's not even a brief written or anything where the records are just sent here,

the court reviews them to see if they think there's anything that should have been disclosed,

and then we're not forcing victims to go through a trial, then do a review and go through an appeal,

and then possibly another trial.

Well, I know your time is up, but I just want to close the loop here.

So if you say that middle step is essential to preparation for trial,

and it is going to be a lesser standard than for admissibility, right?

I don't think you can make that.

The judge still has to be looking forward to trial and saying,

well, is this essential to trial preparation?

I mean, I'm having trouble making the distinction.

Well, I think you can make the distinction because you do that with all discovery requests

that the court reviews.

You're trying to figure out, is this essential to preparation?

Such as a bill of particulars.

When someone wants a bill of particulars, they have to show that this is necessary.

They need it to prepare for trial.

It's something that could lead, you know, that it's discoverable evidence.

Discovery is a pretty, well, if we use the civil standards, it's really broad, right?

Well, I think, don't think you can do that.

Well, the civil standards for releasing confidential records are not really broad.

They're the same standards you use in criminal cases

because the job is to protect the confidentiality of the relationship.

And if you allow defense counsel to have these...

Balanced against the defendant's constitutional rights.

Yes, and the constitutional rights only kick in if he was deprived of something that was essential

and essential either to trial preparation or to trying the case itself.

And at the pretrial stage, you're looking, I believe, more at what is essential to trial preparation.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Council may come forward in the matter of...

Thank you.
