This is case 2014-0686, state of New Hampshire versus the mandatory poster agency, Inc.

Good afternoon. May it please the court, Jesse O'Neill, for the state of New Hampshire.

With the court's permission, I would like to reserve two minutes of time for rebuttal.

I'm also happy to take questions at any point.

When a statute doesn't define the requisite mental state for criminal conviction,

there are two specific things that the state needs to do.

The state needs to prove the appropriate mental state in light of not only the nature of the offense,

but also the policy considerations for punishing the conducting question.

And future decisions have interpreted that to mean that the things that need to be considered are the plain language of the statute read as a whole.

If that's ambiguous, then the legislative intent.

And I intend to address sort of primarily the legislative intent as well as the policy considerations.

But I think another thing that is to be considered based on the Rollins or Collino case is the context of the statute in the overall statutory scheme.

And that's an appropriate place for me to begin the state's argument.

There are two mechanisms for state enforcement of violations of the Consumer Protection Act.

One is civil, which is created by section 4 of the act.

One is criminal, which is created by section 6 of the act.

So look at section 10 is to confuse the issue.

Section 10 creates a private right of action.

It will essentially never be in a position where it's using section 10 to try and enforce a violation of the Consumer Protection Act because section 10 is only available to an injured party.

What the state chooses between is civil enforcement under section 4 or criminal enforcement under section 6.

And of course those two different mechanisms of enforcement carry very different burdens of proof.

Obviously under the civil enforcement the state needs to only prevail by a preponderance of the evidence.

However in the criminal enforcement it needs to be beyond reasonable doubt.

Can I just ask you a question?

Yes.

In the, in the, in RSA 358A2's description of unlawful acts.

Yes.

Right, it lists 12 of them I think.

Several of them including subsection not Roman numeral 9 and Roman numeral 10 and there may be others.

Just let me take 9 for example.

Advertising goods or services with intent not to sell them as advertised.

Haven't we said that when, so this seems to say that there needs to be an intent.

And haven't we said in fact just very recently that when the legislature uses the term intent it means purposely.

It doesn't mean knowing.

That is true but what we're looking at here is sort of the first step.

The first step is just the section 6.

It's a criminal, it's a crime to violate section 2 as a whole.

Anything within section 2.

What's listed within section 2 of course are a non-exhaustive list of.

Sure, but wouldn't that mean that, that I mean that would mean that there is at least a couple of examples in which you would have to knowingly do something purposefully.

Which might tend to mean that you know more logical construction would be well if a couple of them sort of specifically lend themselves to the idea of purposefully a better construction would be that all of them do.

I think however to look at the reverse of that is if the legislature when drafting those specific examples found in section 2.

If the legislature had intended for all of them to be with intent or to be purposely they could have included that.

I think it's actually highly relevant that the legislature only chose to use that reference to intent on a select few of them.

Well except that they did.

I mean the problem we have here is that they didn't define criminal intent at all.

I mean that's the sort of fundamental problem.

I guess all I'm saying is if we have to plug in what intent they meant and there's a couple of the specific instances of conduct that are prescribed.

That seemed to say purposely is required.

It's hard for me to understand how then that because that would mean then what that that some via for criminal violations some criminal violations of the act require a knowing mental state.

And others require a purposeful mental state.

I don't necessarily think that would be an unfair way to read the statute or an inappropriate way to read the statute.

I think it's perfectly within the realm of possibility to consider that the legislature might have intended to impose a higher standard or a higher culpable mental state on certain specific activities such as advertising which you originally referenced.

But how do we but Justice Lynn makes a good point.

How do we parse that out if there's no definition and so we have in in cases said there's no definition intent means purposeful.

How can we then pick and choose depending upon which case we're looking at.

Shouldn't it shouldn't it be a bright line.

It should be a bright line in the state's position is that the correct bright line would be the would be in a requisite mental state of knowingly.

I think it's also relevant.

We've already said it's purposely.

I think it's relevant to consider that when the legislature drafted those those specific provisions they use the word intent.

I don't believe that at the time there was the same meaning of the word intent as the court has since prescribed to it.

Well you know I spent a lot of time as a trial judge and I remember going through the instructions to the jury about knowingly meaning you're aware of something and purposely meaning it's your conscious object to accomplish the goal.

I see a clear distinction there and the latter strikes me as being intentional and the former is just OK I know what's going on here and something might happen.

I do think that that taking those few select provisions that use the word intent and broadening that to require a mental state of purposely for any criminal conviction of a violation of the Consumer Protection Act is not what the legislature intended.

Well how do we know that there may in fact because of this problem be some ambiguity here.

What does the legislative history tell us.

Legislative history tells us that the legislature intended to create a statute that was very broadly applicable.

This case has already recognized that the very language of the Consumer Protection Act is to be is to have broad sweep which is why to sort of restrict that in such a way wouldn't be in keeping with what the legislature intended.

The legislature when they when they looked at the Consumer Protection Act originally in 1970 when it went from the House to the Senate they the Senate was concerned with how broad the bill was and they looked at ways to sort of limit the powers of the bill

and they choose not they didn't choose to impose a sweeping mental state requirement of purposely across the board.

They may have written the word intent into a few of those provisions they added to section two.

But the general intent of the Consumer Protection Act is expressed in the very title of the act itself is to regulate businesses for consumer protection.

Well then explain to me since we're stuck with your claim that we should use the knowingly standard explain to me how knowingly how knowingness is intentional.

I don't believe in light of Supreme Court precedent that's something that I can do.

Well aren't we stuck then.

I don't think we are.

I think we may be in a situation where certain specific violations of the Consumer Protection Act and I should note that none of those violations or violations that are germane to the factual situation of this case.

So you're saying the default the default mental state is knowingly unless the statute when it you know made its listing of unfair practices then uses the word intent.

If someone is charged under one of those violations you say then it's purposeful but otherwise in general it should be knowingly.

I think that interpretation would be perfectly in harmony with the legislature's choice to only prescribe intent to us a few of the provisions in section two and also in keeping with the broad applicability of the Consumer Protection Act as a whole.

The broad application is arguably the scope of conduct and the activities not necessarily mens rea.

I mean you can have a broad statute with a more difficult mens rea for the state to prove.

You certainly can but a mens rea purposely limits the potential violators who might face criminal penalties.

And there are lots of other remedies available here.

But in terms of the enforcement by the state there's really only two remedies.

There's the civil enforcement in section four the criminal enforcement in section six.

And if the mens rea for a criminal violation is purposely then that means even somebody who knowingly violates the statute can only be.

And where the state can prove that beyond a reasonable doubt can only be subject to those civil penalties found in section four of ten thousand dollars per violation.

And again that looking at the legislative intent and looking at the policy considerations behind the statute as a whole.

That's not what the legislature intended to do.

The legislature didn't intend to limit the criminal enforcement in such a severe way with such a severe mens rea requirement.

So you say there would be a gap in the enforcement authorities.

There wouldn't necessarily be a gap.

The civil enforcement would still be a possibility but it wouldn't be an appropriate level of enforcement.

Your opponent talks about the CPA being based on common law fraud.

And you said no it's not because much of their argument is fraud requires purposeful conduct.

Correct.

And that's directly my opponent's position is directly against the hair excitement decision by this court.

Where this court declined to hold that the Consumer Protection Act was analogous to common law fraud.

And in fact going back to the policy considerations one of the reasons why Consumer Protection Acts were passed in whole across the nation in the late 60s and early 70s was because consumers were having such a difficult time prevailing at common law fraud or common law warranty.

Well what would you call it then fraud light.

Yes fraud like deception is outlawed by the act but also inequity.

Section 2 is prescribed in the disjointive to prescribe unlawful and excuse me to make unlawful deception and unfairness.

So that raises another question doesn't it.

So in other words this is a problem maybe with either but are we to understand that it's the state's position that under the statute you can be charged criminally for knowingly doing something that's unfair.

Yes.

You can.

Yes.

Isn't that pretty you know isn't that really pretty broad that somebody can be somebody can be charged criminally for knowingly doing something that's unfair.

What is there sort of a notice problem with that.

Oh I believe Section 2 is sufficient to put people on notice that the case law of this court has held that those any action that's violative of the Consumer Protection Act must be like those specific ones listed in Section 2.

But I think that's exactly what the legislature intended to make a very broadly applicable law that would protect consumers within the state of New Hampshire.

And you focus for example on the exemption.

There's an exemption for unknowing publication of violative material.

So you said if there's an exemption for unknowing publication the logic is that if there's knowing publication then there is.

Correct.

Juristic criminal jurisdiction.

Correct.

If the Concord Monitor knowingly published some sort of deceptive material they should be subject to criminal penalties because they fall outside of the exemption for media outlets that unknowingly published that sort of deceptive material.

What about the argument that the lower we make the mens rea hurdle and the more likely it is that you'll get a $3 million assessment against you for $12,000 worth of activity the more inequitable and illogical it becomes.

I have two things I would like to say in response to that because I know my time is drawing near.

First of all I believe and it's supported by the legislative history and the policy considerations at the time that the legislature intended to give the state authority to severely punish unfair and deceptive acts in the conduct of trade or commerce within the state such as advertising or things like that.

But I also think and more germane perhaps to this case is that the specific outcome on this specific case isn't one of the things that's considered in an issue of statutory construction such as this.

It's just as easy to sort of picture a flip side where there might have been an unfair deceptive act that caused millions of dollars in harm but would result in only a $100,000 fine if there was a felony conviction.

So I think to focus on the numbers presented in this case is to look at something that's maybe more appropriate for sentencing argument should the case ever arrive at that point and not necessarily to make a decision.

So you're saying it's irrelevant. It's irrelevant to the question before us.

Exactly.

Thank you.

Good afternoon, Your Honours. Ned Sackman for the mandatory poster agency. I have two quick points that I'd like to make and then I'd be happy to take any questions.

Justice Delaney asked the question earlier, shouldn't there be a bright line? That's exactly what we need here.

It's important that this court affirmed the trial court's decision in order to ensure that there is a clear distinction between civil violations of 358A and criminal violations of 358A.

Otherwise, the state is free to do what it did here and take a civil case involving exposure of $38,000 at the maximum and turn it into a 27 felony indictment.

Why isn't your issue solved by, I'm sorry, you have one more point to make.

I'll just finish my sentence and then I'm happy to address your question.

The point is, it's a $38,000 maximum exposure civil case and a $3 million 27 felony indictment criminal case.

Have you made both points?

I haven't, but I'm happy to answer your question.

No, I want you to make your point.

Okay, the second point is this. This is a case of de novo review of the statutory interpretation, which means that the canons of statutory construction apply.

Where those canons apply, it's important that the court be careful not to interpret 358A in a way that results in an unjust result.

Here, to allow a 27 felony conviction of mandatory poster without a higher proof of mental state would be unjust.

My question was, why does the dual burdens of proof solve your bright line issue?

Sure. So on the dual burdens of proof issue, two points.

One, the primary provision of 358A that's at issue here is actually 361B2A as incorporated by 358A2.

And under that statute, the question of liability is rarely going to be in doubt.

Because what it says is, you need to include a telephone number and an address where business is being done on your solicitation.

So the burden of proof doesn't really provide a procedural hurdle there because it's either going to be on the solicitation or it's not going to be on the solicitation.

And so the burden of proof doesn't provide a procedural safeguard.

And you end up with what happened in this case, which is that there was a civil proceeding ongoing, the practice at issue was discontinued.

And without any change in the facts, without any improvement in the state's ability to prove the factual predicate,

what was a civil matter turned into 27 felony indictments and $3 million in exposure.

So what's your response to Mr. O'Neill's comment that, well, we shouldn't care about that, about the numbers here that's distracting, it's irrelevant?

I will submit that the facts of this case are not dispositive, but I think that they are relevant in providing context to what can happen.

We're here saying that you need that clear distinction between civil and criminal enforcement under 358A,

and the reason is because something like what happened here can happen.

And in fact, it's even worse than simply moving from civil to criminal.

Mandatory posts are paid all the money back.

So it's a situation where not only did the case not improve for the state, arguably it got worse because the harm has been addressed

and there's no additional facts that make the act any worse.

And yet without any notice, without any reason that anyone could discern by reading the statute, you went from civil to criminal.

How is that relevant to what the mens rea is? I mean, you would have the same argument.

If the state turned, if we agree with your position in the trial court and we turn around and we say it's purposeful,

they could file the same indictment just changing from knowingly to purposely, couldn't they?

Certainly they could, although the difference would be the state would have to make an evaluation as to, okay,

we've got facts here that the state we know was confident could at least support a civil proceeding.

They initiated a civil proceeding. And then there would need to be a second evaluation.

Do the facts we have support a criminal proceeding where we now know, and everyone now knows,

that we're going to have to prove a purposeful mental state, that we're going to have to prove a specific intent and meet a higher bar?

If we accepted the state's bright line, which is a two-tier bright line,

do you think that that would effectively engraft the Consumer Protection Act into the criminal code?

I'm not sure I follow your question.

Well, the Consumer Protection is generally civil.

If we talk about a knowing mental state as being the one that's required as the default position, let's say,

then much more of the enforcement actions under the Consumer Protection Act would de facto become criminal proceedings.

Well, I think that's what we're worried about right now. You don't have that clear distinction.

And so you have knowing, and knowing is in the Consumer Protection Act already.

It's in 358.810. Now, you heard the state argue.

But that's the private right of action, right?

That's right. But that no less regulates the deceptive behavior that the legislature was concerned about when it enacted the act.

So there are two ways civilly that you regulate the behavior.

Either the state does it through initiating enforcement provision, or you have 358.810 and you have a private right of action.

And if you look at that, there is even an attorney's fees provision in there and a cost provision in there,

so that a lit against when considering the private right of action may even be able to consider financing it

or finding an attorney to be able to take it on contingency so that private right of action is something that's encouraged in the text of the statute.

What significance is it that there's a provision for exempting unknowing publication of offending material?

The state says this is a perfect reason for us imposing the knowing standard because if the legislature created an exemption for unknowing publication,

the implication must be that it wanted to penalize knowing publication of offending material.

Well, I think you can penalize knowing publication civilly and you can do it with trouble damages and an award of costs and fees.

But that doesn't necessarily mean that criminally it's penalized.

And so I think although the statute says that and it says that sort of in the opposite,

you don't necessarily get to turn that around and say, well, that's dispositive as to what the mental state is here.

What the mental state is here is the mechanism through which you consider what the mental state is here is the test in Aldrich.

You look at the nature of the offense. You look at the policy justifications.

And if it's not a common law crime, you heard the mention of the Erklina Rollins case,

you start to look at other things like similar statutes, the structure of the statute.

And so, for example, when you look at 358A, you see or our position is you see sort of a three tiered structure.

So you have your garden variety violations of 358A.

That'll support a modest fine.

If it's a state action, it's going to be a $10,000 or up to a $10,000 fine.

If it's a private right of action, it's going to be $1,000 or actual damages, whichever is more.

Then you get to a willful or a knowing violation of 358A.

That's going to support a stiffer penalty.

It's going to be two to three times actual damages plus fees and costs.

And then looking at the structure of the statute, it sort of suggests that there needs to be one more third level

for the most severe penalty under the statute, which is the criminal enforcement,

which in this case is up to $100,000 per violation.

And so you get to with the statutory penalty assessment in excess of $3 million in exposure.

A couple other points I'd like to make.

The state cited to legislation in other states in support of its position.

And we actually think that supports our position.

Number one, we know that out of all the other states, there are only nine that even have a criminal provision in it.

And if you look at those nine, what you see is there's not another state

where the mental state for criminal and civil violations is the same

and felony conviction is the first thing that happens to you once you cross that threshold into criminal violation.

So in those other states, it's a misdemeanor, it's a fine.

Now, if you get into repeat offender status in the other state, you might get to a felony conviction.

But what you don't have is the opportunity for what happened here, which is you're in a civil proceeding,

there's no change in the facts, you've discontinued the practice, and then all of a sudden you're in criminal violation.

I'd like to explore another point.

You say in your talk about in your brief that we have recently said that willfully means knowingly.

The Consumer Protection Act provides that if a person acts willfully or knowingly,

a private party can collect two to three times actual damages and attorney's fees.

So you say logically that has to mean a greater mental state is required for criminal conduct.

But I wonder whether you could look at it precisely the opposite way

and say if in the civil realm the legislature imposed two to three times actual damages to punish knowing conduct,

then in the criminal area, why wouldn't that support a knowing mens rea?

Do you understand what I'm saying?

I think I do, and let me try to answer your question as follows.

I think what you see in that statute is the legislature speaking to what should be the maximum penalty civilly.

So you take your worst offenders under the civil side of 358A,

and those offenders are going to be subject to up to three times damages, costs and fees.

For knowing, for knowing conduct.

And so it seems to me that if there's another higher penalty that's going to apply to these people,

and you're going to move from a civil remedial regime.

But your argument is premised on criminal is necessarily higher in the hierarchy of punishments.

And I wonder if that's really true.

It's a different arena for sure because it's the state's obligation to act on behalf of all the people of the state.

So I'm wondering whether the entire dichotomy you've set up, I'm not being critical of you.

You've argued throughout your brief, civil's got to be lower on the hierarchy than criminal.

But given the fact that criminal enforcement can't come from an individual, it has to come from the state,

I wonder if that hierarchy makes sense.

Well, I think if you look at the facts of this case here as simply an example of how that civil versus criminal procedure would work,

you've basically got a situation where this company made $12,000 in New Hampshire,

and they're subject to in excess of $3 million in fines.

So I think it is fairly straightforward.

But should that drive our analysis?

Because as the state points out, we could come up with another hypothetical which would work the other way.

So isn't that putting the cart before the horse essentially?

We can worry about that.

If there was that kind of result, you may have quite an argument to be made elsewhere.

Well, I think in that instance, so take the hypothetical that there's a harm that's on the civil side caused more damage than might be available for fines on the criminal side.

There's nothing to preclude the state from pursuing that activity criminally and the civil litigant from pursuing that activity civilly.

And so you might have recovery in both places.

So if something was truly that bad, you might have however many $100,000 fines and felony convictions on top of a treble damages award and fees on both sides.

So I don't think there's a danger there that the procedure we're setting out doesn't make sense if you do it the other way.

I think the real danger is that you've got civil activity that is all of a sudden subject to fines an order of magnitude larger than what they would be if they were on the civil side.

And the other thing that I'll point out here is, you know, we're talking about corporate entities.

So the 358A Act defines basically natural persons and then LLCs and corporations and so forth.

And so one way to look at this is to say this is what happens when you're dealing with a corporate entity.

Because under 358A6 paragraph one, natural persons are only subject to misdemeanors for criminal violations.

It's only if you're a corporation or an LLC or some other kind of entity that this felony conviction $100,000 fine kicks in.

If we accept your position and affirm the lower court's ruling, are we going to be the only state to do so under Consumer Protection Act laws?

Yes, you'll be the only state to both address this question and to issue a ruling that requires a higher natural state.

No other state has ruled on this issue.

No other state that we're aware of has ruled on this issue.

But no other state has faced this issue because no other state has a situation where you go from this civil enforcement regime to felony criminal enforcement without any difference in mental state.

I know your time is up.

The state tells us that all the other states that have Consumer Protection laws use a knowingly mens rea.

Is that true based on your knowledge?

There is a knowingly mens rea and as we read some of those statutes on the criminal statute, there are a couple that have either a purposely or a specific intent.

So I believe we set forth in our brief the ones that we said have the specific intent mens rea and the ones that have the knowingly mens rea.

But it's specified in the statute, right?

In those statutes.

I believe it is.

Or is it grafted on by a common law court?

I don't believe that's the case because the statutes are what we cited to in our brief and I think that's where we got the information.

Now there are some that are the same mens rea but again there is at least that escape hatch that that first conviction is not going to be that felony conviction.

Thank you.

It seems as though we've been in no other state land much of the day today.

Court will take a brief reset.

Chief.

You know what the state never does that.

That's why I forgot.

Excuse me.

Thank you for granting me the two minutes.

There's just two points I'd like to make by way of rebuttal.

One is that it's incorrect to say that this case began as a civil proceeding and was converted into a criminal proceeding.

This state began as a Section 8, 358A, Section 8 investigation into the activities of the mandatory poster agency.

There was never a civil case.

There was a subpoena that was issued.

There was some litigation surrounding that subpoena but this wasn't a conversion from a civil case to a criminal prosecution.

The other thing I would just like to mention by way of rebuttal is that the current setup of 358A with the two tiers of state enforcement, civil and criminal, does provide for a difference in mental state that goes along with the different penalties.

If the state prevails in a civil case where there's essentially no to minimal mental state requirement and the standard of proof is preponderance of the evidence, the state can only get $10,000 in civil fines per violation.

However, in the case of a, quote, bad enough offense, if the state is able to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that a crime took place, including the correct requisite culpable mental state, then the criminal penalties come into play a misdemeanor for a natural person versus a felony for any other person.

Are we okay now?

Yes.

Okay.

Thank you.

Court's in recess.

Thank you.
