This is case 2014-0662, state of New Hampshire versus Paul Bedell.

May it please the court?

Yeah. May it please the court?

Christopher Johnson on behalf of Paul Bedell.

This is the case that raises the issue about a mid-trial dismissal of a juror for cause.

My plan this morning is to address both the dispute about whether this was error

and also the dispute about whether this error was reversible.

And my plan is to start with the reversal issue,

but I'm happy if the court has another preference to start in a different place.

And I'll take questions at any point.

With regard to reversal, my first point is about the law.

The state suggests that I think that if a court can contrive to end up with 12 qualified jurors,

that cures all harms in the processes of jury selection.

And we seem to recognize that in Addison,

and that seems to be butting heads against our decision in Solomon.

I think, no, I don't think the court, I think Addison is distinguishable in a certain sense.

And what happened in Addison is that was a claim of error in the erroneous denial of a cause challenge.

And so what you have there is a juror who arguably shouldn't sit,

but then there's a peremptory challenge that removes the problem.

Here the problem is an erroneous grant of a cause challenge.

And I think it's different because there what you have is a juror who should sit

and then is removed and in that removal, when the removal is about a point of view that the juror has,

the jury is deprived of a perspective, a legitimate perspective that should have been in there.

But the cases seem to deal with deliberating juries.

And therefore the, I'm wondering whether the bias issue is still alive here

because this juror was not part of a deliberating panel.

True. No, I think the two cases, there's McClellan and Sullivan, and I'll talk about each of them.

What you see, if the rule was you end up with 12 qualified jurors sort of game over, no problem,

that's not what this court said in McClellan.

It was essential to the holding there also that the ruling was reasonable.

And in Sullivan, if the rule was you end up with 12 qualified jurors game over, no problem,

that isn't what the court said because the court found reversible error just in the dismissal.

Are you conceding that Sullivan was correctly decided?

I think it was correctly decided, absolutely.

But that was in the middle of the deliberation.

True, true. But I mean, it is true, that is an important line.

But my point is there's another important line, and that important line is the beginning of trial.

And the reason the beginning of trial is an important line is there are opportunities that are lost.

And so really what the holding I'm asked the court to say is that when you have an erroneous...

How do we know? I mean, we had, as I understand it, there were 14 jurors.

So we don't even know that this juror might not, if there hadn't been an erroneous exclusion,

that this, and the judge, I assume, was going to pick the alternate randomly at the end,

that this juror wouldn't have been one of the...

True.

One of the...

True.

One of the alternatives.

True, I think that's different though.

If random chance produces a jury in which this juror doesn't sit,

we can't complain.

I could complain to the guardian angel or to fate, but there's no legal error.

But if this juror doesn't sit because of a judicial error,

and to be completely accurate about it, there was a 6th, 7th chance that she would sit.

I mean, this sort of strikes me that the basic problem with your...

I mean, you're sort of saying, well, he may have gotten a fair trial, but he didn't get a perfect trial.

Because the jurors that were, that deliberated, there's no claim that they weren't impartial.

But what happened is, as a result of judicial error, assuming there was error,

we have a jury that was deprived of a perspective that was legitimate and should have been there.

Let's go over to the error side of the equation.

As I understand it, at least part of the standard is that the juror's inability to perform

must appear in the record as a demonstrable reality.

And as I understand this case, it was purely inferential.

There was something... the state was desperate to get rid of this juror

and made opening remarks that caused the trial court to reconsider its earlier point of view.

But we don't know what... if someone had asked the juror at that point,

we don't know what she might have said.

That's true, that's true. I mean, I think the key to the error

is that the court relied on an analysis based on the defense's opening statement.

And as I've tried to show in the brief, when you look at any possible interpretation of that analysis,

it's unsustainable.

Do you say the court should have wa-deered the juror after the defense's opening?

Not... I mean, I think if the court was going to dismiss the juror, it should have.

But not particularly, because there was nothing that happened here

that should have precipitated even a inquiry of the juror, because nothing that was...

You know, what about... I'm sorry, no, go ahead.

Can I get back to the Solomon case, because I really came away from reading your brief,

thinking that was your argument, and that's the case that stands for the proposition

that the right to a particular tribunal, this is what we said,

is an accused right to complete a trial with the chosen jury once sworn or a particular judge.

And in Solomon, we didn't talk about error that's harmless.

We said once the jury's sworn, that is a defendant's right to that jury.

Right.

I mean, are you relying on that?

I thought that's what you were arguing.

I mean, in part. I mean, this is what I would say, but the court, I think,

is asking me what's the harm, fundamentally, is the question.

What is the harm?

And Solomon never dealt with an analysis of what the harm is.

I did put a CF side, because I thought the sentence was illustrative

of the larger point I'm trying to make.

I recognize that it was a different factual circumstance.

But here's the harm.

There's the harm that's unique to the mid-trial setting of this.

First, it is then, at that point, too late, as I suggested in the reply brief,

to adjust counsel's pretrial jury selection plan.

Secondly, if the state's rule is adopted,

what the court would then be inviting the prosecutor to do, as happened here,

is to continuously, throughout the trial, re-initiate this challenge for cause.

Because, and to put it bluntly, the state has no skin in the game in this.

If they can somehow persuade this judge, even for a reason

that ultimately doesn't withstand scrutiny to get rid of the juror,

reversal can't happen if the state's rule is correct.

And so you're sort of inviting this continuous, you know,

and I would say, meritless challenge to this juror that ultimately won anyways.

And as a result, it inhibits legitimate advocacy.

If the defense has to sort of step back from the line,

when they should be able to go up to the line, not over it, but up to it,

and they have to be careful not to provoke even meritless challenges for cause,

because, you know, the state will keep coming back.

What my rule, I suggest this court should hold, is the state risks something.

If you wait till mid-trial to get this to make these challenges for cause,

I mean, we know from Sullivan, you know, deliberations are too late.

But they didn't wait. I mean, they raised it.

This isn't something that they raised the first time.

No, but they kept coming up with new things.

There's at least three or four different arguments they made

over the course of the case.

I'm saying they had better be right on the argument that prevails

if it prevails mid-trial.

And the rule that the state is asking for is it doesn't matter really

if we're right or wrong, if we eventually wear down the judge.

Do we know what other states...

I mean, is this issue come up regularly in other states?

I mean, I think the mid-trial context of this is quite unusual.

And I don't recall any other cases where...

I mean, most of the time, as of course, obviously, jury selection issues

are resolved pre-trial during jury selection.

Sullivan is an outlier because it was mid-trial deliberations

and there's a set of cases about that.

And I remember all the judges involved in Sullivan.

But this is kind of an unusual situation because it's after jury selection,

after the jury's sworn after a day of testimony,

but to be sure it is before deliberations have begun.

And I didn't really find a case that confronts that precise setting.

You know, I guess one of the other things that worries me

somewhat about this is we...

I mean, if we accept your analysis,

why should it be limited to after-trial starts?

In other words, why shouldn't it be, you know,

if there was an improper for-cause exclusion

even during regular jury selection?

Let's assume it wasn't for some racial or bias kind of rule.

But just an improper exclusion that...

Well, I think my argument for harm stands on two pillars.

Only, and the court could say, you need both pillars.

So it has to be an erroneous grant of a cause challenge.

And I've tried to suggest the harm that survives in that situation

that is not true for erroneous denials

because they get corrected by bremperies

is this loss of a perspective that should have been there.

But also, you know, if it happens pre-trial,

the court could say, well, counsel can adjust in jury selection.

So they should have had that juror,

but they still have some more decisions to make

and maybe they'll be able to replace that perspective

or adjust their theory.

But when it happens mid-trial, that's too late.

The other question I have is if this becomes...

If this is a basis for reversal,

I'm just wondering if the message to trial judges

won't be to be less sort of...

Let's take the view that if there's any possibility,

I'm going to sort of let this person go.

And my suspicion is, based upon my experience on the trial court,

is that often judges do let people go probably...

I mean, I certainly think I did,

and I suspect many of my colleagues did,

let people go more easily than they should be.

And maybe if this were, now, the rule you'd be thinking about...

I think if the court made the holding rest clearly

on both of those pillars, that concern disappears.

That is, we are only going to tell you, judge,

to be very, very careful if you're doing this dismissal mid-trial.

Pre-trial, when 99.99% of these decisions are made,

we're going to say an erroneous dismissal for cause,

pretrial, that does not justify reversal,

but it's the mid-trial ones that do.

And I think that would be a limiting principle

that would preserve that appropriate practice of care

without inviting appellate claims,

because this situation comes up so infrequently

that I don't think it should drive the bus in that sense.

Most of these other questions,

I haven't particularly addressed the error

maybe other than an answer to a question,

but unless there's questions about that,

I'd ask the court to reverse.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Mr. Fuller?

Good morning, Your Honours.

Steven Fuller representing the State of New Hampshire

in this appeal,

and I'm happy to start with the reversal question

as defense counsel did.

What do you say to the defendant's argument

that he had a right to that juror's perspective?

He acknowledges that, presumably,

there was a fair jury that ultimately decided the case,

but he says the defendant does have a right

to assert the loss of this particular juror's perspective.

That's how he puts it.

The easy answer is that a defendant

does not have the right to any particular single juror.

The defendant has the right to an impartial panel,

but not to any particular juror,

and that right, I mean, there's no difference then

between excusing the juror in the middle of the trial

and excusing the juror pretrial during juror selection.

You know what I mean?

Okay, but I mean, if the juror,

for example, suppose that what happened here

is that the judge said now mid-trial,

there's a basis now for excusing this juror for cause,

and I'm concerned that this juror has tainted

the rest of the panel, I'm declaring a mistrial.

I mean, then isn't the law pretty clear that you do,

if that was an erroneous decision,

one of the reasons that there might not be a basis

for a retrial, a double jeopardy prohibition on retrial

would be that the defendant does have the right

to that particular panel.

Right, but that's a double jeopardy right,

and then we start talking about manifest necessity

for the mistrial, and that's a different sort of body of law.

That right comes from double jeopardy.

That right doesn't come from the impartial jury guarantee.

This defendant had 14 jurors in the box.

As the trial was going on,

excusing this juror left 13 in the box,

and one of those 13 was then chosen as the alternate,

and the judge himself decided his guilt.

But nothing had really happened,

at least as far as the juror was concerned,

since the jury selection process was completed.

No, I believe three witnesses had testified the first day.

But I mean vis-a-vis there was no misconduct

on the part of the juror, is that correct, right?

Correct.

The juror hadn't done anything wrong.

The juror hadn't done anything wrong.

The difference here was the opening statement

by defense counsel,

which had gone through a fairly lengthy voidir,

if you look at the transcript, during jury selection.

So the judge already knew kind of the issues involved with this juror.

After defense counsel's opening statement,

which is quoted in our brief,

it looked like the opening statement was aimed at this juror's concerns.

But what if that's true?

I guess, you know, I saw you cite a couple of K-1's from New Jersey

saying that it's somehow improper for an attorney

to sort of address an argument to a particular juror.

But boy, that seems, that's very troubling to me.

I mean, if you knew, for example, that in some kind of a case

that one juror was from California or something like that,

you know, had grown up in California,

you knew that from the juror questionnaire,

would it really be improper to say, you know,

it's supposed that there was a question about traffic,

about how terrible it is to be stuck in traffic.

Would it really be improper for the lawyer to say, you know,

you, Ms. Smith, you grew up in the San Francisco area,

you must know what about terrible it is in the morning?

Would that really be improper?

In that case, it probably wouldn't be improper.

I mean, the context of this case matters a great deal.

So what was said here is we've all had firsthand information

about people who make things up.

Well, any of us who's a parent has firsthand information

about stuff being made up by people, namely, their kids.

I mean, what is the...

I could not figure out what the big deal was with that statement.

Because at the time of opening statement, the parties already knew

that this juror had an issue with a victim in another sex assault case

who she believed was lying because the defendant was a relative.

They also knew that his defense was going to be this kid's lying.

It was going to be a he said, she said case all along.

So in that sense, no different from any other where a defendant says

she's making this up.

So that was his defense.

And it was soon going to be readily apparent to the jury that that was his defense.

Presumably, he could have made that statement in the absence of this knowledge

about this juror.

He may have already had that written in his opening statement

because the defense was she's making it up.

That's true, but regardless of whether he had planned to say that or not,

when he did say it, he knew that this juror already had a relative

in a case where she disbelieved the victim.

He was going to say that one way or another in his opening statement.

The evidence will show that she made this up.

The defendant is going to tell you that she made this up.

I mean, one way or another, that defense was going to find its way

into the opening statement.

And that may be true.

But again, the context was she said during the voir dire that,

well, maybe she might be able to believe this person if they had been brought up properly,

if they had had good parenting.

And the judge was concerned because the judge says,

well, you're probably not going to hear evidence about the parenting

and how she was brought up.

And would you still be able to make that determination?

And so the concern was already there at voir dire.

He believed her at that point that she could still be impartial.

But the opening statement, call that the straw above the camel's back.

That was the last straw.

The judge was making some assumptions.

And I wonder whether the judge should have voir dire the juror at that point after the opening.

He could have, but it was unnecessary because she had already gone through extensive voir dire.

He already knew the background.

The real issue here is, assume error.

Assume error.

What's the result, right?

And you say, no harm.

The result was that he was found guilty by 12 impartial jurors.

I understand.

So you say that's what's really driving the analysis in this case.

But when you're defending these cases,

many times the defense counsel is just aiming for one juror to get a mistrial or a hung jury.

And the defendant here would say that that deprived him of that defense or that strategy.

Why should we uphold that?

Because I'm not sure that that strategy is a sort of constitutionally protectable value.

Just because a defense attorney has one juror in mind who seems,

maybe that juror seems to be sleeping through the trial.

Maybe that juror seems apathetic for whatever reason.

The right that the defendant has is to an impartial jury in a fair trial.

We have the right to have a particular juror who maybe that juror has been bored through the trial.

We don't know.

But the, and I have to step back here and say,

I don't think that the rule that the state is asking for is quite as absolute as defense counsel is making it out.

Because we're not asking this court, obviously, to revisit Sullivan,

where that was a deliberating juror who was then excused

and a new juror was put in during deliberations.

Why is that different?

Because in the Sullivan case, this court went through the dangers,

the risks that are involved when you replace a deliberating juror,

because that juror hasn't heard the deliberations up to then,

may not be able to inject his or her opinion into the deliberations.

But we have jurors' prudence on how to repair that.

Maybe the trial court didn't do it quite right in Sullivan,

but that's why you've wired here the whole panel separately on the record

and get them to commit to starting their deliberations from the beginning.

Right, but if the judge doesn't believe that that's possible,

then you end up with a jury, you end up basically with a due process problem,

with a fair trial problem.

If the jury has not started deliberations,

that's not going to be a problem because you've had 14 jurors.

At that point, they didn't know who the alternates were,

so they all had an equal investment in paying attention to the case.

And no discussions, no deliberations had happened yet,

so you don't have those risks the way you did in Sullivan.

In Sullivan, the risk there was even if the 12 were impartial,

the deliberations were tainted so we can't trust the result.

Here, so we would draw the line between deliberations and before deliberations.

I mean, during the trial, the jurors haven't started discussing the case.

No juror knows what another juror's opinion is of the case.

The dangers that this court identified in Sullivan don't, well, they shouldn't.

The dangers that this court identified in Sullivan just didn't exist in this case.

You had 12 impartial jurors that the defense doesn't say otherwise,

there was no right to be vindicated that was violated here.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted, court is in recess.
