This is case 2014, 0566, state of New Hampshire versus Christopher Keane.

Counsel.

I ask for two minutes of rebuttal time held in reserve.

Madam Chief Justice and may it please the court. My name is attorney Seth Hipple, and I represent the appeal in this case Christopher Keane.

In applying the test for the return of property laid down in State Vigarro,

this court made clear in State v. Bassetto that the state has the burden to prove whether an item is contraband and

also stated that it has the burden to prove all other material facts.

The core issue before this court is whether a defendant enjoys a presumption of ownership in

property seized from the defendant and whether the state bears the burden of proof on the ownership issue when applying the Garo test.

As Officer Byron admitted at trial, page 38 lines 12 through 19 in the transcript, and as the state passively admitted in its

objection to the motion to return property, the state has no reason to doubt that the property belongs to Christopher Keane.

But isn't, I mean, you're arguing about the fact that Mr. Keane wants the jacket and the patch.

Correct.

Well, the the state says he can have the darn jacket. We don't care about that.

But the patch is a current Manchester Police Department patch, and as to him it's

arguably contraband because he has no right to wear

Manchester Police Department patch.

Well, of course, the motion was not asking the court to say whether or not he could wear the patch.

It was asking whether or not he could resume possession of the patch. And in order to make that determination, this is

Well, if it's attached to a jacket, presumably he's going to wear it, right?

There's no wear in the record that the court can make that presumption from.

Presumption, it's an inference. And he was wearing it, right? Wasn't he wearing it? Twice?

I mean, including after he was told not to do so. That is correct, and as stated in my brief and explained in my brief,

that is not a criminal offense in this state.

The crime of false personation requires Justice Lend that a person have the intent to be recognized as a police officer.

But we're not saying it's a crime. We're just saying that the inference is drawable or maintainable that he would wear the jacket with the patch if it were returned to him.

And if it's true that that patch belongs to the Manchester Police Department and he is not with authority to wear it, then it might be contraband vis-à-vis him.

Well, those are two separate issues, Justice Hicks, whether or not the property belongs to the defendant and whether or not he would wear the jacket again.

Those are two separate issues. And of course, the issue of whether or not he owns this property is one of the core issues in this case.

And that if we're arguing that the state bears the burden on that. Now, if we analyze the record to see does the state have anything in the record that can show that they own this patch?

No, it doesn't. What we have in the record is a police officer who never worked in training, testifying that he, when he was asked what do you do when uniforms are no longer in service,

he answered what you do is you turn the men for either reissue or for disposal.

I will note, by the way, that the lower court said destruction or reissue. Disposal doesn't necessarily mean destruction.

There's a disposition property that can include, for instance, leaving it with the officer who wore it proudly for many years.

There is no indication on the record about any policy, not even a practice, that was in place in 1999 or earlier.

Absolutely no evidence about any kind of policy in place in 1999 or earlier.

There's a relevant period for this discussion that says that patches or property of any kind or any kind of obsolete uniform had to be returned.

And there's no information.

Were there any rules about saying something along the line that you had to be a Manchester police officer in order to wear this patch?

There's no evidence of that on the record, Your Honor.

Could this fellow walk into a uniform store and buy a Manchester Police Department patch if he's not a Manchester Police Department?

I don't know what the store's policies would be, Your Honor, but it's definitely true that he could commission such a patch to be created.

There would be no law against such a patch being created.

There's no law, Officer Byron admitted it's in the record that there's no law against him possessing or owning this patch.

So, yes, obviously-

But that would be a counterfeit patch. Doesn't that make a difference?

How would that possibly make a difference?

Well, I'm asking you.

No, it doesn't, because the issue here is what test should the court apply?

And we have the Garrow test, which the court explicitly declined to apply.

And the issue that the lower court hung its hat on was that the patch still belonged to Manchester PD.

It was at all times property of the Manchester Police Department.

Well, but it also expressed a safety concern that the public would, as a good chance, the public would mistake the defendant, your client, who was wearing the jacket, for a police officer.

And that could create serious safety issues.

There are several problems with that analysis.

First of all, it makes an inference.

Well, first of all, it attempts to say that something cannot be done, even if the legislature has not seen to make it prohibited.

The legislature could have written a statute, and the false personation statute could have written it to say that nobody can display a patch or any kind of uniform that is or looks to be similar to an actual police uniform.

Could have definitely said that, but it didn't.

So for the lower court to say, well, I still don't think it should happen, that's not an appropriate thing for the lower court to do.

But the trial court also said, and I think you were down this road, that the patch remained the property of the Manchester Police Department.

You're saying there was no support for that in the record?

No, Your Honor, there isn't.

Because in order for the lower court to have support for that on the record, we would have to know whether or not this Manchester police officer who gifted the jacket to Mr.

Kane had a right to carry it out of the Manchester Police Department.

That's only if you're right that the burden of proof is on the state.

You say that the burden of proving ownership is on the state, but do you have any case that supports that?

Because the cases that you've cited do not say that.

Well, Your Honor, it's definitely true that I'm asking the court to say that the state has the burden of proving all material facts, including ownership.

But when you're the one that wants the property back, in other words, suppose that this was stolen, suppose that this was, you know, the police arrested your

client for stealing a book from somebody, all right?

And for whatever reason, the case, your client was not convicted.

Now your client says, I want the book.

What's wrong with saying, you listen, if you want to get this book back, you have to show, at least, you have to make the initial burden of showing it's your book.

Why is that unfair to your client?

Well, I would suggest that we simply apply the test that this court laid down in State Vigarro.

So State Vigarro says, first of all, is it contraband?

No, that's a different question.

That's a different question about whether or not it's contraband, it should go, that question asks, even if it is yours, should it go back or is there some reason not to?

But why is it unfair to say you at least have to show initially that it's your book?

Well, in your scenario, the property would be contraband, so the court wouldn't even need to reach the ownership issue.

It would be derivative contraband, it's a stolen item, but to the heart of your question, which is why is it unfair, well, there's a few things.

I don't think it's difficult to say that nobody in this room would be able to prove that everything in their house is theirs.

You know, there's family heirlooms, there's plenty of things that people don't keep receipts for, and so what do we rely on?

Generally, in the federal jurisprudence, for instance, there's a presumption that the defendant owns property that was seized from him.

So the evidence, the main evidence of whether or not Christopher owns this jacket is that it was found on his personal.

And what are the cases that you say established the federal presumption that if it's seized from you, you own it?

I'm sorry.

What you said, there were cases that established a federal presumption under federal law that if it's seized from you, you own it.

What are those cases?

I cited those in my brief, Your Honor.

There's United States v. Martinsen, there's United States v. Wright.

There's a few others that talk about the fact that once the case is disposed of and the property is no longer needed for evidence, the burden for showing that the defendant doesn't have a right to its return?

That's yes.

But again, that's a different issue than the issue of ownership.

That's about whether the property, assuming it belongs to the defendant, should be returned to him.

I'm not aware of any case that says that the defendant doesn't have to show he owns the property.

Well, Your Honor, the question you're asking, and I'm happy to file a supplemental brief afterwards to explain the federal case law if Your Honor would like that.

We don't need any more briefing.

Thank you.

Thank you, Your Honor.

We'll read the cases ourselves.

All right.

But the question of, well, why is it more fair for the state to do this, for the state to bear this burden?

There's a few reasons.

First of all, we're talking about an acquitted defendant.

So there is a presumption of innocence that he still has.

Second of all, as I said, the properties found on the defendant are seized from the defendant.

So that is enough, at least.

When you say your complaint was acquitted, I thought the charges were dismissed.

Was it actually acquitted?

It was a motion for a judgment of acquittal.

So yes.

So there actually was a trial.

The evidence started and there was a judgment of acquittal as opposed to a motion to dismiss the court.

That is correct, Your Honor.

Okay.

It was after a trial.

Okay.

In addition to that, I think it would be very, I don't think it's fair to a defendant to expect them to have to prove that the property belongs to them.

After all, we all know it doesn't belong to the state.

Mr. Hippo, let me ask you about the ownership.

Do you concede that at some point this particular patch belonged to the Manchester Police Department?

Yes.

And so at some point, so the one thing we know is that it once belonged to the Manchester Police Department.

And then it seems that your proof that the ownership shifted is what, possession?

Yes, Your Honor.

It would be that the fact that it was, that the possession shifted, yes.

Now your client testified that he was given it by a retired police officer.

Yes, the motion to return property, he did testify.

Did he testify anything about the authority that that donor had to give him possession of the patch?

No, neither the state nor the defense had any evidence about whether or not the donor had the authority to keep the patch.

And that's why the main part of my argument is who has the burden to prove ownership?

It's very important. You're absolutely right.

And based on the language in state, Vipassetto, which did cite favorably the fact that a case that said all material facts,

the burden is on the state to prove all material facts in a situation of a return of property.

But in Passetto, the issue was the state had the burden of proving contraband, not ownership.

That's correct. And what's the state supposed to do if you concede that at one point that patch belonged to the police department,

then how are they going to prove the negative that somehow it, what are they going to offer in terms of proof of continued ownership other than it's not supposed to go any place except we own it?

Two things. First of all, yes, it is difficult to prove a negative, but the state is in a much better position to make an offer of proof

on that issue than the defense is. Second of all, it would be very simple.

They would simply say we had a policy in place in 1999 when this jacket went out of service that said that all of them had to be turned in and they were no long, they remained the property of the Manchester Police Department.

I thought essentially they had that evidence from the officer.

No, the only evidence of them.

Can you say something about, I had such a patch in 1999, they changed the uniforms and I was required to turn my jacket in?

Not quite your honor. What Officer Byron actually testified to Justice Conway was that he did in fact turn it in.

He said I had such a patch in 1999 and I turned it in. That's all he says. He doesn't say he was required to just that he in fact did.

And that is not enough to meet what we argue would be the state's burden to prove ownership in this case.

They definitely have what they definitely, if it did in fact continue to be theirs, they definitely had opportunities to prove that.

But in fact a trial officer Byron said, I have no problem believing this is his jacket. We're not disputing that it's his.

That's what Officer Byron said at trial.

So if, yes, I see my light is on.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Good afternoon, Your Honors. May it please the court. Elizabeth Woodcock for the state. I'll take questions at any time.

Do you take the position that this patch is contraband or that it's just simply not the property of the defendant and therefore it should be returned to the Manchester police?

I think essentially both. The patch itself, Officer Byron did testify that the practice was to return discontinued uniforms to training, I think it was, and that they would decide what to do with it.

The patch itself is a current patch. The way that the defendant was using the patch made it contraband because he was standing outside a police station in a police jacket with a current patch.

But he was acquitted of presumably impersonating a police officer? What was he charged with?

I think it was impersonating a police officer and he was acquitted. The state's key witness, the officer who actually rested him that day, was somehow not available.

And I think that the state thought that they could prove it by putting the convenience store clerk on, but that clerk's testimony wasn't consistent with the charge.

Okay, so he's acquitted. And counsel says, I don't know if this is true or not, but counsel says that forget the jacket.

This fellow could have walked into a uniform store and purchased one of these patches. Is that true or not?

There's nothing on the record that supports that. There's no, nobody ever introduced any evidence that says you can go and get Manchester police department patches or order copies made of them or anything.

Even if your opponent makes much of the fact that he was acquitted, but it's a completely different burden of proof, isn't it?

And this is a civil case. I mean, it's a civil standard that would apply. And so couldn't the trial court on the issue of the return of the property have said, I don't care whether he was acquitted or not, by a preponderance of the evidence,

I find that he was using this, he was using it in a manner that made it contraband. And therefore he's not getting it back.

He cited a case that is analogous where a bookie had all the, I guess he was a loan shark or something, had all these books associated with his business.

I can't remember if he died or simply wasn't prosecuted, but the wife wanted the books back. The books in and of themselves didn't necessarily show anything other than they could be used to continue the business.

The fact that the man was not prosecuted didn't make any difference in terms of the court's decision on whether to return the books so that the wife could continue the business.

What we have here is Justice Brown drawing the conclusion that if this jacket is returned to the defendant with this patch on, it's highly likely he's going to put the jacket back on and walk in front of one of the police stations in Manchester,

because that's what he'd done twice before.

Who's burden of proof? Was it the proof ownership?

I think at the outset it is the person who's seeking return of the property.

And what did Judge Brown rule in terms of who satisfied that burden of proof, if anyone?

He ruled that the jacket and the patch were at all times the property of the Manchester Police Department.

I think he reached the conclusion that the patch should be taken off and the opinion is not detailed, but if you kind of read between the lines,

I think that the fact that the jacket itself had been discontinued, he didn't see that as being a problem.

But the current patch was a problem because it suggested that the wearer was a current number of the Manchester Police Department.

But that would suggest that he thought that he bought the argument that the property, except for its sort of bad use,

that the property actually belonged to the defendant, because otherwise he wouldn't have given the jacket back either,

if it actually belonged to the police department.

His opinion doesn't say that.

It says that the jacket and the patch remained all times the property of the Manchester Police Department.

I don't understand exactly why he reached the conclusion that he was taking the...

Sort of split the baby in half.

I think that there may have been some equity working here.

You may have been more generous, you say, than he needed to be by returning the jacket.

He may have been more generous. I'm not going to criticize Justice Brown's generosity, however.

It seems to me that in looking at the facts, he must have reached the conclusion that because the jacket had been discontinued,

the jacket itself didn't pose the problem.

He did move from deciding that the jacket was the property of the Manchester Police Department into an analysis on contraband.

And I'm not sure that that was a step he necessarily needed to take, but he did take it.

And I think that the contraband analysis suggested to him that the real problem was the patch and not the jacket.

If the court has no further questions for me, I will yield to my opponent for his rebuttal.

Do you need your time, Mr. Hipple?

Yes, Your Honor, please.

I would point out that the lower court did not find that the property was contraband.

But in terms of what proof do we have that this belonged to Christopher Cain,

the court made an order of forfeiture, and forfeiture wouldn't be necessary if the property didn't belong to Mr. Cain.

So I'll admit that the lower court's order is in some ways contradictory in the way that it performs the analysis.

And one of the things that we've cited in our brief is the fact that this court laid down a test

for what to do in these situations, and the court explicitly declined to follow it, instead citing a federal law.

I also did want to speak to Justice Lin's question about the federal cases.

I do note in my brief, in United States for you to write, I have a quote in there, and it says,

It was incumbent upon the government to come forward with evidence calling into question the appellant's ownership or right of possession.

And noting that the government has not satisfied this burden. That's a D.C. circuit case.

Excuse me.

I mean, doesn't that, just from the language you read, doesn't that suggest that the appellant had made some initial showing

that it was his that the government then had some obligation to call into question?

That may be the case, Your Honor. And honestly, I'm not in a position right now to state whether that was true or not.

Well, here, even if the government had the burden on ownership, if you're not contesting that the patch was once owned by the PD,

then isn't that the status quo to start the analysis and therefore it's then incumbent on you to disprove that essentially once ownership is conceded?

No. I mean, if I buy some property at Walmart and it seized, I would concede that at one time it belonged to Walmart,

but at some point it was transferred to this officer and then it was transferred to Mr. Cain.

I'd also note that a forfeiture proceeding as noted in Gero serves two purposes.

One is to prevent further illicit activity and the other is to impose a penalty.

And here, neither of those are appropriate because if I may finish your sentence.

Thank you. When neither the property nor the owner are tainted by any criminality.

So forfeiture in this case serves no purpose.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Council may come.
