This is case 2014-0674, appeal of THI of New Hampshire at Dairy LLC.

May it please the court?

My name is Andrew Isles and I represent THI of New Hampshire at Dairy LLC.

Please feel free to ask me questions at any time.

I need a factual clarification, please.

Yes, Your Honor.

The board's rulings said that the board denied both requests.

That is for approval of transfer of the 109 nursing beds from Exeter Healthcare to THI

and also for permission to submit a certificate of need application.

In the board's order it said they denied both requests at the February 21 meeting.

You say in your brief during the February 21 meeting the board approved both requests.

Have I, I mean I was trying to sort this out and figure out what exactly happened.

What, did the board in fact approve both requests at the February meeting because it strikes me?

That's the heart of your argument because then they went down a different trail later.

But what do I make of the board actually saying it denied both requests?

Is that an error?

That is an error, Your Honor.

The board in 2013 did two, made two substantial decisions in this case which are controlling.

Number one, it approved the transfer of beds that THI had obtained from Exeter under its.

So we look at the record.

We're going to say the record is inconsistent with what the board said in its own order.

You will find that inconsistency, Your Honor.

In fact, let me be clear, in 2013, February of 2013, the board made two decisions

which are crucial in this case.

One, they approved the transfer of beds from Exeter Healthcare to THI at a public meeting.

They approved that transfer of beds after THI had entered into a purchase and sale agreement

with Exeter by which upon that approval, pursuant to the purchase and sale agreement,

those beds became fully, all the right title and interest to those beds went to THI.

The second decision they made, even though the agreement between THI

and the third party said the beds don't get transferred until a later date.

No, the agreement transferred the title of the beds to THI.

THI then sought necessary approval from the board to have those beds transferred

because that is part of the regulatory scheme.

The second decision made on that same day in public meeting was the following.

The board granted THI's petition for THI to submit a certificate of need application

for an entirely new facility somewhere in Rockingham County.

But their claim is, I'm sorry to interrupt you, but their claim is that's not enough.

You still have to have an existing facility.

Their claim is that, Your Honor, and that is a reading of the statute that can't be done.

When you look at the statute, it says, and in particular, the exception to the statutory moratorium,

which is all this case is about, it's a case of first impression, it's a case of statutory interpretation.

Might be a case of last impression.

If any kind of luck.

Perhaps, if the CUN board goes away.

But in any event, the language of the exception says to accommodate additional beds

obtained by transfer to an existing facility.

At the time that THI acquired the beds, and at the time THI obtained by transfer those beds,

it did operate an existing facility, Pleasant Valley.

But you know what, here's the thing I guess I don't understand.

Explain to me again, why is a facility that's located somewhere else, an existing facility?

I understand that the state doesn't seem to challenge that, but it strikes me that

how is something that's located away from the existing facility part of an existing facility?

The board correctly interpreted in February 2013 that statute, the exception we're talking about,

to mean that an applicant could obtain beds and then seek to place those beds,

in this case 109 beds that were needed in Rockingham County, in a location yet within the service region,

apart from the facility which it opened.

But I understand that that's the ruling they made, but I guess I'm having trouble understanding how they could have made that.

What is, how does that qualify as an existing facility?

Because at the time THI obtained the beds, it operated an existing facility.

I understand that, but I guess what I'm saying is, when the language says an existing facility,

how can that be interpreted to mean a facility somewhere else?

It just seems to me that that's a twist on language that I just don't quite understand how that can work.

I'll answer it this way. There is no language in the statutory exception

that requires continuous ownership or continuous maintenance of an existing facility such as THI.

At the time that THI obtained the beds by transfer, it ran an existing facility and in fact, as a DBA.

Right, but I think you're missing my point. I'm not, the question of ownership is,

that's sort of a separate question from what I'm asking is, what I'm really asking is,

how can beds that are to go to some physically different location

be considered part of an existing facility?

I mean, the very fact that they use the term, the language facility seems to me to

suggest that it should be interpreted to mean at the same site.

Well, I think you have to read the entirety of that particular section.

It's obtained by transfer to an existing facility and there's no question in this case,

that THI obtained by transfer, the 109 beds, the final order of the board on page three

of my supplement to the brief says specifically, the board itself acknowledged that transfer had

been completed. So my answer is, Your Honor, that THI, at the time it acquired the beds,

was itself an existing facility. And after, and the board, at that time, the board composed of

slightly different people at that time could make the interpretation of its statue, and it correctly

did so, that in order to satisfy the need in Rockingham County and recognizing that those 109

beds could not be placed at Pleasant Valley, just they couldn't be because of the geographical

limitations, it made sense under the statue and did not violate the statutory moratorium

to allow THI to submit an application for a new facility in Rockingham County.

Because what did that do? The statutory moratorium in this case, in the same statue we're talking

about, prohibits an increase in beds. Similarly, the exception encourages and actually prohibits

to the extent it can, a decrease in beds. The board's decision in February 2013

actually implemented that statue. There was no increase in beds in the region.

The transfer was allowed, and there was no increase in beds by virtue of the CON application

filed. And as a result, the board in 2013 correctly interpreted its statue to allow

the filing of this application for a new facility. Now, if I may proceed, the

line of cases that are cited by the board in its brief go to the heart of this,

go to actually go to the heart of my argument. And that is, at every time when an agency

inserts language that is not part of the statue, this court has reversed that agency.

And the four cases in particular cited by the state in its brief, this court did exactly that,

albeit under different circumstances. So the requirement for an existing facility

is in a rule, not a statue? No, Your Honor. To be clear, the requirement for an existing

facility is in the statue. The board's final order, however, expanded that statutory

exception to include language which is not in it. Specifically, the board, and this again

is in the supplement to the brief, it can be found in the last page of the order, said

due to the transfer of Pleasant Valley, which was not the applicant in this case,

THI was, which did never attain the beds THI did. Due to the transfer of Pleasant Valley,

THI no longer owns an existing licensed health care facility in New Hampshire to receive

the transferred beds from Exeter. That is not the language of the statue. It's to accommodate

additional beds obtained by transfer to an existing facility. So what the CON board would

require is that you have full bricks and mortar in place at this new facility

before it approves your certificate of need under the exception. Is that fair?

It's fair to say that what the board is arguing in its brief is that without Pleasant Valley,

the statutory more, the approval of the certificate of need application

violates the statutory more. I don't see how Pleasant Valley makes any difference whatsoever,

do you? I don't. In fact, Your Honor, I'll go so far as to say that once THI obtained by transfer

the beds pursuant to the board's order in February 2013 and that was recognized by the

board and then filed a certificate of need application or got approval, rather, to file

a certificate of need application. I'm still confused about when the actual transfer occurred.

Did it occur at the time the board, you're telling us, approved the request to transfer

or at some other time pursuant to the agreement between THI and this other entity?

If you look at the record, Your Honor, the transfer occurred upon the approval by the board in 2013

of the transfer of beds from THI to THI from Exeter.

That was the reason THI went to the board, in fact, in 2013 was that it had executed a

purchase and sale agreement which says upon NSR approval, meaning the approval to transfer the

beds, to use a term that the board uses, upon that not subject to review approval,

the beds all right title and interest to those beds will be transferred to THI.

For purposes of regulatory review and for purposes of the CLN application,

at that time THI had obtained the beds by transfer.

And as a result, Pleasant Valley, and Justice Hicks is right, Pleasant Valley was irrelevant after

that point because- So, you say, you know, we don't even have to get into statutory

interpretation. You say based on the fact that THI was the entity that received the transfer

end of analysis. When you look at the statute that's at issue and you look at the facts,

that should be the end of the analysis. But you say, in other words, you would agree that

Pleasant Valley, if Pleasant Valley had not had any other business operations in New Hampshire

before the transfer, they couldn't have just taken the transfer, even if this would not

involve an expansion of beds, they could not have done that.

Yes, I will say that. And the reason that existing facility language is in there

is that the state wants to make sure that those who are transferred beds under the statute

are bona fide operators of nursing homes in New Hampshire, which makes sense.

And if they are transferred beds, which require a new facility for a variety of reasons,

location, the old one doesn't work, whatever, then those bona fide known operators who are

not speculators in nursing home beds, by the way, are valid operators.

Once the transfer was made to a valid operator, it was then free to sell to this third party

without further board examination.

Yes, I will answer your question this way. Yes, it was. But when you say without further

examination, that needs some attention. And the reason it needs attention is because

the CON application process is in and of itself a rigorous regulatory review.

Just because THI was given permission to file a certificate of need application for a brand new

facility doesn't mean that it naturally could get it. It had to qualify for and be.

And you say it was qualified on the whatever the medical requirements were.

It satisfied, according to the board's own order, it satisfied all of the criteria and

standards required for a new facility. There was never any question of the quality of the

financial ability to run this operation or anything else. The only question was,

and it was raised very late in the process, and my brief does address that, but my red light

is on so I don't have time to stress. Thank you. Okay, thank you. Good morning. May it please the

court? Ken Sansone from the Attorney General's office here on behalf of the respondent, the

New Hampshire Health Services Planning and Review Board. I'm happy to take questions at any time.

Do you agree with Mr. Iles about what happened in February of 2013?

I agree that in February 2013 the board granted two requests for relief that were presented to

it by THI. So to the extent the board says otherwise in its order it was just an error of some sort?

Yes, there's some inconsistent language in the order. I suppose I take it just to be a

Scrivener's error. The board was always under the understanding that it had granted that

relief to THI. Well, that's very helpful. So at least we've got the fact straight.

Well, not yet. What are those two things? What are the two things that were granted?

The two forms of relief were a request that the transfer of the beds from Exeter Health Care to

THI would not be subject to a certificate of need. The certificate of need was necessary in

order to accommodate the beds. The beds could not be accommodated at the existing physical plant

that THI was operating at Pleasant Valley. So THI fully understood it needed a certificate of

need in order to accommodate the beds. So the second form of relief was permission from

the board to submit the application for a certificate of need. Because nothing else?

Nothing else. That's correct, Your Honor. So it didn't guarantee approval of the

certificate of need. It just says we grant you petition to submit an application.

That's correct, Your Honor. That was what was envisioned by the Purchase and Sale Agreement

and that is what THI asked for in February 2013 and that's what THI got.

What do you say is the purpose of the statutory language that talks of an existing facility?

Well, the purpose of the moratorium is set forth in the purpose section

at the outset of the statute 151C1. The moratorium reflects a legislative judgment that care for

aging and infirm individuals should typically take place at home and not in nursing homes

because of concerns about the cost. Right. But I mean, I understand the moratorium,

but this is sort of an exception to the moratorium. Maybe it's not even,

maybe that's even too broad a statement because as I understand it, what this statute allows

or this section of the statute allows is if you're not sort of adding to the number of beds,

but you're just sort of transferring them, keeping the same total number of overall

beds in the area, then that's okay. That seems to be the effect of the statute.

So I guess in the context of that, if the idea is don't increase the number of beds,

what is the purpose of the existing facility language?

It's in addition to not increasing the number of beds, I suppose, and I would have to

speculate here because I'm not aware of any legislative history to this effect,

that as Mr. Isle stated, to ensure that an unknown operator isn't receiving beds from

transfer. Okay. So you then agree, you don't dispute that the existing facility language

doesn't mean that the transferred beds have to be physically located at some place that already has

a license. At some place that already has a license, that's correct, Your Honor. I do want

to take a moment with the court's indulgence to address what I think is a very important fact

in this case, and that is when the beds were actually obtained by transfer from Exeter HealthCare

to THI. Contrary to THI's repeated statements to this court, when THI was asked this very question

by the board during the approval process, that is, and I'm quoting, if the sale of

beds from Exeter HealthCare to THI will not occur until after the con has been granted,

does Exeter HealthCare still retain ownership of them at this time? THI stated, and again I quote,

Exeter HealthCare, quote, retains ownership of the beds until all the conditions to

closing have been satisfied, including the issuance of the con for traditions at

London Dairy. So the board asked and was told that Exeter HealthCare owned the beds at that

time. I agree with you that that may be important, but what does this make any sense to you? We had

how many beds are there? 109, Your Honor. Okay, you had 109 over in Exeter, great facility,

but for some reason it didn't work. There's a need. No one disputes that. There's a need

for those 109 beds. Why is the certificate of need board parsing words so tightly?

Respectfully, Your Honor, I don't believe that any parsing went on here. The term at issue here is

what does existing facility mean? Right, but it doesn't make any sense. Does it make any sense

that there be the existing facility requirement while the legislature saw fit to include it

in the statute? No, but if you know, but the thing I guess I don't understand is this, if you

say that the purpose of the existing facility is not to sort of physically require that the

new beds be adjacent to or part of the same structure as the old facility, if you say that

that's not the purpose. That's what the board said, Your Honor. And that the purpose is to ensure that

wherever the beds are transferred, this is not sort of some new operator that we don't know

anything about and maybe it's a fly-by-night operator or it's not going to be able to

care for patients appropriately. If that's the purpose, then why isn't that satisfied here?

Because you do have a track history and the mere fact that after they at least made the contract

to acquire the beds from Exeter, they sold the other facility, so what? I mean, you know

what their track record was? You have the records of whether they were operating that facility before

they sold it in some improper manner. The only way to answer your question, Your Honor, is to say that

the board didn't believe that the statute gave it the authority to approve this in the absence

of an existing facility to accommodate the beds to be obtained by transfer. Is it relevant

that the purchaser, this new organization, would then assuming your opponent is correct,

is it your position that what's missing here is accountability of this new purchaser

because THI had a good track record, but the purchaser has zero track record. Is that relevant

at all? I don't believe so, Your Honor. What's relevant is the absence of an existing facility

because that's what the statute requires. The new operator, as it were, was Savva Senior Care,

which took a transfer of the existing Pleasant Valley facility in settlement of a big commercial

litigation matter. A dispute among my understanding is the partners of the holding company.

Am I missing something? I guess I thought that the entity that was going to operate the new beds,

so to speak, or the beds that had been transferred, was the entity that had operated the other facility

in what is it, Derry or London Derry? Yes. The only thing that has changed is that

that operator sold the old facility. That's right. But it's the same operator that used to

operate the old facility that will now operate the new facility. It's the same operator, but it

lacks an existing facility. I think it's important to, THI tries at length to fault the board

for the state of affairs. THI is the subsidiary of a national operator of nursing homes,

very sophisticated entity. It was THI that chose to structure its affairs in this way.

It was THI that chose to structure the purchase and sale agreement for those beds,

so that title to the beds, and the agreement is clear on this, and again this is what THI

specifically told the board when it asked, did not transfer until after the application was

approved. And I might add, THI didn't have to pay the money for the beds with the exception

of a small deposit until that all happened. So they chose to enter this P&S. It put all the risk

of a non-approval on the seller. That was the first business decision that this outfit made.

The second business decision- Might it not have been a requirement of their financing bank

or investors? I can't say, Your Honor, that's not in the record. I'm sorry I interrupted.

The second business decision that THI made was the decision by its parent company,

despite the fact that this application was pending, which invoked a statutory

exception to the moratorium, which expressly requires an existing facility. THI's parent

company made the decision to transfer its only existing facility in New Hampshire

to an unrelated entity in settlement of unrelated commercial litigation.

How does this benefit any of the purposes of the statute? If I understand correctly,

the moratorium, this would not violate the moratorium, so that presumably having these

beds available is a good thing for the public. So how does this- I cannot disagree with that,

Your Honor. There is another important principle, I think, at play in this case that's intention

with that. Administrative agencies have only that authority which has been delegated to them

by the legislature by statute. Administrative agencies cannot be free simply to do what they

want and exercise their powers as they see fit, as long as an argument can be made that, well,

this is in keeping with the purposes of the statute, what's the big deal? That's really

what this case is about. Let me ask you this one thing that troubles me is I look through the

record. It seems like this issue came out of the blue and it shouldn't have been a surprise.

It seemed like the state had a lot of opportunity to say, well, wait a minute,

and maybe the deal could have been restructured, but all of a sudden this appears to come out of

the blue. Respectfully, Your Honor, that is a misimpression that has been created by THI's

presentation here. As I've already mentioned, when the board learned of the sale of Pleasant

Valley, the transfer of Pleasant Valley, which, by the way, it learned about by receiving a

letter from a law firm which, so far as the record reflects, had not been representing

THI in any of the prior proceedings before the board, it reached out to THI and asked about

who is Savva Senior Care? Do they have any affiliation with THI? And they also asked,

as I've already mentioned, have the beds already been transferred? Who owns them at the moment?

So this issue did not come out of the blue. This happened during the completeness review

process. Well, those questions are one thing. The issue of what those particular words mean

and how expansively they're going to be interpreted is another. I suppose that's

correct, Your Honor, but there was a public hearing on this matter as required by statute

at the public hearing. THI was present through representatives represented by council.

Was that particular issue joined the expansiveness of the reading of those words?

Yes. What the term existing facility and whether it could be satisfied in light of this

intervening sale, which again was THI's business decision to sell that Pleasant Valley facility

while its application trying to invoke the existing facility?

Forgive the obvious question, Mr. Sansone. What if THI today goes out and buys a facility

in New Hampshire? Problem solved? If THI buys a facility in its entirety under the statute,

is it presently exists depending on the financial impact of that? It might need a certificate of

need. It might not. As Your Honor, I believe, referred to earlier, my understanding of a

provision of HB2, which has been in the news a lot lately, is that the certificate of need

process will be eliminated. So I suppose THI could wait and try again and not have to deal with

the board any more on the certificate of need issue. But again...

At that February meeting when the board approved both requests, did it have any information

that a third party was off in the wings? Absolutely not, Your Honor. And that's

clear from the record. In fact, at the public hearing on the certificate of need application,

THI's own representatives stated that even they did not know at that point that Pleasant

Valley might be transferred to an unrelated third party. There was no discussion of that at all,

nor was there any discussion when the approval of that transfer occurred, which was during

the pendency of the certificate of need application for the transfer of beds from Exeter.

There was no discussion at that hearing or in connection with that hearing about the effect

that this might have. Again, this is a sophisticated national operator of nursing

homes. They were fully aware of what the statute said. They were trying to take advantage of the

exception created by the statute. Then they made a decision that simply disqualified them

from that relief as a matter of law. The board simply recognized the limits on its authority

under that statute and in the absence of an existing facility. So your argument is not

based upon the merits of providing the 109 beds to people who need them.

Respectfully, Your Honor. That's not for me to say. It's a jurisdictional issue

and you say the board essentially had no choice given the language of the statute.

That's absolutely right, Your Honor. But I guess the thing I'm not clear on is

if I understood what you just said, the board, I assume it was the same board,

had to approve the sale of the other dairy facility. Is that right?

That's right, yes, DeSava. So I suppose you're right that you can fault the company for not

understanding that the board would take this view. I assume during that approval process,

nobody from the board said to the company, by the way, you understand that if you do this,

you're sort of screwing yourself for the other thing you want to do. Nobody from the board

raised it. That's correct, Your Honor. My light's on. But if I can answer that question,

as I've already mentioned, before that hearing and that approval even took place,

and this is in the record, the board reached out because it got this letter out of the blue

from a law firm representing Sava Senior Care saying that effective the end of the year,

we will be the owners of this facility. Upon receiving that information, not voluntarily

provided by THI as part of the approval process, from this random law firm, the board reached out

and asked for information about the impact that that transfer could have upon this certificate of

need application, which again, was invoking the statutory exception requiring an existing

facility. Well, if it reached out for the information and it got the information,

why didn't it say, oh, okay, we reached out for a reason and there's a problem here?

Well, I think that they probably did the best they could under the circumstances,

Your Honor. Again, I have to remind the court, this is a sophisticated entity.

It's not a mom and pop nursing home. They knew what the statute said.

They knew what the statute required, and the board did not in any way blindside them. And

if the court looks at the transcript to the public hearings, this is not an estoppel case.

Not at all, Your Honor. In fact, the sequence of events establishes that

THI did not, and they don't claim to have, taken any actions in response to anything the

board said or did. The purchase and sale agreement predated the board's involvement in this at all,

and the sale to SAVA predated anything that the board had done as well.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you.

Court stands in recess.
