This is case 2014-0617 in the matter of Tamry Rakowski and Shane Rakowski.

Council?

Good afternoon, Mayor, Police and Court. My name is Don Ekberg. I'm a lawyer in North Conway.

I'm here representing Mr. Rakowski.

Welcome to the South Country.

Well, they let me out every once in a while, Your Honor. Thank you.

This is a divorce. It's not an atypical divorce. It's pretty standard.

They were, priorities were married 23 years. They had two children at the time of the final hearing.

The kids, two boys, 17, 18, 16, 17, something like that.

There are six pieces to this case I'd like to address.

The first piece is the Connecticut home. The party's originally from Connecticut,

and there was a home involved which was owned by Mr. Rakowski's folks.

It was at the time of the divorce, still is for that matter, rather run down, old, unlivable, lead paint, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.

It was marital property. We conceded that in the divorce. We proposed an order that he get the whole house,

but we did concede it was marital property. We had a hearing on it. We presented evidence.

My client's testimony and evidence from a realtor from Connecticut who was familiar with the house,

who the court references in their opinion as being an employer of my client, which is true,

because my client is in the plumbing business, did some work for the realtor.

There's no evidence that that influenced the realtor's appraisal.

What did the realtor appraise the house at?

65 to 70. It's in a run down neighborhood.

And did the realtor appear as a witness, or was it just the letter?

No, just the letter.

Mrs. Rakowski presented zero evidence as to the value of the house.

There was a tax assessment from the town that was submitted, which was considerably more, I think, in the nature of 150.

I added as 165.

Thank you.

$667,000 is the assessed value.

By the town.

Our problem with the house is twofold.

One, the value is excessive.

And two, more importantly, that the court on its own, without either party being consulted or giving any notice or whatever,

went out and consulted an outfit called Zillow.

Let's say we agree with you that the trial court shouldn't have done that.

A couple of questions.

First, was the assessed value, and I understand that the court selected 2014 as the evaluation date,

was the assessed value the same or similar in 2011?

The tax assessment?

Yes.

I don't know that answer.

Will the record reveal that?

We'll check the record.

I don't think so.

Next question.

If there was no other evidence except the opinion of your client that the house was in bad shape,

but no formal appraisal, why is the trial court wrong in selecting the town's appraised value?

Because there was evidence.

It was the realtors' letter after inspecting the house.

There was my client's testimony as to the condition.

There was the realtors' testimony as to its value given that condition.

Doesn't that just mean, okay, so there's conflicting evidence,

and the court actually didn't buy either the appraisal or your client's testimony.

Actually, as I understand it, concluded that the value of the house was $150,000.

Let's assume that we, as the Chief said, suppose we agree that there might be a problem

with the going out and going online.

I mean, isn't the other evidence that's before the court sufficient for the court

to have found what it found?

It didn't have to believe your client's testimony or the realtors,

and it didn't have to believe the appraisal,

but it could have said, look, putting all three of these things together,

I think $150 is a reasonable conclusion.

Possibly, yes, sir.

However, the weight of the evidence would have been,

the weight of the evidence of my client's opinion as to its condition,

because it was in the family for years,

and the realtor who looked at it is probably stronger evidence than the town appraisal.

Well, but you know what, here's, but let me just follow up on that.

I mean, given the gross disparity,

in other words, if your client had testified,

look, you know, the appraisal says $167,000,

we think it's only worth $150,000.

Let's say that that was your client's testimony.

You might say, okay, they didn't challenge the appraisal, they didn't do anything,

but here, your client's saying the property is worth less than half

of what it's been appraised at,

yet there's no indication that your client ever went to the tax people in Connecticut

and sought to have a reappraisal.

I mean, isn't that something the court could also have thought?

See, we got an appraisal for $167,000 that's never been challenged.

At least there's no evidence that's ever been challenged.

That's, you know, that's not bad evidence.

Well, that would be true assuming there was a conflict between the assessment

of $167,000 and my client saying $70,000,

but my client is backed up by a realtor who actually looked at the house.

And our problem with the court's procedure was she never looked at the house,

the court never looked at the house and consulted a outfit

which we have submitted copies of their regulations in our appendix

that says that's for personal use only.

Did your client ever seek an abatement of his real estate taxes

on account of his view of the value of the property?

I don't think so. I can't say for sure, but I don't think so.

So what is your position as to what we should do?

If we agree with you that the court shouldn't have gone online

and done its own research and we have the three pieces of evidence

that we're all talking about, would the proper remedy be to send that back

and tell the court to look at those three, forget about the other data

and determine value and then wouldn't that need to be taken into account

in the other aspects of the divorce?

Yes.

Why wouldn't a printout of the Zillow appraisal be admissible in evidence?

In the subsequent hearing.

It could very well be if either party presented it.

Well, didn't your client rely upon Zillow himself at some point?

No, never heard of it.

The court on its own went out and found Zillow.

In the court's order, the judge refers to a similar online site

to the one used by Mr. Rokowski.

So he evidently relied on some internet site

for some purpose in valuing the house, no?

I read that in the order.

It may be in the order, Your Honor, but I don't remember him ever doing it.

Our evidence on the value of the house was his testimony and the realtor's letter.

Okay.

Okay.

So to answer your question, Your Honor, yes, that's the answer, send it back,

which is our suggestion for the entire case, I might add,

because I know I'm under time strain.

The court never told us about Zillow,

never gave us an opportunity to be heard on it one way or the other.

We think it's inappropriate to go beyond that.

You might want to move on to one of your other issues

because I think you might have some agreement here on the court about that.

Thank you.

Alimony, lifetime versus permanent.

We have a chart in our page 11,

and we did a math exercise.

Given this child support he was to pay,

given the wife's income of $1,500 in change,

and given the alimony,

it comes out that she gets $3,885 a month,

and he gets $530 a month.

We think that's grossly unfair and not on any basis whatsoever.

She wanted $1,000, she was getting $7.50 a month.

But haven't the children both aged out of child support?

They're all gone, they're living with him in Connecticut.

So there's no child support payable?

There's no child support.

All right, you have to back that out then.

Fine, we'll back that out.

But the fact of the matter is that when she,

she was getting $500 in alimony originally,

which we thought was excessive,

no, excuse me, I think it was $7.50.

She wanted $1,000 at the hearing,

the judge gave her $7.50.

But the math just doesn't work.

And that's sort of based on your assessment

that the court needed to accept

your client's evidence as to his income.

The court didn't have to do that, did it?

No, it didn't, which brings me to another point, Your Honor,

because they didn't.

But he has a financial affidavit.

There's no evidence whatsoever that that wasn't accurate,

which brings me to, and I'll skip down to,

hiding money issue,

which I call the hiding money issue.

This was, they were,

both of them were involved in the family business,

the so-called, the fireworks business

and a plumbing business,

mostly a fireworks business in Connecticut.

Mrs. Rakowski kept the books.

She was involved in the business.

The court order says right around,

she was part of the business,

she was involved in it,

she kept the books,

handed the books to my client,

and he handed it to the accountant.

So when it came time to do the taxes,

they had the same accountant, same books,

there was a quote-unquote book

that's been mentioned several times.

There was handed to the accountant,

the accountant did the taxes,

they both signed joint returns.

This went on for years.

The last year, during the divorce,

she all of a sudden decided

that she didn't think those numbers were accurate.

She went to a guy named Dick Goss,

who was my accountant,

does my taxes in Conway,

and said to him, in effect,

I don't trust my husband,

I think he's hiding money.

Should I sign the return?

Dick Goss says, of course you shouldn't.

So she comes back to the court and says,

my accountant says don't sign the joint tax return.

So she filed on her own, got a refund.

He had to file by himself.

He's under $17,000 and counting penalties,

which the court ordered him to pay solely alone.

Now either she's part of the business

or she's not part of the business,

and either she should have been a joint return.

She chose, and which is her right,

she chose not to sign a joint return.

But that stuck him with $20,000,

which the court stuck him totally with.

And she kept saying, I think he's hiding money.

I think he's hiding money.

No evidence was ever presented

that he was hiding any money.

There was a box when they took the cash

from the fireworks sales.

They took a box and they wrote it in the dome book,

the book and gave it to the accountant.

No evidence he was hiding money,

but the court based its opinion on that.

Fault versus no fault.

This case is loaded with fault.

Page after page of trashing, quote unquote,

my client about his drinking, et cetera.

Not one word about her activities.

She refused to take the kids to the Guardian and Lightham

and per court order.

She refused to cooperate at all.

He got stuck with the whole Guardian and Lightham bill

and the Guardian in the court order

goes on and page after page about him.

So your position is that this is a no fault divorce.

Yes.

And all of the discussion that the court engages in

regarding fault, you said should not have entered

into the court's overall assessment.

Correct.

The judge does not say I find fault.

It doesn't use magic words like that,

but it's obvious through this opinion.

But the trial court, if I understand the pleadings correctly,

endeavored, I understand you may disagree,

but endeavored to divide the marital estate equally, right?

Well, no.

Does it say in there somewhere he gets 30%, she gets 60?

Yes.

Page 18 of our appendix.

She gets $460,000 if you take $355 for her alimony.

No, no, no.

That's not property.

That's support.

Talking about the property settlement,

that's what we're discussing here.

Right.

If you take out the $355 for the alimony,

you'll see it also since it's in that same chart.

Okay.

104 goes to her and 40 to him,

even if you don't count the alimony.

Of assets, not income.

Yes, debts, debts and assets.

Okay.

He gets all the debts and if you do the,

it's on my page 18 of the appendix.

But are you saying that the court undertook

to do something other than divided 50-50?

Yes.

Or are you saying that the court got it wrong

in calculating values and allocating assets?

No, the court...

Where does it say in the order

that it's something other than 50-50?

I can't point to any wording,

but if you do the math on the bills he got stuck with

and the assets she got,

it comes out to 104 for her and 40 for him.

Is that using your valuation on the real estate?

No.

Does that enter into the number you just gave us?

That's splitting the real estate 75 each,

which is 150, which is what the court did.

Even if you do that,

she got two and a half times what he got

just on the assets, not counting the alimony.

Delay.

This first hearing was

January 10 of 13.

The second hearing was May 9, 13.

We got a decision 14 months later.

Everything changed.

I understand when you do divorces,

you take a snapshot of what you got right now.

I understand that.

However, the whole situation has totally changed

in that whole delay.

And wording by the judge of things like,

quote, the kids will have to take care of her some day,

so that's why I'm giving her alimony.

That's just, I don't know where that comes from.

There's no evidence whatsoever that the kids will ever take care of her.

The court just came up with that on its own.

So things of that nature, there's guesswork.

If you read the whole, you have to take the whole case.

The whole case is totally unfair to him.

It blames him for the fault,

never says a word about her fault.

There's no cases ever of this nature where one party is 100% right

and the other party is 100% wrong.

Never.

It should have been a no-fault divorce.

The assets should have been 50-50.

The child support is now gone because the kids are gone,

and we'd like to relook at the alimony.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you, Your Honors, and may it please the court.

I'm Danielle Santuscio, and I represent Tammy Rakowski.

I invite questions at any time.

Well, doesn't Mr. Eckberg have a point?

If this is a no-fault divorce,

which presumes a 50-50 split of assets,

take the valuation of the house out of it.

It doesn't, assets and liabilities.

It doesn't appear that it was close to 50-50.

I believe that what Attorney Eckberg has included in that chart,

most of it is not marital assets as it would be.

The Guardian and Lightham Bill is not property for distribution,

which is included on his side of liabilities in that chart.

That is not property.

He gives credit to Ms. Rakowski for a $22,000 car.

There's no evidence of that in the record.

There's no evidence of what debt is with that car,

and that car was purchased after the party separated

because she needed a less expensive car payment

because she was not getting any support from Mr. Rakowski.

There are two credit card bills on there that are liabilities

that I am not sure when they were incurred.

They may have been after the separation,

which would not be included in that

because all debts incurred after separation are the responsibility.

What's the evidence supporting alimony for life?

Ms. Rakowski, this is a long-term marriage one.

Ms. Rakowski has very limited job skills.

She stayed at home, took care of the kids,

and she is now just going to be entering the marketplace.

She's only making, I think it was 10.53 an hour,

whereas Mr. Rakowski will be able to run his businesses

as long as he wishes, making over $100,000 a year.

She didn't get any money from these businesses,

and I think the court knew that and gave her that alimony

so that when he was running the businesses,

it had an income stream for her.

If she gets remarried, it goes away.

She also won't have social security like Mr. Rakowski will

because she hasn't had W-2 employment.

So she won't have that when she reaches retirement age.

Does that, she can't collect off of his benefit?

I don't know, Your Honor.

No, she wouldn't collect off of his benefit.

I actually, I don't really know the answer to that question,

but that wasn't addressed.

I thought if you, my understanding was that if you're a former spouse

and you've been married for at least 10 years,

you can collect, unless you remarry,

you can collect off your former spouse's income.

I'm not sure the answer to that,

but I believe that that would be used in the income for the alimony.

I think that's what the court took into account.

We haven't looked into whether how much she could get from his social security

or how much it is.

I don't know what his social security payment would be.

How old was she at the time of the divorce?

Early 40s, 42 maybe?

I mean, it does seem like that's a really long time.

I mean, the amount of the alimony itself and the amount is not particularly troubling to me,

but to make it basically for life, for somebody that's 42 years old,

seems like, you know, that's, at least to me, is troubling.

And I understand the concern in that.

It's not something we see very often, an alimony award for life,

but it is well within the court's discretion.

But usually, if we do see it, it's awarded to a spouse who's well above 42 years of age,

more like well above 60.

In the lifetime alimony cases, there were many that were early 50s.

I didn't find any that were this same age.

There were many that were 50s.

And in Fowler, this court stated that rehabilitative alimony may be inappropriate

for somebody who is just entering the workforce

and didn't have skills to live a reasonable lifestyle like she did during the marriage.

Well, she's got skills.

If she was the brains behind the brawn here, she ran the businesses,

so doesn't she have business management skills?

No, she didn't run the businesses, Your Honor.

Well, she handled the books and she took care of the payments

and did all the paperwork, right?

Her testimony during the trial was that he would read off,

he being Mr. Rakowski would read off the numbers from the cash register receipts

and she would enter them into a composition book.

And that is what she did, and she would write checks for him to sign for both.

So she was a bookkeeper?

I don't think it goes as far as before.

An informal bookkeeper, let's say.

She helped him with the books.

I wouldn't say that she in no way ran the businesses.

She helped out at the tents with the fireworks,

and she did record sales from those tents,

but running the businesses isn't what she did.

And in those kind of small businesses, I guess,

you don't really have a formal bookkeeper all the time,

but she did supply that.

Making money as a bookkeeper isn't going to keep her in the lifestyle

that she enjoyed during the marriage.

I don't think that it would increase her income that she can make now.

So even if she could be a full-time bookkeeper

and even if she would be hired for that, she's never done it as a job.

I think she'd have trouble getting hired for that type of employment.

Has she made any effort?

Is there music here in the courtroom somewhere?

I thought I heard something.

I heard something.

It's gone down.

It's gone down.

Okay.

I'm sorry.

An errant cell phone perhaps.

What efforts has she made to get employment?

She has been working.

She worked throughout the dependency of the divorce.

Oh, okay.

She was working about 32 hours a week.

There was some conflicting testimony about the hours.

She was questioned and that she wasn't working full-time.

32 to 35 hours at this particular place of employment was full-time.

She was making 10.53 an hour,

and she, as I stated in my brief,

there were other times that she had tried to get other jobs

but she just didn't get them.

But she is working, and she worked during the divorce.

What about the value of the Connecticut property?

The value of the Connecticut property can be found on the assessment from the town.

The court did look at evidence outside on the website,

but only to corroborate the comparable sales that were given by Mr. Rakowski.

She didn't base her decision on the value on that.

And where did those comparable sales come from?

I'm not sure.

They are town records, I believe.

I don't know if they were obtained online or not,

but I believe they were town records.

We've asked several of us, I think,

have asked some questions about whether it would be possible

to uphold the trial course decision on the value of the property,

even though it did go online.

As I think about it, though, I'm wondering,

if the fact finder here had been a jury as opposed to a court

and we had heard evidence that the jury had gone online,

wouldn't we end up saying, even if there was some other evidence

from which they could have come to the correct decision,

we don't know how they came to their decision

and they could have been influenced by this improper online

and presumably we would reverse if it was a jury.

And so I'm wondering how we could do differently with a court.

Well, two things.

One, jurors operate under instructions

and they have to follow the court's instructions

and the court's instructions don't look online.

Right, but our instructions to ourselves include,

decide the case based upon the evidence presented to you

and don't go outside the evidence.

So it's the same thing.

I believe she did decide it on the evidence in front of her

and there was one case in New Hampshire

where a juror did look online at a rape statute,

I think, I think it was State v. Gordon

and the court didn't reverse the conviction

because the juror said it didn't affect the verdict

and this court upheld the conviction,

even though the juror had gone and done their own research.

But the judge here didn't say, I've looked online

I've now put that out of my mind and I'm deciding the case

based solely on the three pieces of evidence.

It didn't say anything like that, right?

I mean, quite candidly, the court put in its order what it did.

That is true, but I think the number, the 150 that the court came to

shows that those other numbers weren't taken into account

because they were so much higher.

What was the assessed valuation?

The assessed value is 167.

167.

If the trial court had come up with 167,

I understand there's a dispute about whether that number is within the realm of reason.

It strikes me that that would have been more sustainable

than, oh, let me pick my own number.

The reason she came up with the 150 as opposed to the assessed value

is because Mr. Rakowski testified there were repairs that needed to be done.

So she gave him credit for the fact that there were repairs

that needed to be done to the house.

That's where she came up with the 150 from the 167.

I think the court says exactly that it's based on the appraisal

and then she says, even though these other sites say this,

that the 150 gives credit to the downtrodden nature of the neighborhood

and the repairs that need to be done.

I can't see my lights here.

As far as the fault that was brought up,

the court did talk a lot about Mr. Rakowski's behavior.

It certainly did.

She took pains to castigate him

and we didn't hear much negative about Mr. Rakowski

and that's probably the way the trial court saw it.

But if this is no fault divorce, why all the fault discussion?

What did that bring to bear if not to an unequal division of the property?

The court in its order states that all the talk about Mr. Rakowski

is because during the two years that we were in front of the court

Mr. Rakowski spent so much time and energy demonizing

Mr. Rakowski and how she was to blame for his relationship with the children.

When the court talks about Mr. Rakowski's behavior,

it has to do with his relationship with the children.

It doesn't have to do with property settlement and alimony.

She even limits it herself saying it's limited to that purpose.

I'm only saying it for this purpose.

But the boys were just about emancipated

so there really wasn't an issue about residential.

It wasn't.

But I think the court just, because he had spent so much time

saying how awful she was, she needed to respond to that.

It didn't go into her factoring the property settlement

and it might have had to do with the Guardian-Adlitum bill, for example,

because she had originally been ordered to a 25%

and then I moved to reconsider, the court reconsidered it

and he was responsible for 100%.

She talks about it in that context a little bit

about the relationship with the boys.

The court used the date of the final decree

for the valuation date of the home

and your opponent objects to that.

What is your position?

It's well within the court's discretion to choose a valuation date.

I didn't see any evidence presented or anything in the record

that shows that that was unsustainable

or that it was unfair or clearly untenable in any way

or different than it would have been in 2011.

It's well within the court's discretion to choose that date

and I haven't seen anything that shows that that would be unsustainable.

Can I just ask a clarification?

When looking at the court order about these other properties in Connecticut

it says 34 Roth Street was also provided as a comparable,

60 Roth Street was offered as a comparable.

Who did the offering of that?

Mr. Rakowski in his exhibits to the court

provided those comparable sales

and that's why when I was answering Justice Lynn's question earlier

I stated that I believe she was just corroborating what he had provided.

So there were more data points than just what we were talking about before.

Before we had talked about the assessment, 167 and then the 50, right,

and then the 150 in between,

but here there are these comparables that were identified

and so that information was provided in the form of exhibits.

What did the comparables show?

The comparables I believe there.

Just in a range.

One of them is 146 here on 34 Roth.

The judge does go through them I think in the order

and I can't remember off the top of my head

but what had been provided was limited comparables

that I believe were submitted to show that Mr. Rakowski's testimony

about it being only worth $60,000 it was accurate.

The comparables that were provided were short sales or foreclosures only

and I think the court just wanted to corroborate that information.

So where it talks about offered as a comparable

that came in through testimony as an exhibit

and then when the paragraph continues in each instance

and it talks about Zillow that's what we are all talking about

in terms of the court doing its own research

as to each of these comps that had already been introduced into evidence.

Yes Your Honor.

I believe she was corroborating the properties that were given

by the respondent in exhibits to the trial court.

Did you say they were all short sales or foreclosures?

I think there was four of them and at least two of them

maybe three of them were short sales or foreclosures

that were even though they were assessed at maybe $150,000

they sold for you know one sold for taxes at $17,000.

They weren't really representative and comparable.

I think it was to show that even though this house is assessed

at $167,000 it's clearly only worth $60,000 or so.

And I think another one was assessed at $170,000

and sold at short sale for $40,000 or something like that.

The amount of alimony I know that this was briefed extensively by Miss...

Well, my light is on.

You can rest on your brief for the remainder of the issues.

Court is adjourned. Thank you.
