This is case 2014-0459, West Epping Water Company versus New Hampshire Department of Treasury at all.

The record should reflect the fact that Justice Bassett is disqualified from this appeal. Council.

Good morning. Thank you, Chief Justice and Associate Justices.

May it please the Court. I'm Robert Best and I'm attorney for West Epping Water Company.

Standing in a civil matter requires that both the plaintiff and the defendant or the petitioner and respondent

each have their own concrete interest in the subject matter of the case.

Both parties require that standing and standing is a question of law that this court reviews de novo.

In this case neither Michael Spelt as an individual nor as the administrator of four states nor as former employer

of the Society for the Protection of New Hampshire Forests has such an interest in the land at issue in this case.

There's no theory advanced by them in which Michael Spelt's the estates of the society owns the land at issue.

So they didn't file the required answers setting out what their claim of title might be?

That is one of our claims of appeal as well as what we raised before the probate court.

Standing as well as under RSA 498-5C which requires them to specify what it is,

where their right of title comes from and what it is.

Their answer is included in my appendix at I believe page 103.

So if they claim your argument I guess is if they claim no particular right in any particular piece

of property they have no standing to argue about it.

That's exactly the argument and the statute requires their dismissal and it says in the statute

for any party that does not claim or identify what their interest is.

That's not exactly what it says.

Does it require an affirmative disclaimer in the answer?

Two-part question.

Then doesn't the court once this starts and I think your client started it,

does it have an obligation to quiet title somewhere?

Two questions.

Sure.

The statute does have some wording in it that looks like any such party that disclaims title

shall be not charged any costs as well as without further proof the court shall render judgment.

However that sentence immediately follows the initial sentence which says if you've got a right in interest

you've got to come forward and lay it out.

Or sort of leave a third option if you said well no you actually have to say I don't own it in those words

with some magic words in order to trigger that second part of the statute which does away with the fees

and gets that party out of the case.

Or I don't want it.

My great uncle left me a dilapidated apartment building somewhere

and I really don't want that so I'm disclaiming any right in it.

It certainly could be the case where you disclaim a right in that

and in this particular case there are some parties that were named

which were heirs of certain individuals who were named in the case who defaulted

because perhaps they had no statement.

So has anybody claimed a right here?

Anybody?

My client has claimed a right.

Apart from your client?

Of the respondents.

None of them have come forward and said here's how my theory of title has come in.

The administrator of the court states.

Didn't you say in your petition that title was in Irving Norris

by virtue of the probate of the estate of Israel Norris?

So didn't you affirmatively make a statement that there was in fact title

in one of the respondents, at least one of the respondents as states?

Yes, Justice.

That part of our petition is laying out the chain of title that leads to us and to our title

and we've identified as states that were in the chain of title

but being in the chain of title somewhere in the past

can't be grounds for standing to contest the petition of quiet title

because if it did, every past owner of property forever more would be able to come forward

and weigh in on who owns it now and in the future and that can't be the law.

Subject to a statute of limitations.

Potentially a 21 year statute of limitations.

Now those particular states I think the first of them is the 1950s

and so if we were looking at statute of limitations I think that would be invoked in this case.

But isn't that typically what does happen in the quiet title action?

Is that the petitioner will file a petition to quiet title

and will serve anybody that the title indicates could have some interest in the estate

and that may very well be.

That may very well be people that had the current heirs of somebody that is disclosed

as owning the property 100 years ago.

Thank you Justice Lynn.

That's an excellent point and it brings up sort of why petitions to the quiet title are statutory.

They didn't exist at common law because a party in possession of the property

didn't have the ability to bring a claim against the world unnamed.

It would end up being an advisory opinion and there's some case law that sort of describes that.

You create it statutorily and in the statute which is 4985C

they create this mechanism of sorting out who can now respond.

The petitioner comes forward and names everybody that could theoretically have a claim

and then those parties come forward and say I do or I don't

and here's how I do if I do and if you don't you gotta go.

So you say we shouldn't even get to the default issue because of the standing problem.

But assuming, just assuming that you don't prevail on the standing issue

then we do have to get to the default issue, right?

Yes, yes Justice.

And so what do you say about that?

I mean was the court really wrong in defaulting because as I have it

there just was no, I may be confusing this with another case today,

but the petitioner was defaulted for not responding to discovery.

The petitioner was defaulted for not responding or for responding late.

Very late.

Several weeks or months late.

Four months, something like that.

Yes.

After what the court found to be a series of unforgivable or barely forgivable

misdeeds in the litigation.

That's part of one of the claims that we raise is that as you come to answer a sanction

for failing to answer interrogatories the court in this case accumulated all of the other conduct

and sort of said well with this plus late interrogatories we're going to impose this sanction

and that other conduct was not something that was either noticed

or that you could be prepared to answer for.

It was already sanctioned one time and so now you're going to sanction that same conduct again.

What's wrong with that?

Don't courts often consider what's the cumulative if the judge sort of thinks that

this is the first kind of transgression.

The sanction may be at one level if it appears that this is a cumulative kind of thing.

The sanction would be harsher.

What's wrong with that?

I think that that's an important question and if you were looking at a sanction that was

necessary to bring about compliance I think that you'd have to decide well what do

I have to do now to bring about compliance because whatever I might have done before

didn't do that but that's not what occurred in this case.

Compliance had been achieved 144 days before this sanction was delivered.

144 days the answers had been delivered and when you are doling out a sanction

not to bring about compliance with the rules which is what should be the case

but 144 days later when compliance had been achieved how is that not a punishment

and a punitive sanction and our civil justice system simply doesn't do it.

If we affirm the trial court's judgment who owns the property?

I think that that's an unanswered question because you still got to have some party

prove to the trial court that they've got good title.

I don't think that you can acquire title to property by default in a petition to

quiet title. There's case law that says somebody has got to prove their title.

Now we won't be able to contest it.

If you don't prove your entitlement because you were defaulted doesn't the situation

just go back to where it was before the petition was filed in the first place?

I think the net effect of it would be that is that you have to...

But we don't have any obligation to then try to anticipate in advance a problem

that is no longer before us.

I don't understand the question.

Well if your client fails to prove entitlement in this case because of a default judgment.

Yes.

I don't see that either the trial court or we have an obligation to say

oh my goodness then that puts us in a case in a state where it isn't clear

who does have title that's a question for another day raised by another petitioner.

I think that you're right and that isn't necessarily part of our appeal

or some of the arguments we've presented to the trial court.

However if my client is defaulted and then can't by Residucata come forward with another claim

and all of the successors in title that might follow him in a chain of title

couldn't either you may have a situation where you've got a piece of property

with a permanent irreparable cloud on the title.

And somebody at some point will come forward and make the argument to us.

It seems to me, yeah.

I think that they will but that's not the focus of the appeal that we have.

I think that there's also a second reason with respect to the default for reversing it

other than the idea that we're talking about before.

And that is in this case you've got these pleadings that have come forward

where you've got parties Michael Spelts is the administrator for states

and at some point the pleadings begin to bear indicia being filed

by the Society of Protection of Hampshire Forests.

Correct me if I'm wrong but isn't the society actually what you could call the record owner

by virtue of an error in the description of Mets and Bounds?

No question at all although there's a very clear Supreme Court case

from this court that says that an error in a title,

plain error in a deed will be rejected and the deed construed

reasonably to conform to the intent of the parties.

Now they bought a budding property that inadvertently

included the land they wanted and 10 more acres.

Doesn't that by definition give them standing?

Maybe they should be the party to this case.

Perhaps although the society was never named

nor they come forward to intervene in the case other than in this...

I mean if you're saying that there's a deed

that even if it's wrong it lists the society as owner of some of the property in question

why didn't your lawsuit name them as a defendant?

I wasn't part of the case back then so I couldn't answer to what that strategy was

although I could say that even had they done so

RSA 498 5C would have been invoked in that case as well

because the society has been very very clear throughout this

that that is only an error and they don't claim to own the property

by virtue of this deed to the budding parcel.

They've been very clear about that throughout

and so that kind of a disclaimer would certainly invoke 498 5C.

And the court actually corrected itself?

On the parties?

On the parties and it made clear that the society was not a party to the case.

The court made that clear however all of these pleadings

including the motion for conditional default and the motion for final default

and the arguments that my adversary made in front of the court

were clearly made on behalf of the Society of Protection of Hampshire Forest.

The transcripts are in my appendix.

The argument went on for 18 pages in the transcript about how the intent was

and the party is Society of Protection of Hampshire Forest

and only sort of afterwards as a fallback position it's sort of

well never mind all of that it was just an accident

and switch the names for me please.

And if that kind of a correction occurs in a case

and is not sanctioned there's no consequence at all for that

at the same time that late interrogatories

that don't prejudice the other parties at all

end up terminating your right to dispute your title as a party.

Well what's an argument made at the time of the second court order

on the motion for reconsideration?

It was at that point the court said

okay wait a minute I misunderstood I misstated whatever

the Society is not a party.

At that point in the litigation then

did the petitioner request some kind of relief?

We need time now to reorganize

because now we appreciate who the proper parties are

we're asking for a continuance we need to do more discovery

was any of that done at the time of the court's ruling on reconsideration?

Not continuance and more discovery but pending

and then reconsideration we had asked for partial summary judgment

to eliminate those parties.

So you weren't you or your prior counsel

obviously didn't feel prejudiced by the fact that the court

corrected the record?

Oh I did absolutely.

Without prejudice.

And that's the sixth issue in our appeal.

I know but did you bring the prejudice issue

to the attention of the trial court?

I don't know if I used the word prejudice but we certainly suggested

that it was error to do it the way that the court did it.

Okay.

Can I just ask you a question?

If I remember the law correctly and I may not

and I may be incorrect but I thought it was always the law

on a quiet title action that in order to sustain

in order to show that you own the property

you had to prove that you owned it

not that somebody else did not own it.

And I guess what I'm wondering here is

if we affirm the judgment of the trial court

which basically says that the effect would be that

you don't own the property

but not that your opponents do own the property.

I guess what I'm wondering is

what's the practical implications of that?

Do you, you know, will by us not doing something

will that mean that you will,

your client will continue to use the property

as if it did own it and the opponents will continue

to use the property as if they owned it

and there'll be, you know, that may not bode well

for some kind of physical, you know,

people will be, it creates the risk

that there'll be some kind of confrontation

between the parties.

I don't know whether there would be a confrontation

in sort of a, you know, out in the field

pointing fingers at each other kind of a thing

although I guess it's certainly

not out of the realm of possibility.

Hopefully that wouldn't come to pass.

But I think the more practical sense is

that neither party could then get building permits

or subdivision permits or timber permits

or any of those things because neither party

could establish whether they owned it.

The effect would not be a ruling that says we don't.

It would, a ruling that says

your petition to quiet title fails.

It's just your title and neither has anyone else

which is I think what Justice Convoy was getting at.

What that does is it has a piece of land

that can't be conveyed.

It can't be, you know, building permits,

no development, no subdivision,

any of that kind of thing because nobody

has the ability to come forward and say it's mine

and here's my proof of that.

Thank you.

Thank you, Justices.

Good morning.

May it please the court.

My name is Jed Callan.

I represent Michael Spelt.

So let's just be clear here.

You do not speak for the society.

I do not.

The society is not a party or an intervener.

Exactly right.

Never filed an appearance and never filed a pleading.

The society doesn't claim any interest in this property.

The society does not claim current real title.

The society as one of you acknowledged

is record title owner through an error

in a conveyance from purchase of adjoining land.

And so the society acknowledges that error

and claims no title.

Correct.

The society having discovered the error

did extensive title research

and opened these four estates

that had clear title, record title

in order to allow the probate court

to trace the title,

the theory of Michael Spelt

as administrator of those estates

is that the last decedent died in testate

and that the land escheets to the state of New Hampshire.

One answer to several of the questions

several of you asked is what happens

and the answer is much simpler than was posited.

The state of New Hampshire is a party to this lawsuit.

They were named, in fact the title is

versus US Treasury of New Hampshire.

Is the state.

The state has been present throughout litigation.

Their counsel Chris Aslin

from the Attorney General's office is in the audience.

They believe they have title.

If and when.

How will they, in other words,

if it's correct that in order to show,

in order to prevail in a quiet title action,

you have to prove that you own the title,

not that somebody else doesn't own it.

Has the state filed a cross petition

or a counter petition to quiet title?

No.

So how would they end up owning it?

I think they would end up owning it

because if West Stepping Water Company

is dismissed from this case,

I think it surely should be.

The case reverts to the remaining parties.

The probate court has jurisdiction

of both the quiet title action

and the opened estates.

And I will note that those estates are opened.

They are separate docket matters.

And as open estates,

they claim a present interest in the property.

But they didn't comply with the statutory requirements

to explain exactly what that interest is.

Well, they have.

Where?

Council says it never happened.

Well, I disagree with them

and the court has found otherwise

and as a matter of fact,

the court has found that the estates

have made a claim and have an interest.

In this litigation,

are they making it in context of the open estates

or in this particular litigation?

In both.

In both.

This court below.

Where do I find the answer

in which the estates claimed a particular right?

I don't have the answer in front of me.

I have the court's decision below

where the court found

that the interest

has not only been stated by the estates,

but admitted by the petitioners.

But here's what I don't understand.

If your position is

we the estates don't own this now,

it's a sheeted to the state,

then what is your standing?

I mean, that would be like my...

Why isn't your opponent right to say that?

That would be like my saying,

I used to own a house in Bow.

I don't own it anymore.

I sold it, but I want, you know,

or it is sheeted to the state

because I didn't pay taxes or something,

but I want to claim some interest in it.

Because we, the estates,

had and have an interest in the property

in the title change.

What is, when you say have,

you have an interest in the property,

how will you be harmed if a judgment

were entered for anybody else?

Whether it's the state or your opponent,

how will you be harmed

if you have no interest in the property?

That's a very good question.

Is there an answer?

Yeah, there is an answer.

The answer is we will be harmed

by the disallowing

of the ownership interest

in the correct chain of title

that we claim.

How is that a harm?

Do you have any authority anywhere

that says that that's a legally recognizable interest?

Well, it's a somewhat theoretical interest

because of the passage of time,

because now we believe has moved on,

but if the estates are still open

and it's a matter of law,

those four estates are open

before it's for clarifying title.

Isn't that completely beside the point?

If you were fighting with the state,

if you were saying, well, wait a minute,

it didn't really a sheet to the state,

we own it, we own it, we have some interest in it.

I could certainly see that,

but you're saying no, we agree that the state owns it.

So, I mean, it really does seem like

there's no, you know,

you're serving interrogatories,

you know, which ended up being the default.

For what? For what purpose?

You have no interest in this property.

The interest we have in the property

is in seeing that the title

is properly recognized by the court.

Isn't that exactly the kind of interest

that we have said in the past

is not enough for a general interest

in sort of, you know,

the efficient operation of government

or the land title system or whatever

is not sufficient to give you standing?

I don't think it's just an interest

in the efficient operation of government.

It's an interest in our title

being declared by the court.

I'm having a hard time

seeing how any of this matters,

because if Mr. Aslan,

nice fellow good lawyer,

really cared that the state

owned this 10 acres,

he would be the one arguing that, no, no,

it comes to us,

the last heir was in testate

and therefore we're the party in interest here

as against the water company.

And you folks strike me as,

I say this with respect, irrelevant.

Well, and that may well be,

but we didn't bring the quiet title action.

Except for the fact that Mr. Aslan...

You've got to close some estates.

You can't close these estates without an order

from the court disposing of this asset.

That's correct.

That's only because you created the problem.

You opened the estates

when you had no interest

and now you're saying,

well, now our interest is we need to close the estates.

I mean...

We opened these estates not

because we had no interest.

We had an interest.

They admit the interest.

They admit the two of the four estates

held title to the property.

We opened all four quiet title actions

and the jurisdiction granted to the court

are quite broad for a good reason.

54711C

gives the probate court jurisdiction

and gives standing...

Can you give us an example?

It still needs to be litigated

because as I read the court's order on reconsideration,

it said,

in the pleadings there are numerous references

to possible, the word possible,

the court used,

possible adverse interests or claims

that could be held by the estates.

So it strikes me that all the court did hear

is say petitioner did not

meet its burden,

didn't prove its entitlement.

It's possible that the respondents

have a claim,

but this needs to be further...

It seems to me implied is

there needs to be further litigation

in the estate matters.

But how can that...

I guess the way I understand it.

Your Honor, how can...

Even if that could be true,

if you say...

If you say...

But we don't say that we have any interest.

We agree that it belongs to the state.

Isn't that the end of the matter?

No, Your Honor, I think not.

Let me just parse and distinguish

between 54711C and 4985C.

The first, the statute,

and this is in the brief

at Roman VIII,

in petitioner's brief.

That's the statute that grants

jurisdiction to the court

and standing to the parties

to bring quiet title actions.

Very broad.

It talks about anybody who may claim

to own the same in fee for years,

for life, reversions,

or to have any interest in

and or in whom the land records...

So if we accept your position,

this means that if there's

some disputed property

that I'm trying to quiet title to,

and I file a lawsuit and I list

as defendants, you know,

15 people or their states

who might have some interest

in the property.

And all of them say,

no, no, we don't have any...

I'm sorry, 14 of the 15 say,

no, we don't have any more

interest in the property

because the 15th person owns it.

All 14 of those people

can now say, you know,

because I used to have some interest

or at least arguably I have to,

I'm going to submit interrogatories.

I want to take the depositions

of various people.

I mean, they can do that?

I think so.

And here's why that would be important.

When an issue is a chain,

a title chain issue,

and this is that, you know,

we agree through the first two estates.

They then claim that they gain title

through a deed that's not only not recorded,

but of, nor have they produced the original,

nor have they produced even a copy.

I mean, it's a non-existent deed,

and then they trace it

a different chain.

If the court didn't have jurisdiction

to have the parties

at the time where the dispute arose,

all the parties in the chain of title

who care to stay in the suit

and believe that they had an interest,

that they passed it in fact

to their daughter,

you know, over the gap that they claim

is interrupted,

we can't litigate

those cases.

Of course you can't.

Isn't this, aren't there plenty of cases

that say that if you,

that if for some reason or other

you can't get jurisdiction

over some person,

well okay, that person can't be a come a party,

but you can certainly quiet title

as to everyone in the world

over which you do have jurisdiction.

But clarifying title as to those

four estates in which

we claim to have had

an interest in the open estates

to still have it until the probate

court determines, does it in fact

go to that next step,

or does it in fact go somewhere else?

And finally, we do have

the state of New Hampshire in the case

who is saying, and then it

comes to us, and as Justice

Comboy pointed out, if in fact

West Epping water companies claim

is dismissed as it properly ought

to be, the case does

proceed in probate court, the court

traces the title, either a

buys the argument that it

tracks the way both the state

and the estates

believe it does, and declares it

in the state who is a party.

So you're saying

that even though the state has

not filed a cross claim

seeking to quiet title, that the

probate court can in fact quiet title

in the state? Absolutely so.

It can clarify, and I believe will

clarify, the statute says

to clear up all doubts and disputes.

Isn't that kind of contrary

though to as I said, I thought

the law was that you had to show

that you own the title,

not that somebody else did not.

And how do they show that they own

the title when they didn't claim it?

They haven't brought an action to quiet

title. They were sued

and being a party to this

quiet title action. I can't answer for

them, but I believe they believe they are

before the court and will make their

case, and the case will

proceed toward resolution in

which the court will determine

if both of us, the estates

and the state is right that

this case is not

the case.

It is not the case that this

case is cheating, or possibly

another outcome, as justice

convoy suggests, that's not decided

yet, nor is it before you.

What is before you is whether this

party was properly defaulted

and whether

my clients had

standing to be sued by them,

which of course they did

sue my clients in 2012

claiming after being defaulted

that we shouldn't have sued them.

What was the purpose of serving

the interrogatories?

To explore

the basis for their claim to

title. And your interest

in exploring that basis was

to quiet

to see the conclusion of the quiet

title action and the result

that pertains,

which we predict and

believe we know the answer to, but only

can determine. And it can,

in fact, as a matter of theory,

decide that it does not

a cheat. In fact, as

counsel pointed out, they

named three other parties

because they found

a will of our last

estate, Dorothy Norris Kirkland,

that was not probated

and if that will were accepted

by the court, the land would go

to those three heirs.

They

I don't believe as a matter of

law that I can ask the probate

court to

to honor that

that will because I can't prove it's

the last will. I don't know if she did

10 more the next day or whatever.

But it is a possibility

that the court will see that

that will is the most valid explanation

of what the last

heir wanted

to happen to her estate and it may go

to them. I believe not

but that's my legal theory. That's

not resolved yet, nor before

this court. Thank you.

Thank you. Case submitted.
