This is case 2014-0299, state of New Hampshire versus Jason Czakowski.

Good morning, may it please the court.

Good morning, in case counsel looking up here, wondering what's wrong with me.

Not at all.

I just had cataract surgery, so I'm doing a little gimlet eye thing this morning.

I understand. Thank you, Your Honor.

Counsel.

May it please the court. Good morning, my name is Thomas Barnard.

I represent Jason Czakowski.

Plain to make three points this morning.

First, requiring that all recordings authorized by Chapter 570A be protected from editing or

other alteration is the only logical statutory interpretation.

Second, it is the only interpretation consistent with the plain language of the statute.

And third, the court's error here was not harmless.

Let's say you write about the statutory interpretation.

I don't know if you are or not, but let's say you are.

Wanted the defendant's burden to produce a record in the trial court sufficient for the

trial court to find that this recording either was or was not susceptible to editing?

In other words, we don't have a record that tells us whether it could have been edited

or not.

Well, I think the trial court is going to look at the pleadings of the parties to

determine whether there is a factual dispute or whether the dispute is solely legal.

And here, Czakowski and his motion to suppress asserted very clearly that this

recording was not conducted in a way that would protect it from editing or other alteration.

And the state, in its objection to the motion to suppress, did not contest that at all.

Well, the state takes issue with that characterization of what happened below.

Well, the state says that the state did not concede that the recording was not conducted

in a way that protects it from editing or other alteration.

But what's the problem with the recording?

What is it about this recording that doesn't protect it from alteration?

Well, I don't know, because there's no record, but there's no record, but there's no record

because the state did not dispute it.

But it's the defendant's burden.

But it's the defendant's burden to assert the grounds for his motion to suppress.

And here, he did so by asserting that the recording was not protected from editing

or other alteration.

But doesn't he have to prove that?

Well, not if the state doesn't dispute it.

But I guess the thing I'm having, did this recording eventually come into evidence

at the trial?

It did.

So, I mean, it's there.

I mean, somebody could have said, you know, look, Your Honor, here's what I was telling

you about.

There's an 18-second gap here.

We don't know what happened in this 18-second gap.

And there are some indications as to what may have caused Chakowsky to make that

assertion in his motion to suppress.

The trial, the detective testified that he used, in his words, simple Sony digital audio

recorder.

There was no testimony that it was encrypted, for instance.

The statute does not require suppression, correct?

If, well, it's our position that if the recording is not done in a way that preserves

its integrity, then the statute does require suppression.

If the statute applies as you would like it to, because there are two important words

that we're dealing with in Section 9, one is chapter and one is paragraph.

That's, and I think that's correct.

The section at issue starts out with the words by any means authorized by this chapter.

And then under that, it uses the phrase this paragraph.

But the only thing this paragraph could possibly refer to is this chapter that was mentioned

earlier.

This chapter spends most of its time talking about court orders and not Attorney General

Intercepts.

Well, the chapter as a whole, I think, talks, does talk mostly about court orders.

This is a statute that was modeled after a federal statute.

And under the federal statute, the Attorney General cannot, on his own,

authorize wiretaps.

It has to be a court.

But there is provision in the statute for a member of the Attorney General's office

to authorize the wiretap.

But the statute seems to treat both as separate procedures.

So there's the Attorney General procedure and the court procedure.

So I think that's right.

You're arguing that the provision for security of the tape relates to both, but that's in

the provision just physically.

It's in the provision relating to court orders.

So there's RSA 570A colon 9 is not the statute that provides that courts can issue orders that

authorize intercepts.

That's elsewhere in the statute.

There are additional requirements for intercepts that are listed in RSA 570A 9.

And I can see that when those requirements are phrased in terms of a judge or in terms

of an order, then that doesn't apply to intercepts that are authorized by a member of the Attorney

General's office.

But this statute, this requirement is not a provision.

I mean, on that point, it seems to me you have a problem.

It would be strange, it would seem to me, that the legislature, if you're looking at legislative

intent that the legislature would have thought, well, if it's a wiretap, if it's a no-party

consent, then you have to be careful and make sure that there's not going to be tampered

with.

But if it's a one-party consent, we don't really care.

I agree with you on that.

But the thing I don't have, I guess I'm having trouble with is, are you saying that if the statute,

that we should interpret the statute to mean that, let's assume that some recording was

not done in a way that, I'm sorry, some recording was done using equipment that you say was

not properly encrypted or whatever so that it could be a problem.

But in fact, there was no problem.

There was no evidence that anything was, you know, even though it could have been wiped

or there could have been an 18-second gap or whatever, there wasn't any.

That the appropriate remedy, then, is suppression?

Well, I don't know how, I mean, if the recording is done in a way that doesn't protect it

from editing or other alteration, I don't know how we would know if it was edited

or altered.

If that protection isn't in place, then the danger is not only that somebody

edits it or alters it, but does it in a way that is un-detectable.

You're saying there's no forensic science that would indicate whether it was altered

or not?

I think there are sophisticated ways to alter a recording, particularly a digital recording

that would not be detectable by.

What's the likelihood that the police in this case had that capacity?

I'm sorry?

What's the likelihood that the police in this case had that capacity?

I don't know.

Well, in this case, too, don't we have both the complainant and the police officer

who could have testified as to the content of that phone call and, in fact, during

the interrogation, the police officer merely mentions the fact that he listened in on the

phone call, and then the defendant makes the statements that he makes.

The detective didn't merely say that he listened to the phone call.

He said that it had been recorded.

But he didn't play the recording.

He said, I listened to it, and it had been recorded.

And then the defendant starts to talk, right?

Well, Tchaikovsky was talking before he was denied.

Right.

But the part that you're upset about, he starts to say after that statement.

Exactly.

Exactly.

And so the officer could have spoken, testified about the content of that call or the complainant.

If the witness had an independent recollection, independent memory of that phone call, well,

let me limit it to the complainant.

If she had an independent recollection of that phone call without, you know, not dependent

upon listening to the recording, then she could testify to them.

Right.

But there's no evidence in the record that she had that independent recollection.

In fact, she testified.

Well, she didn't need to because the recording came in without objection.

At this trial, yes.

And she testified that she listened to the recording before she testified.

And she didn't offer any testimony about the content of the recording at trial.

If she were called upon to offer an independent recollection, I don't know whether she could

do that.

And I don't know whether she could establish the burden of proving that whatever memory

she has of that phone call came from the phone call itself.

Well, but now those things unfolded because there wasn't any objection that the recording

had been altered or manipulated in some way.

So neither the officer nor the complainant really had any reason to come and testify

about the content of that phone call because it was already in.

Well, and I think, you know, the way things played out, I think that may be true.

But in terms of the officer, I do want to make a distinction.

The detective at trial testified that he was in a cruiser with the complainant and

that he plugged in his digital audio recorder into her cell phone and that he was wearing

headphones.

So it would be our position that he couldn't testify to what he heard because that's part

of the intercept.

That's an intercept of that phone call.

As the court mentioned before, it would be illogical for the legislature to intend

to protect phone calls from editing or other alteration if no party consents but say

that that requirement doesn't apply if one party consents.

But it would also be illogical for the legislature not to use the word chapter if that's what

it meant.

I think that paragraph and chapter are, none of us would argue those are the same

thing.

There, I agree and I think part of this problem is that this statute was sort of imported

from the federal statute.

But there's, this court has said repeatedly that it will not ignore words in a statute

and that it will give all words effect.

And Tchaikovsky's interpretation gives effect to the words by any means authorized by this

chapter.

So if we, let's just assume if we agreed with you, what do you say the relief is?

In other words, we, I assume are you, are you saying that what we should do is just

sort of, you know, say this evidence simply shouldn't have come in?

Or are you asking for some other relief?

I'm saying that, that the recording should have been suppressed in light of the position

that the parties took below.

In light of the fact that the state's sole objection to the motion to suppress was the

police don't have to record in a way that protects it from editing or other.

But they still could testify as to their recollection of who said what to whom.

Even, even if it were suppressed.

If the complainant has an independent recollection, yes.

The officer's knowledge of the phone call came only through the intercept so I don't

think the officer could.

So the recording would have to be suppressed and I think for that reason.

What about the incriminating statements?

They would come in, wouldn't they?

Because they were the product just of a mention of the fact that there was a recording and

that the officer had listened in.

Well, but I, and I think that that makes the incriminating statements the fruit

of the illegal recording.

The officer didn't play the recording, but he made clear to Chakalsky on a number

of occasions that it had been recorded.

Well, they're illegal recordings and they're illegal recordings.

If this one's illegal, it's illegal because of some technical glitch that it

wasn't unalterable or something like that.

It doesn't seem that logically it follows that the fruit of the forbidden

tree should apply to that.

Well, I think it, I, I, I think it does.

I mean, I think the police officers have been lying.

Let's assume it hadn't been recorded.

And he told the defendant that it was recorded.

He's entitled to do that.

That's trickery in the heat of the moment.

A suspect's statement is not suppressable on the grounds that it was listed by a line.

Right.

Some police officers are comfortable lying to suspects.

I imagine some are not.

I do not know whether this detective would be comfortable.

But you know what, isn't the, the, the other question, even on that, you know,

where you say, well, the officer was listening in.

He was listening in to the actual phone call.

Is that right?

That's right.

So the, even the, the section of the statute you're talking about, doesn't it talk about

sort of preserving the recording?

And so, in other words, if he would, he wasn't, he wasn't listening in to the record.

And I grant you, it was being recorded at the same time.

But what he was listening in to was the actual phone call.

And so, I mean, unless we would interpret the statute to mean that, you know,

if you're going to get, when you're doing this, you got to make sure that the phone

company is, is, has taken adequate precautions to make sure that the phones are not, you know,

I mean, and I don't, I assume you're not arguing that.

I'm arguing that, that in order to intercept a telecommunication under this

statute, certain requirements have to be met.

And if those requirements are not met, then that interception and

its fruits should be suppressed.

But is it an interception?

I would say the recording didn't work.

And he's sitting there listening to the call.

That's not an interception, is it?

It is an interception.

It's, it's, and I apologize to the court, this is not a case in, in the briefs, but

there is a court, a case, state me tell us, this court's case from 1995,

where a foster parent had listened in on an extension telephone to a phone call

in her own home, and this court held that that was not an intercept because

the equipment was issued by the communication carrier and

because it was used in the course of ordinary business, as that equipment would

normally be used.

But here we don't have that.

Do we have to decide this question?

The state argues that even assuming an error here, it was harmless because the

defendant made admissions to the victim, his wife, the police, and

we have the victim's account.

Well, the, what I would say on that is that this was a close case.

The jury found Chakalsky not guilty of one indictment alleging a pattern

of sexual assault for touching EC's genitalia.

EC testified clearly that a pattern occurred.

So the jury's acquittal on that charge indicates that the jury did not

credit all of her allegations, at least did not credit that one.

Maybe, maybe the jury didn't understand the pattern charge.

I, I think the, the instructions were clear and, and her testimony was clear.

The state, the state relies on a number of pieces of evidence.

The state primary, primarily relies on the, on Chakalsky's incriminating

statements to make its argument that the evidence here was overwhelming.

But as I've argued, if had the court correctly suppressed the recording,

it also would have suppressed his incriminating state.

I don't understand the link there though.

Cuz the only thing that happened during the interview is the officer said,

I've listened to a recording, right?

He actually said, I listened to the call.

To the call, rather.

Okay, I listened to the call, and

then the defendant made incriminating statements.

So you've acknowledged that it's okay,

even if the officer hadn't listened in on the call,

he could say that he had, right?

Well, I don't, yeah, he, he could.

I don't know if he would have.

I don't know if that, if that course of actions would have taken place in, in,

in this case.

And I think that it's our position that as a matter of law, his, Chakalsky's

incriminating statements were the product of the illegal recording.

But if this court disagrees and thinks that, that the lower court would not

be bound to make that finding, then the remedy is to remand the case for

the lower court to determine what is and is not the fruit of the illegal recording.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Good morning, your honors.

Elizabeth Woodcock for the state of New Hampshire.

I just want to make one quick comment, and then I'll take the court's questions.

I don't, I'm sorry.

The comment is that there were the police officer who listened to the call, and

the victim made the call, but the other person who heard the call was the defendant.

He was involved in the conversation.

And if the defense wanted to make an argument that somehow this call was in some

manner defective, they could have done it by saying that the defendant's recollection

of this telephone conversation was different in the following ways.

Could he have testified in the trial court without giving up his Fifth

Amendment rights?

I think that you could make the argument that the, that the telephone

call was defective by saying that these are the following statements that the state

alleges were made.

And the, the defendant believes that parts of this conversation were either

eliminated, I mean the 18 second or 18 and a half minute gap from the

Watergate era, you could point out that there were problems.

The other thing that obviously.

But would that drive the statutory interpretation?

In other words, we have the words of the statute and then we had some

discussion with opposing counsel about the facts of the matter.

But I wonder whether if, if it turns out one way or the other that the

recording, there was some kind of evidence that the recording was not

accurate, does that really drive our interpretation of the statute?

I don't think it does.

I think it does drive your view of the motion to suppress, however.

Because you could, you could file it.

The, the interpretation of the statute is what it is.

But you could always challenge the validity of evidence by saying

somehow it had been tampered with.

It's almost like a chain of custody kind of argument.

So the defense could have made that pitch to the court.

That somehow separate and apart from the statutory interpretation.

I think that's correct.

Right.

Well, is it the statutory?

I mean, I guess it strikes me that isn't the, the argument here sort

of akin to, you know, an argument that, well, you should suppress

the evidence because the police didn't make the return on the

search warrant within 10 days or whatever the, whatever the

requirement is that you're supposed to return, return the

warrant to the court within 10 days.

And the police, let's assume that they didn't, it was 20 days

when they returned it.

I think our law, and I think it's generally around the country,

the same, the same effect is that's not the kind of violation

that should result in suppression unless there's really been

some prejudice.

If you can show that, you know, something happened in that

five, in the 10 day period that the evidence got tampered

with or something, sure.

But if it's not that, if it's just you were late, okay.

You know, and it seems to me that that's the same kind

of thing here.

If it's not, if there was really something wrong with the

recording, fine.

But it doesn't seem like there's any allegation that there was

anything wrong with the recording.

Or maybe I shouldn't say allegation.

There was no evidence that there was anything wrong with

the recording.

That's correct.

And I think that-

Even if there were, is suppression mandatory under

the statute?

I think it would not be.

I think that the defense would have a better argument that

the evidence should be suppressed, but not under the

statute particularly.

It would be more along the lines of this evidence is no

longer reliable.

That for whatever reason there were, that the defendant

remembered denials in the course of the conversation.

And those seemed not to be there.

And there was something that showed that there was a

possibility that this had been tampered with.

And I think that there is a lot of ability to check on

the validity of a recording.

I mean you could always submit it to a laboratory and

determine whether or not it had been tampered with.

I think under those circumstances you would

have a better argument that the evidence should be

suppressed.

But I don't think that it goes directly to the statute.

And I'm not sure why the legislature wrote the

statute as it did.

Providing sort of a security or greater security under

some circumstances than others.

Except that if it's the analogy to the federal

statute is not quite right because as a federal

prosecutor or under the federal law one party can

record a conversation without any court order or

without any approval from anybody.

The federal statute goes towards basically wire

tapping.

And that's when neither party knows that the

recording is being made which is a somewhat different

circumstance because then the sort of the arbiter

of the accuracy of the recording is the actual

recording itself.

There's nobody who is aware that that conversation

is being recorded.

And that may be why they decided to put in an

additional protection.

I'm not sure.

But if you have a circumstance in which one

person knows that the recording is being made it

sort of builds in a security.

Well, I mean as I understand it even in the

federal I mean somebody is always monitoring.

I think they have to in order to require in order to

comply with minimization there's somebody is an FBI

agent or somebody monitoring the wire tapping when

it's happening because they need to the guy picks

up the phone starts talking to his lawyer they've

got to turn off the turn it off.

True enough but if you go back to the infamous

Monica Lewinsky case in which Linda Tripp

recorded the conversations that she had with

Monica Lewinsky that would not have been illegal

under federal law.

It was on illegal under Maryland law and the only

person who was aware that the recording was being

made was Linda Tripp.

On here we had the officer listening in as well.

True and the New Hampshire law is different from

the federal provision which is why I draw the

distinction because I think that the distinction

does make a difference in the way that you

look at the entire scheme.

Do we do we have to interpret the provision under

paragraph nine that talks about the recording of

the contents of any communication under this

paragraph which seems to refer to paragraph nine

which refers to court orders correct but in any

event shall be done in such a way as well to

protect the recording from editing or other

alterations.

Is there any other specific guidance on that how

that would be accomplished.

There there isn't to my knowledge not in the

statute.

No and this is a general sort of ad admonition.

Do it in a way to protect the recording from

editing or alterations.

So I suppose that could mean a lot of things that

could mean just make sure that the recording gets

the chain of custody is followed or that gets

there's some software that can be used to protect

any changes in it strikes me there are a lot of

ways to protect a recording including just making

sure the chain of custody is followed.

That could be certainly one way I'm not sure I

don't I don't know what the what what all the

alternatives might be for the court but it would

seem to me that that the court in looking at the

circumstances would determine what the best way

of protecting a recording that it had authorized.

Well I guess what I'm getting at is that

we're we're having an argument over statutory

interpretation but query could the facts of

this case indicate that if this sentence were

applicable it was complied with.

I think that that would be a fair interpretation

your honor or fair conclusion because as the

court is aware the victim authenticated the

tape and didn't say that there was anything wrong

with it and no one raised any challenge to

and and that the defendant having been a part

of the only authentication.

Or did the officer testify as well.

I can't remember if he testified to the to the

tape it wouldn't surprise me if he did but I'm

just not able to tell you that there was no

objection on authenticity grounds correct.

So he we don't have anything like after the

recording the officer took the tape and brought

it back and had it marked as evidence with his

initials do we have anything like that we

don't have we don't have what actually happened

to the tape I'm not even sure I mean I'm assumed

that it was on some sort of compact disc but I'm

not even sure about that.

And when you say the victim authenticated the

conversation or the recording I can't remember

specifically from the record did did she speak

to I've listened to the recording and yes that

is it or did she just give her memory of the

call or or something different.

I can't remember I think that they gave her a

copy of the disc but I I have to say I've done

so many different cases sometimes they begin

to blur together sometimes I'm remembering the

cases that I tried which is very unhelpful I

will I will add I mean the typical the typical

way of doing it is to hand the person the

exhibit and ask if they can identify it and

usually what they've done is initial it or do

something like that after having listened to it

but there was no objection raised.

Right I mean we could the court could have gone

down this road and explored all these issues

had it been given some reason to do so.

Correct didn't have that reason.

Well I see my yellow light is on if the

court has no further questions I would ask

that the case be submitted.

Thank you case submitted.
