This is case 2014-0256 in the matter of Adriana Sullivan and Sean Sullivan.

May it please the court. My name is Doreen Connor and I represent Sean Sullivan this morning.

Mr. Sullivan is asking this court to vacate the family court's relocation order

because it was issued without the required statutory requirements

and is contrary to the court's own factual findings.

The court committed three legal errors in applying the statute.

It did not conclude that a relocation of 40 miles,

which it then by motion increased to 50 miles, was for a legitimate purpose.

It did not analyze or conclude that it was a reasonable location.

And thirdly, it did not confirm that that relocation would be in the child's best interest.

Factually, the court found that mother was voluntarily unemployed

because she, quote, has the ability to obtain gainful employment in a number of fields

in the state of New Hampshire.

That finding alone contradicts the court's order allowing relocation.

In addition, the court found that this was a case of parental alienation.

It adopted the GAL's findings that allowing a relocation that would not allow my client

to have sufficient and consistent contact with his daughter

would result in further alienation for which the child was in counseling.

For all of those reasons, it was error for the court to then have allowed relocation.

Do you say the court needed to articulate all of that

or can we look at the entire record and conclude

that the court's ultimate decision was supported by the record?

Your Honor, there needs to be some analysis of the statutory requirements

and also the Tomasco factors.

In this case, there was none of that.

If you read the decision, initially it is all focused on Connecticut

because that was the initial, that's what was tried.

There was not a trial about a relocation of 50 miles.

That's something that the court came up with on its own.

When you get to the analysis, to the extent that there is analysis,

allowing relocation, it is two sentences on page 52 of my opening brief

and basically the court said the economic enhancement

because mother presumably will get a job at some unknown time in the future

supports this move.

This court has already concluded in the case of Piper

that an economic interest does not outweigh the adverse impact

of a father being relegated to an every other weekend father.

This court said that an economic increase is not sufficient to overcome that.

I also, before I'm out of my very brief time,

want to comment about the fact that the parental schedule that's in place

is not going to be practical come September.

Currently my client is able to have some midweek visitation

because he picks up his daughter on Wednesday evening,

keeps her out of daycare or kindergarten,

and she is picked up on Thursday night.

Presumably when she enters first grade in the fall through grade 12,

the schools aren't going to allow that child to miss a day a week.

At that point my client will be seeing his daughter every other weekend.

We're talking about an extremely young child. She's currently five.

That means my child misses all of the after-school activities.

This court has never authorized relocation of a child that young

when the father has been involved and has expressed an interest in co-parenting.

My client is just aside himself of the thought that he will not be able to go to her school.

He will not be able to chaperone field trips.

He will not be able to be involved in any of her extracurricular activities.

And based on the absence of any analysis and the court's finding that relocation

in general was going to be adverse to this child's relationship with her father,

the court committed error and the relocation order should be vacated.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you. May it please the court? My name is David E. B. I represent Adriana Salvin in this matter.

I will address the relocation issue first.

There are three issues but that seems to be the most important and or difficult here.

Adriana Salvin did have a legitimate purpose for wanting to relocate.

Initially she requested of the trial court that she be allowed to relocate to Connecticut for three reasons.

So what do we do with it?

The court did a lot in its opinion when it was addressing Connecticut.

But it didn't do very much when it was addressing the clarification motion which changed the facts

and really didn't articulate a Tomasco analysis.

So I'm just wondering whether we can say okay,

let's look at the entire record and determine whether the court's finding on the 50 mile radius

is supported in the record or whether we have to send it back for the court

to reconsider and articulate because we don't have a Tomasco analysis.

We do not need to send it back. The court does not need to send this back for the following reasons.

The court was required to look at the Tomasco factors.

The court did look at the Tomasco factors.

There's nothing that requires the trial court to specifically articulate each and every one of those seven Tomasco factors.

So to your point, Justice Conboy, the court can look and this court now can look at the entirety of the record.

This court has also indicated that simply because one factor is discussed in a trial court ruling,

one of the seven Tomasco factors, that does not imply that the others were not considered.

And here I think it's important for the court to recognize that the trial court specifically articulated

that it recognized the need to review those Tomasco factors and that they were part of the case.

The court specifically adopted my client's proposed finding of paragraph 59.

I think if we look at the totality of this case and the totality of the other...

So you say it's sufficient on review for a trial court to say,

I've considered the Tomasco factors and here's my conclusion.

You say that's enough.

I would say that that's not exactly what happened in this case.

I would say that the trial court needs to address the Tomasco factors

or at least acknowledge that that's what the court needs to look through.

The court then should have some analysis ideally,

but there is no requirement that the court walk through each and every one of those seven factors,

specifically with headings and the like.

The court did focus on the distance and what that would mean for this child and for these two parents.

And I wanted to point out that the main thrust, I would say, of the argument now before the court,

like the opposing counsel was brought to the court's attention,

that this is a three-hour drive from the marital residence to Connecticut.

That is all over in the pleadings in the brief in this case.

That is not the issue before the court.

As the court knows, the trial court did look at the move to Connecticut, but rejected that.

That issue is not relevant. It is not before the court.

My opponent also describes the one and a half hour drive between the marital...

Was there a further hearing when things shifted to Concord, Massachusetts,

or was this just done on the pleadings?

My recollection, I was not involved in the case, Your Honor,

but my recollection is there was a hearing and the focus was at that time,

are we looking at a 40 or a 50-mile radius or distance from a family home?

But I think going back to the initial concern of Your Honor,

and that is we need to look...

The court, I would submit, needs to look at the record as a whole,

and there is sufficient evidence in this record to support not only the legitimate purpose here,

to find a better job, but also that it was reasonable...

The short move was reasonable, and I wanted also to point out,

my client has found a position now in the general Boston area.

It is a full-time position. It is a well-paying...

Where in the general Boston area?

Is it in Boston?

It's not in Boston. It's outside of Boston.

I don't have the exact town in my head at the moment.

Under the order, who's doing the driving for...

When the child gets transported, who does the driving?

Your Honor, I believe they are sharing some of the driving,

but to that point, there certainly is added driving time with this relationship with the move.

I would submit that you're going to have added driving time in most every divorce matter.

That is the reality of divorce.

And that alone is not enough to set aside an opinion like this.

It's one factor the court can consider.

Another thing to consider is this.

The Guardian-Adlidem in the underlying trial talked about a 20-mile move,

and that was something that the Guardian-Adlidem recommended,

and that was something that Sean Sullivan was okay with.

The delta we're talking about here, the 20 miles up to 50, is the 30 miles, and that's it.

My client moved to about 40 miles away from the Merrill residence.

Thus, the real delta we're talking about is 20 miles.

We submit that that is certainly something that reduces some of the time for both parents,

but is not significant given the other findings of the court.

Presumably, all of this is going to change when yet another petition is filed

when the child is going into the first grade.

I guess you folks are going to be arguing this fall about that.

Well, all I can say, Your Honor, is as the court well knows in divorce matters,

many of these issues don't end after one order or three orders.

Yes, we do know, and the children are always the ones who suffer.

Thank you.

Thank you, Your Honor.
