This is case 2014-0591, State of New Hampshire v. Rowland-Dow.

Good afternoon, Your Honor. Please, the Court. Charles Keith on behalf of Rowland-Dow.

This Court should reverse the trial court's decisions, the two issues that are presented before Your Honors,

in a big-picture way because Rowland-Dow was denied a fair trial

by the admission of inadmissible 404b evidence and then compounding this error

by letting the State essentially pile on with what should have been inadmissible expert testimony.

Why isn't this case just a variation on Beltran?

Your Honor, thank you. In Beltran, the trial court specifically found

in this Court used into rationale and reasoning when it upheld the trial court's decision

that the witness, Arika Siegel, testified before the trial court

that the reason she loaded the shotgun and the reason she lied to the police

was because she was afraid of the defendant because of the abuse.

She's specifically testified to that, Your Honor.

Right, but isn't that the model here?

The reason that a mother did something so counterintuitive was because of fear of the defendant.

However, Your Honor, as laid out in the defendant's brief, Jessica Linscott was asked many times

why she did the things she did, and she gave many, many, many, many reasons,

and none of them were because Rowland-Dow-

But couldn't the jury, but you know, you seem to make it, you seem to suggest

that she had to say that, and if she didn't say that, then the evidence was inadmissible.

But isn't the test really would the evidence have permitted that inference

that the reason that she didn't was because of fear?

Your Honor, I think that question goes to a foundational issue about the admissibility

and probative value slash relevance of 404b evidence.

As laid out in every definition of 404b, the evidence in order to be relevant

has to be connected to the evidence in some significant way.

And in this instance, that significant way would have to be testimony from the witness

just like in Beltran.

Well, isn't the mere fact that you're making that argument about the absence of evidence

an argument in favor of letting the expert testimony in, because doesn't that answer

the argument that you're making?

Well, Your Honor, if, and switching to the second issue, as Your Honor has raised it,

if Jessica Linscott had recanted or minimized what done the things that we laid out

in our brief that Searle's discusses, then the expert testimony would have been admissible.

But here where the witness gave answers as to why she did or didn't do certain things

and somewhat counter to that, the state was able to offer evidence

and then argued to a jury things different from what the witness said

and what that evidence did was, and this is what makes this situation unique,

we're not talking about a witness, we're not talking about a victim,

we're talking about a co-defendant accomplice who, the evidence established,

even though she minimized what she had done, had abused this child.

Well, but I thought there was evidence of a friend of hers who testified

that Linscott was afraid of the boyfriend.

She didn't have, in the record, yes, there is a friend of hers who did testify to that.

Okay, and the jury got to observe Linscott's testimony

and her answers, as I understand it, are basically, I don't know why.

I don't know why I did what I did.

Am I, is that a fair summary?

The first part, yes, and I would just add to her answers as to why she did

or just to do what she did.

Her answers ranged from, I don't know, she loved Rowland,

she thought he would change, she thought he cared for her,

she didn't want to baby her son,

she didn't know what to do when Rowland put James in the shower,

she was a bad mother, she'd just let these things happen.

She spanked him because she thought she was supposed to.

And there were more, there were many more laid out in the defendant's brief.

And so as she was giving these explanations,

the jury is watching her and evaluating her credibility, right?

And so it seems to me we have a combination of the jury's observation of her,

the friend's testimony that she was afraid of the defendant,

and then the expert's testimony concerning women who are involved in situations like this.

We have to look at all the evidence in its entirety,

and so query is all of that supportive of the trial court's rulings.

You know, I respectfully don't think so.

I think under Beltran that this court's set,

and it makes evidentiary sense that there has to be a basis

and evidence for the admission of the evidence that the witness has to testify.

But I don't think Beltran necessarily stands for that proposition.

As I recall, the author of Beltran felt that there was unexplained conduct,

much like there's unexplained conduct here, counterintuitive, as the chief says,

and that, accordingly, in order to aid the jury in evaluating the evidence,

the 404, ostensibly 404b evidence came in as an explanation for the unexplained or the inexplicable.

And again, it's hard to...

Sorry.

Direct my answer directly to the author of that opinion,

but what I will say, Your Honor, is that that opinion specifically referenced in the fact pattern

that Judge Barrett found that Ira Casigal testified,

she was afraid of the defendant, and that's why she did what she did,

and then in its reasoning in that opinion,

the court specifically stated that in support of its finding that it was admissible 404b testimony.

But I'm not sure why there should be a distinction between explicit and implicit.

In other words, she may have said I'm afraid,

but the jury could certainly infer from her testimony as a whole that she indeed was afraid.

And I think there's a gradiation of experiences that a witness can have in that instance.

There could be, say, like the child witness that doesn't have an answer for why they didn't disclose,

because it's a child and they either can't articulate or they're afraid.

On the other hand is someone who says,

well, I didn't do it because he threatened to kill me or he had beaten me so much,

I was afraid he was going to do it again.

And then there may be a middle ground in there where a witness either is reluctant to say

because he or she is afraid of the defendant, has expressed some indirect fear.

But here, this situation is different because the witness, Jessica Linscott,

addressed that issue over and over and over again,

and she never said she was afraid of the defendant

or did anything because she was afraid of the defendant.

Did she ever say that she was not afraid of him?

I'm trying to think about the entire record and its whole.

And I don't think so, but I would then put the onus back on the statement

as the proponents of the evidence, they would have to establish that.

And that goes back to the foundational issue of making 404B evidence relevant.

And I will submit the statement.

So was the defense theory that Dow never did anything

and that the injury to the child was caused by Linscott?

Was that the defense theory at trial?

You know, I didn't try the case.

My reading of the transcript is that the overall defense theory

was not specific just that Miss Linscott was much more involved

in the abuse than she portrayed herself to be.

So the theory of defense was that they needed to point the finger at Linscott, right?

So given that theory of defense query,

whether this 404B evidence concerning the abuse of Miss Linscott

isn't relevant as the state is meeting the defense theory?

I think the issue in general is relevant.

I think the evidence would become admissible.

I'm going to the Chief's question.

If just Linscott never answered the question or simply said,

I don't know why and left it at that.

But here she gave many answers as to why it happened

and why she let it happen and why she did certain things.

And again, I point the court back to the four reasons

the trial court found for allowing this information in.

And it was for why she allowed the defendant to abuse her son,

why she didn't stop it, why she fled to Florida,

and why she lied to the police.

In her testimony, when asked about why she did those things,

she never said it was because she was afraid of rolling.

She said things that had nothing to do with her son.

But isn't the test under, you know,

you say the sort of conditional relevancy,

but isn't the test under Rule 104, I think it's 104,

maybe it's 103B, that the court shall admit the evidence

if there's sufficient basis for a fact finder

to find the relevant point?

And wouldn't there be, whether she admitted that she was scared or not,

wouldn't there be sufficient evidence that a fact finder

could find that she was scared?

Well, that's what the trial court did find.

The trial court couched it in a could.

She could have been afraid.

However, I think when it comes to 404B evidence,

where the dictate is that it must be,

the evidence must be significantly connected

and you have a mountain of evidence contrary to fear

that that should make it inadmissible,

especially when you weigh it against the prejudice

and the severe prejudice that results from this.

Here we have, I'm sorry, Your Honor.

Shifting to the expert testimony.

Yes, Your Honor.

You made an interesting point

that I'd like to hear just a little bit more.

You point out to us that the professional literature

actually criticizes this so-called social framework

evidence when offered by the prosecution

as opposed to being offered by the defense.

So, for example, if a woman is on trial

for shooting her husband,

then an expert might say these things can happen

as a result of battered woman syndrome.

That usually is presented by the defense.

Here it's the prosecution

that presenting the so-called social framework evidence.

Do you say we should adopt that view

that is now being expressed in the professional literature?

Well, I do think this court should adopt

not a per se line,

but take what the Supreme Court of Minnesota said to heart,

is that this evidence, and I'm in my head

as I've done this appeal and prepped for this,

I thought of this as kind of third rail evidence.

You have to be very careful if you're going to touch the third rail

because it is so dangerous for the reasons those experts discussed

that if a jury hears from an expert

in the way they heard from Scott Hampton in this matter,

and I think it's important and it should hear

that Mr. Hampton was not simply a witness.

He was an educator in this case,

and many witnesses are, but he was almost like a professor.

He would go for nine pages at a time,

just lecture this type of evidence.

But I think we should follow...

Were timely objections made?

They were interspersed,

and I think reading the transcript wasn't going to do any good.

But you're not raising plain error.

I'm sorry, what?

You're not arguing plain error.

No, it was preserved.

And I'm not saying...

I just think that's an aggravating factor in those two.

Justice Conboy's question that this becomes very dangerous

because a jury will listen to this expert

and absorb this information as book and page gospel.

And what it does is it ends up demonizing the person

sitting in the defendant's chair,

and that's the difference when a defendant offers it

versus when it's offered against the defendant

because the defendant has all the constitutional rights

inherent when...

Well, there's certainly an opportunity to cross-examine

the expert and take on all of these speeches

or these issues.

Of course, Your Honor.

As with every witness, there's the opportunity

to cross-examine the expert.

However, the cat is on the bag to a large degree

at the end of the state's direct exam.

Isn't that speculation though?

My experience is that when witnesses pontificate like that,

jurors tune out.

So it could cut either way, I would think,

and we'd be speculating absent a clear record on the matter.

Well, I think because we can't read into juror's minds

and you can't submit interviews with them,

the material we did in the brief

about experts who've commented on this

is that based upon their study

that this seems to be the reaction of jurors

is that it is taken incredibly seriously.

But there's no dispute in this case

that this expert did not offer any opinion

as to Ms. Linskets, her particular situation.

All he did was talk about, in general,

his experience and knowledge in general

about domestic violence and the power

of an abuser over the abuse.

He did not, in this case,

give an opinion concerning Ms. Linskets and this defendant.

Did he?

Not specifically Ms. Linskets and this defendant.

However, the state did present him with hypotheticals

that paralleled the facts of the case

that eventually got him to a point

where he said in such a situation

the abuser may end up killing the victim

and the state hammered that in closing

and that's exactly why this type of evidence

should not have been allowed

because it was used for the exact purpose

it shouldn't have been.

With all experts, as your owners know

from sitting on trials and trying cases

you can ask hypotheticals of experts

but in here the state offered hypotheticals

that paralleled the case that got very close to the law.

So you say because the evidence was offered by the state

that's the important difference here

from when it's offered by the defense.

This makes this expert testimony inadmissible.

And I see this is my last opportunity to answer.

I do, Your Honor, if when it's offered

sort of a battered woman syndrome

I think that is entirely different

than offered as 404b evidence.

If the defendant offered it as 404b against

evidence against another witness

I think the analysis that we're putting forth here

would apply.

I think the battered woman syndrome defense

is entirely different.

Thank you very much.

Good afternoon.

May it please the court.

My name is Heather Schurniske

and I represent the state in this matter.

The trial court properly admitted evidence

of the defendant's prior bad acts

against Jessica Lynn Scott, his former girlfriend

and the mother of the child's victim in this case

in order to understand her state of mind

and explain why she participated

in these horrific acts against a three-year-old child,

her son, and why she initially lied to the police.

Now, in contrast to what the defendant just argued

there, when he stated that there was

a mountain of evidence indicating that Jessica

was not afraid of the defendant.

That is not what transpired at trial.

As Justice Convoy indicated,

Ms. Lynn Scott testified at trial

that she was afraid of the defendant.

Her friend Stephanie Nikoza also testified

that she was afraid of the defendant.

Clarification.

My understanding was she actually said

at trial she was afraid?

Yes.

She stated during trial that...

The opponent tells us no.

At no point did she say that.

We look forward in the record.

Your Honor, Ms. Lynn Scott testified

at one point during trial that to her,

the defendant was scary.

He may seem small, but to her he was scary.

She made statements along those lines

and she also did make statements

where she indicated that she didn't know

why she participated in the abuse.

She just didn't know why.

She was a victim of domestic violence

and lacked the edification to understand

what she was going through at that time,

which is why the expert testimony

in this case was very important

to tie together, to link together the evidence

and explain for the jury why a victim

of domestic violence would act the way

that Ms. Lynn Scott did here in this case.

Should we view this evidence?

Should we do a different analysis

because the expert testimony was offered

by the state as opposed to a defendant?

Your Honor, I do not believe

that there should be a separate analysis.

This court has found that this evidence

is admissible and the court found that

in state versus surals.

The court stated in that case

that domestic violence, just like sexual assault,

often results in the victims exhibiting behavior

that is counterintuitive to the average person.

So the education and the knowledge

that an expert has on these issues

can assist the jury in their function

of assessing the credibility of what it is.

In other words, if you have the evidence

that says that if you admit the evidence

on sort of the issue one evidence,

the other evidence about the defendant

being abusive to the mother,

then it's no longer counterintuitive.

If a jury hears that this happened,

the mother was allowing this to happen,

and oh, by the way, the mother

was being regularly abused herself

by the defendant.

Is it really counterintuitive to understand

why she didn't report this

or why she was sort of participating in the abuse?

Why do you need an expert?

Your Honor, in this particular case,

this abuse was horrific child abuse

on a three-year-old child,

and there was much testimony regarding the type of abuse,

which included the defendant holding the child

underneath the shower while he sprayed water in his face

and letting him go when he would hit his head on the faucet

and the side of the tub,

and Ms. Linscott was there for that.

The defendant would hit the child so hard

it would leave a handprint on his face.

Ms. Linscott was there for that.

The defendant would have her three-year-old son,

excuse me, the defendant would have Ms. Linscott's

three-year-old son run laps around the house.

Ms. Linscott was there for that,

and despite all of that, she let it go on

and she lied to the police when she was first questioned.

So it was very important for the jury to understand

how a person could allow their three-year-old child

to go through this.

So an understanding of domestic violence

and how this syndrome can really affect a victim

was very important in order for the jury

to really assess how an individual

could let this type of behavior

occur to her own child.

What is your take on the defendant's

theory of defense at trial?

Did the defense point its finger at Linscott?

Yes, Your Honor. Actually, in closing,

the defendant stated...

Just one moment, Your Honor.

He actually stated in closing at page 1437

that Jessica was the abuser

and she did those acts and she lied repeatedly.

That was at page 1451.

So the defense was pointing the finger at Jessica,

was saying that Jessica was responsible

for what was incurred by J.N.

And therefore the state would say

that the 404B evidence regarding Linscott

was relevant to counter that defense.

Yes, it was to counter that defense

and it was also, as stated by Your Honors previously,

it was offered to explain

why Linscott acted the way she did.

What her state of mind was

during the time of this abuse.

And the court did give a limiting instruction

to the jury about how they could use

the evidence of the abuse against Linscott.

Your Honor, there was not a limiting instruction

at the time of the testimony,

but there was a jury instruction

and that jury instruction

stated that the jury

was to use the evidence presented

relating to the defendant's treatment of Jessica

only for the purpose of analyzing her behavior,

her state of mind.

The evidence is not to be used

to prove that the defendant committed

the crimes that are before you.

And as this court has held many times before,

jurors are presumed to follow the instructions

given to them.

And the defense has made no argument

that the jury did not do so in this case.

So it is presumed that the jury

did take that instruction

and properly use that evidence

in order to understand

Ms. Linscott's state of mind.

Additionally, Your Honors,

the expert testimony was

properly presented.

Again, this was another level

in order for the jury to understand

why Jessica

acted the way that she did.

There was no testimony

regarding the specifics of this case.

Dr. Hampton did not know

any of the facts of this case.

So it was not prejudicial

because he testified

generally about the effects

of domestic violence.

But if the prosecution suggested

hypotheticals that were

a hair's margin away from

the facts of this case, then

wasn't Dr. Hampton in effect

testifying about this case?

Your Honor, the hypotheticals that were presented

weren't hypotheticals.

It was more that

they would ask Dr. Hampton

a situation where there's domestic violence.

What would the addition

of a non-biological child

do to that situation?

It wasn't so much hypothetical

as just asking pointed questions

about what different

types of situations

could victims face

when they're in domestic violence situations?

Additionally,

this evidence was not prejudicial

because again, there was a jury instruction

and again, the jury is presumed

to follow these instructions

and this instruction...

The defense counsel points to Searle's

and tells us that

Searle's should narrow

our analysis and that

such expert testimony should only

come in when there's

then minimization

or recantation by the witness.

Your position on that?

Yes, Your Honor.

Your Honor, in Searle's

that particular case, there was

recantation and minimization.

The court stated that

that

domestic violence syndrome and an expert

testifying about domestic violence

syndrome offers an explanation

for particular actions and statements

of victims that may seem counter-intuitive

such as

a victim's recantation

or minimization.

So the state's proposes that this

was not limiting this type

of testimony to situations where there was

only recantation or minimization

but was simply naming

instances where this would be

appropriate. In addition,

in this particular case,

Ms. Linscott did

minimize what was going on.

She even testified at trial

that she still blames herself

and felt that this was all of her fault

because if she had never brought her son

into this situation, nobody

would be where they were today.

So not only is

this evidence

admissible to show

Jessica's state might explain the situation

that she was in, but the state would argue

that she did, in fact, minimize

to some extent.

So, Your Honors,

based on the evidence,

the 404B evidence

was properly admitted.

The court properly found that this was

appropriate evidence.

It was not unfairly prejudicial

the 404B evidence, in this

case, consisted of abuse

upon a grown woman where the charged

conduct had a separate

victim, a three-year-old

child, where the jury heard

extensive testimony

about the abuse upon that child.

So the domestic violence

evidence that was submitted

against Ms. Linscott was not

substantially outweighed

by unfair prejudice,

especially in light of the fact

that Ms. Linscott was

the sole eyewitness to the

abuse in this case. She was a pivotal

witness, and so this evidence

was very important in order for the

jury to understand why she

acted the way she did, so that they

could assess her credibility.

Also, Your Honors, the expert

witness testimony was properly admitted

to aid the jury. As under Rule 702,

the trial

courts can admit such

evidence if they would find that such

specialized knowledge would assist

the jury in its

findings. Did the court give

the standard expert testimony

jury instructions? Your Honor,

I don't recall if they gave the

standard expert jury instructions, but

as I stated, they did give an instruction

stating that the testimony

could assist them in understanding

the evidence or deciding a fact

and issue, but they could ignore the

opinion if there was not a

sound basis or if the evidence

weighed that opinion, and that was

given to our jury instructions.

Thank you very much, Your Honors.

Thank you.
