Good afternoon.

This is case 2014, 0614, State of New Hampshire versus Harvey Martell.

The record should reflect the fact that Justice Lynn is disqualified from this case.

Council?

Thank you.

Good afternoon.

May it please the court?

I would appreciate questions at any point.

I was trying to figure out how to address the court on this matter.

I think that from my analysis, the court has the briefs.

They have the arguments.

Certainly, you know the law.

But the way that I perceive the situation

is that this case just smells bad.

I've done a lot of problems.

The court didn't find any bad faith, though, did it?

No.

Judge Temple did not find bad faith.

And actually, in his order, he did not.

But the problem is that I would, you know, there was a question posed,

and I think it's quoted actually in the state's brief,

where trial counsel acknowledged that, you know,

there was no deliberate intent to do anything.

But the definition of bad faith at least

is raised in the brief that I presented to the court suggests

that the actions by the state were not necessitated.

And in my brief, I referenced, you know, there was, you know,

you have good faith, you have bad faith,

and then you might have something in between like negligence.

From my perspective, the state had no justified basis.

Even if you say that the state at the time that the no process

was entered on the day of trial, there was a gap.

There was that four-year gap in time.

And in that four-year gap in time,

the state should have taken affirmative action

to have done something had the state sought

the prosecution of Mr. Moore.

Did it take an affirmative position on the annulment

petitions, or did it just not object?

Well, my understanding from the record

is that I don't know if you characterize it.

I view it as affirmative because they didn't object.

I mean, the petitions come through.

All it takes is, you know, an objection that

takes 30 seconds that could have been filed.

I think, actually, that that is part of the reason

why this is so unfair.

If the state had, I mean, because if I could just,

I'm going to come back to that point.

But if I can just go back, because remember,

the record was clear that on the date that the no process

was entered, it was clear that the state had no intention

of going forward.

It was just, I don't even think that's an argument.

It was clear.

So then you fast forward to the annulment.

If the state had had any inter, one would think,

common sense, one would think that the state would

have had communication with the complaining witness

from the time that the no process was entered

prior to the entry, and certainly

prior to taking a position on the annulment.

It just doesn't make sense, because in the record,

it's clear that the complainant didn't show up for the appointment,

and that's why the state made the decision

that the state was not going to go forward no matter what.

So, OK, let's just say that that's

accurate, which I'm not saying that the state made

a misrepresentation.

But you would think that day two, when the witness doesn't

show up, you would say, OK, what's going on?

Day three, what's going on?

Certainly a week after day four.

But certainly when you get a petition to annul,

you would say, well, maybe we ought to reach out to the state.

And then if you fast forward a little bit,

and I think it was 2010, the complainant reaches out

and says, I want a prosecution.

And this was around the time when she was arrested

and subsequently.

Was that the reason that the indictment wasn't

brought to 2012?

Well, that's interesting also, because there was a gap

in time from 2000.

There was a gap in time.

My understanding is that Ms. Martel, who was subsequently

convicted and is incarcerated, there was a gap in time.

And it was in the record.

Actually, I think it was in the state's brief that Ms.

Martel reached out to seek prosecution of, you know,

to revive the case.

And then the state was like, no, go get counseling.

She went and got counseling.

And then the prosecution was revived again.

So at that point in time, which is now somewhere between 2010

shy of 2012, as we know he was re-indicted in 2012,

there was some period of counseling.

There's nothing in the record that I'm aware of,

as I was in trial counsel, that suggests

what the nature of that counseling was

and what precipitated.

Was she incarcerated during that period?

Yeah, yes, that's my understanding.

I mean, again, I didn't represent Ms. Martel,

but my understanding is yes.

I mean, she was arrested and charged

with second degree murder.

So my understanding is that she was held without bail.

So, and that's interesting in and of itself,

that that's when she reached out to seek the prosecution.

But the problem is that prior to her incarceration

for the second degree murder, you still

have the gap in time from 2008 to 2010

when the state, to my knowledge,

and it's not in the record, didn't take

any affirmative action.

So when getting back to Justice Slayas,

when you made the reference about the bad faith,

even if you get the, I mean, maybe that's not

the right word, but pass for the bad faith at the 2008

no-pros, I don't think you get that same pass from the day

after the no-pros to 2010.

Well, why not?

I mean, the statute of limitations

still had a way to go.

So anytime within that period, prosecution remains viable,

and the state knew that it was dealing

with an unstable complainant.

Well, that's the other question.

We don't know if the state, we don't

know whether the state was dealing

with an unstable complainant, because we don't have,

excuse me, we don't have a record

as to what, if any, communication the state had

with the complaint.

In fact, the entire record is devoid of any type

of interaction.

First, their position is that would be irrelevant.

That's the state's position.

Well, it is the state's position, but then, all right,

you're fine, but then don't agree to a no-pros,

because I think going back to what Justice Delanis was

just referencing, you don't get to say, well, OK,

then go no-pros to it, because that certainly,

I mean, no, I apologize.

That certainly is closure.

I mean, if I was arrested and charged

with some horrific crime and charges are dropped

and I seek an annulment and the state doesn't object,

I mean, why wouldn't somebody reasonably

situated believe that you're done,

and then go another two, three years, three years,

and then all of a sudden it's refiled

and there's no communication between, I mean,

the state could have said, the state certainly

could have filed some type of pleading.

I mean, we file pleadings every day in the Superior Court

whether you're supposed to or not.

You just represent your client.

I mean, I've done that many times.

I mean, I get denied, but I do it.

So, I mean, there's nothing that's said to the state,

well, let me just file something with the court,

say, hey, this case may be coming back.

They just sat on it, sat on it, sat on it.

You don't get to do that, or at least from my perspective.

I mean, you're the ones in the robes,

but from my perspective, you don't get to do that.

So I think that even if, I mean, I think Judge Temple,

you know, if this court, you know,

sustains his decision and that's what happens.

But the state, I think that that's the problematic part

from my view of this case is from that day

after the no-pros that nothing was done.

So what would the rule be from your standpoint?

If we agreed with you that there's something unfair

about this case, what would your rule be?

Well, my rule would be that you don't get that no-pros.

I don't believe that this, I mean, I think with the judge-

But is that, is the Bernstein rule grounded

in the Constitution, a statute, a case decision, anywhere?

I'm hoping that that does get published somewhere,

but in the event that that doesn't get published.

Yeah, I mean, I think that, you know, the court,

you know, in this case, you know, it was Judge Lin.

Judge Lin had the robe.

Judge Lin issued the order.

That order was clear.

I don't think you get to circumvent that.

I just don't.

I mean, you know, we-

The enrollment order you're talking about.

What are you talking about?

I'm talking about the order that Judge Lin issued

that no further continuance is shall be.

Oh, okay, okay.

Because you had asked what would my rule be?

I don't get, I mean, I get that you get to no-pros.

I understand that, you know-

So your basic argument is that this was an end run

around Judge Lin's order, no further continuances

because the defense knew the judge wasn't going to give

any further continuances.

Without a continuance, the state wouldn't be able

to go forward and presumably the case would be dismissed.

Without question.

I don't even think that that's in dispute

because I think that the record is clear

that Ken Smith was the prosecutor.

It was clear that he told everybody, including the court-

We didn't want to pay $14,000 to an expert

or whatever it was going to cost to fly the expert up.

Yeah, and Judge Temple referenced that.

But, you know, you don't-

Okay, so let's say that that's fine.

Let's say, you know, you get to circumvent the court.

Okay, let's say that's fine.

I don't think you get to continue that circumvention

and give, in this case, Mr. Martell,

the illusion that this prosecution-

Okay, so your rule would be in the face of a court order

that there will be no continuances.

The state should not be permitted to nullpros

on the day of trial.

This was the day of trial, right?

Can we, yeah, literally the day of trial.

Could we just add the sentence without a hearing?

See, that's what I think should have happened.

I think there should have been a hearing.

I don't think that the state should have just been able

to go in there and nullpros

because it's clear from the record

that had hearing beheld,

I mean, it seems to be clear from the record

that had a hearing been held,

that the result would have presumably been dismissed.

I mean, Judge Linn's order was pretty clear.

It said shall, you know, there shall be.

And I think it's also important to know, Justice Scott,

that that was not the first order in this case.

There were like 16 continuances over years, right?

Oh, yeah, there were 16 continuances,

which is also in and of itself doesn't smell right.

I mean, I've been doing this for a while.

I've never had, I'm lucky to get two or three,

much less 16.

But what I was gonna say was there was not-

Whose instance were the prior 16?

I don't know.

I mean, was the state moving

because it was having difficulties

with its complaining witness?

I know that I can't represent to you

that it was all 16 continuances were based on that,

but I can make, I feel comfortable making the representation

from the pleadings and review of the trial transcript

that Mr. Martel was not the precipitating factor

in these continuances.

Well, what case law, if any, are you relying on

to tie the annulment to the relief that you're seeking?

Why is that relevant here?

I'm relying on you to make the case law

because I don't know of any specific to your question.

It just doesn't seem, because I mean, I forgot who asked,

but where's the bad faith, so to speak?

I think that is bad faith.

If the state had intent on refiling its charges,

it is nothing but a one paragraph pleading

and you could have had a hearing on it, right?

Because the pleading would have triggered

the court to schedule a hearing

and you could have litigated that whole issue

and the state could have put on record,

look, Mr. Martel, we may be refiling.

So what happened here is on the morning of trial,

on the morning of trial-

It was no problem.

There was Judge Linn's order, no further continuances.

And there wasn't, there was not even

an informal discussion with the court?

Right, and I raised that in my brief

and that's the issue.

Had there been a hearing,

then maybe we would not have been here today.

But that's the problem.

I mean, that's one of the major issues-

Did Mr. Martel ask for a hearing?

Absolutely, I mean, that's my understanding.

I mean, and the record seems to support that,

that he did because that's also referenced,

if you look at the appendixes,

that is referenced in Attorney Cross' motion as well.

And it's also referenced in my plea.

So your bottom line here is you really

don't have any particular case law.

You're saying, put all these pieces together

and this is extraordinary.

This is extraordinary.

Yeah, I mean, like I-

And so you have sort of a different definition of bad faith.

It's not, you know, egregious

or malicious conduct by the prosecution.

You're just saying if you look at all the pieces here,

it really is not justifiable.

Right, I agree with that.

And that's why I think this is a case specific.

I mean, this is fact, this is a fact specific situation.

I just have never seen in my 16 or 17 years of practice

where you have a defendant charged in 2002

that goes through four years of litigation.

And I mean, it's not just, you know, little, you know, motion.

I mean, you know, these were, you know, deposition,

this was-

I'm sorry, I think I know what you're gonna say.

So let me just ask you, given all that,

presumably that argument was made to the trial court,

why shouldn't we defer the trial court's

finding of no bad faith?

What's this, do you agree with the state

as to the standard of review?

If it's supported by the record?

Except for the fact that I think

that there's another definite.

I mean, I tend to, I mean,

I agree with Justice Convoy's analysis.

I'm not saying that the state acted malicious

because they didn't, I mean, you know, they didn't.

But I just think that this specific set of facts

and circumstances apply to the law

that we do have with respect to due process

and with respect to speaking trial.

And the affirmative action or inaction

by the state in this case, it just, it's not right.

And you don't get to drag a case from 2002

through litigation, go circumvent the court,

do nothing for four years,

and then refile charge in 2012 with no explanation.

And don't forget before the charge was refiled in 2012,

it was at least based on the record,

some period of time where the state had knowledge

that they were gonna refile charge.

So what you're saying is,

when we're looking at this concept of bad faith,

maybe we should put a gloss on it

along the lines of the prosecutor

has prosecutorial discretion,

but there are limits.

And in this case, that discretion is not sustainable.

I agree.

And the other courts that were cited

in my brief support that.

I mean, I cited other, I mean, obviously for reference,

but there are a number of other jurisdictions

that have, or that would agree with that analysis.

So you would be the perfect court to interpret that.

And that's basically what I'm saying.

Thank you.

Thank you.

May it please the court.

I'm Nicholas Court for the state.

I'll take questions anytime.

Maybe unfortunate, but the fact is

this is not extraordinary as I point out in my brief.

This was the second order that said no more continuances.

There had been a previous order

also issued by Judge Lynn in 2006

that said no more continuances.

And there were, in fact, seven more continuances

lasting another two years.

Wait, what does the record show

that engendered those continuances?

That's a lot.

It's not perfectly clear.

My brief simply cites some remarks made by prosecutor Smith

at one of the hearings that they were agreed on

by both parties.

There was no specific representation

as to who requested each one

or whether it was just something

that both attorneys agreed on and presented to the court.

Well, was there a waiver of speedy trial

with each one?

I assume there was.

I assume there was.

I don't know for sure, but.

Was there any response by Judge Lynn

on, we have the day of trial.

He's got an order, no continuances.

And all of a sudden, whoop, we have a nullprost.

Does the record show whether he reacted

in any way to that?

It does not.

The point is that some charges are nullprost

as part of a plea agreement.

Those can never be reinstated

unless the defendant breaks the agreement.

But this kind of charge,

which is nullprost for lack of evidence,

can always be reinstated if new evidence shows up

before the statute of limitation runs out.

There's no significant difference between.

Is this lack of evidence?

It is.

This is, well, it's non-appearance

by the complaining party.

It's not a question of a discovery of new evidence

that wasn't available to the parties.

Does that make a difference?

I don't think so.

I think there's absolutely no difference.

The witness simply disappeared completely

without any warning.

And when she reappeared, there were no charges pending.

They'd been a null.

How often could the state do this?

How often?

Let's say she doesn't appear, then there's a nullprost

and then some six months goes by

and it's rescheduled, re-indicted, rescheduled.

She doesn't appear again.

Does prosecutorial discretion permit the prosecutor

to simply pull the plug?

How many times indefinitely?

Somewhere this has got to end.

I think it probably does, but this is nowhere near that point.

Eight.

I recently filed a brief in another case

where I argued that you have to presume prejudice

if a defendant disappears for 30 years

before being reapprehended.

But this is only four years.

Well, the defendant disappeared.

In this case, the plaintiff wins.

In this case, it was a witness.

So we've got eight years before actually 10 years.

10 years from the time the offense was committed

until the second indictment, right?

2002 to 2012.

That's not at all unusual in the sexual assault case

involving a very young victim.

But in this case, the witness disappeared.

The prosecutor simply assumed that she disappeared for good

or that she was unavailable for good.

Did the prosecutor have any responsibility

at the annulment phase to say something, do something,

as opposed to not objecting?

I've heard a lot of annulment petitions.

And usually in the case of AFSA against a young person,

the state is jumping up and down saying, oh, no.

No can do.

I'm sure they do frequently.

But I don't think there's any authority

that they have a duty to do it.

Defense seems to be arguing that there's

a requirement of constant reappraisal for any case that's

been null-prost.

So obviously, the state doesn't have the resources to do that.

Bottom line is that you tell us in your brief.

The only argument, really, that the defendant could make here

is a due process argument.

And he didn't make that.

Well, he didn't make it.

And there's no basis for it anyway,

because you have to show extreme prejudice

to dismiss a case with prejudice.

This is a case of pure good faith.

It's exactly the situation the Supreme Court was referring

to in Barker v. Wingo.

And it said that delay due to a missing witness

should never be held against the state.

And there's no authority for any holding

that you can find a violation of speedy trial

when there's no bad faith.

The prosecution.

What about the tension between the court's order

no further continuances and the prosecutorial discretion

to null-prost?

I mean, how does this cut?

Obviously, Judge Temple thought it did not

cut against the state so that the state could wait

until the morning of trial in the face of a court order

that there would be no further continuances

and still the prosecutor could pull the plug.

Well, obviously, in the Jones case,

which is what the defendant was relying on in his brief,

there's authority for the fact that if it's

an unnecessary witness that's causing the state to null-prost

because the unnecessary witness is unavailable,

then that should be deemed bad faith

because they're basically trying to do a run

around the speedy trial right.

But there's no suggestion of that here

because this is a complaining witness.

And there's no dispute that she was, in fact, unavailable.

They couldn't find her.

So the prosecutor's action is not only legal.

It was commendable, as the trial court suggested.

And the delay was simply not long enough

to create any unfair prejudice.

Do you agree, as a factual matter,

that there was a request for a hearing

and that the trial court didn't hold the hearing?

I don't know there for a fact.

I can't say one way or the other.

So the record isn't clear.

I don't think I've seen it in the record.

It may be there, but I don't remember.

Would it matter?

I don't think so.

Again, it's a null-prost in good faith because.

Well, of course, at the time it was null-prost,

the court would have no reason to know whether it was

or wasn't in good faith.

Sure.

And I suspect that if the defense thought

it was in bad faith, they would have made

some kind of a pleading alleging that.

But all we have is this appeal alleging something

in between good and bad faith.

And there is no authority for that.

If that's all, thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Counsel may come forward.
