This is case 2014-0659, state of New Hampshire versus Vic Washington.

Good morning, ma'am. Please, the court.

Susan McGinnis for the state of New Hampshire.

I have reserved two minutes for rebuttal.

This is a state's appeal from a decision of a trial court dismissing three

identity fraud indictments on the basis that the meaning of the term

another person in the statute, identity fraud statute,

requires the state to prove that the defendant posed as an actual person.

This is a real philosophical dilemma.

It is, I agree, because if the court rules-

Excuse me?

Where's Nietzsche when you need him?

Okay, I know.

If the court rules, as the defendant has stated,

it will leave out a whole category of identity fraudsters who are the worst of the worst.

People like the defendant and his partner who bought or captured hundreds.

This defendant had 16.

So he could have been charged with theft by deception as he was in other indictments.

What would have prevented the state from charging him for those particular crimes with theft by deception?

It did charge him with theft by deception for the actual thefts from the merchants using those cards.

The problem with that is there are two victims under the identity fraud statute.

The business who has been different.

Who is the victim here?

The Eli Watts that the state finally turned up in Tennessee?

No, Eli Watts, the victim is the person whose information is embedded on the strip on the back of the card.

What these people do is they buy information.

They buy credit card numbers that don't have a name associated with them.

They belong to an actual person.

But they take this strip information and put it on a different card that they then just create a name for.

So nobody knows who the people were whose information was stolen?

Oh, no, the state knows.

As the state pointed out in the motion to dismiss, they eventually got information that each one of the strips belong to an actual person.

The problem is under the statute,

the defendant has to pose as someone.

He said he was Eli Watts, which is the fictional name he had put on the front of this card.

These are manufactured cards.

They use the strips from actual people's cards, the information in the strips,

and then just create a name because they don't know the name.

Could you agree that this is synthetic fraud as has been identified by other jurisdictions?

Are we talking about the same thing when we look at what other jurisdictions have done?

Synthetic fraud.

This particular one isn't because the information on the strip is an actual person's information,

and Eli Watts is just a name the defendant made up.

It's not really a fictional person.

So you say we get no guidance from the other jurisdictions that have legislated against synthetic fraud.

Well, there is a form of synthetic fraud where the state finally identified somebody by the name of Eli Watts.

There is somebody in the United States.

But synthetic fraud is more where you take one person's social security number

and another person's date of birth and you combine them to apply for an account.

This particular one is a little different because this is an actual person's information on the strip,

and he just assigned the name Eli Watts to it because that's the fake ID.

The name on the front doesn't really matter.

It's just you've got to have some name when you give somebody a credit card.

Yes, so the statute...

But couldn't you have, couldn't you, I mean, isn't this in some sense,

even if we agree with your opponent's position, isn't this something that you,

that could easily be fixed just by filing new indictments,

which would say assume the identity of a fictitious person.

That is the person who actually had, without naming that person,

the person who actually had the numbers on the code.

Yes, because the state has identified those people.

There were actual victims, most of them were from Texas.

And but the statute, that's one point I wanted to make in the defendant's brief.

He says that the court that has jurisdiction is the court where the person lives whose information was stolen.

But actually, under the New Hampshire statute,

it's the act of posing as another person that is the crime.

So I agree, you have to pose as a person.

The defendant compared it, if you pose as Mickey Mouse.

Well, no, he posed as Eli Watts.

And it's to pose is to directly or indirectly represent yourself as someone else.

He's representing himself as Eli Watts, which is a fictitious name.

He's given to whoever it is whose information is on the strip.

There is an actual victim.

These strips belong to someone.

So he's your argument that he was really posing as the person whose information was on the strip.

Yes, who he had given the fictitious name Eli Watts to match his ID.

So you say the two of you are arguing over different things because the defense is saying

has to be an actual person, and you say, yeah, there was an actual person.

Yes, but it wasn't Eli Watts.

It wasn't Eli Watts.

The actual person was the person whose information was on the strip.

Yes.

Right.

And Mr. Barnard says, but you didn't argue that below.

The state did repeatedly argue that there was actually a real person.

But the reason they use the name Eli Watts is because that's the defendant said he

was and presented an ID for.

So under the defense theory, the only time you could prosecute under this section

of the statute is if somebody actually put the name on the front of the card that

belonged to the person on the back.

But the indictment did say he posed as Eli Watts, no?

But that's because the defendant said he was Eli Watts.

That's who he said he was.

But by doing that, he's indirectly representing he's Eli Watts, but he's also indirectly

representing that Eli Watts is the person who was authorized to use.

But now you're adding a couple of layers to the statute, which doesn't.

The statute defines pose as to directly or indirectly represent yourself as another person.

And was this presented to the jury this way?

It never went to the jury.

Oh, right.

That's a point I want to make.

He dismissed it.

Because?

So you're reading into these indictments that he acted posed as Eli Watts with

the purpose to defraud in order to obtain merchandise from Home Depot, et cetera.

And pose is defined as directly or indirectly represent yourself as another person.

Well, I know that.

But whether he directly or indirectly posed as Eli Watts, that's not what the indictment

said.

The indictment should have said he directly or indirectly posed as an individual whose

information was on the strip on the card.

And quite frankly, since we're pretrial at this point, the court, if the court dismisses

the indictments either on that basis, that Eli Watts is not a real person, it's

a fictitious name, or on the basis that the indictment as the defense alleges that it's

an alternative basis that the indictment doesn't use the term another person, the state may

re-indite because we are pretrial.

Jurisdict, there has never been any jeopardy attached.

So which, regardless of which way this...

You're in a good place.

We are because if you...

And the other point is that if you were to affirm on the basis that the indictment

simply didn't use the words another person, you still need to decide this issue.

Because unless the state re-indites, because the problem with this is the defendant didn't

represent...

He indirectly represented, he was the person whose information is on the back of the card,

who he'd given the name Eli Watts.

The only way under the defendant's theory, the only way you could prosecute under

this statute is if somebody actually stole someone's card and used that card, so the information

on the front and the back match, or if they put the name on the front of the card that

matched the information on the back.

But you're missing in the whole group, the legislature was very concerned about these

type of people who steal mass amounts of them.

Apparently other state legislatures got it and actually included a provision in their

statute, which is not in our statute.

But those states are also states that have rules of strict statutory construction.

Under our statute, the rule of strict statutory construction does not apply, statutes are

interpreted according to the fair import of their terms and to promote justice.

And if you hold, as the defendant says, that the defendant has to actually represent

himself as the person whose name is on that card and it has to match the information on

the back because it has to be a real person, you leave out, that does not promote justice.

It doesn't promote it at all and it explicitly leaves out the main group of people the

legislature was concerned about.

If we buy the defendant's view of this, are we going to have litigation about whether

who Eli Watt is and whether Eli Watt is alive and if it has to be established that this is

a real live person, how's that going to go?

Well the state presented that information that after the hearing on the motion to dismiss,

they found out that there is a human being named Eli Watt in Tennessee.

I'm sure there's a human with every name.

Well that's the problem with this.

If you go by the name a defendant puts on the front of the card, which is who

he's holding himself out to be and ignore the part of the definition about indirectly

representing himself to be, that you could never do it.

The state could always prove it, I guess, because somewhere in the world there has

got to be a human being with that name.

Unfortunately the defendant...

But it has to be, he has to have an intent, right?

So I mean, we do have to consider that.

If he picks his neighbor's name, that's one thing.

If he pulls a name out of the air that somewhere on this planet there is a person with that

name, but he didn't know it, that's a different situation.

That's why I think you have to look at it as the information on the back of the strip

that belongs to an actual person.

Well why didn't the indictment say that?

I mean that's a pretty sophisticated argument you're making and that's not what's in

the indictment, it's not what's in the statute.

So you're going to have another shot at him and maybe we need to tell the

legislature that it's got to be specific.

Yes, but the definition of the word pose in the statute does include indirectly

representing yourself and I think when you hand someone a card you are

representing to them that you're the person on the card and that you're the

person whose information account the card is going to be charged to.

You make a wonderful argument and I'm sure you would be able to draft a

provision to put in our statute which isn't currently there.

And if they need to say fictitious or synthetic identities where it's just

where you combine information from several people or you just make something up.

But the only way, they have to have the intent to defraud.

The only way you can defraud is if that credit card strip actually comes

back to an actual account because that's the only way you're going to

defraud the merchant.

And there are two victims, the person whose information was taken in the

first place whose account is going to be charged and the store who's defrauded.

And charging someone with theft by deception if they didn't actually steal

the card information they bought it say that's receiving stolen property.

But the person whose information was taken and who will have to spend years

trying to straighten this all out is not covered by the theft by deception statute.

They are not a victim under that statute which is why it's important

to understand that this is exactly the type of fraud the legislature was aimed at.

And it was aimed at real people.

There's no question about that.

Oh, yes, and I would agree if there was no person at all involved,

then it would just be theft by deception and the only victim would be the store.

But where these are real people whose information was taken, they're on the

strips and the defendant simply put a fictitious name on the front.

It's not a fictitious person.

It's a fictitious name that he's given to the person whose information is on there.

There's nothing further.

Thank you.

May it please the court.

My name is Thomas Barnard.

I represent Vic Washington.

Be happy to take the court's questions at any time.

I think the state's position has evolved quite considerably in this case

from its position below to its position here at Oral Argument.

As I understand the state's position today,

if there's no actual person whose identifying information has been misused,

then it's not identity fraud.

It could be theft by deception.

That's completely different than the argument the state made below.

And it's completely different than the argument as framed in the state's

notice of appeal.

The argument in the issue in the notice of appeal is this.

Whether the term another person in subparagraph 1A must refer to

an actual person, and therefore whether the state must prove that the identity

used by the defendant belonged to an actual person in order to prove

the defendant guilty under that variant of identity.

That's the only decision that Judge Horan had to make, correct?

It is.

And in fact, the Superior Court said I'm not deciding synthetic identity.

I'm just deciding whether there has to be an actual person

whose identifying information is misused.

And the answer is yes.

And what I hear the state today saying is that they agree.

There has to be an actual person.

The state's entire argument today is, well, there is an actual person

because we have real people who have these credit card numbers that

were listed on the back of the card.

That's not an argument the state ever made below.

That fact is in the record, yes.

But the state never argued below that these indictments were valid

because there were real people in Texas with these credit card numbers.

It's not an issue that was listed in the state's notice of appeal.

It's simply not an issue.

The whole argument below was all about Eli Watt, right?

Well, it wasn't.

The argument below for the main motion

was whether the state had to prove an actual person whose

identifying information was misused.

And the state maintained, no, we don't.

The court granted the motion to dismiss.

And then the state filed a motion to reconsider

in which it emphasized that it had now found somebody named

Eli Watson, Tennessee.

The Superior Court refused to consider that evidence,

said in a motion to reconsider.

If the proponent advances new evidence that wasn't advanced

below, the court has the right to disregard that.

And the court exercised that right,

the state doesn't challenge it really not.

If the court has no further questions.

Do you wish to use your reserve time, counsel?

OK.

The defendants just made a point

about what was raised in the notice of appeal.

Well, I'd like to just make one point.

In his brief, he argues that this court can affirm on the basis

that the indictment failed to use the term another person.

That issue was never raised by the defense below and not

even an emotion to reconsider.

And it isn't in the issue that was raised

in the notice of appeal.

It's not subsumed within it.

And the only way this court will now

reverse on valid alternative grounds

is if it is the only decision the court could have reached

below if presented with the facts.

Well, in State Beachini, the defendant

raised the issue that the state had failed to legend

its indictment that the victim was coerced

through the use of force or threat of force.

And this court held that the allegations in the indictment

that the defendant had grabbed the victim

and done some other threatening and forceful acts

was sufficient to substitute for that statutory language.

And in this case, the use of the name Eli Watts

is sufficient to substitute for another person

because Eli Watts is a person's name.

And I have to say, too, that the reason the argument

was focused on Eli Watts is because that's

who the defendant said he was.

So when you're arguing he posed as somebody,

that's who he held himself out to be, which indirectly says,

and this is my card and I have a right to use

and it'll be charged to my card.

But the reason we focused on Eli Watts

and whether that had to be a real person

is because that's who the defendant said he was.

So otherwise, the indictment would

have to say posed as another person, i.e. Eli Watts,

for the purpose of defrauding by leaving the store

to believe that Eli Watts was the real person whose

identifying information was on the strip on the card.

It would be a very complicated indictment.

So when someone holds himself out,

if I hold myself out to be justice convoy,

that's what you're going to charge with,

not whoever else's information was on the strip.

Nothing further.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Council may come forward in the matter of.
