Thank you, Paul. Before we begin today, I want to welcome Professor Barbara Abbott and her students who are visiting from New England College.

Barbara, there you are. Nice to see you again.

And having said that, parties and counsel may proceed in state versus, is it Done or Duane?

Done.

Done, thank you.

This is case number 2014-0276, state of New Hampshire versus Robert Done.

May it please the court, Christopher Johnson on behalf of Robert Done.

The issue in this case is whether there was air and not severing the charge involving the possession of buprenorphine, which is also known as suboxone.

My plan is to address first the question of air and then the question of prejudice.

In regard to air, there was no significant duplication of witnesses.

This was really a one witness case. Detective Maher found the suboxone in the room and Detective Maher could prove it was Done's room

because he also found his social security card in the same dresser.

The possibility of overkill, the possibility that the state might call other witnesses to say, to add to that,

who are unnecessarily or cumulative, can't change the analysis.

Second point.

Does it matter that at trial the defendant conceded guilt on the, let me say this,

buprenorphine?

Right. I've been calling it suboxone because it's easier to say.

Suboxone. Okay, but we all know what we're talking about.

But it's the same thing. Yes.

It does matter. I think that goes to prejudice.

This court has recognized in its case law that there's a risk of danger when you join a stronger case with a weaker case.

Did the trial court know that the defendant was willing to concede guilt on the suboxone charge?

I think it was known before trial.

I'm not sure how long before trial it was known, but I don't know that it matters because it was always clear

that the state had overwhelming evidence on that.

They found the suboxone in his room and the room was locked.

Right. Now, at the trial court, the request was to sever all three charges.

On appeal now, you're arguing that the suboxone charge should have been severed from the other two.

Did the trial court have the opportunity to consider that proposal?

I believe so. I mean, I consider that as I'm arguing less than all the claims that the trial lawyer raised.

The trial lawyer said there should have been three separate trials.

Well, all right, I'm just going to say on appeal because I think it's the strong claim that it was the suboxone trial should have been separate.

Did you say to the trial court, if you won't give us three trials, would you at least give us two

with the suboxone because we intend to concede guilt on that?

I don't think that was said.

Can we really resize the trial court for not doing what you're proposing on appeal?

I think you can because the arguments were the same.

I mean, the points that I'm making were the points that the trial lawyer raised.

Yeah, but isn't there something about, you know, suppose you have, let's say, a typical drug case with four sales of heroin or whatever,

and you come in and say, I want four trials.

And you don't say, well, look, judge, if you won't give me four trials,

at least give me two trials because here's this particular issue that is kind of really important about this charge.

I mean, isn't there a likelihood that the judge is going to say, wait a minute,

we always try multiple drug charges together and sort of, you know, he's going to give short shrift,

or she's going to give short shrift to what you're saying.

Whereas if you had really said, you know, look, my real claim, judge, is that I really want two trials and here's why.

The way I would look at it is, I mean, the lawyer said this case should be separate,

the box zone case should be separate, the gun case should be separate, the heroin case should be separate.

The trial lawyer probably wasn't right about the second two things, but he was right about the first.

And so that's what I'm arguing on appeal.

I mean, I understand what you're saying, and it wasn't presented exactly this way,

but it's not a binary all or nothing proposition.

No, but particularly where something is a discretion, I mean, you can see that this is a discretionary decision.

And when you, you know, I mean, I can sort of remember from law school,

and a tax, you know, the tax course the professor had, you know,

so that where people get in trouble with the IRS is when they follow the pig theory,

that if you ask for, you know, for everything, you make unreasonable requests,

then it's very likely that they're not going to get granted at all,

even if there might be some part that's reasonable.

No, I understand.

And I mean, I guess the record shows what it shows about what he asked for,

and I can't say more than that.

I think what I'm asking for is I conceive of as a kind of a lesser included request

for what he asked for.

I did want to make a point about the prejudice.

The heroin charges were weaker, were definitely weaker.

It was credibility impaired civilian witnesses.

There was no heroin found.

The recorded call contains incriminating references,

but it doesn't contain, you know, a clear confession.

So that would have been an credibility dispute

between what's his name White and Don.

And the propensity risk here was real.

I mean, the jury, they knew he had suboxone

because nobody could deny that.

And that means he's involved with heroin,

or they could say that means he's involved with heroin.

And if he's involved with heroin,

then we can believe these people who said it's his gun

and sort of it built that way,

and so the prejudice was real.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Ms. Woodcock.

Thank you.

Good morning, Your Honor.

Elizabeth Woodcock for the State of New Hampshire.

The trial court really made no error.

These charges are all linked together.

They came out of the same investigation.

What's the link between the gun and the suboxone?

Well, the defendant imparts the link

between the gun and the suboxone,

but it's also the testimony of the other witnesses,

the detective who saw him attempt to sell drugs

outside his house, the testimony of the neighbor

who said that he was always out in the driveway

selling drugs, the fact that White said that he took the gun

and always chambered around before he went outside

to sell drugs.

The events in this particular case

are very closely linked together.

I understand.

At trial, did he actually admit in front of the jury

guilt on the suboxone charge?

I don't know where that's coming from.

I made a note of it that that's what the defendant said.

I don't remember exactly.

I think that he may have admitted it.

I don't think that that was clear before the court

when the court was trying to determine

whether to sever the charges, though, Judge Convoy.

The defense went in with a sort of all or nothing.

Give us three different trials,

even though this will require calling the same people

over and over again.

If he had wanted to, he certainly could have said,

well, I'll plead guilty to the suboxone charge.

Can I just ask, when I have sort of the same question

that Judge Convoy did, I mean,

are you saying that the defendant made an admission

about the suboxone by testifying,

or was it simply that his lawyer, you know,

in opening or closing or whatever said,

look, he really is guilty of this?

I honestly don't recall, Judge Lynn.

I'd have to go back and look at the transcript.

I just don't have that in my head right now.

Well, the reason I think it's important

is because I'm asking myself,

did the defendant build in his own prejudice argument?

Because if he's saying at trial,

I'm not going to challenge the suboxone charge.

And because of that,

being tried on the other two charges

builds in a propensity argument

that otherwise may not have been there.

Right. I think that the point is well taken.

I'm not certain. I'm sorry.

I'm just not recalling it may just be

that I've gotten over the age of 60,

and I don't remember things as well as I should.

I'm not telling me anything new.

Well, you know, I wonder, though,

if another offshoot of this is,

if it happened that way,

could this actually have been

to the defendant's tactical advantage

on the other charges,

in the sense that, you know,

in other words, if it would seem to me

that at least potentially this could establish

some viability

or establish some credibility

on the part of the defendant.

In other words, if the defendant is charged with four things

and his lawyer gets up in front of the jury and says,

look, I'm not going to try to be estuary about stuff.

He's guilty of this.

And he really did do this.

But he's not guilty of the other stuff.

That might very well engender some credibility

in front of the jury on the other charges

because it would be different

if he was saying I didn't do anything.

Right.

Right.

And that certainly is a potential argument.

The thing is that I think that that was not presented

to the trial court.

I think that what the trial court had was,

I want three separate trials on these three charges.

If he had said to the trial court,

look, the evidence against me on this one claim is overwhelming.

But I think that setting that claim aside

and I'll plead guilty or I'll admit to it at trial

or something like that,

these other two claims are linked to each other.

But they should be tried separately

because I think that my overwhelming guilt

on this charge will lead the jury

to conclude that I'm also guilty of this less strong case.

That pitch was never made to the trial court.

And I'm not sure that the trial court

then should have anticipated that argument being made.

I see my yellow light is on.

If the court has no further questions,

I would ask that the case be submitted.

Thank you, counsel.

Case submitted.
