This is Case 2014, 0-025, State of New Hampshire versus Alex Duchamp.

Mr. Moses, you certainly can clear a room.

It's not the first time.

Likely not to be the last.

I'm thinking Woodstock and Jimmy Buffett. I'm trying to figure out what year this is.

Unfortunately, we all know ourselves for sure.

I mean, well, I was there.

Unfortunately, well, I realize they didn't have water bodies in the aisle.

May it please the Court, my name is Robert Moses.

I'm from Amherst, New Hampshire.

I have the pleasure of representing Alex Duchamp who is present seated right behind me today.

And we're here to discuss an appeal from the lower court claiming three errors.

And by the way, I'd be happy to take questions at any time.

It seems to me that you were arguing, among other things, that the evidence was insufficient

in terms of proof of having been driving the vehicle on part of your client.

Am I right about that?

Isn't this the case with the brawl in the parking lot?

That's your third argument, I think.

Is it?

Well, the third argument, actually, is the one of whether or not the...

Actually, my third argument is actually the Miranda and the versus the goading situation.

The confusion doctrine.

The confusion doctrine is just...

Correct.

That's correct, Your Honor.

The actual...

So back to the chief, she's asking about the sufficient evidence to prove that he was operating a vehicle.

That's actually issue number four, whether or not...

Whatever the number is, that's my question.

And you say there wasn't enough evidence, but the state comes back and says,

well, wait a minute, the bouncer saw him drive into the lot after he had just driven away.

So why wouldn't that be sufficient evidence, all things being equal, of him driving the vehicle?

That could be considered to be sufficient.

Okay.

So...

But that doesn't solve the problem.

And I'm happy to work in any order.

That sort of works backwards because it still doesn't help.

Even if the factual finding that he drove, there's still this insufficient evidence for the court

to have concluded that there was the requisite probable cause to have arrested him for driving

while intoxicated.

But isn't that a piece of the probable cause?

Yes.

Proof of operating?

It's all operating.

Okay.

Yes.

You say it comes at the back end.

I'm thinking, well, that was part of the probable cause determination, no?

No.

And the reason that the problem...

The problem here is you are saying he wasn't arrested for DWI.

He clearly wasn't.

So if we start where you want us to start, you say he was never arrested for DWI.

So you say that that's why it doesn't really matter whether there was sufficient evidence

because that's not what he was arrested for.

That's your argument.

You say, and the State argues, well, initially he wasn't arrested for DWI.

But by the time the ALS form A was reviewed and B, the officer answered questions, it

is at that point that it became clear that he was being arrested for DWI.

I understand you disagree with that.

But that's where this confusion about sufficient evidence, because you maintain

that throughout he was never arrested for DWI.

That's your position.

That's true.

That's true.

But to address the errors that we've claimed with respect to the trial court,

my position has to be that correct.

The requirements under Salviano were never satisfied.

And the requirements under 265A4 were never satisfied.

All assuming that the arrest occurred at the, wherever this was, at the club.

Because what you're doing is you're carving out any arrest that happened

upon the reading of the ALS form.

I'm not doing it the legislative way.

I guess the thing I don't understand about your position, Mr. Moses, is I don't

have any dispute that any doubt that you're right that he was arrested originally

for whatever the trial did.

Simple assault, right?

He's arrested for simple assault.

But what, I mean, you seem to suggest that because he was arrested

for simple assault, the police could not arrest him for anything else.

Why?

Where's that authority?

Why couldn't the police say, listen, you're under arrest for simple assault.

And then at some later time say, oh, and by the way, in addition to simple assault,

we have probable cause to believe you've committed a theft.

So we're charging you with theft also.

And we're charging you with resisting arrest.

But just because the police initially arrests somebody for one offense

doesn't mean that they're thereafter precluded from charging them with other offenses

without sort of going through these things I'm saying, we're arresting you again, do they?

But that's precisely the point.

In other words, it is certainly possible for someone to be arrested for a particular offense.

And at a later time, potentially charged with additional offenses.

But the statute, which is very plain on its face, the statute says

that the person in order to be subject to the implied-to-sale law

has to be arrested for defense arising out of acts unless you've been committed while driving.

Right.

And so why isn't the officer reading him at the police station, the ALS form,

which says you have been arrested?

Why isn't that sufficient?

The fact that he was arrested for something else earlier, so what?

They've read him the form and it says we're now, you know, we're now,

doesn't that tell somebody we're now arresting you for this too?

Well, that might be the case if you follow the cases that the state has cited.

The four cases they've cited, Nelson, Underwood, Nichols, and Dungen.

But the problem with all of those cases is those cases did not involve initial arrests

for non-driving related offenses.

And because of that, you have Saviano and you have the statute that requires the arrest to be made

for an offense arising out of acts unless you've been committed while driving under the influence.

Let's say that there is an arguable basis for your argument up to the point of the ALS form.

But the officer, as I have it, your client expressed some confusion.

And the officer then explains the sequence of events and he says that he told the defendant

this was why he was under arrest for driving while intoxicated.

So at that point where the explanation is provided by the officer, doesn't that make it crystal clear

that he was arrested for DWI?

No, because that portion of the officer's testimony was the officer's explanation

as to what his intent was in telling the defendant what he said.

What he said to the defendant was I was explaining to him the point that we had reached

and when asked on cross-examination why did you read him that,

the officer in the transcript in his testimony says that that was his way of explaining

to the defendant why he had been arrested for DWI.

But the officer never testified, other than the reading of the form,

never testified, never said to the defendant, you're also being charged with DWI

or you're being arrested for DWI, other than by reading the form.

And if you look at the form literally in terms of grammar,

the officer says you have been arrested for an offense and as far as your client

at that point knew he had been arrested for assault, which to him, arguably,

doesn't have anything to do with driving under the influence.

Right.

It's a non-qualifying offense.

Exactly right.

And so your view, I take it, is that unless the officer uses some new magic words

like, oh, by the way, I'm also arresting you for DWI, then the State's argument

fails just in terms of grammar.

It does.

And that's because the statute is clear on its face.

The 265A4 is clear on its face as to what triggers the implementation

of the implied consent law and merely reading the form.

Particularly in a, and you have to look at the totality of the circumstances here

because he arrests Mr. Duchamp for simple assault, puts him in a cruiser,

goes and has a conversation and does some, takes some witness statements,

goes to the Hillsborough Police Department and the very first thing he does,

he gives him a random, and the very first thing Mr. Duchamp does

after getting Miranda is he asserts it and says,

I don't want to answer any questions.

I don't want to sign anything.

I don't want to do anything.

And that's what happened.

And that's undisputed.

So I take it, your argument turns on where the form says you have been arrested

for an offense rising out of acts committed while you're driving.

If it said you are being arrested, then your argument would have no force.

Is that right?

If it were, instead of have been, it said you are being arrested.

That would, your argument would be...

That would make a difference, I think,

because it would put someone on better notice of exactly what had happened.

That might cure it.

I'm not willing to acquiesce 100% that it would.

Because, again, in this particular case,

we have the intervening administration of the Miranda rights.

We then have the reading of the ALS.

Miranda gets asserted and gets completely ignored by the officers.

He gives a Miranda and just continues on with this DWI process.

Didn't even bother with anything dealing with this.

But the state says in response to that, Mr. Mokes,

that might be the basis for an argument if your client had refused to take the test.

Because then you could say, it seems to me,

and I think there are some cases that support this.

Wait a minute. He was told nothing he said could be used against him.

Then they read him this Miranda form.

He refused to take the test, relying on Miranda,

and now they're going to use it against him.

They're going to use his refusal as evidence against him.

Some cases have said, wait a minute, that could be confused.

But that's not your client's situation.

He took the test.

So where's the confusion?

He took the test.

He didn't say, I don't have to do this.

He took the test.

Because it's equally infuriable that a person in the defendant's position,

having asserted Miranda,

and having an officer continue on,

his assertion meant nothing,

then reacted as he felt he should to the ALS at that point.

The doctrine of confusion doesn't apply simply to a refusal,

because implied consent applies to taking a test as well as refusing a test.

There's penalties for both, and they're all on that form.

So you have Mr. Duchamp.

But isn't the difference that if somebody is believing

that they have this Miranda right,

and that that extends to not taking a test,

which of course it doesn't, the case law is very clear that it doesn't extend to that.

But if somebody believes that because they've gotten the Miranda rights,

then why do they take the test?

Because whatever beliefs they had, or might have had,

became undermined by...

Exactly, and it became undermined,

and in fact it doesn't exist,

so it's been clarified for them by the officer that this,

what I just told you about Miranda, doesn't apply to this.

No, I respectfully disagree with that completely.

So you would have it be, I take it,

okay, you're invoking your Miranda rights,

then the officer should have said,

oh by the way, I'm also arresting you for driving under the influence,

and there's a separate procedure here that involves administrative license suspension,

and that Miranda has no bearing on.

Correct, that's exactly right, and that's what Pennsylvania said.

And Pennsylvania's current form, as a matter of fact,

which is on page 22 of my brief, says, it's on their ALS form.

You have no right to speak with an attorney,

or anyone else before deciding whether or not to submit to testing.

If you request to speak with an attorney,

or anyone else after being provided these warnings,

or you remain silent, when asked to submit to chemical testing,

you will have refused the test,

resulting in the suspension of your operating privilege,

and other enhanced criminal sanctions, and so on.

That's what the ALS form in Pennsylvania says.

That's the right way to do it.

The problem here is, we have the voting case,

which this court decided quite a while ago,

along with the green case,

Green says you're not entitled to counsel

because it's not a critical stage of the proceedings.

That was 1985, that's 30 years ago,

and Goading says Miranda doesn't apply in the context of the ALS.

Okay, fine.

But when the officer creates the confusion

by electing to give the guy Miranda,

and then saying, I'm giving you money,

and the guy's, I don't want to talk to you,

I don't want to make you do it,

I don't want to sign anything.

I don't want the officer as an obligation

because he's basically stepped on Goading.

He's got to say, okay, well, hang on a second,

let me explain something to you, just as you said, Chief.

I've got to ask you some questions,

and I've got to go over this form with you

because I'm also charging you with EWY,

and Miranda doesn't apply to that,

and you can't talk to an attorney.

But he didn't do anything.

If we look at the transcript,

you're telling us we will find nothing

that supports the officer

making any attempt to explain this shift

in what the charge is.

You will find an explanation in the transcript

that, and I'm trying to find the quote,

it was the quote is in there

where the officer explains that

I put you in the cruiser, I rested you out,

I took some witness statements, I came back,

I brought you here,

and this is the point we've gotten to.

And the officer was then asked,

why did you either say that

or why did you then read the form

or something along those lines?

His answer was that that was part

and parcel of my explanation to him

as to why I had arrested him

for driving while intoxicated.

But he didn't.

That's his explanation.

That's not what he said to the defendant.

The transcript itself is very ambiguous

on that particular subject.

Thank you.

May it please the Court.

Nicholas Tort for the State.

Does that take questions any time?

Can you clarify that last point?

What's your position on the point

that was just made?

The inherent confusion of the...

Well, what was said as opposed to

what was offered at trial

by way of explanation.

Can you clarify the distinction there

and what we're going to see on the transcript?

Well, what was said was

he gave him his Miranda rights

and then he read the ALS form.

And so you agree that the officer

never said...

And the reason that you're reading this

ALS form is because I'm arresting

you for DWI.

You agree that nothing along that

line was said.

Because I misunderstood the briefs

apparently.

I thought you said

that the officer did explain

when the defendant showed confusion

that the officer did explain

that he was being arrested for DWI.

He explained the ALS form.

He went through every line on the ALS form.

But he had not been arrested

for DWI-related offense.

He had only been arrested

for simple assault.

He had been arrested as soon as

the officer read the first line

of the ALS form which says

he had been arrested.

No, shouldn't the officer say

I am arresting you?

He doesn't have to because

I've cited at least three courts

that have said he doesn't have to.

Plus...

But in the context of having been arrested

for a different crime, it seems to me

that is a difference.

In other words, if the defendant

had not been arrested for assault

and had just been picked up,

brought to the station

in the ALS form which says

you've been arrested for DWI,

that strikes me.

That's a very different situation

from being shown the ALS form

which says you have been arrested,

have been arrested for DWI

when at the scene

he was told he was arrested for assault.

The cases I've cited

on page 11 of my brief

disagree with you.

Those cases involved

an arrest for a different crime?

All right.

Can I ask you, Mr. Court,

on the chief asked a while ago

about the sufficiency of the evidence

and that's one issue

and I tend to think

for the reasons that the chief

indicated that the evidence is sufficient

but on the probable cause

issue, I guess that is a different

what is the evidence

that the officer

understood

at the time that

he made, let's assume

that he made an arrest for DWI

at the time he read the form.

What is the evidence that the

officer had probable cause

to believe that he had

driven

relatively recently

to the time he was now arresting him

for DWI? Because that

does seem to me to be a weakness

in the state's case.

It's in

the officer's

testimony when he said

and this is on page 83

of the transcript that his own

observations plus the witness statements

led him to conclude

that these events came

right after each other.

I was taking the report, he returned

then he assaulted

somebody else and then

another fight started

within minutes.

He didn't say

I knew precisely when he returned

he just said this is the sequence

of events that I understood

from all the statements that I took

and the implication is clear

that somebody told him

this guy just got back

from after leaving

from the initial assault

because the officer was taking

statements about the initial assault

which also involved a defendant

and so he would say

or he left the parking lot.

And you would say that that instance

that you would just have us draw

is confirmed by the fact

that the bouncer actually said

that

I saw him driving

very close to the time

after the officer had arrived.

That's correct and

you should infer

as obviously the jury did

that either the bouncer

or one of the other witnesses

told him when

this defendant got back

into the parking lot.

It doesn't make any sense that they didn't.

I guess

what I had been overlooking

it sounded like what you're really saying

is that the analysis

or the inquiry

on whether there was probable cause

in this case really kind of

is the same analysis that the jury

would have had to go through

in saying

whether they found him guilty of DWI

or not because they also

didn't conclude that he must have been

driving close enough

to the time that he was intoxicated.

No, they're not precisely the same

because the jury heard the bouncer

say I saw him driving.

The question with probable cause

is slightly different because

that depends on what the officer knew.

Okay.

Specifically,

to get back to the first issue,

the Underwood case from Georgia

Mr. Moses is correct that

the statute in Georgia is not

precisely identical.

It doesn't require that

he have been arrested

for an offense occurring while

he was driving. It's more

narrow. It requires that he

have been arrested

for any offense arising out of acts

alleged to have been committed in violation

of the DWI law.

In other words, he had to have been arrested

for DWI.

And he wasn't. He was arrested

for one.

So what the Georgia court said

was that doesn't matter

if he was arrested for anything

and

there was probable cause

to arrest him for DWI,

that satisfies the statute.

And then Maine went

one step further.

They said, doesn't matter

if he was arrested at all formally

as long as there was probable cause,

this statute applies

because any

other interpretation would defeat

the purpose of the statute.

As I said, this court doesn't have to go that far.

It can simply rule that

when the officer read that

first line on the ALS form,

you have been arrested.

That was the equivalent of an arrest

for DWI. It was effectively

an arrest for DWI.

And the argument

that Mr. Moses seems to be relying

on today is the one

that was rejected by

the Levitt case from New Jersey

that I cited on page 23

which was that

the argument was that if you give

a ran and then read the implied consent

you're in automatically

confusing somebody.

They said no.

And here

it's clear that the defendant

was initially confused or at least he said he was.

And the officer then

started from the beginning

again.

Went through every line of the ALS form.

When the officer explained

the sequence of events,

if we look at the transcript

is it going to deal with

issues related

to DWI?

In other words, is it going to be implicit

in the officer's

recitation of the sequence of events

that

that he was being arrested

for DWI? You understand what I'm saying?

I think so and

I'm not sure that the transcript is that

precise but it does

indicate

that the officer was telling him

why he had been arrested

for DWI

but not in those words.

The officer said that was my intent

was to explain why he was being arrested

for DWI. When he was

explaining the sequence of events, did he talk

about, well

you were seen driving the car

you smelled of alcohol?

We don't know precisely.

He just said sequence of events.

I think that's right. So that's ambiguous

because that sequence of events could

relate to the assault

I suppose.

I'll have to

We'll look at it. We've heard to this statement of facts.

But

doesn't the DWI, doesn't

the implied consent form?

This is on page 5

of my brief.

I've been called there, called to Rednecks

Bar and Grill for a past tense assault

while taking that report I had witnessed him assault

another male.

I have witnessed statements stating

that he drove away from Rednecks

and then drove back

and that's where we were

at that moment.

He then testified and this is on page

page 73 of the transcript

that this was to explain to the defendant

why he was under arrest

quote for driving

while intoxicated

that is what the officer testified to.

That he was explaining

why he was under arrest for DWI.

He says he then

read the entire

ALS form line by line

and the defendant indicated

he understood each line.

So that would be the second time he read it.

So arguably the first time he read

you have not been arrested for an offense

that might be true at that point

he hadn't been

but your position is that informed him

that he was and then when it was read

after a discussion

a second time

does that matter? I don't think he had to have

read it twice but in this case he did

so it's

even more evidence.

We're arguing that this is a case where

a hyper literal interpretation

of the statute would defeat his purpose

and

it would lead to absurd results because

as I argue

it would mean that if you were arrested for anything

other than an offense that occurred

while you were driving, you then couldn't be

arrested for DWI.

Well, but couldn't all that had to

happen here before

reading the ALS form would be say

you're arrested for DWI.

That would be an easy cure.

Could be a strictly literal interpretation, yes.

Again

the main court said

we're not going to

be so literal because

if we were we would defeat the purpose

of the statute. You don't even have to

say you're under arrest.

As long as you have a probable cause to arrest

for DWI and you read the ALS form

that's enough.

Doesn't matter if that's an arrest or not.

In the main case had the defendant

been arrested for a different crime?

No actually he hadn't been arrested for anything.

He was being interviewed in the hospital.

Alright.

But in the Georgia case he had.

In the Georgia case.

And again the statute said

you have to have been arrested for DWI.

And the court

said

you don't have to have been arrested

for DWI to

meet the purpose of this statute.

You just have to have been arrested for

something and

there has to be a probable cause

to arrest you for DWI at the same time.

Again this court doesn't have to go that far.

It just has to say

when Officer Lord

read that line.

Is there nothing further?

Thank you. Case submitted

and the court will take a...
