This is case 2014-0580, Jeffrey Frost et al. versus Michael Delaney et al.

The record should reflect the fact that I don't think you were here, Mr. Douglas, when I announced it earlier, that Justice Lynn is unavoidably away from court today.

But he will participate in this appeal. And as well, Justice Hicks has disqualified himself from the case.

Okay. Thank you, Your Honor.

May it please the Court? My name is Charles Douglas. I represent Jeffrey Frost, and I would like to reserve one minute for rebuttal.

Also, if I could, I'd like my uninterrupted three minutes for just an important piece of this case, which is the facts.

We will try to refrain from asking you any questions.

For three minutes only, and then you can have at it.

Examiner Sheehan testified below as follows.

Mortgage lender means a mortgage banker. Question. That was the law in 2010, correct? Correct.

But in 2009, when this mortgage was recorded, that was not on the books, was it?

The definition was not on the books prior.

Question. When Mr. Frost was doing his mortgage in March of 2009,

we had no such statute in effect, did we? The definition wasn't there.

And in fact, you failed to point out to either Judge Ryan or Detective Swerco the definition was not in the statute at the time the loan was made.

Answer. I did not point that out to them.

Question. Have you ever prepared a purchase money mortgage? I'm not familiar with the term.

Did you ever look at the installment sale agreement involved in this transaction?

I don't know if I ever reviewed the note in this transaction.

There would be no mortgage lender involved in an installment sale when a seller already owns the property, correct? Answer.

I don't understand your question. Question. You don't really understand installment sales, do you?

That's a term we're not using or that we don't frequently use.

Question. Are all lenders in New Hampshire mortgage bankers? No.

Nowhere in the note of the mortgage does it use the term mortgage bank, does it? No.

That's because there were no funds transferred in this transaction, and she agreed.

Finally, and then I'll open it up, a brief quote from the only expert who testified in the case.

There was only one. It was John Cronin, who's a 20-plus year real estate lawyer in Manchester, who said as follows.

In a traditional mortgage, the person would wire money to our closing account,

and they would not have an ownership interest in the underlying real estate.

That seems to be something lost here.

Cradian Tillinghast owned the property, and we have freedom of contract.

Question. So this is not what, in your opinion, the statutes on mortgage lending relate to.

Absolutely not.

And that is, to me, the key to the case. The state says, well, there's this policy.

A policy that we've never seen. We don't know when it was created.

We don't know the contours of it. That somehow these two terms, mortgage bank or mortgage lender, are synonymous.

Let's say we agree with you about the legal proposition here.

And let's say further that the investigator at the time was relatively inexperienced, probably hadn't been trained as well as she might have been.

Maybe could have used a little more particular schooling in the area.

How do those two things put together deprive the person in question of immunity?

That your client was done wrong, and this person didn't know what she was talking about.

Well, I think it's a classic, Your Honor, because in this particular case, we're sitting, you're sitting as if you were a federal court.

We have waived the arguments on state immunity. It's not before you were only dealing with 1983.

And the Supreme Court in Malley v. Briggs said that officers, in that case, it was a cop, are given qualified immunity as long as they're reasonably competent.

So I think the competence piece fits with Malley v. Briggs and its progeny.

Also tied into your question is the fact that you have to look at this from an objectively reasonable competent bank examiner.

The test isn't the lowest common denominator.

If that were the case, it would be a great defense in every civil rights case under the 4th or 5th Amendment to ask the cop the following.

So were you sick the day they did the 4th Amendment at police standards and training? Yes.

So you don't really know anything about the 4th Amendment, do you? No. But I acted in good faith.

So that's all I'd have to say. I acted in good faith. I don't know anything about the 4th Amendment.

That would be the end of all that litigation. Here, the judge actually made a finding of incompetence.

Judge Brown said she lacked the proper experience, training, or supervision.

She was not qualified to handle the level of sophistication necessary to investigate installment contracts

or make affirmative representation concerning real estate sales to a judge.

Does your argument focus on competence because your brief makes the flat-out statement that she lied?

Well, she did lie.

Well, to lie means you know the truth to be something other than you're articulating.

It seems to me that's what a lie is. You've just argued to us that she was so incompetent that it seems to me

what you're saying implied in your argument is she couldn't lie because she was incompetent.

I think we would win on either prong, Your Honor.

I'm having trouble with the lying because when I looked at the brief, you said flat she lied

and given her testimony about a policy, and I appreciate that you were arguing

that they didn't present a written format or anything like that.

But if the trial court believed that she in her own head felt that she was acting in accordance with a policy, she's not lying.

I think two things. First of all, and if I could, I'll parse it a little bit.

Judge Ryan's question was very specific. He asked her what is in the registry of deeds.

He didn't ask her for what do you think this thing is.

He asked her, when you've looked at it, what did you see?

And she said, it said mortgage banker.

Now she's misstating the fact. It says lender.

She doesn't even say mortgage lender. She might have a better argument had it said mortgage lender

because then she could use the policy argument, all mortgage lenders are mortgage bankers.

And unfortunately, when I say lie, I guess the term is she intentionally knew what it said

and misstated it to the judge.

So that's bad under Molly versus Briggs anyway. And all the search and seizure cases, cops can't come in

and create facts to get a search warrant. And there are legionary cases that say that.

But do you really think she did that? Do you really think she said, I know in my heart of hearts

that that document said lender and I am going to lie to the judge and say the document says mortgage banker?

I don't think it matters in this sense.

Doesn't it when we're looking at immunity and the exceptions to immunity?

But you're looking at her subjective mind. And that's what Harlow, the U.S. Supreme Court case said you don't do anymore.

In 1982, they said we're stopping doing this because all it is is the officer, the official will say,

well, in my mind that was this or I really believed X. Harlow says belief is out.

Her belief may have been in her mind in good faith, but that's irrelevant under a federal qualified immunity analysis.

My belief that I had to shoot the guy as he ran away from me is my belief.

However, a reasonable officer under the circumstances would not shoot a guy eight times in the back who's running away from me.

And your argument is that the trial court never did the reasonable analysis.

He did.

And it appears that he did by the good faith argument.

Yes.

And he made that finding, but in your view he needed to go and conduct a separate additional analysis.

No, he should not have used the analysis he did at all because her subjective belief

and the water cooler policy that she thinks they all said at the bank department

helps her mind to give her a justification after the fact for what I said to Judge Ryan.

If you're right about this and the judge used the improper framework for the analysis,

we can't be the fact finders first.

We would have to remand for further proceedings, right?

I know that's always the risk in these cases.

I think he clearly used the wrong standard.

He tried to say she had objective knowledge.

Now, I don't know what that means, but you'll see in the reconsideration he switches gears a little bit and says,

well, she had objective knowledge of this policy, which as this court knows under Reno and Hopkinson

from 40 years ago, a policy can't change a statute.

And this is an ex post facto case.

I don't know that it came across to you because I think we get immersed in it.

Under the federal constitution, you can't prosecute someone for a crime that wasn't a crime

at the time they entered into a transaction.

And your client was given relief.

We gave your client relief in the last order.

In the last order that was before you when the bank department was after him?

Absolutely.

You've seen this case before.

And now 160,000 in legal fees later, he's trying to get that money back.

But back to my question, we would have to remand for the correct analysis to be conducted by the trial court in the first instance.

Wouldn't we?

Or you as an appellate court could say that based upon his findings that appear in page 79 and 80 of the appendix,

those findings in and of themselves of incompetence meet the Malley versus Briggs test.

And therefore, we are making a determination that no reasonable objective person could have come up with the answer she came up with.

So what you want us to do is say that you win this case, not just that they don't win this case.

Of the choices, Your Honor, I will take that one.

But I understand that door one may not be open.

At least door two would be.

But I honestly think if you look at the at the Harlow case and the fact that they don't want to deal with subjective what I thought.

I thought I was right in shooting the guy.

That's just they don't do that anymore because you never win the case.

You've got to look at what a reasonably trained competent person would do.

But if the if the trial court didn't understand that to be its mission or that that's what the parties were trying to do,

then the evidence and that wasn't the issue before anybody.

So the evidence wouldn't have been focused on that.

The trial court wouldn't have been and the parties wouldn't have been right.

Why shouldn't we send it back if we agree on the law?

I think he used the wrong standard.

If the record and it's not that long if when you read the record with I think it's 160 pages,

you feel that that record plus her, his finding concerning her competence is sufficient.

We win.

If you don't buy that, then obviously it would have to go back for a different standard of decision by Judge Brown than the one he used.

Now he did not say that there was no such policy and that this woman was pulling it out of the air.

Right.

So I'm thinking well maybe what is implied in the court's order is in fact a finding that it was reasonable

because if he did not find that the policy was illusory or you know a fiction,

then he could say he could reason that made her action reasonable.

Anyone looking at that would say if that was the policy conveyed to this employee,

then her actions were reasonable.

Isn't the record sufficient for us to go there?

Now true, you lose under that but I'm asking the question.

Well he did say and this appears in the appendix of page 80,

her decision resulted from her good faith belief based on an unmodified policy

to treat the terms mortgage banker and mortgage lender synonymously.

Un-codified.

I don't even know what that means.

That's the word he used because I made a note of it too.

Un-codified.

The policy was never introduced.

No one said here from their website is this policy.

I refer to it as a water cooler policy.

It's something like all cars are Chevrolets and therefore all Chevrolets are cars.

That's not an accurate statement.

But the court did not find that there was no basis for this policy.

It assumed the policy was as she described.

That's how I got the court's order.

And even if that were so, how does that help her?

All mortgage lenders are mortgage bankers.

All mortgage bankers are mortgage lenders.

This mortgage used the term lender.

So even if there is some policy that no one has seen or produced,

bank commissioner didn't testify, deputy didn't.

Their lawyers, they could have come in as a witness.

State could have called them.

I think the water cooler policy might have been good in 2010 when they changed the statute.

But in 2009 it can't be a policy that changes an RSA.

To follow up on your point, this was a mortgage deed that was executed.

It was a mortgage deed to secure the note back from the...

I understand that, but nonetheless it was a mortgage deed.

And she may have been incompetent, but she linked mortgage deed with lender.

Correct.

Which equated to banker according to this policy.

In her mind, and she obviously got it wrong.

And she also misstated the fact because it doesn't even say mortgage lender in the mortgage deed.

It says lender.

And she agreed with me, and I read it to you, because I asked her,

are all lenders mortgage bankers?

No.

Thank you.

Thank you.

May it please the court?

My name is Brian Bonamano.

I'm here on behalf of the defendants.

This court has already noted regarding the circumstances of this case in Frost 1

that the department took a legal position which involved complex statutes

in their application to a highly regulated industry.

Given that Ms. Sheehan made her statements to Judge Ryan

prior to this court's decision in Frost 1,

the determination that Frost was engaged in mortgage banking was objectively reasonable.

I will take questions at any time.

Where's your policy?

The statement that this...

Can you give me a piece of paper?

Show me where I'd find it?

Policy, the word policy is a term of art.

And I think you can see this is...

So the answer is no.

You can't give me a piece of paper or tell me where I can read it.

This was the law as applied by the banking department.

To call it a policy is to really misapprehend what we're talking about.

The reality is, is that if you are engaged...

If you are non-exempt, you know,

that you meet the definition of a mortgage banker,

you're both a lender and a banker.

But that wasn't Mr. Frost, correct?

Mr. Frost was determined...

Conducted fewer than four, right?

...for the four transactions here.

Yes, but the banking department had determined that he was not exempt,

meaning that by being a lender, he was a banker.

And prior to Frost won, you know,

and the banking examiner going in under these understandings,

not a policy, the...

Let me say it this way.

The standard here is not competence.

The standard is what we know it is,

which is that the conduct does not violate clearly established

statutory or constitutional rights

of which a reasonable person would have known.

That is the standard.

The notion that is she competent or not competent,

and that should determine the question.

Can we find that implied in the court's order?

In other words, I take it you don't think it needs to be remanded

that we can affirm on this record.

Correct.

Help us understand that.

To the extent that there was any differences

or any mistakes made by the trial court

analyzing the case,

that is an issue of law that this court can analyze for itself.

The facts...

Well, let's say we find that the trial court

used an improper framework for its analysis.

So it didn't do the correct analysis.

Then you say we can just look at what the trial court saw

and make the factual determinations ourselves.

The analysis is an issue of law.

The application of the analysis is an issue of law

that the court can look at and reframe the analysis

in the manner that it sees fit

in accordance with the facts as properly found by the trial court.

You say upon remand the facts aren't going to change.

That's your argument.

Correct.

So we can do it.

That's exactly right.

The testimony is what the testimony is.

The questions are...

The record is what the record is,

and there's no reason to go and receive new evidence.

The question is how do we analyze questions?

So did the state understand the reasonableness of her actions

as to be one of the factors that was in play at this hearing?

Yes, and we...

Yeah, we think that this entire case,

we agree that they waived official immunity,

which I think the good faith discussion

is far more relevant in the official immunity analysis

than it would be in the qualified immunity analysis.

In fact, it's not relevant in the qualified immunity analysis.

But we would suggest that the objective reasonableness

of Michigan's statement is based on one,

at the time she said it was consistent

with the then existing statutory law

defining mortgage lender as mortgage banker,

which did apply to the mortgage since it was not paid off,

not discharged.

Not only was it codified at the time she made the representation,

it was entirely consistent with the law

as applied by the banking department

at the time the mortgage was executed.

So when she made...

Let me back up.

When attorney Douglas told us

that the mortgage deed was executed

in March of 2009,

the amendment, the statutory amendment

was in July of 2009,

and that removed the exemption

but added the language that

mortgage lender means mortgage banker.

You're saying,

we shouldn't be comparing the amendment,

the July of 2009 amendment

to the time the mortgage was executed.

We should be comparing the 2009 amendment

to the date that Sheehan was talking to Judge Ryan.

So have I got that right or no?

I'm not sure I understood that.

The amendment...

Was the amendment in effect

when Sheehan was speaking with Judge Ryan?

At the time she was speaking to Judge Ryan,

the provision that equated lender with banker

was on the books.

It was on the books.

And in effect.

And in effect.

And in effect.

And not inconsistent with prior interpretation

by the banking departments.

Okay.

So we should find that it was objectively reasonable.

Objectively reasonable for the examiner

to not understand the significance

of the fact that this particular mortgage

was executed before the statute changed.

Well, I think it's important to note

that she's not a lawyer

and that even a lawyer

looking at this would not necessarily assume

that there's an ex-post-facto issue here.

That's a question of law.

We would disagree with the plaintiff's contention

that this was an ex-post-facto application.

At the time of the execution of the mortgage,

you could not avoid application of New Hampshire banking law

simply by describing yourself as a lender.

In fact, by describing yourself as a lender,

you're making yourself a subject to New Hampshire banking law,

especially where a determination was made

by the agency who implements the law

that Mr. Frost was not exempt.

So your argument is that the 2009 amendment,

which added the provision that mortgage lender

means mortgage banker,

was consistent with this,

whatever the policy was, practice in the banking department,

and in fact was consistent with what she told Judge Ryan.

That's exactly right.

That it was consistent all around,

especially if you look at it from her perspective.

You know, she's coming in as a state employee

being sent in by the department to get a search warrant,

and these were determinations that she...

you know, she's coming into that room

with all of the understandings and history

that the banking department has with it.

So if Judge Ryan took the time to research the amendment,

he would see that mortgage lender means mortgage banker, right?

I'm not criticizing Judge Ryan,

but that was the fact in existence.

So if he just pulled the books off the shelf,

saw that there was an amendment that said

mortgage lender means mortgage banker,

and this woman just told me that Mr. Frost was a mortgage banker.

She's not lying.

We do not think she was lying.

In fact, we think...

I mean, the activity regulated is lending.

And so certainly Judge Ryan could have followed up

with further questions, could have done more research,

and I'm not trying to criticize him either.

I understand.

But you know, we certainly do not...

the state certainly does not see that as a misrepresentation.

It would have been accurate at the time that the mortgage was executed.

It was accurate at the time that she said it.

Can you clarify for me, I guess we've established

there's no written policy that anybody can hold up

about this understanding or policy?

What is the state of the record before the judge

as to the policy or the understanding at the time?

You're making representations to us.

I just don't know what the factual record was

before the trial judge.

I think that the description of policy versus practice

versus understandings, this is all really short hands

for interpretation of the existing law.

But did somebody testify about, well, in our department,

we don't have a piece of paper,

but our understanding was what you're saying.

Did somebody say that?

Yes, we had one, of course, Kathleen Sheehan,

one of the defendants testified to that,

also Attorney Karen Gorham testified to that fact.

And so certainly the record demonstrates

that whatever you want to call it, it was real.

So it wasn't just machine that testified to this?

Correct.

Attorney Gorham also said there was this policy

slash practice slash understanding.

Yes.

So do I understand that you agree with Mr. Douglas

to the extent that you don't think this needs to be remanded,

but you say, don't remand it, we win.

He says, don't remand it, we win.

We agree that they're with Attorney Douglas

that there should be no need to remand this

due to the fact that there's no need to hear

different evidence and that it's just a question of law.

And if there's no other questions, I'm happy to.

The rest of my briefs.

Thank you.

Mr. Douglas, do you need your reserve time?

Just very briefly, your honor.

Sure.

The issue of what they knew in 2010 is irrelevant

to be applied backwards to March of 2009.

The state takes the position today that because it's

a mortgage, anytime the laws change,

that would affect the mortgage.

That is not the law of contract.

Part 1 Article 23, the U.S. Constitution,

you can't change the banking law and constantly have

20 and 30 year mortgages being rewritten

for transactions that were done prior to the change.

I just think that we didn't brief all that,

but if that's where the court goes,

I just wanted to put a very red flag on the play

called the contract clause.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Thank you.
