This is case 2014-0145 and 2014-0146, state of New Hampshire versus Robert Tarloo.

May it please the court, Sarah Newhall for Mr. Tarloo.

There are two issues I raised in my brief, and I'd like to address the second one first.

After Mr. Tarloo exhibited a lack of understanding during the failed 2013 plea colloquy,

the reasonable course of action would have been to make certain that an incompetent person

was not forced to go to trial, would have been to order a new evaluation.

Have a third evaluation.

A third evaluation, yes.

And since you raised third evaluation, Justice Lane.

That would appear to be the issue we're most interested in.

It would. So he was first evaluated in August of 2012 by the state.

Let me just ask this. What do you say about the fact that you have, it seems to me, the most critical thing here,

is you have the testimony of this immigration officer who said,

What are you talking about? I talked to this guy.

When he came back, I talked to him. He didn't have any trouble understanding English,

and his responses were appropriate, and he was, you know, and that was very close in time.

Well, I would say this, that conversation is not part of the record as far as the determination that was made at the time

there was the request for the third competency evaluation.

That testimony was part of the trial.

So I understand the court was going to consider everything before it,

but the defense desired a cross-examined may not have been the same at trial

to cross-examine that ICE officer about Mr. Tarloo's competency.

I think that that assertion went relatively unchallenged as part of the trial,

but may have been treated differently if it had been part of competency hearing.

But we have two competing expert opinions.

Yes.

You characterize the state's expert's opinion as shaky,

but the state has a different characterization of its expert's opinion.

I mean, couldn't the trial court credit the state's expert's opinion,

along with the other evidence before it,

consistent with how the state interprets that expert's opinion?

The expert said he, at bottom, felt that your client was not being forthright.

So I take two things in answer to your question.

The state's expert, Dr. Rebenzer, stated he had limited confidence in his own findings,

and that's, I think, where my characterization comes from.

Secondly, he stated as to his feeling that Mr. Tarloo...

And the reason he had limited confidence was because he found that the defendant,

to use the psychological term, did not quote present validly.

So if you read that opinion in connection with his lack of confidence,

doesn't that really say, look, I can't give you an accurate assessment?

Because I think the guy was fibbing?

That's an interesting question.

Dr. Rebenzer, when cross-examined, would not go so far as to say

that Mr. Tarloo was malingering or fibbing or faking,

but simply said he didn't present to the best of his ability.

Based on, and this is what I argue in my brief,

based on the assumption that he had some level of knowledge in 2020

when he successfully completed an 82-minute plea colloquy,

a 2010 plea colloquy took 82 minutes,

and I know you've all administered plea colloquies.

So based on, and Dr. Rebenzer never reviewed that plea colloquy

to see exactly what Mr. Tarloo seemed to understand in 2010.

My argument is that Dr. Rebenzer made an assumption

about what Mr. Tarloo understood in 2010,

and based on that assumption said,

well, I don't think this matches what a person who successfully

pled guilty should have known.

Certainly the competency in 2010 is not the issue before the court,

but Rebenzer said it doesn't match

what a person who pled guilty should have known,

so that's why I think he's not presenting validly.

That's why I stated it's improper to rely on that,

and this goes into the first issue, I know.

But some 11 months after being evaluated by the state

and six months after being evaluated by the defense expert,

Mr. Tarloo was still unable to understand sentencing.

I know the state will rely on fatigue.

There was no physical or mental fatigue, no illness to suggest that.

So we have his mental fatigue, which suggests incompetence.

He simply was unable to understand,

especially in respect to the suspended sentence.

And those intervening years are what Dr. Rebenzer

did not take into account,

and that's why it was not reasonable for the court to rely on that.

Because in those intervening years,

Mr. Tarloo, who had just received a suspended sentence in 2010,

was not released with time over his head.

As far as he understood, he was kept incarcerated

and moved to another state

and held without knowing when he would be released.

He was an immigration custody. We understand that.

But what a person who, I would say, is barely competent

to get through 82 minutes of a colloquy in 2010,

after that experience in 2012 and 2013

may have felt everything he thought he understood in 2010

was frankly untrue, because it didn't match

what he had experienced through his incarceration.

But isn't that a different issue?

I mean, you seem to be saying that if he was wrong about the law,

in other words, he had a misunderstanding about the law,

that that somehow makes him incompetent.

But that doesn't follow.

In other words, if I don't know the law,

if I don't know, let's say, I don't know some aspect of the tax law

or some other complicated thing,

that doesn't make me incompetent just because I don't know that, does it?

It does not. My argument is simply that Dr. Rubenzer

and his evaluation did not fully take into account

those intervening two years of incarceration

and the development of anxiety that Dr. Kinsler noted

when faced with things that didn't jive for Mr. Tarloo.

And is that inability to understand

and inability to accept as the truth

the information he was being given by reliable sources

and simply just inability to understand that concept?

Not lack of knowledge, but inability to understand it

as exhibited by, frankly, a year of working with an attorney

and still at 2013 having that failed plea costly,

which is now new information before the judge

and warranted a third evaluation.

Thank you.

Thank you.

May it please the court.

Nicholas Court for the State questions anytime.

On the second issue, we submit that when a defendant

has been found competent, there's only two possible

justifications for a new competency evaluation.

Number one is some evidence that casts serious doubt

on the original finding, and there isn't any here.

And the other one is some substantial change

in the defendant's mental condition,

that's what they're arguing, but the defendant's behavior

of the plea hearing wasn't evidence of a substantial change.

The judge specifically said it was consistent

with his behavior at one of his previous evaluations.

It simply indicated he's having trouble understanding

and he's exaggerating the trouble he's having.

And that was clear from Dr. Reubenza's original finding,

which wasn't based on his past and the defendant's past experience.

It was based on a test that Dr. Reubenza performed on him,

the results of which were not consistent with his display

of ignorance about the court system.

It was that inconsistency combined with the fact

that the defendant did have experience that led Dr. Reubenza

to conclude he was not presenting to the best of his ability.

There's nothing further that's all I've got.

Thank you. Case submitted.
