Good morning.

Good morning.

This is case 2014, 0720, Greg Blackstone

versus Executive Assistant Adult Parole Board at all.

Mr. Ernie Hausman.

May it please the court, Stephanie Hausman

from the Appellate Defender Program as Amicus Curiei.

I have reserved two minutes of my time.

The issue before the court is the interpretation of RSA 651A6

paragraph 2 before it was repealed.

May it just point of clarification.

The brief seemed to suggest that everybody

agrees that the statute, in effect, the applicable statute

is the statute that was in effect when your client was

sentenced.

There is an ex post fact.

It's not your client, but when Blackstock was sentenced.

There is an ex post facto question

that depends on the interpretation of the statute.

So depending on the interpretation of the statute,

that determines whether the statute

can be applied in an ex post facto manner.

And I'll address that towards the end of the day.

I'm still confused.

I thought everybody agreed that we

would be applying the statute that

was in effect at the time Blackstock was sentenced.

I think there is no question that this was the statute that

was in effect at the time Mr. Blackstock's crimes were

committed and he was sentenced.

And so therefore it's appropriate to look at that.

There is a separate ex post facto question

about depending on what the statute means,

should it be applied to him, or is it

more of a not substantive change that doesn't need

to be applied to him now that it's been changed?

Thank you.

Can I just ask one other question?

Am I?

I understand, though, that both sides

agree that reference to the statute that

was appealed in 1975, that was not intended to,

you both agree that the statute was not intended to just

cover the people that would have been covered by that statute?

That's correct.

Because the statute was amended after the repeal of that statute

that is mentioned, it seems to be just retained there

as inadvertently.

So why isn't the protocol adopted by the parole board

a sensible way to apply the statutory scheme?

There is a canon of statutory interpretation

that the agency charged with applying the statute's

interpretation be given some credit.

However, the adult parole board uses

neither party's interpretation of the statute.

There's no evidence that, as appellies argue,

the adult parole board considers a consecutively

sentenced inmate to serve two maximum terms on parole.

Rather, as this court described this summer

in Petition of State of New Hampshire,

State v. Roberts, the parole to consecutive process

means that a consecutively sentenced inmate generally

serves only his last maximum sentence on parole.

Well, the statute doesn't say the longest minimum sentences.

It says the longest sentences.

That's correct.

The statute applies to sentences.

Appellies argue that it means the time spent on parole

or that function of the maximum sentence.

But the statute, the paragraph, doesn't

refer to maximum sentences and doesn't refer

to the time spent on parole.

Rather, it applies to, quote, the provisions of this section,

end quote, which in paragraph one determines both release

on parole and then duration of time spent on parole.

And so for consecutively sentenced inmates,

it means paragraph two is specific.

As to those two dates, a consecutively sentenced

inmate may be considered for parole

at the end of the two longest minimums.

And then if paroled would serve the two longest maximums

on parole.

If you're the person for whom you serve as amicus is correct,

what's the practical effect for him?

The practical effect for him would

be that the parole board would be considering him

for parole to the outside world

because he has served the two longest minimum terms

of his consecutive sentence.

So in other words, if we interpret

the statute the way you read it, that

would mean that somebody could not be sentenced to more than two

consecutive sentences that would have to be served.

In other words, the parole board would have,

even if the court said I'm imposing

five consecutive sentences of 5 to 10,

at the end of the two sort of maximums,

the court would, the parole board

would have the authority to parole despite that.

That's correct.

This statute gives the parole board

the authority to parole a consecutively

sentenced inmate at the end of the two longest minimums.

Does it mean that a consecutively sentenced inmate

would be paroled at that time?

No.

And so it doesn't make ineffective the other

third, fourth, fifth consecutive sentence.

It just gives an opportunity for release

at the end of the two longest minimums.

It seems odd that Blackstock is complaining

that he had two shots at parole when he said,

I only should have had one shot later.

It seems odd to me, given the respondent's argument

that this parole into consecutive sentences

is meant to benefit inmates.

I don't disagree that that is a bit odd,

but it's not the questions that the court

asked Amicus to address.

I'd like to address a Pelley's argument, which

is based not on the language of the statute,

nor on the statement of legislators

in passing or repealing the statute,

but just on an assertion that the words used by the legislature

create an absurd result.

Allowing a consecutively sentenced inmate

an opportunity to be paroled at the end of his two longest

minimums is not absurd.

Rather, it is a variation on a well-established practice

of limiting the scope or effect of consecutive sentences.

For 20 years before the passage of the criminal code,

New Hampshire had such a limit in effect.

And during that era, an inmate would

be eligible for parole after serving two-thirds of the aggregates

of his minimums for 20 years.

New Hampshire criminal code was based on the model penal code,

which also advocated a limit on consecutive sentences.

It was a practice the code drafters found

common among the states.

And the code, finally, contained an explicit prohibition

on consecutive sentences, except in limited circumstances.

So it's not absurd that out of this history,

the legislature would choose to grant consecutively sentenced

inmate an opportunity to be paroled at the end of their two

long.

Isn't there something, though, in the legislative history?

I thought that there was some argument

that the legislative history suggested

that there had been a case.

I think this was when Governor Gregg was the governor,

in which somebody was on parole

for only the last portion of their consecutive sentences

and then committed some offense.

And after he maybe got off parole,

and then there was some argument that the parole should

be the combined aggregates of all of the consecutive

sentences.

And the legislature didn't accept that,

but did compromise to make it the two longest ones.

I have two responses to that.

One, the appellias don't explain why the statute is ambiguous

and so why the court should consider legislative history.

But two, in the legislative history,

it is true that the parole board and the governor requested

that the statute be amended so that a consecutively

sentenced inmate serves more time on parole.

However, the legislature rejected the language requested

by the governor and parole board.

And there is no statement from a legislator in the history

that says that is the purpose of the statute.

But I guess the thing I'm not clear on

is doesn't the effect of the way you read the statute,

the amendment, mean that not only did the legislature not

accept what the governor wanted to do,

but they actually decided we're going

to make it more favorable to a defendant

than it had been before, which seems to me to be kind of.

Prior to 1991, the statute said the provisions

of this section shall be computed from the longest

of said sentence.

So under our interpretation, it meant

that a consecutively sentenced inmate

would be eligible for parole at the end

of his longest sentence.

And so this change under our interpretation

increases both the amount of time a consecutively

sentenced inmate must serve prior to be considering for parole.

But let me ask you this, then, where in this did the where

in this scenario of this statute

did the legislature pass the law that basically

allowed consecutive sentences without limitation?

In 1975, the legislature repealed the statute

that limited consecutive sentences.

OK, and at that time, what did this statute say?

It said a consecutively sentenced inmate

under the provisions of this section,

the sentence shall be computed from the longest

of said sentences.

If we agree with your position, this decision

will have a limited effect.

It will be effective only as to defendants

who were sentenced prior to repeal in 2008.

2008.

Yes.

Any idea how many people were talking about?

I don't know how many people would still

be at the prison who had committed crimes prior to repeal

in 2008.

One other point to address Justice Lynn's question

is the legislature did state in 2008

when they repealed this statute that it

was a relic of a bygone era when consecutive sentences

were not served consecutively.

And so that's another indication

of the legislature's intent rather than the statements

in the legislative history from the governor

and the parole board.

The consecutive sentence computation paragraph

must mean something.

And if this court is left with two competing rational

interpretations, the interpretation advocated

by us and adopted by the federal court in two cases

or the interpretation urged by appellies,

the rule of lenity prevents the court

from adopting the interpretation that

disadvantages Mr. Blackstock.

To get to Justice Convoy's question

about the ex post facto question, the United States Supreme

Court cases are uniform in holding

that a statutory change that delays an inmate's first

parole eligibility date violates the prohibition

against ex post facto.

In Morales, the case appellies rely on,

the court found the statute didn't violate ex post facto

because it didn't affect the inmate's first parole

eligibility date.

Under our interpretation, the statute

does govern the consecutively sentenced inmate's first parole

eligibility date.

Blackstock's position was he shouldn't

have been eligible at the first point.

When his first minimum, he should have been eligible only

after expiration of two combined minimums.

So he's arguing that he was considered too early.

I understand Mr. Blackstock is arguing both

that he should have been considered for parole

to the outside at the end of his two longest minimums

and also that that point came in a year later

because he had been considered for parole

at the end of his first minimum.

Either point is moot at this point

because he's been at prison longer than the 11 years.

But isn't the problem, though, that if we interpret the statute

the way you read it, wouldn't that

mean that, for example, let's make it a little easier

in the four consecutive five to 10-year sentences?

Wouldn't that mean that the person could not be considered,

could not be paroled from the first sentence

to the second one after five years?

They'd have to spend, they'd have to go for 10 years

before they could be paroled at all.

As the court, if I may answer the question,

as the court noted over the summer in Roberts,

the parole to consecutive process

used by the parole board is nowhere in the statutes

because the statutes are ambiguous as to how

that is to be determined.

But the reading of this statute

is that the provisions of this section,

so release on parole and duration of parole if released

are to be determined from the two longest sentences.

So whether he gets considered at five years

to go into 10 or not, doesn't seem mentioned in the statute,

but what the statute does say is that

at the end of his two longest minimums

he should be considered for parole to the outside.

And if paroled, then, I'm sorry,

I think I said maximums, I meant minimums.

No, you said minimums.

We're listening.

Thank you.

If released, he would serve the two longest maximums on parole.

Thank you.

May it please the court, Elizabeth Leahy,

for Andrea Goldberg and the Department of Corrections.

Council, on behalf of the court,

I would like to welcome you to your first argument here.

Thank you.

And we lit the fireplace just for you.

Thank you.

I will focus my argument on the second issue raised

by the court, which is whether RSA 651A62,

which I will refer to as section two,

governs parole eligibility for inmates serving

multiple consecutive sentences.

The trial court found that section two

did not govern parole eligibility

and correctly found that it governed

how long an inmate serving multiple consecutive sentences

will remain on parole if he's granted parole.

So can I just, I want to make sure

that I'm understanding what the state's position is.

As I understand what we said in the recent case

that on the parole to consecutive,

basically as I understand what the department

of correction does now, or the parole board,

I'm sorry I should say, does now is,

if somebody has let's say four consecutive

five to 10 year sentences.

And assuming there's no institution,

they've been of good behavior and there's no reason

that they should, that they would not be eligible.

At the end of the first sentence,

the parole board will parole that person

to the second sentence.

And so now for that second five year period,

they're serving the first five years

of the second sentence and the second five years

of the first sentence.

All right, so at the end, let's make it easy,

just two sentences, at the end of the second sentence,

at the end of the second sentence,

they're no longer, they've fulfilled

a complete obligation on the first sentence.

That's correct.

And so the only period of parole

that they would then have is five years,

five years of parole on the street.

That's correct.

And given that that is the process now,

that's my understanding as to why section two

ultimately became obsolete.

What I am unclear of is to whether

that was the same process in 1991

when the statute was amended.

So if you were paroling an individual to its consecutive

and you don't have that mechanism

to allow them to earn time basically

on the max of their prior sentence

and the minimum of their current sentence,

they would end up in a position

at the end of their last minimum

that they would have multiple unserved terms,

which again is not the case now,

but I think it could have been.

So in other words, what you're saying

is that we should interpret this statute

to mean that in the situation of,

let's say that there are more than two consecutive sentences

that the court can, that the parole board

can make the, can make, let's say the first to the second,

again using the five to 10 year sentences.

At the end of the first five years,

the court can parole the person to the second sentence

so that the person will then serve five,

will serve the first five years of the second sentence

and concurrently will serve the second five years

of the first sentence.

But now at the end of 10 years

when it goes into the third sentence,

what the court would have to do then is say,

I'm sorry, what the parole board

would have to do then is say,

we're gonna split up, we're gonna interrupt if you will,

the second five years of the second sentence

so that that sentence will carry over

until you are released on the third sentence.

So that at the end of the third sentence,

you would still have 10 years of parole

as opposed to five years under the,

which would be the case under the current practice.

I'm not sure I followed all of that.

Well, would you explain it to me?

So what I think is the way, if you take out

the current practice, which was addressed

in the petition of warden case earlier this year,

if you take out that ability to earn time concurrently,

you would be put in a position where,

say you have three consecutive sentences

like Mr. Blackstock and they're all five to 10s.

You would serve your first five

and if you were granted parole to your consecutive,

you would serve your second five

and then if you were granted parole

to your third sentence, you would serve your third five.

At the end of that third minimum

under our reading of the statute,

you would remain on parole for the longest,

longest unserved, the two longest unserved portions,

which would be five years.

So you would remain on parole for 10 years.

And so what doesn't, I mean,

but doesn't that in effect mean that you can't,

you can't, unlike the present practice,

you can't serve the maximum portion

of an earlier sentence sort of concurrently.

This statute sort of interrupts that and says,

no, even though you may be paroled

to the second sentence,

what's left over from your first sentence

isn't now served concurrently,

it's put off until you actually are released to the street

and then two of those remaining maximums

is the period that you're on parole.

Correct and at some point that procedure

with the parole board changed

and I'm not sure at what point that change was made

but I think ultimately that is what rendered

this statute obsolete because individuals

who had served multiple sentences

by the time they reached their last,

they only had an unserved portion on that last sentence

because the other maximums had been served concurrently

with the subsequent minimums.

So, but doesn't, I'm sorry.

Go ahead.

So at the end of the day,

if he serves all of the minimums,

he's on parole for 10 years, correct?

Correct.

As opposed to five.

Now it would, under the current practice,

it would be five under this statute,

it would be 10.

Right, but you seem to be telling,

I thought what you just said is that

even when this statute was in effect,

the parole board wasn't applying it that way?

In other words, they were,

I thought you said that the reason

that the statute was repealed is

the parole board wasn't following it anyway.

No, I think my understanding is that at the beginning

they were, I'm not sure at what point the process changed.

But isn't that, I mean,

isn't that something that we ought to really know?

Because if they, I mean, if the situation

is that they were never following your interpretation,

doesn't that suggest that maybe

that interpretation is not correct?

The legislative history indicates that they were

in 1991 and prior following our interpretation.

And that's cited in my brief,

but it's in the statements by governor's council,

which talks about that they,

being the adult parole board,

said that currently a prisoner

who has served multiple convictions,

which might add up to 15 years of a three-year conviction,

only serves parole for the longest of those convictions.

Although they have a 15-year period,

and this is the key language,

they might only have a three-year period on parole

after serving all of their minimum sentences.

So what do you say is the ambiguity

that would lead us into that legislative history?

There are two reasons to get to the legislative history.

First is the ambiguity in the statute,

which I think is created by the reference

to truth in sentencing,

which refers to the fact that all inmates

have to serve their minimum term

as established by the sentencing court.

Is that section 15 or 14, rather?

No, no, that is RSA 651, 2, Roman 2D.

Thank you.

And so there is an express reference in section one

that with a reference to truth in sentencing,

which is absolute.

So to read section two is that Amicus suggests

you would have to ultimately create

an exception to truth in sentencing

where to date one doesn't exist.

The second reason you would get to the legislative history

is the absurdity of the result

that results from the Amicus' reading.

And I'd like to address those three points.

First, as I've already touched on, is truth in sentencing,

which is again expressly referenced in section one.

And what truth in sentencing did

is it eliminated the ability of the parole board

to parole inmates prior to serving their minimum.

And the way they did that was tacking

on a 150-day disciplinary period on the minimum.

And so inmates through good time

could work off that 150-day period

and ultimately be released at their minimum.

And what was happening before that

is that inmates were having their minimum

and then working, getting good time credits

to dip them below their minimum.

And so truth in sentencing eliminated that

and required all inmates to serve their minimum.

So under the Amicus' reading,

one, you would eliminate that 150-day period

on any sentence imposed beyond the first two sentences,

as well as eliminating the minimum entirely,

eliminate the entire sentence,

which would yield basically a defacto pardon

for all sentences beyond two.

And the court, and I think the best example to use

is there are a number of cases

that are stayed currently,

waiting the outcome of this case,

I'm currently aware of, at least three.

And in one of them,

the individual has seven consecutive sentences.

And so if this reading were to be applied to him,

he would be eligible for parole

after serving the minimums of his first two sentences.

Then he would remain on parole

for the unexpired portions of those two sentences.

That would certainly come as a surprise

to the sentencing judge, wouldn't it?

Exactly.

And so then you would have a situation

where that individual didn't serve any time,

let alone the minimum as required

by truth in sentencing on sentences three,

four, five, six, and seven.

But why wouldn't the statute,

I'm confused about where you ended up with that logic,

so that if we did, as is argued,

and someone with seven consecutive sentences

would be eligible to be released to the street

after expiration of the first two,

and then how long would he be on parole

out on the street?

The unexpired portions of those two sentences.

Just to those two.

That's based on the language of the statute.

So, section two.

Section two.

So if you read it as the amicus suggests,

one, it would go to the eligibility for parole,

which would be the minimums of your two sentences,

as well as the maximum duration of parole,

which is the maximums of those two sentences.

So the remaining time would be pardoned, essentially.

So in other words, and if I'm understanding the sequence

from both what you've said and Ms. Ausman has said,

is before the amendment in, I guess, 1991,

there was a, it was the longest,

that statute said the longest sentence

would be the period of parole.

When in relation to that, did the legislature enact

what you refer to as the truth and sentencing?

1982.

So 1982, while the statute that said the longest sentence

is the period of parole, while that was in effect,

the legislature now passes truth and sentencing,

which effectively makes the sentencing system harsher.

Correct.

And then if we interpret,

if we would accept your opponent's argument,

that would mean that the legislature in a sense

did an about face by saying in effect,

by passing a new statute, which although it made,

although it changed the, and I guess made harsher

in some sense, the parole statute would effectively under,

would effectively wipe out the truth and sentencing statute.

Correct.

And I think going back to the legislative history,

the comments by governor's council,

which the 1991 amendment was prompted by a memo

that was prepared by the governor as well

at the recommendation of the parole board,

and I don't have the page in front of you,

but it's that last section talking about

how the parole board requested that the change

from the longest sentence be made

to the two longest sentences.

And so when you look at that in relation to the comments

that governor's council is making,

those comments indicate that pre 1991,

which is post truth and sentencing,

the parole board is following truth and sentencing

by requiring the inmates to serve all of their minimums

before they're eligible for parole.

And so what the bottom line here is

the defendant in this case was sentenced after 1982

when truth and sentencing became the law.

And therefore the truth and sentencing statute

trumps section two upon which amicus relies.

That's correct.

That's the bottom line.

That's correct.

And it's as simple as that.

I mean, our hypotheticals suggest

that this is all very complicated,

but it may not be.

That's correct.

Can I ask you a question about

the ex post facto issue?

You rely on Morales and Ms. Hausmann

had a response to that.

I'd like your response to hers.

Going off of Justice Combo's comment,

I think the cleanest answer

to the truth to the ex post facto issue

is that Mr. Blackstock was sentenced

under truth and sentencing,

which became effective in 1982,

which required him to serve all of his minimums.

That's exactly what has been required of him.

So presumably we don't have to get tangled up

in an analysis of what section two

did or didn't mean because it effectively

was vitiated by truth and sentencing.

And that, yes, I think that's correct.

And another point that I'd like to add

is that when truth and sentencing was enacted in 1982

as part of House Bill 20,

included an amendment to the predecessor statute to this,

which was 651, section 45,

that included a direct reference to truth and sentencing.

I mean, we couldn't just say

that this statute was vitiated by truth and sentencing

because this statute was amended

after truth and sentencing.

So I mean, presumably,

I don't think we could just say

the legislature didn't intend to accomplish something.

Correct.

And I can clarify.

So truth and sentencing relates only to minimum.

So to the extent you read section two

to relate to maximum and minimum,

after truth and sentencing,

it abrogated any reference, if there ever was one,

to minimums, but the maximums still remained.

And that's what the 1991 amendment related to.

And that's what carried forward.

So it didn't viscerate the entire statute,

but it left maximum.

And that's what the 1991 amendment related to.

Thank you.

Do you need your reserve time, counsel?

Yes, Your Honor.

I just want to address the truth and sentencing argument.

As the court pointed out,

truth and sentencing was passed in 1982

and it addressed a very specific section

of the sentencing and parole statute,

which was does good time cut below the minimum

or, and it changed the regime

so that good time was added to the minimum

and then you earn it down to your minimum.

It only dealt with that provision.

Again, this amendment happened in 1991.

Truth and sentencing was never intended

to be an absolute, as appellees argue,

because there has existed throughout this era

other mechanisms by which a sentence

may change from what the trial judge pronounces.

But I mean, wouldn't it,

I guess if we,

when truth and sentencing was first enacted,

is, I mean, would it be,

is it your view that truth and sentencing,

which said if you get consecutive sentences,

you have to serve the minimum,

that that still meant you could only be subject to parole

for the longest period of the, for the longest sentence?

When truth and sentencing was passed,

it only dealt with the question of good time at the prison

and how that affects minimum.

And so it didn't affect RSA 651A6.

You alluded to other, were you finished?

No, thank you, Judge, you're right.

There were, there have been other mechanisms

by which a sentence may change

after it is pronounced by the trial judge.

So there's been sentence review,

RSA 65120, which allows the trial judge

to suspend a portion of the minimum,

as well as mechanisms by which the parole board

can release an inmate early from parole,

thereby shortening the maximum sentence

pronounced by the trial judge.

Thank you. Thank you.

Case submitted, Attorney Leahy.

We hope you'll be willing to come forward.
