This is case 2014-0765-IN-RAY-NB and IN-RAY-JB.

Let me just repeat, counsel, that the Chief Justice is participating in this case. She's simply unable to be here. She's required to be at the legislature this morning. Did you hear me? Okay, thank you. Please proceed, counsel.

My name is Charles Capace, and I have the privilege of representing the appellants in this matter.

Assisting me on this matter is my associate, Phyllis Schacht, and the rather famous Russ Riley.

We are here today to dissolve a blanket order preventing appellants from filing a civil suit in the public clerk's office and filing it without seal and without any protective order covering it.

Don't you have the keys to this conundrum in your pocket?

In the sense that we can decide to file at any time, but I think that's beside the point.

Right, okay.

The idea is we shouldn't be under this blanket protective order to start with.

It puts the burden on us, and specifically what really went wrong here, among other things, was the Keene Sentinel process was deferred to the Superior Court.

Why does it put the burden on you? I don't understand if the court just said you file it and then the next court will apply Keene Sentinel where the burden isn't on you.

Well, the burden is on me because I have the, this is a prior restraint, I think everybody agrees on that.

I have to then lift it. I have to file it in Superior Court under seal. I have to live with the prior restraint and I'm the one that's going to have to lift it.

They're not going to want to lift it. I do. I shouldn't have that burden under the case law in the state.

The party who is the proponent of non-disclosure has a burden and a very high one of proving that there's either, that there's a compelling state interest.

Well, you don't contest that there's a compelling state interest involved here, do you?

Oh, I do. I do in the way that is being framed.

There's a compelling state interest in protecting the identities, certainly, of my clients.

I certainly agree with that. I wouldn't think anything else.

But the idea that there's a separate compelling state interest in the juvenile statutes generally, which is what the lower court principally based its opinion on, as a notion that's been rejected at least three times by this very court.

Let me ask you this. If we agree with you that this is an unconstitutional prior restraint, what do we do? What are you asking us to do? Do you want us to send it back to the trial court or do we have the power to refashion it in a constitutional fashion?

I would very much favor the latter, Your Honor. I think this court should not send it back. I think this court should write the law. After all, I don't think there's been a case on juvenile proceedings directly on point, as this one raises.

I would urge the court to write the law clearly and dissolve the injunction and allow us to file this case like any other case. Proper anonymity preserved, of course.

So would it satisfy you if we said, okay, well, the court almost got it right. It could be filed but only be sealed for ten days, and then if the other side doesn't come forward and satisfy Keene Sentinel, then it's going to be made public?

Your Honor, it shouldn't be filed under seal for ten minutes. It shouldn't be filed at all.

Let's say we agree with you. Does that mean that the statute that establishes confidentiality in abuse and neglect cases is vitiated entirely?

It does not.

All right. So where is the line? Under what circumstances do you say confidentiality would be imposed pursuant to the statute as opposed to when it wouldn't be? I'm searching for that line because you've just said we're not throwing out a confidentiality in its entirety.

No. The confidentiality that the statute speaks of, specifically 169 C25 Roman Rule 2, which was amended in 2002, to include language that wasn't there before, that allows people who are entitled to be at the abuse and neglect proceedings to relate what has happened in those proceedings to anybody and everybody afterwards, provided that they don't use the identifying information.

So the idea here is that the identifying information only relates to the individuals. They're the ones that have the privacy interest to protect, not the state.

Can I just ask this? This is the thing that I don't understand about your opponent's position. Your clients now are the adoptive parents of the child.

Correct. Is that correct?

Is that correct? Nobody claims, and it would seem to me there's no basis for claiming, that your clients are anything other than completely fit parents.

And the appellees agree.

The appellees agree.

So if that's the case, I guess what I don't understand is if the purpose of this statute is to protect the identity of the children,

and you are the parents, and nobody's claiming that you, I'm sorry, your clients are the parents,

and nobody's claiming that they are unfit or anything else, why isn't it your decision, your client's decision,

as fit parents to decide if they want to invoke that protection or waive it, even as to their names?

I mean, I would think that if a fit parent decides my child has been, my minor child has been abused by somebody else,

and I make the decision that I think a lawsuit ought to be filed in favor of my child,

I can make the decision that, you know, that I think that, that is part of that.

My child's identity, this is going to be a public trial, and my child's identity should be, and I don't understand what, what,

I mean, what interest the state has in, in opposing that.

Agreed. And furthermore, what, what right does the state have, and they have suggested in their briefs,

to claim that the parents, the new parents' rights to bring a damage action for compensation and damages and treatment costs

is somehow against the interest of these kids?

Well, there's no, there's no bar to the parent disclosing any information that the parent has learned independently.

In other words, I understand from the briefs, there were newspaper articles, et cetera, et cetera, the parent has information.

What is not disclosed here is the court's file.

But if the parent wants to say, I have knowledge, outside of the court's file, I have knowledge that my children were abused,

that this happened, this didn't happen, the parent is free to do all of that, right? All of it.

The parent is. The only thing at issue here is the court's file, which the statute says needs to be maintained as confidential.

Nothing prevents your client from naming her children, from naming the alleged abuser, because she has information,

as I get it from the brief, she has information independent from the court file that the abuse happened,

who the abuser was, and how it was handled by DCYF.

She's got all kinds of information independent of the court file.

The only order here was, the trial court said, the court file stays confidential.

So this isn't keeping her from speaking the knowledge that she has.

Well, under section two, she could be, let's say she had a photographic memory and attended the abuse and neglect proceeding,

or was entitled to do that. She could go outside the courthouse and relate the entire thing in detail,

under the statute, provided that she'd preserve the anonymity of the child and the parent.

Now you've got me confused. I thought that the court allowed your client, or you as a counsel,

to obtain a full copy of the court records.

We did, because they're one of the people under the statute who wanted to do it.

And you have one, right? So all you're complaining about is this prior restraint, borrow your word.

Indeed.

Requiring that any civil suit be filed initially under seal, is that correct?

Yes. That's the prior restraint.

You're not challenging the second component of the order, which actually sort of puzzles me that it's not being challenged,

given your exchange with Justice Lin.

We could easily have challenges, but our thinking was, if this court decides the constitutional question,

which we urge them to do, it would essentially vitiate the paragraph two of the court's order.

Isn't there a way to decide this case without reaching a constitutional question?

Not fully. Not in a way that would provide the kind of instruction that I think the court needs in this area.

So my answer would be no, Your Honor. It would be difficult.

How about this? Under the circumstances of this case, the court erroneously exercised its discretion in its order.

How does that work?

Well, that would result in a reversal and a vacation of the order.

We'd be very pleased with that.

But we'd like the court, as I said before, to go further and set forth what the statute means

and what the Constitution requires in a juvenile proceeding such as this.

And its opposition-

So you say it's not a question of discretion.

It's a question of the statute.

Because the statute says no disclosure of court records, right?

It says that they should be separate and apart.

The only time it says confidential in the statute, 169C25, is when it gets to talk about DCYF records, case files,

which we're not dealing with here.

Right.

That's the only time it uses the word confidential.

We're only dealing with court records.

That's right.

And there's no confidential language attached to those in sections one or two of 169C25.

So, I would urge this court, construing paragraphs, excuse me, Articles 22 and 8 of this state's Constitution,

and two decisions from this court, namely Associated Press versus the state of New Hampshire and Enra Keene Sentinel.

I think those are what you need, really only those, to decide this case.

Let's look at what the lower court did.

But doesn't Keene Sentinel contemplate that records are filed under seal?

I mean, that's the starting point in Keene Sentinel is that there are records filed under seal and then the process begins,

and the burden is on the party who seeks to prevent disclosure.

In that case, there was a sealed order of many years before in divorce records.

So, there's a seal order already in place.

So, here the starting point is the legislature's made a determination that these type of records should be regarded differently than normal court records.

So long as they don't identify the child, as long as they preserve anonymity, there is no reason why the court file should remain secret.

But doesn't your argument, if you just walked in, you got the entire court file from the earlier proceeding,

and just walked into court and said, this is the basis for my claim, you would say that the Constitution gives you a right to do that?

In the Superior Court you're talking about?

Yes.

With proper anonymity preserved, yes.

Well, with proper anonymity preserved, but that's not...

Say you just walked in and didn't do anything with that record from the abuse and neglect proceeding,

and just went in and put it down and said, this is my case that I'm filing in Superior Court.

With names?

Does the Constitution protect your right to do that?

As long as there's no names that identifies, the answer is yes.

But there might be, so if there are, how is there a protection for that?

Because under the Keen Sentinel procedure, even if there is established a compelling state interest, which there's not here I would argue,

the court then has the obligation to decide what is the least restrictive alternative.

And anonymization redaction is that alternative.

Then, the rest of the file, the facts, the events, the documents, the reports, they should be public fair.

And that's what the Constitution requires, if press access to the court has any meaning.

One of the interesting things about...

Well, I'm wondering how difficult, and I don't know the answer to this, I wonder how difficult your burden, you're referring to it as your burden,

if we kept in place what the trial court has done.

You would then have to go to the Superior Court, file the claim naming DCYF and whomever, and you would have to say,

we want the trial court's record in the abuse and neglect case to be opened because it is necessary for us to prove our case.

Would that be a terribly high burden for you to meet?

I think it's a question that I shouldn't have the burden at all.

Well, I understand. Theoretically, I understand that.

But I'm wondering whether, given the nature of the claim you want to make against DCYF,

which is mishandling the case, resulting in your argument in Superior Court, I take it,

is going to be based on DCYF's mishandling of the case,

these children were placed in a situation where they were abused that was unnecessary and it only happened as a result of DCYF's negligence.

That is your case, in a nutshell?

It is.

Okay. So, if you go to the Superior Court and you say,

in order for me to present my case, I can't be hobbled by a sealed record,

I'm just sitting here asking myself, are you going to have much trouble doing that?

I would have a lot of trouble, and it would be multiple troubles.

The Court's order was broad. It said pleadings.

That means the complaint, any amended complaints, discovery, motions, counter-motions, et cetera, et cetera.

At each stage, I would have to go and remove the cloud of secrecy. I shouldn't have to do that at all.

No, you would just file a motion with your pleading, with your initial complaint.

You would just file a motion seeking relief under Keene Sentinel or relief of the burden under Paragraph 3.

And it would be based on the nature of your claim.

In other words, it seems to me that the way the statute is set up, it all depends on the nature of your claim.

You can't go into the Superior Court and say,

you know, one of the DCYF workers is my neighbor and she puts garbage on my lawn.

I want to open up the abuse file.

It's critical what the character is of your claim.

And it strikes me that, given the complaint that you would be filing, you would say,

in order for me to pursue my claim, it is critical for the file to be opened.

And?

May I say this?

Yeah.

Not only my claim, there's a public issue here, separate and apart from our individual claim.

And it's that right for public access to the courts that's right at the heart and soul of this matter.

And you would make that argument to the Superior Court.

I should, it's not my job.

I shouldn't be told to do that.

That's the essence of prior restraint.

It puts the shoe on the wrong foot in a very simple claim.

Whether it's five minutes, ten minutes, or two years.

Whether it's one document or 50, it puts the shoe on the wrong foot.

Seems to me that your, your true complaint here is the, you don't think 169C, the restrictions in 169C are constitutional.

But that's not the challenge that's being mounted here.

It's not the challenge here.

I, I, if you ask me, I would, I would have some problems.

Certainly this court has had some problems with the statute in its earlier form.

And mentioned it, I think it was in Weber's case.

That was before the 2002 amendment, which allowed some publication by those entitled to be there,

of the events that took place.

But that's all.

That's the one little chink of light that they made.

I think without that, even perhaps with it, it might be unconstitutional.

And I, you know, I, I'm thinking of the Associated Press case,

where this court had no problem, incorrectly I think,

finding 458 that provided for financial affidavits and matrimonial disputes,

to, to, to be confidential and private.

And this, and this court in that case, in an implode, explode,

and in, in Ray Senegal, said just the mere pointing to a statute that says confidentiality, per se,

that does not constitute a.

Councilor, your red light is on.

It is, your honor.

And I will, I will, I will, thank you for your, very much for your time.

Thank you.

I very much appreciate the opportunity to come before you.

Thank you, council.

May it please the court.

My name is Mary Beth Misleck and I represent the Department of Health and Human Services.

I intend to split this time with counsel for CASA and inform the monitor.

This state has a long-standing policy of maintaining the confidentiality of child protective prisoners.

Let me, let me just ask you this.

Is it your position that a fit parent, who was not in any way involved in the abuse,

cannot waive the privilege, waive the confidentiality?

Yes.

And, and why?

What interest does that protect?

In other words, if the, if the, if a fit parent says,

I understand that these proceedings under the statute are, are confidential.

That's designed to protect my child.

I am a fit parent.

I've decided that it's more important to bring a lawsuit, to have this open to the public.

And nobody claims that, that, that my decision in that regard is, demonstrates that I'm not a fit parent.

So what is the interest of the state in the face of that, in keeping this confidential?

In enacting the Child Protection Act, the legislature made certain policy decisions.

And that was one of the policy decisions it made.

It did not provide for a parental waiver of the confidentiality of the court file.

But wouldn't that, wouldn't such a waiver come under the penumbra of Troxel?

I honestly, I can't answer that, Your Honor.

I apologize.

Because I mean, are you saying, in other words, I, if you were saying, for example, that there is in these records,

let's say that, let's say that there was some claim that one of the parents was, was abusive,

and the trial court had found, no, that that, you know, in the, in the abuse and neglect proceeding, a parent had been exonerated.

Or whoever the respondent was, and maybe it doesn't have to be a parent, but whoever the respondent was had been exonerated.

And, and then in my example, the parents said, you know, I want this released.

Well, I could see in that circumstance that, that, that somebody would say, well, wait a minute.

Now, you know, it's not just the interest of the child.

We've had this, this, this parent was accused, was exonerated.

And, and he, he or she has a privacy, some interest that would be protected by the statute.

But as I understand it, that's not the case here. There is no, there is, it seems to me in the circumstances of this case,

the only person that would be protected, sort of rightfully if you're in, in, under the statute, would be the child.

And the fit parents of the child are saying, we're not interested in that protection.

So I don't, it does sort of seem like, you know, this is kind of big brother, uh, to interpret the statute the way you say it needs to be interpreted.

I would respectfully disagree, Your Honor. I think as an initial point to make, um, it's not uncommon for the interests of a parent and a child to diverge.

And that is why we have CASA, we have guardians ad litem who protect the interests of the children as opposed to the parents.

Absolutely. And if you were here saying, if somebody was here saying this decision by the parents is not in the best interest of the child,

and, and, you know, that demonstrates that they're not fit parents. Great. That's an entirely different situation, but nobody's saying that.

I think that we're going a little bit astray because we're talking a lot about whether these adoptive parents, the parents, they're fit or they're not fit.

And that's not the standard that's before this court. And that's really not the issue that's before this court.

What's before this court today is whether or not a prior restraint through this protective order is lawful or unlawful.

And I think what appellants misunderstand is that simply having a prior restraint is not unlawful.

That is not an unconstitutional thing to do. You can have an unlawful one, but that's not the case here.

In order for us to give the appellant the relief she's looking for, do we have to hold the statute unconstitutional?

Otherwise it stands? The lower court's decision stands?

Sure. I don't think so. I think that the interpretation of 169C is certainly intertwined in this.

But there's also a common law precedent even set by this court protecting the confidentiality of children in abuse and neglect proceedings.

So we can look at it from a common law standpoint. We can look at it from a 169C standpoint.

Then why isn't the obligation of confidentiality satisfied by redacting the names?

If confidentiality was just satisfied by the names, I think the statute would say names, but it doesn't just say redact the names.

It says any information that may identify a child or a parent. There's more than just a name that can identify a parent or a child.

Well, how much more? How much more?

I think there's quite a bit more. I think there's towns. There are circumstances. There's facts of the case.

Facts that I will not talk about today, but there are certainly facts that can be identifying of a child or a parent.

If we agree that with your opponent that this is an overbroad and unconstitutional prior restraint, do you agree that we have the power and the responsibility to refashion it to what we deem to be constitutional?

Or what's the remedy here?

You agree. And I agree with your honor's statement earlier that you could say, okay, it's going to be sealed for 10 days after filing.

And then within those 10 days, if let's say the state doesn't move to maintain the seal or to apply Keene Sentinel, then everything's opened.

I think that's a perfectly fine remedy.

So you agree the lynchpin is the need in relation to a separate lawsuit, not just disclosure for the sake of disclosure?

Right. This protective order, all this is is an intermediate protective measure.

This protects certain information because once the bell is rung, it cannot be unrung.

This information will be in the public sphere forever. It will follow these children forever.

The Internet manages information at light speed. And once it's out there, it cannot be taken back.

But we have lots of statutes in New Hampshire that limit the established confidentiality.

What concerns me here is you could issue a an order that applies to everybody in the state and say, you know, you shouldn't file any pleadings until publicly because they should be looked at by the court to make sure that they're okay.

And that would certainly be an unconstitutional prior restraint. So here we're assuming the worst and we're imposing a burden on somebody that may well be unconstitutional, it seems to me.

I would disagree. I would agree with your earlier statement that that something as broad as what you describe would certainly be unconstitutional.

I disagree that this particular protective order is unconstitutional. All the family court did was take its interpretation of the statute and include it into an order.

And so let us be clear. You would not be opposed to our fashioning or remedy which protected these court records for a period of time until a lawsuit was actually filed.

And at which time the restraint would be lifted because, in your view, the purpose of the protection would have been accomplished once, because once you have a lawsuit that raises these issues, then there's no more need for protection of the statute.

I mean, that's what you're saying, right?

My light is on, but if I may.

Please.

Counsel, counsel.

Thank you.

This is an important case.

Yes, it's an extremely important case.

In which case the burden would switch and your opponent would not have his burden concerns.

Exactly.

And I agree with that to the extent that, yes, once it's filed and then the opportunity for Keene Sentinel to be applied.

I don't think that filing it under seal but then having it, let's say, be opened up without the application of Keene Sentinel, that would be sort of nonsensical.

But you agree that the burden would be then on you and CASA?

Yes, and I don't think the burden has ever shifted from the state and from CASA to show that there's a compelling interest and that there's information that is sensitive and should remain sealed.

So, let me just make sure I understand.

So, if I understand correctly, let's assume we did something like that.

Your view would be then in the trial court, despite the fact that the now parents, adoptive parents of this child say, we have made the decision that we want these records to be open.

You could say, oh, I'm sorry, we the state have decided that this really isn't in the best interest of the child and so therefore we want, we want you court to not unseal these records.

Well, the state would be a party and certainly that's a commonplace situation for parties to find themselves and sealing and redacting complaints and information is not an uncommon practice.

But you would be saying, we know better, we the state know better what's in the best interest of this child than the fit parents.

I think that this court has recognized that the state does have a compelling interest in protecting children, yes.

So, all you're saying is we would make the argument, then, and that argument doesn't need to be made here.

I'm sorry.

I'm sorry.

Okay.

The argument about what's best for the children, you say that's an argument that you acknowledge we don't have to deal with here.

That would be dealt with in the superior court where you have the burden.

That is what you are telling us.

Yes, that's correct.

Absolutely.

All right.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you.

Please have one second.

Take your time.

Have some water.

Okay.

And Dean on behalf of CASA of New Hampshire.

And I had some introductory remarks, but I really want to jump into one point that's being made here, which is that really what this order does, it is very narrow.

And to get to your point, we're talking very much in the abstract here.

And to Justice Hicks' questions about what exactly can identify exactly.

We're in the abstract here.

We're talking about abstract constitutional principles.

What we need is a record.

We need to actually see a complaint.

What do they want to put in the complaint?

What do they want to attach to the complaint?

Can I just ask you, Azir, do you agree that CASA and the interests of CASA as in protecting sort of CASA and the interests of the state in protecting the state are not sort of at issue here?

In other words, the purpose of this statute, correct me if I'm wrong, the confidentiality statute is not to protect CASA from potentially being sued or not to protect the state from potentially being sued.

It's to protect the child.

Of course I agree with that statement.

Of course I agree with that statement.

Yes.

That is why CASA, that's why we're here today.

CASA makes, and the CASA of volunteer advocates make recommendations to the court on the best interests of the children.

There might be circumstances, and this is not the case here, but there might be a circumstance where there are dueling parents, not uncommon, where one parent would want records disclosed, another parent might not want records disclosed depending on the interests that were being pursued.

And that's why the state in CASA says the interests of the children, frankly, are the interests of the state.

Right?

That is correct.

That's generally.

So that's why you say we need to know what the complaint is, because if it's simply one parent trying to air dirty laundry, that might not be a sufficient interest to put the child's interests at risk.

On the other hand, if there is no such risk based on what this complaint that no one has seen yet suggests, then the records can be disclosed.

Correct.

Because we have a fit parent who's making a decision.

But your argument is, we've got to see the complaint.

What are the allegations being made?

That's exactly it.

And they may well support disclosure.

That's exactly it.

And I think the protective order here is just seeking to pass control from the circuit court, which had control over its own proceedings and the confidential files, to whatever court now ends up with a lawsuit, rather than having a gap there where we're hoping that the best interests of the children will still be upheld by the parents.

But we don't know that until we see the complaint.

And it may very well be that they're very good at redacting and using pseudonyms and they're very judicious in that effort and that there is no objection to the complaint they file.

That is a possibility for how this case could turn out.

But in the meantime, we need, and the process that's set by the protective order, is transferring control to whatever court accepts the court.

One thing that concerns me is the trial court could have issued an order that tracked the statute 169C a little more closely and said, well, what shouldn't be filed publicly are the names of the kids or the identifiable information.

But that's not what it did.

It wrote very expansively, it is just pleadings.

And that concerns me.

Right.

But again, that would then be open to interpretation as to what is identifying the children.

And it would be ceding control to the party filing the complaint to make that determination in the first instance.

And as counsel for DCYF said.

It might be difficult because as we have been told, there was a lot of publicity about it.

Correct.

So it wouldn't take much disclosure in the pleadings to make everything identifiable.

Exactly.

It's been out there in the papers, and there were criminal prosecutions, criminal trials, evidence from the criminal cases.

I mean, the more sensational the case, the more publicity there already is in criminal trials, the more this interest of protecting the children is heightened.

So what, so let me just ask you, suppose we take this out of the context of a lawsuit altogether.

Suppose you have, and again, I completely understand that this, things have got to be done on a, you know, on a case-by-case basis.

I certainly can understand, as Justice Convoy pointed out, that if there are, if this was a fight between conflicting parents or something like that, it would be a different situation.

But let's suppose the situation is this.

We, we have the facts that we know here.

The adoptive parents are fit parents.

Suppose that they decided that they thought it was the best interest, in the best interest of the children, not to file a lawsuit against CASA and DCYF, but they want to, they want to give the, they want to open the court file, and they want to give it to the Concord Monitor, or the, or the Manchester Union leader or whatever, because they want, they think it would be in the best interest of their children.

To have this all public about how their, you know, the abuse their children suffered, and the fact that, in their view, CASA and DCYF, et cetera, et cetera, did, you know, acted inappropriately here.

Is it your view that the, that CASA or the state could come in and say, without making a claim that the parents are not fit parents, that they could come in and just say, no, we don't.

It's in, it, we, we've decided it's in the best interest of the children not to do that.

Yeah, I'm not sure that CASA would necessarily have standing, I'd have to think more about that, but I think the state certainly would, because, because of the Child Protection Act, which codifies that, that children, not all children, but children that are in these awful abuse and neglect cases, this, this is a special circumstance.

And the harm is not just that what's occurring during the abuse and neglect case and what publicity might come out of it at that time, but it extends beyond that, the stigma, the shame, the humiliation.

The, the statute is designed to give these children an opportunity at a fresh start, either reunifying with their parents, perhaps in a, in a happy story or, or, you know, or, or being adopted.

Can I follow up on your question? Would it make a difference, say, if we, we have, we, the starting point are fit parents, but it turns out that the parents want all of these records disclosed because they want to sell the records to the National Enquirer.

and make half a million dollars, which would go to the parents and not the children. Any role, does the state has, have any role in assessing what the parents motivations and goals are?

I know that's not this case and I'm not implying anything by, I'm trying to come up with an absurd example to figure out where the lines are.

Again, I, I think your example again, and, and Justice Lin's example too, it, it just underlines that the court needs to be involved, that the, the parents, they can make decisions for their children, but on, on, on this issue, on the confidentiality of these abuse and neglect proceedings, that, a court has to look at that and determine whether, yes, this is in the best interest to do what you're proposing to do.

What, what's the worst that happens if we lifted the seal order?

What is the worst that happens to the children?

What's the worst that happens?

Well, uh, there, they would be identified and, uh, you know, they would, in their,

Assuming the identifiers were successfully redacted, what's the worst that happens?

Well, I, I guess I'm not understanding your, so the worst that would happen where they're successful in, in redacting, in redacting and you can't identify the children?

Right.

Well then, then we're, we're okay. In fact, if they file a complaint that way, there wouldn't be an objection to it.

But it's not limited, it's not limited to redacting their names because identifiers are not limited to names.

Exactly, yes.

Identifiers are, would include what elementary schools they went with, who the neighbors were, um, that record would have to be scoured to do an effective redaction.

It's not just running it through the computer and saying every place where there's a name, block it out.

I agree.

But I, and that's why we need, and that's why we need, and I have more faith in good lawyers than that. Lawyers do that all the time.

They do, but that's where the adversary proceeding becomes helpful because now they can propose a complaint that could be open to the public.

And then the parties that are, uh, trying to uphold the confidentiality and on behalf of the children can look at that and, and they can weigh in and the court ultimately will make a decision,

which can then be appealed here and you'll have a concrete record to look at and, and determine, you know, whether or not the, the balance was struck correctly.

Can I just ask one other, one other question here? Let me ask you this. Suppose that what happened here, suppose that, that these children were, were older.

That, that, that, you know, we were talking 10 years in the future or maybe longer than that. And now the children who were the subject of abuse are adults.

And they want to have the file, the court file open. Can they do it?

They, do they have a right to say, we want, you know, we are now adults. We understand we, and we, not our, not our fit parents even, but we want this file open because the file was designed for our protection.

And we think it's in the best, it, it, we now have made the determination. It's now in our best interest not to have it sealed. Can they do that?

If they're, if they're competent, you know, they're competent adults. I, certainly a very much stronger argument that, yes, they can decide their own best interest once they're adults. If they want to disclose things from the past, then that's their prerogative.

Thank you, counsel. Case submitted. Thank you, Your Honor.

The court will take a brief recess. Thank you all.
