This is case 2014-0364, state of New Hampshire versus William Roy.

Ms. Newhall?

May it please the court, Sarah Newhall for William Roy.

There are three issues I raised in my brief.

I'd like to begin with the first issue, the exclusion of the divorce decree in its terms.

And we submit that that's an unsustainable exercise of discretion because the terms were relevant and crucial to the theory of defense that Mr. Roy was presenting.

This court has held that court may not completely deny cross-examination on a proper matter.

Why is this, I guess the thing I'm having difficulty with is there's no, as I understand it, there was no dispute.

The victim said on the witness stand, I owed him money in connection with the divorce and I paid it.

And so if you're just talking about the divorce decree, that doesn't say anything more than that.

I mean, the victim wasn't disputing. I owed him money at some time.

And that's all the divorce decree said. It was issued in 2010, if I understand.

It couldn't have said what happened in 2013. So why was the decree itself relevant?

So the decree itself and the terms of the property settlement, it showed that at the time that the decree was finalized, there was only partial payment on the settlement.

That there was still more that needed to be paid by a certain date.

And then the case was closed and nothing further was filed.

Mr. Roy would have testified, as discussed at the motion eliminate hearing, that there was money still owed on that settlement and that these checks were authorized as part of that.

The court didn't, and the court didn't prohibit him from testifying about that.

The court didn't.

But you never asked.

The trial council never asked.

You're right. There was overarching testimony about money owed in a divorce and still owes me money, doesn't owe me money.

But the existence of the property settlement and the decree and the fact that it may or may not have been settled was relevant because it goes to Ms. Holland's motive or bias

to fabricate in this instance to later denies to authorize these checks.

There were two checks, right?

Yes.

One of them, the $3200 check, was according to the defendant, was for a debt owed by items stolen from the RV and not for the divorce debt.

So given the fact that one of the two checks in issue was acknowledged not to relate to the divorce debt,

it strikes me as even stronger that the divorce decree was irrelevant.

As Your Honor notes, there were two charges, however.

And if one of the checks, as Mr. White testified, he believed was authorized towards payment of what she owed him in the divorce settlement.

Did he take that position?

Well, we have to look at the two checks separately.

And the $3200 check, I agree, is not related to the divorce, but because the other one is, I mean, did he really make that distinction?

I didn't get that impression from reading the briefs.

It's not clear in the record, and there's not a lot of discussion about this RV and how it played into the divorce settlement.

That all may have probably would have been flushed out more if this had been allowed.

But it would not have been overly confusing.

The questions, going back, Justice Lynch, to your point, the questions that the state brought out, the state brought out this information.

First, they found a motion to eliminate, to keep out the decree, and then they brought out, did you only money in a divorce and did you pay him?

It left a misleading impression because Mr. White contested she still owed him money, but without being able to confront her with the evidence that this is a reasonable plea.

But the court didn't prohibit that.

If I understood what the court said is, this decree was issued in 2010.

It says that she is required to pay him money.

She's only paid part of it, and she has to pay the rest by, I thought it was June 2011.

This doesn't show whether, this decree doesn't show whether she paid it or not.

So showing the, and she didn't dispute that she had paid money.

So, if the question is, you know, sort of, the real question, it seems to me, what the court was focusing on, is this is kind of an accounting.

It's not, the decree itself is irrelevant because she's admitted she owed money.

And so the question simply is, and that's all the decree would show is that she owed money.

So the question is, did she pay it or not, the decree can't answer that question.

What Ms. Holland testified to, although a bit confusingly, was that she paid him money for the divorce.

Not that she owed him money or still owed him money, and in fact later testified it would seem that she felt she did not owe him money.

So, Mr. Roy's testimony that she still owes me for the divorce is then in direct contrast to her testimony, I paid him all the money for the divorce.

But Justice Lynn's point is well taken. The fact that the decree says you owe him what, $115,000 or something like that, and you pay so much now and so much later.

The decree doesn't say anything about whether and to what extent the balance was paid. Nothing.

It does not, and that's why it would have been, that's why it was an unsustainable exercise of discretion to exclude it and any follow-up questioning.

But the follow-up questioning have created a trial within a trial, whereas, okay, she owed this, when did she pay what?

Well, no, I dispute that. We've got receipts. We don't have receipts. The trial court could well have been concerned that this was going to end up a trial within a trial on accounting issues.

The trial court did indicate that it thought it would be a trial-to-trial concern about the equities, although there was no discussion of contesting that original settlement.

But it would not have been a trial within a trial. It was entirely possible. A trial is about contested facts.

Certainly there would have been contested facts, and he could have presented his argument, no, she hasn't paid me what.

Well, couldn't all of that have happened? In fact, isn't that really what happened? Two versions here, and he didn't even pursue the questioning that the trial court gave him permission to pursue.

So two points in your response. No, it's not what fully happened here, because, yes, there were two versions, but the underlying facts about why his belief that she owed him money

was a reasonable belief because of the amount of this decree and how much she would have owed him and why it would have justified a check of a significant amount was not flushed out.

And it so did prejudice him in presenting his defense. I'm sorry. Go ahead.

And on your second point as to whether or not the follow-up question that he was that the court would have allowed him to ask on cross-examination was simply, did you pay him everything you owed in the divorce?

That had already been asked and answered on direct. It did not give Mr. Roy anything more than what the jury had already heard.

But the decree wouldn't have given him anything more either.

The ability to ask her about the decree and for her to be able to respond as to how she thought she had paid it or not paid it may have.

Her testimony was scattered. She said, maybe, I think, for the divorce.

And was it his position that she authorized him to have the two blank checks to meet his obligation under the decree? Was that his position at trial?

That was his testimony at trial, and then they also discussed, as you noted, one was noted something about possessions related to an RV.

Can I just ask, did he, I want to make sure we sort of have this very clear, did he say in his testimony, she told me I could use these checks and sign her name to them because she owed me money?

Did he say, in other words, it's one thing if he said, I believe that she owed me money.

So what? That doesn't mean that if I owe the bank some money and I haven't paid it, that doesn't mean the bank can come in and clean out my house or there's processes for that.

So that's what I'm asking, did he say she authorized me to use, to sign her name to these checks?

My recollection of the testimony is that he did say she authorized me to have these checks and sign these checks in satisfaction of the money she owed me and that she acknowledged she owed me money.

But if she still owed him the other half of the money, why didn't he write himself a check for $50,000 instead of 10 or whatever it was?

His testimony was that there was a discussion about how much she received as part of her monthly stipend and she asked him to keep the checks under a certain amount.

What do you say about the state's harmless error argument?

Given the highly suspicious circumstances concerning the way in which the checks were written and negotiated and cashed at different banks on the same and dated different dates, et cetera, et cetera, that even if there was some error, this was really harmless.

It was not harmless. Certainly the state has raised other pieces of evidence that they believe supports their case.

But this piece of evidence, because it goes to both Ms. Holland's motive and bias and also the reasonableness of Mr. Roy's belief, if the jury based on this evidence had found that it was reasonable for him to think that she did, in fact,

authorize him and that she has motive now.

And so he thought it was reasonable and so he thought it was, well, let's see, I'm getting these checks both at the same time. I think it's reasonable for me to take this money.

So I think I'll write them out with different dates. I think I'll cash one at one branch of the bank and one at the other branch of the bank, because it's completely reasonable.

I mean, couldn't a jury say what?

Given that Mr. Roy was not allowed to get into this at all, I think that this court cannot make the termination that was harmless, because we don't know how the answers to her questions would have panned out and what more he would have said about the divorce decree at trial.

And so because of that, we can't make the termination that it was entirely harmless.

But at least as to one check, the $3200 check, arguably, that argument can be made because he, in fact, testified it wasn't to make up for the marital debt. It was for articles stolen from the RV.

So that carves out at least one check.

Based on the testimony in this record it does, although I would still say that without knowing what would have been more testified to about how this RV played into the settlement, perhaps it would have come out differently and been seen more related by the jury if this had been allowed to be fleshed out.

And that's why we'd argue that it's not harmless.

On the issue of the travel restriction, the state concedes its fundamental right and includes the right to reside. This is the flip side of the coin of the banishment that you can't go into certain town or certain county or certain portion of the state.

And this is simply just too broad a restriction regardless of whether or not you use a test where you're looking at whether it's narrowly tailored or a reasonableness test as the state suggests.

Well, isn't this a little bit different in the sense that this didn't prohibit him from traveling anywhere. It just said he can't reside.

So if he could have, you know, if his mother resided in Kansas, he could have gone to Kansas to visit her or he could have, if he needed, if he wanted to go to Disneyland or something, or Disney World, he could have done that.

He just couldn't reside in Kansas or Florida or California.

Certainly it had that provision, but if his mother lived in Kansas and he said he wanted to go live with her and care for her in her old age, this would not have allowed him to do that.

Or if it was deemed most appropriate for his rehabilitation, the state argues he could have gone back and asked for a modification if the role supported that.

But he shouldn't have to do that because at the outset this was too broad to keep him from residing in any other state.

And didn't actually fit the findings that the court made. The state argued that the court made findings that the sentencing that he had a history of failing to abide and failing to register and hiding his activities.

I don't see that anywhere in the record of the sentencing hearing what the court found at transcript 18 was that he had a serious record just regard to the law and low chances of rehabilitation and needed significant supervision.

And the court gave him significant supervision in the form of probation after he completed his prison sentence.

But the requirement that he reside in Hampshire is not related to supervision. It was more of a, we're going to keep you close so we can punish you again if you do anything wrong.

I suppose could have said if the argument was made to him, alright, if I don't have the authority to make such an order, I won't suspend his sentence.

So maybe this is one of those cases. Be careful what you wish for.

I know the state advances that argument. I don't think the record clearly reflects that the court only suspended the sentence and gave probation because it also wanted a residency restriction.

The court does not talk at any length about why it gives the residency restriction. So I think to jump to the fact that they would not have.

No, but isn't, but I think what Justice Conway is saying isn't as a matter, I mean for us to sort of narrowly construe a court's authority in this regard.

Isn't there, you know, it wouldn't the likely result be that courts will be dissent in cases where a court might have said, okay, a suspended sentence is okay here because I'm going to have these conditions,

one of which is the person is going to be in New Hampshire and if he or she screws up, it'll be really easy to get them back and will, you know, and impose some punishment.

If I can't do that, then the risks are, you know, then the balance tips in favor of I'm going to put them in jail.

I don't think so. And I would also say that if this court were to construe it in this way, it would also suggest that in every case of a suspended sentence,

a court may prefer that the person is nearby and easily supervised and would order a residency requirement in every suspended sentence.

Your client runs a risk though, because if we agreed with you, we'd send it back for resensing, right?

I would suggest that the court does not need to do that.

Because of the record, the trial court makes no indication that he's only suspending so that he can have this residency requirement.

It also has the five years of probation, which includes significance and supervision.

So the residency requirement standing alone only affects the final two years of the sentence.

And so I think in this case, there certainly may be a case where the record would more fully indicate the need for resentencing.

I don't think the record indicates that in this case. Thank you.

Thank you.

Good afternoon. May it please the court. I'm Susan McGinnis. I'm here today representing the state of New Hampshire.

I'd be happy to take questions at any time.

The decree. The court really, you've hit it right in the head.

The decree didn't answer the question of whether the debt was still owed.

And part of the problem here is the defendant didn't want to just admit that one provision about the payment.

What the defendant asked to do is admit the entire property settlement divorce decree,

testify about all the things he'd done for the victim while they were married,

why it was appropriate for him to get that done.

So this was sort of a jury null, this was an effort by the defendant at jury nullification.

Even though I may have done this, I really got screwed in the divorce and so don't find me guilty.

I believe that's really what he was trying to do to say fair is fair.

And that's the exact thing that the state said was the problem because if you let this in,

even if it has some minor relevance, if you let it in, there's a chance the jury will say,

well, she owed him a lot of money, fair is fair, what he took was less than he owed.

And that was a real risk, but the defendant didn't want to admit just the property settlement provision,

that one provision about payment.

So was that redaction issue discussed with counsel about and proposed that this just come in this one section?

The defense never suggested that they could bring in the one provision.

And also the court said the provision doesn't prove what the defendant was trying to prove.

It proved there was a debt owed in 2011 and that the debt had to be paid when the divorce decree was final,

which was in June 2011 and there had been no enforcement actions by the defendant after that time.

So if you even allow this one provision in, it doesn't prove what he's trying to prove.

And then you get into, well, do you think she paid it? Did she pay it?

Why don't you think she paid it? Why didn't you try to enforce it?

And the answer to part of that is that he was incarcerated during that time.

And the other problem with this is when this came up, the victim testified,

the court said you can ask about the divorce decree and whether money was owed from the divorce decree.

So the state asked her, did you pay him money? She said, yes. The state said, what for?

She said, I think for the divorce.

I mean, this woman was clearly very confused on the witness stand and very rattled.

And I take it inferentially at least that she had some sort of disability that may have impeded her ability to testify.

She had multiple disabilities and what's clear from the trial record is what the defendant wanted to get into too

is that her parents were having her put in a mental hospital.

She wasn't going to the hospital for a medical condition.

She was going to a mental hospital because her parents were concerned about her mental stability.

So she was clearly confused and the defense keeps saying the court wouldn't let them ask the questions.

The court told them you can ask her, did you owe money from the divorce?

How much did you pay? Did you pay all of it?

He was told he could ask those questions and he never asked them.

And he was also, he was told he could testify that she still owed him money from the divorce

and that she'd only made partial payment.

And he did in fact testify that he believed she owed him money from the divorce

and that she had authorized him to write the checks to pay back that debt.

But the RB contents, what happened is after this all came up, the court said,

no, you can't admit the decree but you can ask questions.

The victim showed up the following.

The defendant said, well, if you're not going to let me bring in the decree, I'm not going to recall her.

And the court said, well, we don't know what's going to happen, so state have her available.

She shows up that next day with receipts the defendant signed in 2012 that she says

we're in settlement of the decree and it's for a $75,000 for an RV.

So then you're going to get into, well, was the RV supposed to come with the contents?

Does you allege the son-in-law stole it?

Then you're going to get into a debate over whether he stole the property,

whether it was part of it.

Let me interrupt you.

Signed receipts for $75,000 that the money was used to buy an RV?

The defendant, the victim gave the defendant an RV and he signed a receipt saying it was worth $75,000

and it's an RV that was not mentioned in the divorce settlement.

So what was clear is that-

He got credit.

He got credit.

He got more than he was owed when he got the RV.

So this is what you're going to get into.

Instead of a trial about whether she authorized him to write checks,

you're getting into a trial about whether she actually paid him for the divorce.

But if I'm understanding correctly, the court, we don't have any ruling by the court

that the defendant couldn't have asked about-

I mean, the defendant could have recalled the victim, presumably, and said,

well, you've got these receipts, but you know, this is bogus or something like that.

The court didn't prohibit the defendant from doing that.

The defendant just never attempted to do that.

He never did it.

The court told him you can ask about the payments that were made

and why she feels she doesn't owe you any money from the divorce.

And he chose not to do that.

Because $64,500 and $75,000 adds up to more than $115.

Yes, it does.

He got more than he was entitled to.

And that would undermine his argument that she authorized him to sign the checks

because she still owed him money.

Yeah, and what undermined it, too, is one of the checks at RV Contents.

And quite frankly, the other seven checks said-

This trial is about two checks, but the defendant said he stole eight.

She gave him eight.

And the other one said security check failed.

He said he wrote that on there because she should know

she should be more safe where she lives.

Well, obviously she left her door open so the neighbor could feed the cats

and he helped himself.

And imagine how the neighbor felt when she looked under the bed

and there he was.

I mean, his story, on the harmless error argument,

his story made no sense.

He, you know, it made no sense.

I forgot about the end of the bed.

Yes, he hid.

Well, the first time he's in the refrigerator,

and as soon as she opens the door, he slams the door,

does the refrigerator door and is startled.

The second time he's hiding under the bed,

he says it's because he thinks it's the victim's mother.

He must have been really terrifying.

I know.

He takes checks out of the middle of a checkbook.

He caches them at different branches of the bank at different times.

I mean, his story made no sense.

It doesn't, this decree is completely, it wasn't relevant.

It didn't show what he wanted it to show.

It really would have led to a trial within a trial

and in the end it didn't make any difference.

What about the common...

What about the residency requirement?

The residency requirement.

The court did make a lot of findings.

In addition to the residency requirement,

it required him to comply with the reporting provisions

because he was a sex offender and he had repeatedly failed to register.

And also during, there was a lot of discussion during trial

and during sentencing about the fact that he had had his sister

open a bank account for him in her name

so there would not be a paper trail

so the authorities could not find him.

After he committed this crime,

he fled with the victim's money to Connecticut

and the police took them a while to locate him

because the bank account was in somebody else's name

and he was using an address that he'd never lived at

so he has a history of hiding his whereabouts,

hiding from the police, hiding his conduct,

not registering as a sex offender.

So this residency requirement is reasonable.

Is there anything alter-veries about it though?

We have cases in which we say

unless there's express authority for doing these things

in terms of sentencing court, you can't do it.

I don't think so.

So I think there has to be a justification for it

if it's not authorized and it has to be

reasonably related to the goals of sentencing.

The court can impose a lot of suspended sentence conditions, I mean.

But according to counsel, one wasn't a quid pro quo for the other.

I'll suspend the sentence if you live in New Hampshire.

I think if you read the record, that's what the state said.

If he doesn't want this condition,

then you can just impose the sentence

and the court made it very clear that it was concerned,

that it wanted to give him a chance to be rehabilitated.

But over 20 years that had never happened,

he'd never complied with any conditions.

He would, you know, of bad behavior pretty much the whole time.

And so the court was very concerned.

I really don't believe the court would have suspended the sentence.

So your position is that there is no legal impediment

to imposing such a condition?

No, as long as it's reasonably related to the goals of sentencing

and narrowly tailored to meet those goals.

And here it was because if he has...

he can travel anywhere he wants.

He can visit anywhere he wants.

He can live anywhere in New Hampshire he wants.

But he has to maintain a New Hampshire residence,

which means that his IDs and everything will have a New Hampshire address.

Then if he's in another state and commits bad conduct,

it's more likely New Hampshire will find out.

New Hampshire will keep track of whether he's registering as a sex offender

because he'll be required to...

as a resident, he'll be required to register here.

They really can't monitor whether he's registering other places.

So here it's a deterrent to him if he has to reside here

and have a New Hampshire address.

And it also protects the public because the state can monitor what he's doing.

If we were to conclude that the restrictions aren't proper,

then what's the remedy?

I don't think you can just strike the condition

because it's not at all clear the court would have suspended

all or even part of that sentence without that requirement,

the ability to monitor him.

So I think you really would have to send it back

for resentencing for the court to consider

whether suspension is still appropriate, absent that condition.

I don't think you can just strike the condition

and say, fine, the sentence is suspended

and the condition's not there.

There's obviously a reason the court felt that it needed to do that

in order to suspend the sentence.

It didn't make it a condition of anything else.

It just made it a condition of the suspension.

So I believe you'd have to remand for resentencing

would be the appropriate remedy.

There's nothing further?

Thank you.

Case submitted, the court is adjourned.
