This is case 2014 0773 Scott McCarthy versus Manchester Police Department at all.

Mr. Branch?

May I please support and opposing counsel?

I'm B.J. Branch.

I represent Scott McCarthy, and we're here from our perspective for two issues.

First, we believe the lower court mischaracterized the initial claim here as an intentional

tort claim, and assuming that you find that that's the case, we believe that the underlying

municipal immunity statute is unconstitutional.

In terms of the intentional tort situation, certainly the underlying claim was alleged

as a negligence claim, and certainly since the time of...

Can I just ask you, Mr. Branch, if you say that it's unconstitutional, the municipal

immunity statute's unconstitutional, because it differs from the state statute, from

the statute regarding state actors.

Yes.

Okay.

So, let's assume that we agreed with you, that we said that's true.

Yes.

Isn't your problem here that what the trial court did in effect, even if it was sort

of wrong on its construction of the municipal immunity statute, it really gave your client

the benefit of the state statute, because it compared what your client did with whether

or not...

I'm sorry, what your client's allegations are with what would happen if it had been a

state actor, as opposed to municipal actor, and said you would lose even if it was

a state actor.

Yes.

So, why isn't that...

I mean, it was even if we said that the...

Even if we said the municipal immunity statute was unconstitutional, okay, so it's unconstitutional.

You haven't been armed, because you wouldn't have won, even if this had been a state actor.

Well, I respectfully disagree.

The factual matter here is that by classifying it as an intentional tort, it said that all

that had to be followed was the analysis you recently laid out with a hearing on whether

the person was acting in good faith or not, and that was the end of the inquiry.

Whereas in a negligence case, you certainly can be acting in good faith and in the scope

of your employment, and still not act in due care.

And if you look at the sovereign immunity statute, specifically 541B191B, that authorizes

a negligence claim against the state of New Hampshire, whereas if it's...

But doesn't it say that claims for defamation are not allowed unless the person did not reasonably

believe?

And that's...

If reasonable beliefs, I think it's subsection 1D, or maybe it's 1C of 541B19.

And the trial court said that there was a reasonable belief.

So if you look at the construction of the statute, it's D, RSA 541B191D.

It says any claim arising out of an intentional tort, including assault, battery, et cetera,

et cetera.

And libel and slander.

I'm sorry?

And libel and slander.

Oh, yes, and libel, slander, and all those other things.

I would certainly not say that we haven't been brought within the language of the

statute.

That's not my argument.

But what it does say there is it clearly says that if it's an intentional tort, if the defamation

is intentional, then you only do this scope of official duties and reasonable belief

in lawfulness.

Is that really what the statute says, though?

I hope so.

It says arising out of an intentional tort, including libel and slander.

Yes.

It doesn't say only if the libel and slander is alleged to be intentional.

But it would seem that the language that says the predicate language, it talks about it being

an intentional tort, would seem to very clearly say what we're saying here is that there's

two types of claims.

There's the B, there's the 541B191B claim that talks about you can bring a claim

if they're not exercising due care.

That's clearly the negligence formulation, and then by having set out the standard when

it is a negligence formulation, they also say, and intentional torts, and we're including

all of these things in the intentional tort formulation.

But our argument is that that statute is making the assumption that you have brought

an intentional tort.

So it's saying it's if you're saying depending on how the plaintiff pleads it, defamation

done intentionally is going to be treated different from defamation done negligently.

Yes.

That's the bottom line of your argument.

Yes.

And we may end up disagreeing with our interpretation of the statute here, because I have a question

as to whether 541B19 actually says that defamation is only included in this statute

if it is intentional defamation as opposed to negligent defamation.

I think that the state statutory language here is trying to make the point that there

are certain torts, certainly including libel and slander, that can come in an intentional

form and in a negligent form.

I think that's the whole point.

And B would suggest that if you bring a defamation claim against a state police

officer and you argue that they negligently published it, for example, left a defamatory

statement.

Of course, your opponent is saying that at the bottom of all of this is a failure to

state a claim because there was no false statement of fact, and therefore no defamation

at all.

That's what he's arguing to us.

But that's for a jury to determine whether, in fact, truth is a defense, but it is

not a basis for dismissing a claim to assert that something is true.

And I would also suggest to you it's not from, yes, some plaintiff's lawyers, I can't

imagine who, would characterize claims as negligence for insurance purposes.

Yes, this happens.

But it is ultimately for the jury to make a determination.

If you bring a negligence claim and you assert it as such, you still have to prove

the elements of a negligence claim.

The distinction that you're identifying between a negligent and intentional defamation, is that

one that we've recognized in our case law?

Well, I think it's been recognized in all case law since times versus Sullivan.

I mean, that set out the fact that there are not only different levels of conduct that

have to be asserted in particular, not only that there are different levels of conduct

that can be asserted, but that you have to assert the specific conduct for the specific

individual.

Obviously, if there would be no intentional tort against a public figure, excuse me, there

would be no negligent tort against a public figure, because you have to prove maliciousness

and how that's defined.

So it's very clearly when you look at that case, they're saying it's very important,

the form of action, if you will, that the allegedly wrongful statement is made

in, okay?

Because clearly, in this case, our argument is you have a person who is in the business

of issuing press releases for the city of Manchester, and to issue a press release

that says someone is in fact guilty of a crime when they haven't been adjudicated as such

and when all charges were dismissed, it does become a crime, and they're not on a

technicality.

They never found a victim.

No one ever testified.

The blog was written before the dismissal of the case, correct?

Which blog?

The blog that you're complaining about.

Yes.

Was written before your client was, it wasn't a finding of not guilty, it just was a dismissal

of no process?

Yes.

Because the evidence wasn't...

There was no victim to testify, and we alleged it didn't happen.

The blog was written before that happened.

Yes, absolutely.

Okay.

And that is why you don't use the words in fact.

That is why someone who's in the business of writing press releases, who's not involved

in the heat of the chase, if you will, has the opportunity to say at least the words

alleged or believed, to put in the words in fact that Mr. McCarthy was in fact the

person who exposed his penis to a minor child.

As in today's Twitter world, or whatever, blog world, web world, this has ended his life

in a, or impacted his life in a significant way.

Your opponent makes the point that if the, argues that if the department had simply

posted the sworn complaint to the blog, then it wouldn't be actionable.

Do you agree with that?

Perhaps.

I don't have in my mind's eye, as I sit here, the exact words of the complaint.

But that would be protected, it seems to me, by the privilege of a, there's defamation

privileges, including statements that are made within the course of time.

And taken as a whole, how is this materially different than what was in the complaint?

Use of the words in fact, I think a jury would look at those words and say, it's one thing

to say, alleged did do this, or whatever, it's another thing to say that he was in fact

the person.

But didn't the state have a witness, besides the victim, that saw it?

So I mean, what is the, and the circumstances, I mean, the circumstances of his being

at the, being found at the house later with the same shirt, and admitting he

was in man.

Well, that's why they may, you know, the fact that he was not convicted because the child

didn't show, it wasn't available or whatever.

So what?

I mean, the.

Well, there's also, if we had been, if we were allowed to go to trial, I would have

produced and can produce an alibi witness.

I can also produce a timeline, and I can produce a reason why his name was

alleged within this context, and why the person had the plate number, and why they

had the, it would definitely be an intentional tortoise to this person, why he had

the plate number, why he had the collar of the truck, and why he had the, what was

on the sweatshirt.

There is other, you'll never know.

So you're saying that this is, that this whole, that the complainant who

first reported this to the police was, had some acts to grind against your

client?

Absolutely.

Okay.

Okay.

Very definitely.

Okay.

And there's a lot of evidence, well, I mean, in my opinion, there's

significant evidence to call into question his motivation here.

And, and some evidence to suggest that the police officer, that the police

should have known this?

No.

No.

They got a call, they went to the scene, and they, they wrote it down.

Nothing wrong with anything so far, nothing wrong with, to arrest him.

But to put on a blog, a non-court filing, a separate and distinct

publication with the words he was in fact guilty of it.

It says the detectives of the Manchester Police Department Juvenile

Division now say, now say that McCarthy 41 was in fact the man who was

exposing himself.

Yes.

Is, isn't a reasonable reading of that statement that it is their

conclusion, their conclusion, their conclusion that it was the one?

That'd be a forgery to determine.

Well, before we get there.

Yes.

Let's go back to the first year of law school in our

torts class, when we are all told that there are certain torts that are,

have, are negligence, that sound in case, and there are certain torts that

are intentional.

Yes.

And we are all taught that defamation, libel slander, is an

intentional tort.

And so why wouldn't we have to presume that the legislature had that

traditional law school definition in mind and didn't pick up on, or

hadn't picked up on, the niceties that you would parse, and understanding

that there can be negligent defamation?

Well, I took torts two.

I assume so.

Yes, which, which got into negligence.

And the fact that it would spend a lot of time with these ones that

follow multiple causes of action.

But the bottom line is we have.

But it doesn't make it a negligence action.

Well, look, look at, look at misrepresentation, Your Honor,

under RSA 541-B19, 1D.

Now, I'll view read it.

Uh-huh, you'll have me, okay.

It says any claim arising out of an intentional tort, okay.

And it lists some including misrepresentation.

We have separate jury instructions for

negligent misrepresentation and intentional misrepresentation.

So are they, are we to believe that by using of the word misrepresentation

there, that there is no such thing as negligent misrepresentation?

Well, I guess what I'm getting at is that even if it's negligent

defamation, there's an element of intentional conduct involved.

And that's how it got, that's how it got named, yes.

That's how it got named an intentional tort.

Well, I would say that in misrepresentation there is an element

of negligence involved, and yet it's labeled as an intentional tort.

And we recognize negligent misrepresentation as a cause of action.

And we recognize, and the restatement makes it clear,

that liability from negligence can flow from intentional conduct and

negligent conduct.

I mean, this case was dismissed.

Some of these issues are in fact for a jury to decide.

That's the point.

So in terms of the-

So would the jury in this case have to decide whether the detectives

believed or didn't believe that your client was the man exposing himself?

You answered the question, well, that's for the jury.

But how do you challenge someone's belief?

Are you going to say, well, a detective so and so on the stand?

You really didn't believe he was the one.

And you lied when you said you believed he was the one?

No, but you can-

It's not a jury question.

You can be mistaken.

And you can be negligent in making a-

The issue here isn't what they believed.

I would agree with you that if they tested, if that statement-

That might be a reasonable interpretation.

Well, it might be.

But a reasonable interpretation is for a jury to some extent.

And when it comes to-

You quibble with the word in fact.

Let's take the words in fact out.

Okay.

And it now reads, detectives of the Manchester PD Juvenile Division now

say that McCarthy 41 was the man.

You still have the problem?

Less so.

The in fact is-

Ah, so what's the difference?

What's the difference?

In fact.

In fact?

Yes.

How does that change the underlying meaning of this sentence?

Because it implies a certainty.

If they had said believe or allege, if they had said-

This is a professional person who issues press releases.

They are even saying they, you know-

Aaron Hernandez is still referred to as to have alleged the triple murder.

Okay.

So, or single murder.

So from our standpoint to have-

It infects the publication with an imprimatur of certainty

that comes from the position that the police officer has,

and this being a police blog.

And whether it was reasonable for the police to believe it

is very definitely a jury question.

It doesn't mean that they're lying.

You can reasonably believe something and be mistaken.

Thank you.

You're welcome.

I didn't reserve for bottle time.

I noticed that.

I appreciate that.

May it please the court, Bob Maher for the city, and Sergeant Russo.

And by all means, I know they reserve five minutes to jump in

and ask a question if you wish.

As I understand the issues in the case at this point,

the plaintiff agrees that if, and I believe he's arguing

that the statute is unconstitutional as applied,

not on its face.

But if it is constitutional, then the RSA507B5 bars this claim.

The way that the plaintiff gets to unconstitutionality

is arguing that, as we just discussed,

that he's pled a defamation claim as a negligence claim.

And then we go to the dicta in the Huckins case

where this court said perhaps if you could bring a claim

against a state actor and not against a municipal actor,

a negligence claim, then there might

be problems with the equal protection.

Well, isn't there really a problem?

If that's true, if there needs to be some equivalence

between what you can sue municipal officers for

or municipality and what you can sue state officers

or state for, isn't there a problem

with these two statutes in that the only claims that

are allowed against municipalities

are those that arise out of the operation of property

or motor vehicles.

Whereas as to the state, there is not that restriction.

Well, that seems like that's probably

the lion's share of the claims.

But those are negligence claims.

And I think in this case, it's just

explicit in both statutes that they both bar libel claims.

That's what this is, written defamation.

And therefore, there is equivalence.

And therefore, there's no need to go beyond that.

There may be a case under a strict negligence analysis

where you can't bring a claim against the state,

and you could bring one against the municipality.

But this isn't that case.

I mean, I think, as Justice Hick said,

an intentional tort, which is what

I would think of as defamation, is a reasonable interpretation.

So when the legislature puts it in the state statute

and explicitly lists libel, I think we can rely on that.

And I mean, that's our statutory construction.

We don't have to look at it.

It's not ambiguous.

We don't go any farther than that.

And that would bar the claim.

And as we know, when you're going

to argue that a statute's unconstitutional,

this court favors finding constitutionality

if at all possible.

So in this case, that would seem to be the end of it.

In terms of the actual language of the blog,

after we did the evidentiary hearing,

there was no objection to that procedure.

I've heard actually a couple of Superior Court judges

are doing that under the statute now

to resolve that issue about reasonable belief

in the lawfulness of conduct.

Based on the court's order, one of the court's rationales

was that, as Justice Conboy pointed out,

they could have just put the complaint on the blog post,

which doesn't have any qualifying language

like alleged or anything like that,

which is, as far as I know, is the same for all criminal

complaints.

They just state it as a fact, or could have quoted it,

which is what Judge Nicolosi did on page Roman numeral 9

in plaintiff's brief, which just stated flatly

did knowingly expose his genitals

to perform any act of gross lewdness

at 14 Pine Street, Manchester.

No qualification language, nothing like that.

And so that can't be defamation.

It's part of a criminal complaint.

Now, when you're charged with something like this,

yes, there are consequences to that.

And that's just one of the trade-offs

that, as a society, we make in terms

of a criminal justice system.

We have to balance apprehending people.

And with the off chance that it's

going to be uncomfortable when these things come to light.

We don't do these things in secret.

Part of that's constitutional.

But I think that's just a trade-off

that exists in our jurisprudence.

And I pointed out that there is a case.

There really wasn't much dispute with it.

But the Coulada versus New Hampshire

Department of Labor case construing 541-19,

that was a liable case.

And it wasn't discussed whether it was intentional or not.

But there also were some allegations in this case

in the writ of summons, which is attached to the appendix

to our brief, of ill-will, bad motive, and things like that,

which are similar to what was put in the Coulada case.

So I mean, I think if we follow precedent,

we don't have to go that far.

The state statute includes libel.

The municipal statute includes libel.

The plaintiff couldn't bring a claim under either statute.

Therefore, there's no disparity

between bringing a claim hypothetically

against a state actor and municipal actor.

Therefore, no unconstitutionality.

The plaintiff agrees with absent unconstitutionality

that the municipal statute bars his claim,

and that should be it.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Council may come forward in the matter of.
