This is case 2014-0537, state of New Hampshire versus Sean Abbott.

Do you need a new hall?

May it please the court.

Sarah New Hall for Sean Abbott.

I'd like to make two brief points on the first issue and one point on the sufficiency issue.

First, RSA 599-1 is clear that the only type of trial permissible in a de novo appeal is a jury trial.

And state v. Bilk and its predecessors make clear that that jury trial is a fundamental right guaranteed both by the statute and by the New Hampshire Constitution.

It's what makes our two-tier system constitutionally permissible.

Further, Mr. Abbott is not contesting the state's power to generally amend or substitute complaints.

And regardless of which terminology is used in this case, Mr. Abbott prevails because in the misdemeanor appeal for the statute,

he's guaranteed a right to de novo jury trial.

And the state's general power to amend and substitute, it's improper to use that to circumvent that statutory right.

What do you say should happen as a result?

What Mr. Abbott is seeking is a remand to the Superior Court for a jury trial on a class A misdemeanor, the remaining class A misdemeanor charge.

I do think he's entitled to the benefit of the acquittal and the bench trial that he was obligated to have.

Am I missing something, or wasn't he convicted of B's, class B?

At which time, Your Honor?

In the Superior Court.

In Superior Court, he was convicted, I guess let me back up to answer that question.

In the district court, he was convicted of two class A misdemeanors and noted his appeal.

That went up for the de novo jury trial, pursuant to 599-1.

The state then asked the court permission to substitute new class B misdemeanor information.

Thereby extinguishing any risk of incarceration?

Yes.

Then why does a jury right survive at that point?

Because in this court, holding in state view, Bill, and under 599-1, it's that conviction on the class A misdemeanor

that guaranteed him the right to a jury trial.

Statutorily or constitutionally?

We would argue both.

But he's no longer convicted of the class A misdemeanors when the state dismisses a null process or whatever it was that the state did and substitutes class B's.

They're gone.

Well, it just as in Bill, the state argued that the defendant was no longer convicted of class A misdemeanor

because he was given a sentence that would operate to be administratively amended to a class B.

And this court held that it was not proper that the right to the jury trial could not be frustrated by interpreting 625-9 in that way,

that that amendment would be an impermissible frustration of that fundamental right to a jury trial.

That is what this court held in state view.

I guess the thing I don't understand is what is the difference?

I take it you don't not contest that if the state charged somebody with a class A misdemeanor and they filed a notice

and they did all the stuff that Blunt says they have to do.

And then on the day of trial, before they started the trial in the district court,

the prosecutor said we want to reduce this to a B, there would be nothing that the defendant could do about that.

I would agree.

So I guess the thing that I'm not clear on is how does it, you know, in terms of the substance of it?

How does it make any difference that the prosecutor didn't do that until after there had been a trial in the district court

which by appealing the defendant wiped off the books?

Why isn't it now it goes to the superior court?

Why shouldn't we really view that as the prosecutor can do the same thing in the superior court in this brand new trial?

Say, listen, before the trial starts, I'm reducing this to a class B. I don't quite see what...

It's not permissible because of this state's, and the way this court has interpreted this state's two-tier system.

The state certainly urges this court to view this as like a remersal or a man that the conviction was somehow annulled, it doesn't exist.

However, our two-tier system this court has found is constitutionally permissible only because there is an absolute right of appeal

to the superior court where the trial is de novo before a jury.

That is what secures the constitutionality of our two-tier system.

Here the state can charge someone with a class A misdemeanor in district court.

They're entitled to a jury trial on that class A misdemeanor.

They don't get it in district court because of our two-tier system.

They don't get it until they get to superior court.

Now they can frustrate that way.

But what I'm saying is when you say they're entitled, they're not entitled to it unless the trial in the district court actually starts

because you've agreed before that, before that the state could charge somebody with a class A misdemeanor.

And I mean, with class A misdemeanor things probably aren't that serious.

But I mean, presumably the person could be, their name could be spewed all over the headlines of the paper.

They did some aggravated DWI or whatever.

And then before the trial starts, the state says, I'm reducing this to a class B misdemeanor.

And the defendant couldn't say, well, wait a minute.

I want my day in court. I want my day before a jury.

And you can't do this.

You agree they could do that?

We agree. But once that trial starts, once that trial starts on that class A misdemeanor,

and especially as in Belk and as in this case there's a conviction on that class A misdemeanor,

our two-tier system provides that because of that conviction on the class A misdemeanor,

regardless of the sentence as this court held in Belk,

which could administratively by statute amended to a B,

here the state is the one seeking to change it to a B,

that can't be done because under our constitutional system,

under our New Hampshire fundamental right to trial by a jury when facing incarceration,

that that person is entitled to a jury trial.

Your position is essentially that that right, the statutory and constitutional right,

attaches at the time that first trial begins.

And what happens after that is sort of irrelevant in terms of a right to a jury trial.

Yes, and that's why this is different than your traditional sort of reversed and remand

or a retrial after a mis-trial because of this two-tier system.

This is a two-step process.

And what the court can't lose, or the court not to lose sight of

is that in that two-step process there is a guarantee,

a constitutional guarantee and a statutory guarantee,

that it shall be a de novo appeal by jury trial.

I mean, I would note, Mr. Abbott.

So you also rely on the statute which says if a defendant waves jury trial,

he doesn't get a bench trial in superior court.

He goes back to district court for imposition of sentence.

Correct.

So your argument is given that statute on top of our two-tier system,

there should never be a bench trial in superior court.

Exactly, Your Honor.

And two places in the five-

If the prosecutor wanted to, couldn't he or she commence a class B misdemeanor trial

in the superior court?

The superior court has plenary criminal jurisdiction.

In the first instance, if there were no trial in district court,

certainly they could.

We're not disputing the jurisdiction of the superior court over class Bs.

But two places in 5991, it mentions de novo jury trial.

First, that a person convicted in district court may appeal therefrom

to obtain a de novo jury trial.

And later, as Justice Convoy noted, that in the event the defendant

waves a right to a jury trial, it's remanded.

That right to a jury trial is held solely by the defendant.

The defendant can't opt to have a bench trial.

And here the state has sought to circumvent that right

and opt for a bench trial.

Something that the defendant didn't have any option to do.

There's a case that in 1995 that I don't think either of you cited,

it's state versus guy, where in a paragraph, this court said that

what is done here is absolutely permissible and there is no right

to a jury trial after the charges are marked down to Bs.

You may, I probably was remiss in not asking both of you to brief that.

It's under a preexisting statute, but when you get a chance,

read it and tell me what you think we should do about it.

I'd be happy to file an additional memo.

I'm going to go on my memory on that.

It's a different statute.

Under the prior statute that was permissible.

There were some changes to the statute.

The question was whether they were, the question will be

whether they were meaningful changes.

Well, I think in state we built this court answered that question

and I'll address this more in a written memo for your honor.

It may not be necessary.

I think you've just stated your position.

I think state we built addressed that issue because it was addressing

precisely that issue that a conviction that wasn't an amystimine

or any longer by operation of an administrative statutory provision,

sorry by statutory provision was still considered,

still had to be a class amystimine or in superior court entitled to.

You agree that if that under your theory that he has the constitutional

right to have this is jury trial.

You agree that if he's convicted in superior court,

he can be sentenced for a class amystimine.

Yes.

It would be a trial on a class amystimine and he would face

the possibility of incarceration.

Mr. Abbott understands that.

Quite a risk here when all he got was a suspended thousand dollar fine.

Your honor and it's a risk that Mr. Abbott is aware of and has asserted

his right to that jury trial as I noted in my brief.

There are many reasons why defendant wants to put their case to a jury

and I think the facts of this case may make it clear to the court

why Mr. Abbott was so seeking on the facts of the case.

I would briefly like to make a point about this efficiency.

The testimony about the mens re at the time of the alleged act

of pulling his left hand away.

There's only circumstantial evidence as to his mens re at that time

and it does not exclude the reasonable alternatives

such as the documented medical condition that are consistent

with innocence and were presented to the court.

The act is raised here is that he,

handcuffs was put on his right hand and that he moved his left hand away,

pointed away or however it was described differently by other people.

But this happened after he had been tased twice.

I thought he was tased three times.

My understanding of the facts is that he was tased the third time

after they failed to put a handcuff on his left hand

so he was tased while the handcuff was on his right hand.

But he had been tased twice, fallen down three times,

pushed down the stairs, kicked, pulled and yelled at.

All the time where he was simply asking,

don't hurt me, please stop.

It's reasonable to think that he would have complied with the request

to let them put handcuffs on him if that would stop the physical pain

that he was suffering.

And so reasonable conclusion therefore consistent with innocence

is that he did not know and resist that he did not understand

how to make it stop.

He did not understand what was wanted of him

and that he did not knowingly resist arrested attention

in that case.

The court does no further questions.

Thank you.

May it please the court, Nicholas's court for the state.

I'll take questions anytime.

With regard to Bilk, I don't remember the precise holding in the guy case.

What I do remember is that the trial judge in Bilk relied on the guy case

in her ruling.

I also remember that I was the attorney who conceded error in the Bilk case.

I didn't argue for affirmance.

But you haven't, and this is really the second time,

because we've had that order in what is Blackman or whatever.

This is the second time that the state has not urged us to overrule Bilk.

Well, as I say.

So if you don't want us to overrule Bilk.

If this court cannot distinguish this case from Bilk,

then I think I have to argue that it should overrule Bilk

because it didn't...

It isn't a little late for that.

It may be, but I didn't appreciate,

and I don't think this court took sufficient account

of the effect of the Cook case.

And it's basically saying that when someone who is convicted

in district court appeals for trial de novo,

that district court conviction just disappears completely.

It's no longer relevant to anything.

And you say that 1950 case is still effective,

not withstanding the statute,

the intervening changes in the statute,

which seems to suggest that you're in superior court for a jury trial.

If you waive that, you're back to district court.

I mean, doesn't that have any meaning,

given the fact that Cook was 1950,

and I think the statute was amended as recently as 2011?

Well, I think we can distinguish that because,

in this case, we do have an all-pros,

which we did not have in Bilk.

This is one of the few states,

it's a minority anyway,

in which prosecutors still have the common law power

that null-pros with sole discretion then,

about the only check on the discretion.

Sure, and that's a general proposition

that I think we would all agree with,

but our two-tier system is an odd duck.

And so we have to do our analysis in light of that two-tier system.

We can't ignore that that exists,

and then just say, well, prosecutors can always null-pros

in their total discretion.

I think there's no dispute about that.

But that has to be viewed through the lens

of this two-tiered system that we have,

as has been amended by statute.

Well, unfortunately, there are no other two-tier systems

that have precisely that same statute.

Well, I can...

Can I just ask this once quick,

because I remember looking at this

with some degree of thoroughness

when we had that other case,

the Blackman or whatever it was.

Is there...

In Bilk, we relied on the Duncan versus Louisiana

significantly, which said basically

that it's the time of the...

It's the penalty that could be imposed

at the time the trial starts,

rather than what the judge actually imposes

that sets the measure of

whether you have a constitutional right to a jury trial.

And I could not find, at least at that time,

any of the cases that have dealt with two-tier system.

I think there's maybe Taylor versus Hayes

and some others in the U.S. Supreme Court.

None of the cases that had dealt with two-tier systems

had specifically answered the question

of whether Duncan's rationale should apply

in the context of a two-tiered system

where it really is, in the second stage,

a brand new trial right from the beginning.

And if the judge then cannot impose,

even before that trial starts,

at the second stage, an incarceration,

whether the jury trial should still exist.

But I take it...

You haven't cited anything that says it's since that time.

Either my research wasn't good

or there's something happened since then.

The closest I can come is the two cases I've cited,

the one from Massachusetts and the one from Virginia,

where they said it was basically

a double jeopardy issue.

And they said in Massachusetts it was.

The issue was losing the right to jury trial

because the defendant was convicted in the lower court,

appealed for trial de novo,

at which he would have been entitled to a jury,

and the prosecutor now crossed the case

and then brought not another criminal complaint

but a civil complaint under a new statute.

But the same principle applies

because this is not only a new trial,

it's a new case.

The old case was now crossed

and this is now a new information

and it starts all over again.

There is no continuing jeopardy

of the kind that would be necessary

to retain the right to a jury trial.

But wouldn't we really be overruled?

I mean, this would be sort of too cute

if we did this without,

we'd be effectively overruling the bill.

Wouldn't we because it would just mean

that in the Superior Court the state could,

they could file a new piece of paper

which was essentially the same charge

and say it's a,

therefore, bill doesn't apply.

Well, I don't think it's all that cute,

but again, if this court can see no distinction,

then I think it should overrule bill.

It's all I have.

Nobody's done a stare decisis analysis here.

I think it would be a matter of saying

it was wrongly decided in the first place

because it failed to take account of

just how vitiated the district court conviction is

when it is appealed for trial de novo.

And you would go back to,

is it cooked to stand for that proposition?

Yes.

Okay.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Council may come forward in the matter of CBD.
