This is case 2014-0335, State of New Hampshire versus Kevin J. Murray.

May it please the court, Sarah Newhall for Kevin Murray.

There are three issues before the court, and I'm going to focus on the second issue today.

The error caused by the court not granting two different motions to strike testimony during the testimony of Jacob.

The first statement relates to Jacob making a statement that he was told that his father would slash his throat

if he revealed information or found out information.

That objection to sustained and motion to strike were properly made and preserved

because that objection was in fact sustained and not deferred as the state suggests.

The sustaining of the objection did occur at the bench which left the jury unaware that the objection had been sustained

and therefore unaware that there was evidence that they should not be considering and that they should disregard it.

In all other instances, in fact, the court, when it struck testimony, instructed the jury to disregard.

And on occasion it did strike Jacob's testimony.

It did on several occasions.

You know, this is a really an interesting case because apparently the brother was walking a fine line.

He obviously was, I guess, loved his sister, wanted to support her testimony, loved his father, wanted to support his testimony.

Jacob has limited, he's limited, right? Intellectually, and so at least the way the state's brief conveys this to us,

the jury would have seen all of that, that this boy was all over the place.

So let's assume you're right.

It was error not to advise the jury that in this particular case the testimony should have been stricken

or several other places.

Don't you think that in the big picture, the jury, you know, they're smart, juries are smart,

wouldn't they have gotten that this poor guy was all over the place because his loyalty, he was torn.

His loyalties were torn.

I agree that the testimony reflects that he has love for both his father and his sister.

He testifies to that and that he is torn apart, but what both the first statement

and the second statement where he speculates about when they were doing things,

both show that in that credibility battle that Jacob was undergoing between his father and his sister,

that he had ultimately adopted his sister's version of events and that he believed his sister.

And that's what was so prejudicial about both of these statements is that it showed that Jacob was, in fact,

vouching for his sister by adopting what she had said and parroting back as his own testimony, vouching for her credibility.

On the other hand, I suppose it could be argued that when Jacob reports the business about slitting his throat,

if he tells that that could be argued, that that reflected on his view of his father.

And so the jury shouldn't believe that because he was under this influence of his sister.

You could argue with the other way, seems to me.

Certainly I think Jacob's conflict comes through in the testimony, even in the transcript,

with all of us not having been there, but what it is is he assumes the truth of what his sister is telling him

and how that reflects on his father or how it reflects perhaps on his sister's control of him.

Again, it could go either way and that's what is impermissible.

But it's impermissible here because on the whole with the testimony, especially these two statements,

that he has adopted his sister's version for whatever reason.

And it's not cumulative because especially that first statement,

it's not cumulative because Detective Gappard's testimony later, that's for impeachment.

It was not substantive testimony and it would only have gone per the jury instructions for weighing Jacob's credibility.

So the failure to strike that was still prejudicial because even though we have this dichotomy in Jacob,

what we have is ultimately repeatedly talking about what he knows about his sister and that he believes her.

And while some of that was struck, the danger is that the jury has difficulty disregarding that,

which brings us to the third issue that I don't necessarily want to spend a lot of time on,

the confusion you're on or noted, the testimony reached a level perhaps where no one could have been confident

of the jury's ability to follow the instructions and parse that out, to parse that difficulty he was undergoing.

And that's why we suggest the proper remedy would have been to either strike all the testimony

or order a mistrial to a spontane.

Let me ask you about the first issue, which is how was the case tried in terms of the misdemeanor charge,

in terms of consent?

How was it ultimately tried?

Yes.

Ultimately, if I may.

Yes, please.

Ultimately there was a notice of defense had been filed of defense of consent.

Ultimately there was no defense to not put on any evidence that I see in the record that goes

towards an affirmative defense of consent.

They would not have met that.

And the reason why it should have been severed is because the defense of consent is completely inconsistent

with the defense on...

Did he testify?

Did the defendant testify?

He did not testify.

He did not.

Okay.

And the record does reflect when the severance was discussed that he was not necessarily

intending to testify, although that was not fleshed out as to which charge he was not intending

to testify.

But the courts have recognized where a defense is so inconsistent.

The defenses are inconsistent.

AFSA on a minor, the only defense...

Of course the state is telling us it's not inconsistent at all.

He could have maintained his innocence on the AFSA charges, but said as to the misdemeanor,

she was by then, or he was...

I'm getting my cases confused.

She was of age, and that that wouldn't be inconsistent.

The state's incorrect.

I don't think any jury could say...

Well, you're admitting you had sexual contact with her after 16, because you're going

to have to admit that to claim consent, but you're denying all the sexual contact that

occurred before she's 16.

The very similarity of the two charges makes that inconsistency of the defense even more

dangerous as opposed to the Connecticut case that the state cites where the issue was

whether or not they cohabitated, not whether or not the assault's actually...

I know your time is up, but just it is true, isn't it, that the victim's husband,

a fellow named Patterson, testified that the defendant admitted guilt to him

and apologized on his knees to the victim.

So doesn't that go to the brother's testimony being non-prejudicial, given a confession?

Patterson's testimony about this family meeting was that he essentially ordered Mr. Murray

to get on his knees and apologize.

So whether that's construed as a confession, a quasi-confession,

or simply following the orders of a younger, stronger man would have been up to the jury.

All right.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you.

Please accord Nicholas's court for the state questions any time.

The court has already summarized my argument on the Joinder issue,

so I'll focus on the issue of the brother's testimony.

Nothing the brother said could possibly have affected the verdict one-tenth as much

as the testimony of the victim and of Mr. Patterson.

He was not her husband.

They were not married.

But he testified the defendant had admitted assaulting the victim.

He didn't just apologize.

Mr. Patterson asked him, is this true?

And he said, yeah.

The victim said the assault stopped when she was about 16 and a half,

and at that time her brother would have been nine.

And he wasn't testifying until nine years after that when he was 18.

And virtually everything he said was either equivocal, qualified, or contradictory.

So this is simply not enough evidence of prejudice to say

that either the court should have struck his testimony

or that it should have declared a mistrial.

And that specific issue of the testimony about him being told not to say anything

or the defendant would slit his throat,

the court sustained the objection after first overruling it

and then said to the prosecutor, you have to establish that he had a conversation with his father.

The prosecutor then questioned him further and he kept saying, I don't remember.

Then the prosecutor said, if you told Detective Gabbard about this,

would that have been the truth?

And he said, well, yeah, but I didn't say anything

and he wouldn't remember me saying anything.

So then at the end of the trial Detective Gabbard gets on the stand

and the prosecution asked him, did he tell you this?

And did he say his father said it to him?

The answer was yes both times and there was no objection to that.

So they did establish a foundation and the defense did not object to it.

So there was no need to strike the testimony.

That's all I have. Thank you.

Thank you, counsel. Case submitted.
