This is case 2014-0465, Celestica LLC versus Communications Acquisitions Corporation.

Last but not least, counsel.

May it please the court.

Good afternoon.

My name is Michelle Kenney.

I represent the appellant Celestica LLC.

And I'm here today because after a civil bench trial,

my client received the equivalent of jury nullification.

We put on evidence as to each factor of the de facto merger test.

The trial court found facts that established each and every one of those factors.

But the trial court didn't reach the result of successor liability because in its words,

it was to further the purpose of the free alienability of assets.

Now, that may make very good economic policy.

That may make good sense, but it's not the law.

And the trial court didn't have the discretion to go through the beligious factors,

as though it were just some sort of warm up.

But that's not really what the trial court did.

The trial court said that here are some factors that could weigh this way,

but here are factors that weigh the other way.

And isn't it the law that the default position in our system is that sale of assets,

that's the whole purpose of having a corporation.

Sale of assets cuts off the liability.

And it's got to be something that really sort of smacks of injustice to,

and the factors that are outlined suggest some of the things that may lead you that way.

But it's got to be real factors that really smack of injustice before you're

able to pierce the corporate veil in some sense.

Isn't that right?

Well, the factors actually have to mean something.

That is the general principle of commercial law is that when you have an asset sale,

the purchaser does not acquire the liability.

But beligious tells us that when there are certain factors present,

when there's been and it uses that metaphor of the baton passing.

Sure, but the thing I guess I can't get beyond is how does this make,

in any sense, would it be just for your client,

where the defendants put in new money?

They put significant new money in, there's no close identity of the people that owned before

and owned after, one went from a minority position to a majority position.

The person that was owed the most money got out, was not involved at all.

That just seems to me that those seem to cry out to me as being pretty strong badges

that the trial court got it right.

Well, when that continuity of ownership factor is really about continuity.

It's that you don't need to have and there's not a case out there that I've found

and I've looked pretty hard.

There's not a case out there that says you need to have complete identity

in order for there to have been accomplished a defacto murder.

It's a matter of degree?

Well, it may be, all you need is continuity.

Who gets to make that call though?

It's just the trial judge.

The trial judge does get to make that call and in this case,

the trial judge did find that the two shareholders owned about 40% of old whaleback.

The largest shareholder is out of the picture.

Months ago, the largest shareholder and that's a fact found by the trial court.

Just ups and leaves.

But that fact in itself is a pretty significant fact that to the extent that again,

we're trying to avoid injustice where the major creditor gets out.

So it's not a situation that the major creditor kind of stays in the situation.

Well, what you have are the two creditors that are running the show.

They're on the board, they hold 40% of the company,

they with the CEO of the company who is also a board member.

And this is a pretty small company with very streamlined management.

So the largest institutional shareholders were in control because the other shareholder is gone.

They get together and say, the ship is sinking.

We've got good technology here.

We want to preserve these assets.

Let's get on the phone and make a meeting with the largest creditor,

secured creditor and make a deal.

And they made a deal.

And when you talk about fairness, my client's got a $2 million judgment against this company and it got stiffed.

So, Belegus tells me.

But if it thought that this was, I mean, it could have bid, right?

It could have bid on this.

If it thought that this was going to be a great thing, it could have said, listen,

we'll bid on this and we'll put in the $600,000 because we're going to get a huge profit out of this.

They didn't want to do that.

Well, my client's not in that industry.

My client is just a creditor.

My client is not in the telecommunications.

But if the company had, in fact, liquidated, completely ceased business,

your client would not have recovered anything.

Do you agree with that?

That's probably true.

If there had been a liquidation.

However, that's the case in every single successor liability case.

And these successor liability cases and the facto murder cases in particular

are ones in which you've got a struggling company that's got lots of debt.

And it has shareholders who want to figure out a way to keep this going, shed the debt,

keep the good stuff, get rid of the liabilities, say, see you to the creditors,

and continue running on and then making, and of course they're going to do better.

And of course they're going to maximize the value of the assets because they have no more bad debt.

And so you seem to make much of the fact that with the assets,

the new whaleback continued in the eyes of the public the same operation,

the same corporation.

As a matter of fact, it affirmatively wanted to create that impression.

To what extent under the case law is that relevant?

That's a tremendous consideration because when you're looking at this, it's really the same business.

No one knows, aside from these particular shareholders, really what's happened here.

And the baton passing metaphor I think is a very impactful one.

That it's going on its merry way as though nothing has happened, a great thing has happened for it.

It doesn't have to pay the bills.

It doesn't want to pay anymore.

And Justice Delger came straight out at the outset of his opinion and

said that baton passing metaphor, that sort of reason for

a de facto merger as a basis for successor liability has no application

in what he called the context of a complex commercial transaction involving venture capital.

So what he was saying was it's too simplistic for the world that we're in now in this particular transaction.

And it does seem to me that you have to separate out the internal workings and

organization of the corporation as opposed to its face to its customers.

Because in almost any transfer of ownership, you want it to be as you want

there to be nothing that will disturb the client base.

They want to just see continuity.

So that's too good an argument really would seem on your part that if there's

this continuity to your customers, then you are not able to sell these assets.

But then when would successor liability ever apply?

Wait, when it went wrong?

Well, isn't the case where clearly it would apply is as we said in Billius,

if there's a sale for stock, so nobody's really paying anything.

They're just sort of transferring stock in the new corporation to the old corporation.

And nobody's out of dime in terms of the successor corporation and its shareholders.

They haven't written a check to anybody.

They've just issued some shares of stock.

But that's not what happened here.

Well, no, that's not what happened here because you don't have a stock swap when you

have an article nine sale the way that it was done here.

And this court hasn't had the opportunity to address whether you can have a de facto

merger when there is an asset sale.

Every court around the country that has had the opportunity to address that has said,

it doesn't matter the manner in which you get to have this continuity of ownership.

Well, have they said that?

I thought what they've said is that a foreclosure doesn't mean that it's barred,

but it certainly is a relevant factor.

They haven't said that it makes no difference to whether you should grant

relief or not, whether it's a stock sale or not.

The cases don't analyze whether the input of money, the paying for the assets,

means that there isn't a de facto merger.

For example, in the Doro Textiles case out of Massachusetts from about seven or

eight years ago, in that case, shareholders of the old company paid some $26

million for the assets at an asset sale.

But when you went through all of the factors, it was the same company,

notwithstanding the fact that those shareholders paid all of that money in

order to have the privilege of becoming the owners of the new company.

Was that an affirmance or a reversal by the SJC?

That was an affirmance by the SJC of a trial court agreement.

I think metaphors often grow tired, as you know.

And I think the answer to your question might be, the baton does,

the only time it doesn't pass is when it's not the same baton.

And it strikes me that the claim here is that it's a different baton once all

of the somewhat complicated financial reorganization takes place.

It's just no longer the same baton.

I don't think that that is what Justice Delger found.

No, he was stuck with the metaphor.

So let's put the metaphor aside.

We don't need the metaphor.

Let's focus on the factors, because when my client said to me, gee,

we found out that these institutional shareholders bought the new company or

bought the assets and formed this new company and said to me, is there

something, well, let's look at successor liability.

What did I do?

I went to Belegis.

And what did I do?

I looked at the factors.

And then what did I do?

Spent a lot of my client's money taking discovery on each of those factors.

And then putting on a trial, a case, a trial on all of those factors.

And if those factors don't mean anything, then what are we left to do?

You make quite a point in your brief when you say that Judge Delger

aired because he considered other factors.

But you say he lost track of the fact that the other factors

have to be indicative of commonality or distinctiveness.

Would you help us understand that a little bit better?

Sure.

The trial court took its charge to consider and take into consideration

anything that it thought was relevant or important to whether there should be

successor liability.

And I don't think that Belegis says that that's the trial court's discretion.

I think the trial court enjoyed broad discretion as to the Belegis factors.

And then Belegis tells us that the trial court may also look to other factors

as to whether or not these are common or distinct companies.

But fraud is a different cause of action.

Piercing the veil is a different client.

Can I just ask you a question?

When you learned or your client learned that this transaction was sort of in the making,

could you have gone back to the trial court and said, listen, we have a judgment here.

This is what's going on.

We want an injunction.

We want to prevent this from happening and gotten a hearing on that.

I'd have no right to do that.

There is no basis under the law once you're notified

that assets are going to be sold.

And we don't dispute that the senior secured creditor had a right to do the auction here.

We would have had no lawful basis in which to run into court and say, stop the show.

We want discovery into what's happening here.

But doesn't that weigh against you that you couldn't have prevented this in the sense

that you couldn't have said, in effect,

I want a liquidation instead because you would have lost on that because presumably the defendants

would have said, you're not getting, you know, if you stop this transaction, you're not getting

anything anyway.

There's no reason to stop this transaction because you're unsecured.

I mean, even if you had gone into, you know, tried to put the defendant in bankruptcy,

you would have been, it wouldn't have been worth it to you.

Well, one thing, if this had gone into bankruptcy, that would have been a way in which to

actually insulate this transaction from a successor liability claim.

There are protections afforded to creditors and unsecured creditors in bankruptcy that

they're not afforded under the process.

But why couldn't you have thrown the defendant into bankruptcy?

We had absolutely no way to prophesize what was going to happen here.

Could we have put it into liquidation?

Possibly.

When asking whether 40% shareholders of the old company to seamlessly buy these assets and

continue the business as though nothing has happened but get rid of all of the debt, that's

when Celestica looks at its rights as an unsecured creditor left hanging in the wind to see

what its remedies may be.

There's nothing in de facto merger jurisprudence that requires a unsecured creditor to have

had the ability to get paid in any event, to get paid one way or the other.

If this is an unsecured creditor, the reason why Celestica, this judgment is hanging out

there is because there's no possibility it was going to be.

But if this is an equitable remedy, isn't one of the things that equity would look

at is how are you harmed?

If the answer is you really wouldn't have been harmed because you wouldn't have gotten

anything anyway, doesn't that sort of suggest that equity does not lie in your favor?

Not to my mind because in every single successor liability case, the unsecured creditor left

hanging wasn't going to get paid.

The businesses are failing in these cases.

So if it's a criteria that Celestica would have certainly been paid but for this

transaction, then...

I'm sorry, go ahead.

Aren't we bound by the finding of the trial court, finding that the lawyers who testified

that this was an arm's length transaction and never intended to be anything but an arm's

length transaction?

The finding that this was an arm's length transaction is irrelevant to the actuality

of what happened.

The transaction can be dressed up with as many niceties and excellent lawyers at...

Well, here it was dressed up with honest, apparently honest, lawyers and a lot of money.

New money.

Right?

Yes, there was new money.

It's not surprising that when you have a good piece of technology that there was testimony

it would cost maybe five to ten million dollars to build a new company around it.

It's not surprising and it makes good sense that if you have that technology with no debts

then that's the opportunity to put in the money.

What about the change in business...

I'm sorry, Justice Bassett, what about the change, complete change in the business model?

The complete change in the business model was not such a drastic change.

It was to pay our vendors less money and to not spend as much money as we were before.

That doesn't make it a new business.

Was that how it was described in the record?

Yes, those were the findings that these resellers, the middlemen, were paid less money now than

they were paid before.

They stopped the so-called bleeding by figuring out who to pay and how much to pay.

That's not a change of the business model.

Everything's the same, the same technology, the same offices, the same personnel, the

same management, the same everything, just in a whole lot better financial shape.

I take it that motivation is really irrelevant to the analysis.

As to whether this was an order, yes.

So whether people are good intentions or bad people with bad intentions simply doesn't matter.

That's correct.

Okay.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Attorney Kanan.

Good afternoon.

May it please the court?

My name is Talisha Kanan and I'm here on behalf of Communications Acquisition Corporation.

To my left I have Attorney Andrew Volinsky and I might refer during this argument to Communications

Acquisition Corporations at CAC, so you'll know my nomenclature.

So we won't confuse that with Caroline Conboy?

Absolutely.

The trial court correctly concluded that equity does not warrant the imposition of

successor liability.

Wheelback provides telecommunication services and as a service company its value is

in its existing customer base and in its industry goodwill.

Wheelback's senior secured lender Horizon legally exercised its right to foreclose on

Wheelback's assets and conducted a commercially reasonable sale.

The buyer, CAC, is composed of minority owners of Wheelback, Castile and Egan.

The buyer paid $600,000 in real money for Wheelback's assets and this was not a

stock for asset swap nor was there any credit bidding here, excuse me.

After the legal public auction, Castile and Egan invested an additional $1.3 million

into transforming the assets of the failing business and updating its technology.

Only after Castile and Egan, now CAC, invested this additional money did Celestica cry a

fall.

However, Celestica, as you all have mentioned, and its counsel were fully notified of the

public auction and they had an opportunity to object to the auction.

Celestica also took its judgment expressly knowing that it would not affect the secured

lenders, the secured creditors that were above it and knowing that there was nearly

$8.5 million in secured debt in front of it.

I take it there was no at the time that if I understand correctly this debt arose

out of originally a lease of the, you were the tenant, so your predecessor were the tenants

of the plaintiff.

Is that right?

And that's what the debt arose out of?

That's true, but at the time that the debt arose, there already was secured judgment

ahead of that.

So Ascent already had secured judgment, Castile, Egan, and Horizon already had secured,

sorry, secured liens against Wheelback.

Right.

What I was going to ask is I take it that at the time that the lease was originally

entered into, the landlord didn't try to get personal guarantees from any of the, any

of the, of the principles of, of the predecessor's company.

That's correct.

That's correct.

So for the reasons, now Celestica tries to use this foreclosure auction as an opportunity

to improve its position, its priority position, and to jump to the front essentially of

all the secured creditors of Wheelback.

And for the reasons stated in Judge Delker's well-reasoned and comprehensive order, it shouldn't

be allowed to do that.

But, but Council says Judge Delker went off the reservation, so to speak, in his analysis

of the, the bill, so-called billagous factors and considered things that should not have

been considered.

How do you answer that?

Well, Judge Delker didn't really do that.

He, what he did was he looked at this transaction in the complex, the complexity

of the nature that it is.

This was not the type of transaction that was in billagous, which was pretty straightforward.

Judge Delker looked at the nature of the transaction and applied all of the factors here in billagous,

as you see in his opinion.

Were all of the secured creditors eventually paid off?

No, they were not.

So while-

So there was still pending secured debt?

I'm sorry.

They're, they're still hanging out, I mean, what's happening with the secured debt?

The secured debt is lost.

So Castile lost approximately $8 million in secured debt.

Egan lost approximately $8 to $9 million in secured debt.

And Wilbeck's biggest creditor, Ascent, lost approximately $16 million in secured

debt.

Now if this was an unfair transaction, Castile and Egan would have found a way

to pay themselves back.

Instead, they took the hit of the $8 and $9 million loss, so combined of $16 million loss

for them, and paid $600,000 of new money to invest in this company and to purchase the

assets at the foreclosure auction.

Did the business model change significantly?

The business model did change significantly.

Tell me how.

Judge Delker found that Celeste, excuse me, Wilbeck marketed and had a business for

directives towards businesses that were 20 people and under Celeste, excuse me, CAC.

And required person-to-person service.

That's correct.

It was a computer-based system that required person-to-person service.

Under CAC's model, they switched their market to represent and to service businesses that

had between 20 and 500 people, and this was more of a cloud-based service.

Now, the cloud-based service, while it was also available under Wilbeck, it wasn't rolled

out to all of Wilbeck's customers because there wasn't money to do it, and there weren't

resources and human capital to do it.

What about the continuity of employees and management and their interface with customers

immediately after the transaction?

Isn't that problematic for your position?

No, I don't believe it's problematic.

Just talking about the interface with customers and the continuation, CAC also bought trademark

trade names, so they bought the ability to use Wilbeck.

All the assets were sold when Horizon had the public auction.

So the fact that there was a continuation in that name is not an unfair thing here.

Also the trial court found that the appearance of a continuation was in order to preserve

the value of Wilbeck, which, as I already mentioned, was its goodwill and its existing

customer base.

The employees, though, that's what Justice Bassett asked about.

Yes, his second question was about the employees here.

There was a key employment change, primarily in the management.

The key management change was that George Vaughn was brought in first as the CEO of CAC.

He was not in Wilbeck 1?

He is not.

He is completely unconnected to Wilbeck 1.

And then after the closing, he became the CFO designate.

And the thing that's important about this is all the money decisions went through George

Vaughn who had nothing to do with Wilbeck.

He was a complete outsider, so he was able to control the finances of this new company.

In terms of the employees, there actually, while there was an initial continuation

of employees, there eventually was a change.

Wilbeck had approximately 28 employees, only 14 of those actually remained with CAC.

The reason why there was a direct continuation, again, was to preserve the value of the asset.

If, at the time of closing, all the employees will let go, you have nobody to run the company,

the asset goes under, and you end back up in the same place where you were at the beginning.

The asset being the goodwill in that case.

The goodwill, that's correct.

There was mention of this being unfair because, essentially,

it's as if two creditors of Wilbeck are now running the show at CAC.

And I think that it's important to remember that Castiel and

Egan, while they were Wilbeck's creditors, only owned 40% of the shares.

And what that meant is that they couldn't control the shares, they couldn't control the vote.

And they only had one seat each on the board, so they couldn't control the board.

That was 40% total between the two.

That's correct.

And who had the other 60?

The other 60 was held by Ascent, and then there was a small 6% that was held by a group of 15 investors.

But when you fast forward to CAC, Castiel, which was the smallest institutional creditor,

Wilbeck, which had 17%, they now catapult and have 70% of CAC.

So now, where they couldn't control the shareholder vote,

they couldn't control the board, they can control the new company.

Same thing with Egan, they had no control either jointly or separately of Wilbeck.

But now, they can control with Castiel, CAC.

In terms of board membership, as I mentioned before, there was only one member of Castiel and

one member of Egan on the Wilbeck board.

Now, on CAC, Castiel has two members of its membership on the CAC board, and Egan has one member.

So now, Castiel, where it couldn't control the board, can now control the board vote too.

So there's some pretty significant changes that the trial court found there in regards to the continuity of ownership.

Let me ask you about the standard of review.

There seems to be some difference of opinion about what standard we should bring to this.

Yes.

To what extent should we defer to Judge Delker's analysis and his conclusions?

Well, I think here that the deferral should be 100% to Judge Delker.

The nature of successor liability, it's an equitable doctrine, and the discretion lies with the judge.

And so I think here this court should defer to the discretion that is in Judge Delker.

But surely it's not unlimited discretion.

There have to be some way to cabinet.

Absolutely, and the way to cabinet is in those factors.

And so Judge Delker, as you see, went through each individual factor in his order, and

he had a very considered approach to each of those.

And the court should review his discretion in applying those factors.

That's where the parameters of his discretion apply.

Your opponent argues that he did apply those factors, though he did it incorrectly.

But then he went off the reservation, as it were, and looked at other factors, and

that we shouldn't give deference to that, what's your response?

Well, I disagree with that.

Primarily, I think that the final kind of fifth unofficial factor,

is the ability to look at the commonality and the distinctiveness and

compass what Judge Delker looked at.

One of the things in a complex transaction that you have to look at is, how did this transaction come about?

And that's what he did.

He looked at this as a bonafide.

He found that this was a bonafide transaction, a bonafide foreclosure.

He found that there was real money that was invested here.

And he found that there were no assumptions of insider liabilities.

I think that those are all important considerations in determining whether these are common or distinctive corporations.

What if this were a personal injury action?

Same answer, same outcome?

Well, I don't know, Your Honor, because this is not a personal injury action.

No, it's not.

I would have to think about that.

I understand that your opponent says that they were not alleging fraud.

Nonetheless, I take it that the credibility of the witnesses was,

whether there was fraud alleged or not, the credibility of the witnesses was still an important factor.

And if I recall correctly, Judge Delker made a number of credibility findings in his order.

Absolutely, that's correct.

You do recall that correctly.

Judge Delker found that Attorney Wilton, who was the attorney representing Horizon during the bonafide foreclosure auction,

his testimony was credible and he found that Roger Walton, who was a member of Castile, he found that his testimony was credible.

And I think those determinations are, this court should rely on those determinations in assessing this case.

If I understand correctly, the major creditor, and it wasn't Castile or the-

The major creditor was Ascent.

That its counsel testified that at one point there was some proposal for

how the transaction was going to be handled that he sort of nixed because he said, no, we really want to do this by a public auction.

Is that correct?

You're almost right.

The thing that you're missing is that that counsel who testified was actually representing Horizon.

And what he testified was that initially in the first letter of intent that was sent by Castile and

Reagan, they wanted to have a private auction and they wanted to sell the assets for $500,000.

Horizon and their attorney, Jim Malton, who testified at the court said, no, we can't do this.

We want to make sure that this is an arms length transaction and so we're going to have a public auction.

They raised the price to $600,000 and that price was just a floor so

anybody else could come in and bid.

There also was language in the first LOI about Castile and

Reagan would pay for Horizon's cost to run the auction.

Horizon nixed that language.

So that was really what the testimony was and Judge Delker found that credible.

Your opponent argues that Judge Delker essentially treats the auction and

the third party transaction as a trump card and

that once he found that it was conducted in a commercially reasonable way,

that was the end of the analysis from his perspective and that shouldn't be the way it's done.

What's your response to that?

I think what Judge Delker did is he looked at the Ed's Peter's case, which is a first circuit case.

And he saw that this case was not nearly as troubled as that case was where

the debtors essentially tried to wash the assets and start off with the brand new company with no assets.

They paid, some of them were paid for the assets, for their liabilities here.

So I think he used that case and applied that here and

found that those troubling characteristics where the court found no successor liability weren't present here.

And I think he built off of that, but he didn't just consider the nature of the sale.

He considered that in conjunction with all the other factors.

So I think that it's a mistake to think that he only considered the sale and then he said, that's it.

This was a bonafide sale, nothing else to consider.

He really went through all the factors, ambilagous.

So in conclusion, equity does not mandate successor liability where a senior secured creditor

offally foreclosed on the assets and a buyer paid a total of $650,000 in real money.

Celestica cannot use the equitable remedy of successor liability to collect on a judgment

that was virtually uncollectable due to its place and its position behind nearly $8.5 million in secured debt.

The trial court did not misapply the facts of the abilagous or

rather appropriately weighed and balanced the factors in light of this complex transaction.

And therefore, we ask that you affirm the child court's decision.

Thank you.

Case submitted, court is adjourned.
