This is case 2014-0540, David Eldridge versus the Rolling Green at Whippewill Condominium Owners Association.

Mr. King.

Good morning.

May it please the court, Benjamin King, Douglas Leonard and Garvey representing the appellant, David Eldridge.

This case presents the question, must a court grant reconsideration

of an order granting summary judgment, where evidence presented with the reconsideration

motion is a, sufficient to ward off summary judgment, and or b, where such evidence demonstrates

that the affidavit on which the trial court heavily relied in granting summary judgment

is misleading at best.

May I ask you a foundational question?

Yes.

You're presenting a very procedural and technical question.

Do I understand correctly that what is at the bottom here is that your client is a person

with a disability that, a walking disability of some sort, and the condominium in which

he was living had a walkway that inhibited his ability to transit it safely.

So he complained.

Yes.

There are two different entities, the TOA and the COA, I don't understand why, I'm not

sure I care, and the issue was at some point crystallized as fix the walkway, and that's

all we need to worry about.

The COA fixed the walkway, the TOA should have fixed the walkway, but either way,

the walkway was fixed, so now your client can transit correctly.

So why are we here?

We're here because it took the filing of a charge of discrimination with the New Hampshire

Human Rights Commission to get the walkway repaired.

But then it got repaired?

It got repaired, yes.

Okay.

So what further damage does your client claim?

Is it about attorney's fees?

No.

Beyond June 22nd, 2010, there was no additional damage.

But before June 22nd, 2010, and the charge of discrimination was filed on June 3rd, 2010,

there was damage because Mr. Eldridge suffered from at least September of 2009 forward a

walkway that he could not traverse safely.

And the discrimination occurred in or around September 21, 2009 by the Condominium Owners

Association, and this is the, if there's one document that the court looks at in

this case with great care, it should be the document at page 162, which is the Condominium

Owners Association Board of Director meeting minutes for September 21, 2009, where the Condominium

Owners Association, not the Townhouse Owners Association, identified three walkways within

the complex that needed repair, 31 Riviera, 36 Riviera, and 41 Riviera.

31 Riviera belongs to David Eldridge.

The Condominium Association, for reasons unexplained in the minutes, decides to repair 36 and 41.

And you say the court had that information even before the motion for reconsideration.

Is that what you're telling us?

No.

That was in the summary judgment record?

No.

Okay.

No.

These meeting minutes, the September 21, 2009 meeting minutes, were produced by the property

manager, Tracy Madden.

But you know, I guess the thing I'm not clear on is this, when the, sort of a procedural

question, when the, your opponent argued that we don't, in the summary judgment motion,

you got the, you sued the wrong party, because it's the TOA that controls repairing this

walkway.

Right.

Why didn't you respond, well, wait a minute, we need to do more discovery.

We don't know whether that's true or not.

Instead, you, the only argument you made was you, you, you waived that the, that the, your

opponent waived it.

You didn't say, wait a minute, we, we want to conduct more discovery.

We don't know whether that's true or not.

So isn't that, haven't you, you know, waived the issue then, by not rate, by not responding,

saying that, wait a minute, there's some issue here, we can, we need more time.

You can't grant summary judgment.

I, I don't believe I waived the issue.

In retrospect, that probably would have been the, the, the better course of action and would

have avoided this argument about, well, but why, but I mean, isn't the Superior Court,

you know, as a sort of ma, matter of, of the, of the orderly procedure of things, isn't

the Superior Court entitled to say, wait a minute, you could have, you know, you could

have raised this, this issue before, you didn't raise it.

You didn't say, don't rule on the summary judgment motion because we need more discovery.

You just, you made your response, you know, you sort of made your bed, so to speak, and,

and now the Superior Court shouldn't have to do it over again, which is really what

you were asking, that you were asking the court to do in the motion for reconsideration.

Well, you know, you didn't like argument A, but here's a new one.

Well, I, I've framed it, framed it a little differently, and the, the way I'd frame it is

we show the court on the motion for reconsideration that the court had been misled by the

appellee. The appellee submitted an affidavit of Karen Giacinto, a director of the

Condominium Owners Association, on which the court, by its own language in the order

said, it heavily rely. And that affidavit said, we're the, I'm the director of the

Condominium Owners Association. The Condominium Owners Association does not

have the ability or the authority to maintain or repair the walkways. And that's

all Karen Giacinto said, she says it in paragraphs three, nine, and ten of the

affidavit. Don't you think that in the interest of candor to the court at a

minimum, that affidavit should have said that the Condominium Owners

Association, in fact, did repair the walkways and that the Townhouse Owners

Association had nothing to do at any relevant time to this case with

identifying walkways for repair, repairing walkways, but did you know

that? But did you know that at the time you responded to the summary judgment

motion? I did not know that. You didn't know that the con, you didn't know which

whether it was the COA or the TOA that did the repair? No, I did know that the

COA repaired David Eldridge's walkway. Right. So, so, so here's the thing I

don't understand. You say that they filed an affidavit which said that we had no

authority or ability or ability to repair to do this because that was the

responsibility of the TOA. But what you just said in response to Justice

Convoy's question is you knew the COA actually had done the repair. So, whether

you had Madden's affidavit or not, why didn't you say, wait a minute, this

is blowing. The COA actually did the repair. Respectfully, Your Honor, we're

mixing things up a little here. What I knew is that after the filing of the

charge of discrimination on June 3, 2010, it was the COA that in an effort to

resolve this. Right. Repair David Eldridge's walkway. What I did not

know was that the Board of Directors had, before any of this happened, the Board

of Directors of the COA had voted in September of 2009 to repair three

walkways in the complex that needed repair. All right. Or they'd identified,

forgive me, I just misspoke. Okay. So, identified three walkways that

needed repair. Right. And the COA chose to repair the two other

walkways, but not Mr. Eldridge's walkway. And how do we know that that was

discriminatory? How do we know that? The fact that there were three walkways

that needed repair, two were done now, one will do in the spring, and that

happened to be his. How do we know? What's the record that that was a

discriminatory action? That's for a jury to decide. And summary

judgment was not granted on that basis. But I can, you know, I can tell

you that what we would argue is that there's evidence of discriminatory

animus because the Condominium Owners Association represented to the

Human Rights Commission. Oh, we didn't repair David Eldridge's walkway

because we didn't have enough money to do it. And then the Human Rights

Commission found out that the repairs to the walkway would have cost

$1,500 and that the association had in excess of $170,000 on hand for

purposes of these repairs. Was somebody in the organization angry with

Mr. Eldridge for some reason? The fact that that happened doesn't

necessarily add up to discrimination, does it? No, it doesn't. But

that's for a jury to decide. And I do cite cases in in the brief,

the ACCA case, and I think the American Airlines case that stand

for the proposition that a jury is entitled to infer discrimination

when there's evidence that a defendant has attempted to cover

up the real reason. Can I ask you can I ask you one other

question? This is again a procedural one is I understand

it. Even if we say that this Madden affidavit kind of

constituted some new evidence that you didn't know before. If I

understand correctly, you took that deposition before the trial

court had issued its order on summary judgment. Yet even then,

you didn't ask, you didn't say, you know, file something

immediately. Hey, wait a minute, Judge, hold off. We've got this

new affidavit here. We want we want to file supplemental or

this new deposition here. We want to file supplemental

pleadies. You waited until after the court had ruled against

you. And then in a motion for reconsideration, you say you

brought this up. I mean, isn't that, you know, doesn't that

suggest that, you know, well, I've got this new information.

Let's see what the what the judge does. Maybe he'll rule

in my favor. And then I have to worry about this. And if

he doesn't, then I'll file it. And couldn't the court say,

wait a minute, this, you know, this sort of smacks of, for lack

of a better term, is kind of sharp practice. We shouldn't, I

don't have to, I shouldn't have to decide this case, a new

when, you know, after I've issued my decision, when they

when when the person that's asking me to do that, add the

information before I issued my decision,

there is very close in time here. The objection to the motion

for summary judgment was filed in the middle of March of 2014.

This deposition was taken April 23, 2014, a couple of weeks

later. Was it taken outside the discovery period? No, it was

not. Discovery closed April 30, 2014. The deposition was

taken within the discovery period. I may have misunderstood

your opponent's assertion in his brief, but I'll hear

no, there is. I think what you're referring to is there was a

deadline in the structuring conference order for the taking

of non expert depositions that fell earlier. I requested the

deposition before the close of discovery. After that, there

was never any opposition from the defendant to having the

deposition taken. So the trial. So you took it during the

period, presumably when expert depositions would be taken,

but still within the deadline for all discovery. Correct. But

had you requested the deposition during the fact witness period

that just hadn't been arranged or did was the request not made

until after that? I believe the request was made afterwards.

But again, there was no, there was no opposition from the

defense to taking that. So that was never an issue before

the trial court. You agree that the standard of review on

whether the trial court should take additional evidence is

unsustainable exercise of discretion, right? That was that

that's what this court has consistently held, except if the

and there is an unsustainable exercise of discretion, where

the failure to consider the new evidence is clearly untenable

or unreasonable to the prejudice of the case. You're I

would point the the court to what I think is an analogous

analysis or the analysis of the court should employ here. And

that's in the Perez V Volvo car corporation. And here, the

court that the plaintiff produced some emails that had been

after the ruling on the summary judgment motion. And the

emails were late disclosed in discovery. And the court just

declined to consider them. And the first circuit set at page

319 of its decision, the court below never the first of all

dollars standard for construing a motion for

reconsideration under the federal worlds is the same as

here. Abusive discretion or unsustainable exercise of

discretion. But then the court goes on to say, the court

below never really considered the contents of the plaintiff's

profit. Instead basing its denial of reconsideration on

a mistaken belief that race judicata somehow barred the

action. This was an error of law subject to de novo review. So I

think if the court here finds that the emails are not the

emails, but that the the meeting minutes and Tracy Madden's

deposition testimony reflecting that it was the COA that

actually identified the walkways that needed repairs decided

to repair everyone else's walkway. But David Eldridge is that it

was the COA that engaged in discriminatory conduct. Then the

court could follow the Perez case and review on it. They

know you're light is on. But I really would like an answer to

this. Your opponent tells us that you previously litigated and

won the issue that the condominium doc documents don't

give the COA authority over townhouse limited common area. Is

that true? You litigated and won that issue previously. So

query. Well, somebody did on behalf of your client. So are

we getting inconsistent positions? Do is there a question of

judicial estoppel judicial estoppel has never been raised

or briefed as a defense in this case.

Okay, thank you. All right. Yeah. Thank you.

Hey, please court Daniel Mahler from Cronin distance, the

list you on behalf of the appellian cross appellant rolling

green at Whipple will condominium owners association. I

will waive the three minute period for questions.

Essentially, this appeal can sort of be summed up with the

notion that no good D goes unpunished. In this

particular case, this appeal has its origins in an effort

by the association to avoid years of litigation by repairing a

walkway controlled by another association at the suggestion of

a representative of the Human Rights Commission. After some

suggestion had been made that a complaint was forthcoming.

Obviously, this did not avoid the litigation as approximately

four years later. We are still here. But you know, I

guess the thing I'm not clear on is this, I mean, I

understand, you know, there's some this sort of you have, you

can I guess maybe generate some sympathy on the idea that you

were trying to settle this. But the thing I guess I'm still

having trouble with is, if your position is that you didn't

have any authority to do this, that this was really the

responsibility of the TOA. Why did you do it? I mean, why

weren't you know, why, why weren't you worried that the

TOA was going to sue you for for somehow, you know, interfering

with property that they control? Doesn't that sort of suggest

that the TOA, COA, it's really all part of the same sort of

the same thing? No, in terms of from a practical standpoint,

the contact was made with respect to the condominium, the

COA, right, from the Human Rights Commission. Practically

speaking, they did what was practical. They're trying to

avoid it. But if somebody called me up and said, you know, we

want you to repair the driveway that's that's there in front of

your house. And actually, Justice Hicks owns the driveway. I'm

not sure that my response would be, Oh, okay, I'll do it. I

don't want you to sue me. It might be at least initially,

it's not my driveway. Justice Hicks, it's Justice Hicks's

driveway. But it sounds like you didn't even make any initial

attempt to say that.

Again, in part of this here should be also the fact that the

person on the other side actually knew this issue as was just

mentioned, there was prior litigation between the parties

where he raised the issue wasn't the association that

initially raised this issue of in terms of who control the

limited common area was actually the appellant in this

matter in earlier litigation where the association brought a

claim against him and he responded. No, there is this

legal issue under the condo docs. You can only do this, you

can only do that.

In retrospect may have been a better response to say, look,

you gotta go to the TOA. Yes, but as again, as a practical

matter at the time where you have a condo association,

multiple associations within it. That's what they did. Now I

can't change the fact. As I said, retrospect probably would

have been a better answer. But still doesn't change the fact that

the scope of your authority in terms of the within the

association is a question of law. The court looked at that. In

fact, now two superior courts have looked at that and have

said, doesn't matter of law townhouse limited common area is

for the TOA. Well, if we put this if we put aside all the

procedural issues, let's assume that there were no, you

know, that there was no question about timing or

anything like that. I mean, doesn't the fact whatever the

documents say, doesn't the fact that the that the COA made

those earlier repairs on property that, you know, now

you're claiming the TOA actually control. You you repaired it.

Doesn't that isn't that a basis for the plaintiff to say,

listen, what you know, of course, you discriminate, of

course, you're the one that's responsible for the

discrimination, whatever the documents say, you made the

repair. How did how could you have, you know, how can you say

that you didn't control it when you made the repair? Well,

number one, again, the issue as to who has authority to do

it is the legal issue that's controlled by the condo docs.

That doesn't change. If there's an issue as to whether

they did something and the TOA says, wait a second, you

exercise jurisdiction over our thing, we have a problem

with that. That's an issue between the COA and the

TOA. And in this particular case, you really can't make that

argument because the plaintiff here is the person who brought

up the issue is completely aware of the fact that these are

separate entities, they have separate responsibilities. In

fact, I've argued that. And I have one on that issue. Isn't

the triggering question here for us, though, the timeliness

question. If the complaint wasn't timely filed, then we all

go home. Do you want to talk about that? Sure, I will. That

was in our cross appeal, right? It's essentially an alternative

grounds. Essentially, the statute requires that a complaint

be filed within 180 days. I believe there is no dispute here

that the complaint in this case was filed with the Human

Rights Commission in June 2010. My colleague has already told

the court that the act itself occurred in September 2009.

But his position is there was a continuing violation. He says

you don't count it from when he made his complaint because it

took a while to fix it. So there's a continuing violation.

It's not a continuing violation. There are confusing

issues here. What they're talking about is a continuing

injury that does not trigger the continuing violation,

exception to the statute of limitations. What we're talking

about here is, even though I believe the report from the

Human Rights Commission cited the Americans with Disabilities

Act plus 354A, it's actually the Fair Housing Act in this

case, is the relevant federal statute and 354A gives them

right to make a reasonable accommodation request. And that's

what we're talking about here. No question that request was

made at the very latest in September 2009. If you read the

plaintiff's complaint to the Human Rights Commission, he

actually suggests that he had done this for years beforehand.

So we're probably going back far before that period.

But what is it? What is I mean, it strikes me that this

this issue of a continuing violation, there must be a

ton of federal case law out there that would speak. I

mean, if the plaintiff's position is correct, then, for

example, unemployment discrimination, if someone says

I was discriminated against because based on race or gender

or whatever, and wasn't given a promotion, let's say, that

presumably that either case law would say that that either

is or is not a continuing violation. In other words,

it either happens at the time that you're not selected

for the promotion, which would be it's not a continuing

violation, or the case law would say, as long as you haven't

gotten the promotion, it's a continuing violation.

I think the employment analysis is a little difficult

here, because, again, what we're talking about and what the

alleged discriminatory act is, is a fair to accommodate a

request. It's a request for reasonable accommodation and

a failure to do that. Those are very specific acts. I ask

you to do this because I have a walking disability. You've done

that after that point in time. If they haven't done it, you may

have a claim for continuing injuries, but that is not

continuing violation. That's the Singer asset case. So at the

end of the day here, what we're talking about is that we

have a case where no one was the initial complaint

stale, but then the investigation took far longer

than it should have. And we then end up in court. In this

particular case, there was a motion for summary judgment. We

raised, it's undisputed, the issue of whether the right

party was sued.

Well, there's another timing issue, isn't it that the

24, the 24 month rule, and you say that Judge Nicolosi

should have dismissed the discrimination complaint because

the Human Rights Commission failed to either close or adjudicate

the case within 24 months of the filing of the complaint.

Correct. That's the argument. Judge Nicolosi focused on the

Martino and Fornir cases and assuming for argument purposes

here, obviously we've set forth an alternative argument in

the brief, but assuming that those apply. You basically look

at two things, the purpose of the statute and potential

prejudice here. Don't dispute that 354A serves to prevent

discrimination. That's its general purpose. However, it's

been noted by this court at the time that this investigation

actually began. The walkway had been repaired. They've been

repaired actually at the suggestion again, of someone

from the Human Rights Commission. The commission, however,

continued with its investigation. That investigation ended up

taking approximately 33 months. Prior to any report being

issued, the association actually advised the

investigator of the 24 month rule. The only thing that

that generated was a negative report that essentially accused

the association of lying and of criminal conduct based upon

documents which the report itself said belong to the TOA, not

the COA, who had been charged in this particular case. Add to

that the fact that it's a stale complaint. And given these

accusations of the report, there is a liberty interest in

terms of reputation. I cite the Paul versus Davis case. But

aren't you asking us to infer that the investigator wrote the

report the way he wrote the report because he was in some

way embarrassed by the fact that this had gone on so long? I

mean, how could the trial court didn't find? How could we

make any determination like that? I think you can look at

the fact. The report speaks for itself. But is it

relevant? I mean, if the question is, is there a 24 month

rule? Or isn't there a 24 month rule? So it really isn't

relevant.

Well, from our standpoint, there is a 24 month rule. The

trial court took a slightly different approach. They said,

because even though there is a 24 month rule, there is no

remedy provided in the statute that therefore we're going to

look at this essentially balancing test in Fornir and

Martino. And the trial court said that in this particular case,

we don't see any prejudice. And we do not think that we think

that the purpose of the statute was to prevent

discrimination. And therefore, this is just a hasten the

adjudicatory proceedings. And therefore, it does not affect

our jurisdiction, nor do we think, in fact, in this case,

that there was any remedy that was particularly appropriate.

Let me let me go back to the affidavit issue. What's your

response to Mr. King's argument that the affidavit that was

filed was incomplete or arguably disingenuous in that it

addressed only the responsibility of the COA to

maintain repair or replace and that there's sort of a

pregnant pause there and that it would have been

incumbent upon your client to say, oh, and by the way, not

withstanding that, we actually fixed it.

My response is number one, in the motion for summary

judgment, the association acknowledged expressly that it

had repaired the sidewalk. So the trial court knew that they

took that action? Correct. I believe the invoice was

included in the motion itself. There's no question. So if

that's true, then what I hear the plaintiff to be arguing is

that Judge Temple then aired by not considering his additional

evidence on reconsideration because the court already knew,

I think that's what he's arguing, the court already

knew that the COA had actually repaired the walkway.

The court clearly knew that repaired because it made a

finding and if you look at, I believe it's page 146 of the

appendix, the trial court actually made a finding that the

COA repaired the walkway. But what your opponent is saying, if

I understand correctly, is what you didn't say in the

affidavit, you're saying you made the repair after the

complaint was filed with the Human Rights Commission. That's

what you said in the affidavit. What you did not say

was we earlier, we, the COA, considered making a repair to

the plaintiff's walkway, but we made the decision not to do

that. If you had said that, that might have led the trial

court to believe, wait a minute, why would the COA have

been making a decision earlier as to whether or not to

repair the plaintiff's walkway when the COA doesn't have any

authority to do that?

Essentially, my response is the same as earlier. This is a legal

question as to authority. Okay. Whether the COA did it

earlier. It doesn't change anything. I would also further

note here, that we're talking about this. Essentially, he's

looking to provide evidence with respect to a new claim. If

you look at the trial court's order, it actually made two

determinations on reconsideration. Number one, the exercise

of discretion not to hear the new claim. And then number two,

said, I'm not going to take the additional evidence which is

relevant to that new claim. They do not brief whether the

court aired.

Well, I'm confused. What is the new claim?

The new claim. Okay. If you look at the trial court's decision

on reconsideration. Basically, they said, when you initially

objected the motion for summary judgment, the only claim that you

raised in response was this waiver claim. They get to

reconsideration. There's no mention of the waiver claim

anymore. They're now going to talk about the merit,

something they chose not to do in the first instance. So the

court, the trial court basically said, I'm not going to hear the

new claim, i.e. the claim on the merits. And I'm also not going

to hear the issue as to whether you should be able to

let's take a step back then on summary judgment, which is

where we are. You know, we have a general rule that we like

to dispose of cases on the merits, as opposed to

technicalities. Why shouldn't the trial court have reconsidered

and address the issue?

Because number one, there is also rules here that if you get a

motion for summary judgment and you want your day in court, you

think that there is something wrong with emotion for summary

judgment, you dispute facts, you dispute law, whatever you

want to dispute, you raise that in your objection, or you

risk the consequence that if it's a factual issue, it's going

to be deemed admitted. In this case, even with this additional

information, it still doesn't change the fact that the

undisputed fact here based on the affidavit is what was that

the association did this in response to a request from the

Human Rights Commission. But you still get to the point

that they had the obligation. If they wanted to dispute it,

they should have done it in the first instance.

Thank you. And we're not talking about technicalities,

where again, talking about that's what parties are expected

to do. Thank you. Case submitted.

Counselor
