You folks certainly know how to clear out a room.

This is case 2014, 0078, state of New Hampshire versus Stephen P. Collins.

Ms. Hausman?

May it please the court?

Stephanie Hausman on behalf of Stephen Collins, I have reserved one minute of my time.

I want to focus on the third issue, which is whether the court could give

consecutive sentences for a pattern act, AFSA, and a single act FSA.

When the single act charge was wholly encompassed within the pattern charge.

Haven't we said that it could?

Well, the court has addressed that in 40 or in Hanin.

And in both cases, the court relied on the question of whether an instruction

was given to the jury to assure that they weren't using the same act

to convict on both charges.

So the jury has to be told that they can't double count in effect.

They can't use a predicate act in pattern and then have a separate conviction

for that predicate act.

They have to be told that, because there may be many acts within the pattern period.

That's correct, because the double jeopardy clause assures that a defendant

is not punished multiple times for the same act.

And that did not happen here.

In this scenario, the trial court acknowledged that the discreet acts

were, in fact, encompassed in the pattern.

That's correct.

Can I just ask you on that point, though?

Aren't there some federal cases that say, for example,

you can be convicted of both a predicate act and a RICO offense?

I believe that that's true.

And so the question then is whether the legislature in here

intended the unit of prosecution to allow double counting of a single act,

both in a single act charge.

But I agree with you.

But then that is a different issue than a double jeopardy issue.

It's really what did the legislature intend?

A unit of prosecution analysis looks at the legislative intent,

but it is a double jeopardy analysis.

In here, this court has considered the legislature's intent

in passing the pattern statute.

And that's to capture those cases where the victim, usually young,

has been victimized so many times that she or he

can't remember individual acts.

And so given that that's the purpose of the pattern statute,

it doesn't seem that the legislature would have intended

that where the victim can remember a specific act,

that that act can be double counted for two convictions.

And where there's any ambiguity about the legislative intent,

the rule of lenity demands that the statute not be interpreted

so as to provide multiple punishments for the same act.

Here, Mr. Collins specifically requested a jury instruction.

And our case law has made that clear.

Pardon me?

Our case law has made that clear, has it not?

The rule of lenity, as a no double counting.

I think that's true.

I think the most specific opinions about that

have been enriched and affirmed in Jennings, where the court was

addressing the concept of two pattern charges.

And the court has said a single act can't be double counted

to form the basis of those two pattern convictions.

It necessarily follows that a single act therefore cannot

be double counted for one pattern and one discreet act charge.

The logical extension of that is that there

could be dozens of individual prosecutions,

as long as you had a single FSA on either side as bookends,

as it were, to justify the pattern indictment.

That's correct.

And so the state could bring a single act

to discreet act charge for each act, as well as a pattern.

And there's no indication that the legislature intended

that kind of double counting to occur.

Can I just ask you, is it in Hannon or Hanlon,

what was the instruction that was given that allowed that,

from which we said the jury must have found

these were different acts?

In Hannon, the trial court proposed giving an instruction

and the defendant objected.

And so no instruction was given.

And under those circumstances, the court

said there wasn't a double jeopardy problem

because the defendant had objected to that instruction

that would have made clear that he was not being punished

multiple times for the same act.

But here, the defendant asked for such an instruction

and the trial court refused to give it?

That is correct.

Do we have any idea why?

Was a rationale stated?

The court said that it was relying on fortier.

And the concept that the actus reis of a pattern charge

is the pattern itself and not the individual acts.

That portion of the fortier decision

addresses the concept of what the jury needs

to be unanimous about.

Does the jury need to be unanimous about the individual acts?

No.

The court held in fortier it needs

to be unanimous about the pattern.

Strangely enough, the trial court

didn't seem to acknowledge the next portion of the fortier,

opinion which discussed the double jeopardy issue

and resolved the double jeopardy issue against the defendant

because the trial court had given an instruction

like the one requested here.

I suppose you could charge it however you wished.

But then at the end of the day, you

say the ultimate double jeopardy protection

comes at sentencing.

That's correct.

I mean, this court has said many times,

the state can proceed on alternate theories.

And so the state in this case may not have known.

Is the victim going to be able to establish

the time frame or the number of events

needed for a pattern charge?

Maybe she won't.

And so as a sort of secondary position,

we're bringing individual act charges.

That does not mean that the jury should not

be instructed that they cannot use the same act to convict

on both.

But we're still back to that.

They should get that kind of an instruction only

if we say the legislature did not

intend people to be able to be convicted of both.

And we do have, apparently, we have RICO cases.

And I think there are cases in other states

that sort of say, well, you can be convicted of both.

The state has never made that argument in this case

either below or on appeal.

And the state doesn't contest on appeal the concept

that under the circumstances, in some cases,

a single act FSA can be a lesser included

offense of a pattern offense.

And so that's not an issue that's

in dispute in this case.

And apparently, at sentencing here,

the state recognized the issue by recommending

concurrent sentences.

The state not only recommended concurrent sentences,

but when the trial court first suggested

consecutive sentences in line with the PSI recommendation,

the state responded there could be

an issue with consecutive sentences.

But the trial court continued to push

for consecutive sentences.

And the state later said, that would be fine, your honor.

In this case, the issue cannot be resolved

by culling the record and speculating about what

the jury might have found.

That's something this court does

in resolving sufficiency questions,

harmless error questions, or plain error questions.

Those issues, those kind of claims,

are not implicated here.

This is a claim that implicates

Mr. Collins's rights against double jeopardy.

And his right to a jury finding

on each element of each offense.

The state argues that the instructions given

suffice to make sure that the jury was not

double counting the same act.

And I disagree.

The court instructed that each indictment was for,

was not the same offense, I believe.

Just make sure I'm getting that language right.

Each of the indictments against the defendant

constitutes a separate offense.

But that doesn't necessarily equate to,

they have to be different facts

happening on different days.

That's correct.

While they might not, while they might be the same,

the court was telling the jury,

these are not the same offense.

And that might be true colloquially,

AFSA is different than FSA,

but it's not true in the double jeopardy sense

of the same offense phrase.

Because they are a lesser and a greater offense.

Right, and one of the problems is,

is that to find a pattern,

the jury doesn't have to be unanimous

with regard to particular acts.

It just has to be unanimous with regard to,

was there a pattern?

And so to use a discrete act,

a discrete act both in the pattern

and then as a separate crime is a problem, so you say.

And that is what this court said in Richard

and then affirmed in Jennings,

where when discussing two pattern offenses,

it might be that in two pattern offenses,

the jury, six of the jurors think a discrete act

applies to one pattern and the other six

think it applies to the other pattern.

But this court says that's not good enough

or the nature of the verdict wouldn't be clear enough

for us to know that the jury isn't double counted.

If we agree with you, is the remedy to remand it

for re-sentencing consistent with the state's

original proposal that is concurrent or just reverse?

We are asking the court to vacate Mr. Collins's

consecutive suspended sentence on the FSA.

And not remand for additional sentence.

The state isn't asking for a remand in this

if we prevail on that issue.

And so I think the easiest and cleanest resolution

is just to vacate that suspended.

If your interpretation is correct,

it really wouldn't matter whether it was,

I mean in terms of the impact on your client,

obviously it matters, but in terms of the legal analysis,

it wouldn't really matter whether it was a consecutive

or concurrent sentence.

The concurrent sentence is still a separate conviction

and if you're right, that couldn't stand either.

I have often wondered about that,

that alternate theories are both recorded as convictions,

but then generally there's trial court only sentences

on one when in fact there should really

only be one conviction.

Well typically what I can recall doing in that situation

is dismissing at the end, dismissing the other one

as opposed to simply saying I'm sentencing

on both in their concurrent

because otherwise it's still two convictions.

I agree.

But there's a dispute in the superior court,

isn't there?

It's handled differently by different judges.

I think that's true, that it is handled differently.

There's not an opinion from this court

that gives clear guidance on that

and it really only arises sort of in the future

when they're looking back at a criminal record,

but this opinion might be an opportunity for the court

to provide the superior court's guidance.

So if we were to agree with you,

probably the better thing to do

would be to decide it, let everybody know

what the decision is and the consequences

to your client would simply follow.

That could be.

The court could decide that when there are alternate theory

or greater and lesser included offense convictions

and in its supervisory authority,

instruct the superior courts on how to handle

that situation and then remand for actions consistent

with the court's opinion.

What position did the state take

when the jury instruction was proposed in the trial court?

The state took no action at that time.

The state didn't object or assent or say anything.

The defendant filed the motion for a jury instruction

knowing that the state wanted to reserve the ability

to seek consecutive sentences.

So if the state wants that ability,

the state should bear the burden

of requesting that jury instruction

and making sure it happens.

The state took no action in this case

to make sure there was a jury finding of separate acts.

If there's nothing further at this time.

Thank you.

Ms. McGinnis.

Good morning, may it please the court.

I'm Susan McGinnis.

I'm here today representing the state of New Hampshire.

I'd just like to address a couple of things first

before I take questions.

Justice Bassett, there is no way

to know what position the state took

that I know of because they didn't file a written

objection to the defendant's proposed jury instruction,

but it was filed the day of trial

and there was a chambers conference about the instruction.

And when they came out, the judge gave the defense

a chance to make a record

and then said he was just denying it.

So I really don't know what position,

there's no way to know from the record

what position the state took.

But presumably when the state recommended

concurrent sentences, it had some sense

that there might be an issue here.

You could infer that, but it's not clear

because the state said something about that

might pose a problem with consecutive sentences

and the judge said, well if I start it

when he's released from confinement,

that'll fix the problem, there won't be a problem

and the state said yes, that would be fair.

So I don't know if they were talking about a problem

with jury unanimity or we've had problems

where there were consecutive sentences

where it wasn't clear if they started upon release

or upon finishing the other sentence.

So again, I don't think you can really,

where am I getting, I have a note to myself

that the defendant argued to the trial court

that this was an Apprendi issue.

He did argue that was an Apprendi issue.

That was not briefed on appeal, they did not argue that

and clearly it isn't an Apprendi issue

because all the elements were given to the jury,

they decided all of it, the same way

it's not an instruction issue.

And the other point I wanted to make

is that the defendant didn't ask

to have the concurrent sentence on the other FSA vacated.

So I've made the assumption that when they asked

that you vacate the consecutive sentence

that what they were asking for is that

the consecutive nature of it be vacated,

not that the sentence be vacated in its entirety.

So that's arguably an inconsistent position.

On the one hand it's double jeopardy

but not as to this one.

Yes, and it is an inconsistent position

so I assume that they were just saying,

they were arguing that it wouldn't violate double jeopardy

if it had been concurrent because otherwise

the other sentence should have been vacated too.

There were two FSAs, they were both alleged,

were alleged to have occurred within the pattern period.

Yes, there were two FSAs and defense

never objected to concurrent sentences below.

What do you say to my absurd result example?

I mean, this is a classic case.

This was an ongoing relationship.

So why you're saying that he could be sentenced,

this gentleman could be sentenced for the first AFSA

and the last AFSA on a pattern

and then for each of the dozen to two dozen AFSAs

in the middle?

Yes, the court has held that can happen

as long as he's not punished twice for the same offense.

And that's, gets me to the,

well, well, hold it, hold it, wait a minute.

Wait a minute.

The jury can convict someone of a pattern

if it finds that there was an act

at the beginning of the pattern period

and an act at the end of the pattern period.

Yes.

Okay, so assuming the jury finds those two discrete acts

within the period, it can convict of pattern.

Yes.

But it seems to me that our case law says

that you then cannot say, well, there,

you can't say that one of the acts

that created the basis for the pattern

can also be the basis for separate conviction.

No, and that is not my argument.

My argument is that what Hannon held

is that there there was a pattern

that encompassed individual acts

and this court said that the proof of the pattern

would not necessarily prove the individual acts.

Right.

And that the proof of the individual acts

would not necessarily prove the pattern.

Right, but the jury should be,

it should be explained to the jury

that they cannot use one act

to support both the pattern

and the separate indictment.

Do you agree with that?

I agree that is a better way to do it.

I don't think it's constitutionally mandated because.

Why not?

Well, because in Hannon,

the decision didn't turn on the fact

that the defendant had objected to the instruction.

The instruction issue they raised,

the unanimity instruction issue did,

but the court first decided

that it didn't violate double jeopardy

to prosecute him both for the pattern

and for acts falling in within the pattern

because proving the pattern wouldn't necessarily.

That's a different question.

You can prosecute,

but when the jury is sorting this out,

wouldn't you agree that it would violate double jeopardy

to have the jury rely on one act

to support the pattern

as well as to support a separate conviction?

If you knew they did that,

what the defense.

Well, you don't know.

That's why you have to instruct them.

But if I could finish in Hannon,

you did the analysis about prosecuting.

There was a little piece about an instruction issue

that you said he'd objected to the instruction.

He can and complain he didn't get one.

And then the court said,

based on our analysis above

about whether it'd be appropriate to prosecute

the case would not violate double jeopardy.

That resolves the sentencing issue too.

So the decision wasn't dependent

on the instruction issue.

What it was dependent on

is in order to find a violation of double jeopardy,

you have to find that the jury necessarily convicted him

twice for the same act.

What the defendant has done is turn that on its head

and made it say in the absence of an instruction,

you have to assume the jury convicted based on it.

Well, but how would,

assuming we take your argument there,

how would we know whether the jury did or did not

consider one act as to both the charges,

pattern and a standalone act?

We don't know.

We give the jury the instruction

and then we assume the jury's gonna follow the instruction.

Without an instruction,

we have no way of knowing

whether they improperly considered one act

on the two charges.

Yes.

And that gets me the instructions.

I agree that the instruction alone

that their separate charges isn't sufficient,

but the judge also gave them an instruction

that the reason crimes have different names

is because they either involve a different mental state

or a different act.

Here, the mental state is the same

for the AFSAs and the FSAs.

So the jury necessarily would have concluded

that it involved a different act.

I don't think your average juror

assumes they can punish someone twice

and convict them twice.

Well, let me ask you this.

Does the state agree or disagree

that the proposed jury instruction

is a correct statement of the law?

I believe that it's a trick statement of the law

that they cannot convict on a pattern

based on the same act under this court's case law.

They can't convict them of the pattern

if they have to rely on the same acts

as the underlying offenses.

But here, as the state...

So you do agree that that's a correct statement of the law?

I agree under the current case law

that you can't convict for the pattern

and the single act.

I believe this court said that

in one of the prior cases.

Believe Jenny.

I agree.

So I agree with that, that the case is you can't do that.

You can't convict for a pattern.

Say you only had two acts.

You can't convict of a pattern and the two single acts.

But as this court said in Hannon,

if a question on double jeopardy

is that would the evidence of one

necessarily prove the other?

And the state specifically argued to the jury

that there were at least five factually distinct acts

during the period.

Now, the defendant's sufficiency evidence

is based on an argument that you can't find

that two acts occurred over a period of two months or more.

Well, you can because you have to necessarily find

that the first act was at the earliest sometime,

at the latest sometime in mid June or late June.

But if you can...

I guess I'm having trouble.

If you concede that our law is not like my RICO example,

if you concede that that's true,

that you can't have one act be both the basis

for an individual crime and a pattern,

then I guess I do have a real difficulty understanding

how the failure to give the instruction

which you say was a correct statement of the law

isn't the problem.

Well, first of all, the defendant has a brief

that the court aired in not giving

the unanimity instruction.

The argument they've made is in the absence of an instruction,

you have to assume that the FSAs were lesser

included offenses and that the jury necessarily found

that they were the pattern.

And I say the birthday assault

which falls within the second FSA

could not prove the pattern

because the earliest the assaults that you can,

there's clear evidence that they started sometime

in mid to late June.

But your approach is let's keep the jury

from knowing what the law is.

And then when they come back with their verdict,

you say, well, we have no way of knowing

how they made their verdict too bad.

That's not my position.

Doesn't the court have a responsibility

in this case especially to explain to the jury,

pattern is difficult to understand,

it seems to me by the average juror,

that a pattern is one crime.

It requires at least two acts over a period of two months.

And in a situation where there may be alleged

other acts within that timeframe

strikes me very important to make it clear to the jury

that it can't use one of the two acts

that mark the pattern

also as the basis for a separate crime.

This is tricky business.

Don't trial courts have the responsibility

to make it clear what the jury can do and can't do.

The jury, the instructions were a correct statement

of the law.

They didn't include the unanimity instruction

but this court's never held that the judges

have to instruct that way.

And in cases like Cannon where there was no instruction,

the case didn't turn on the instruction.

And I can tell the court there's another unpublished

case where the court reached the same conclusion

that as long as the evidence supported a finding

that there were two acts for the pattern

and other factually distinct acts.

But you're talking about sufficiency now, aren't you?

No, it decided a double jeopardy issue

in an unpublished opinion under the same situation

where the indictments didn't.

Can you give us the name of that

so we can track that down?

Do you know?

I do not have it because we couldn't cite it.

It's actually one of my cases

and it involved acts that occurred.

Well, maybe we've just gotten to the point

where we have to make that clear.

I think the court, we could use some guidance on it

but based on the case law now,

the court found it was a sentencing issue.

Not an issue for the jury.

The jury had to decide if all the charges

but a sentencing issue.

And the Cannon seems to say that,

Cannon and Forty, unless you can find

that one would have necessarily proved the other

then it doesn't violate double jeopardy.

And whereas here there are clearly

five distinct acts of sexual assault,

one of which the birthday assault could not have been

one of the two acts necessary to prove the pattern

because it was not, more than two months

after the first act,

it could not have been the basis for the pattern.

Or maybe that's why the defense at trial

only asked for the concurrent sentences

in the end on sentencing

with regard to one of the FSAs.

The defense argued for concurrent sentences

on all the charges.

I see, okay.

The state didn't ask for concurrent sentences.

I mean, they didn't ask for consecutive sentences.

They asked for concurrent sentences on all.

I don't know if it was because of this reason

or some other problem with consecutive sentences

that has come up.

The judge said, well, the PSI recommended

consecutive sentences, why aren't you?

The state said, well, there's a problem,

might be a problem with consecutive sentences.

I don't know what they were talking about.

Maybe this problem, maybe another problem.

And then the defense argued

that he had to get concurrent sentences

because there had been no unanimity instruction given

and therefore it would violate double jeopardy

to give him a consecutive sentence.

So if this court decides

that there can't be consecutive sentencing here,

I think the remedy is based on the arguments made

that you vacate the consecutive nature of the sentence

and the concurrent sentence stands

because the defense never argued

he couldn't get concurrent sentences.

He never argued that conviction had to be vacated.

He argued that he could only get concurrent sentences.

But under the current state of this court's law

is in Hanon, it didn't turn on the instruction,

the defendant refusing the instruction.

And I agree that an instruction would make it much easier

for appellate review, but the courts never said you need one

and I don't believe that the court was completely

off base in saying this is a sentencing issue.

Because here the jury's determination

of whether these five distinct,

there were many, many acts,

but at least five distinctly proven acts.

The jury's assessment didn't turn on

whether they believe those individual acts,

but actually whether they believe the victim's credibility,

whether anything had happened at all.

There was no alibi for certain periods of time.

This all turned on whether they believed her.

So either they believed all of the acts had occurred

or none of the acts had occurred.

This was not a situation where there was clear evidence

of some acts, but not others.

But doesn't that support, doesn't that,

if that's true, doesn't that support your opponent's point

that it's not, you know, that this is really all

sort of part of the pattern, that you can't say,

you know, here was one particular thing

that there was particularly strong evidence on

or particularly weak evidence on.

And so we can kind of infer some things from that.

Here you're saying that it's all sort of jumbled together.

It all turns on credibility.

So if you have five factually distinct sexual assaults,

then there can be some within the pattern time period

that are distinct acts, not just the pattern.

It wouldn't be being convicted on the pattern

and the distinct acts.

It is possible, and if the jury is giving

the right guidance in coming to its conclusion,

then it would be supportable.

I don't know that this is a jury issue

as long as there are distinct factual circumstances.

And if you'd like, I can send you something

with the name of the case that was decided that was unpublished.

But like I said, it was unpublished.

I didn't cite it.

I just know about it.

That would be helpful so we can take a look at the reasoning.

And see who's to blame.

Because the only reason I even knew about it

is it's one of my own cases.

So I had the unpublished order.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Oh, you reserved time.

That's right.

Two quick points to make.

I'm sorry.

Double Jeopardy prohibits multiple punishments.

And so Mr. Collins's position was,

consecutive sentences is what violates double Jeopardy.

This court may want to clarify,

because of Justice Lynn's concern about looking back

at a record, how would a court

know that they were alternate theories or not?

Can I just ask you just to follow up one point

that your opponent made?

Is it your view also that in Hannon and what was the other?

Forty.

We've already decided the question

that something can't be both the underlying act

and the act that's necessary for the path.

No.

And in my brief, I discussed some issues

with those two opinions and what they don't address.

So what is clear from both those opinions

is the importance of an instruction when requested.

So in other words, would it be your view

that we could say, listen, we don't

have to decide what the unit of prosecution is here,

assuming we haven't decided already.

All we have to say is that the court's

got to give a clear instruction saying

what the unit of prosecution is.

And it didn't do so here.

And therefore, you get the benefit of that failure

to do that.

Yes.

I think the court can assume without deciding

that under the facts of this case,

the FSA could have been a lesser included of the pattern.

And where the defendant requested the instruction,

it was failure not to give that.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Counsel, may I come forward?
