This is case 2014-0287, state of New Hampshire versus Lewis Carvalho.

May it please the court Christine List on behalf of Mr. Carvalho.

This is a speedy trial case.

The two factors most at issue here from the Barker v. Wingo balancing test are the second and fourth.

And I'd like to address both in turn briefly.

The second factor, the reason for the delay.

The state contends that this factor should not be weighed against it because it is the result of a missing witness.

You're dealing with an uncooperative witness.

Ms. Girlfriend.

I'm sorry?

One of the witnesses was the defendant's girlfriend, right?

Yes, the first witness being Mr. Nugent, the second being Ms. Montero.

Right.

The state equates that, in making this argument, the state equates that uncooperative witness with the missing witness that is justified as not weighing against the state in Barker.

But no case cited by the state discusses applying to an uncooperative witness.

Rather, the Barker case in case of sight had discussed witnesses who are more typically unavailable, including vacations, illness, trainings.

More foreseeable results where there is a delay that could appropriately be justified.

But with regard to Nugent, the state gave him immunity, right?

They did.

And he still refused to testify.

So the state really could not have done much more.

Certainly, witnesses refused to participate or testify in the process could result in an appropriate delay.

Perhaps that isn't weighed against the state initially.

However, Mr. Nugent continued to vehemently refuse to testify.

And in fact, had done that prior to the state's initial request for continuance in that regard.

So at some point, the state's decision to continue to rely on a witness,

it is Carling who is refusing to testify with the futile hope that further incarceration will cause a change of heart.

Must be weighed against the state at that point.

With regard to the fourth factor, the prejudice to the defendant here.

We are talking about both incarceration, but more importantly strengthening of the state's case.

The state contends that this is never an appropriate prejudice under Barker.

Essentially asking for a blanket rule.

But even some of the case last cited by the state discusses that in some circumstances, and I'd submit in this case,

it is an appropriate consideration when the purpose for the delay is to strengthen the state's case.

The state in their brief argues that they had to replace testimony,

essentially to fill in the gaps from missing testimony from Mr. Nugent and Miss Montero.

These delays were in order to do that, in order to add witnesses, in order to fill in those gaps.

And as illustrated-

What if he had testified?

I'm sorry?

What if he had testified?

Mr. Nugent had testified?

If Mr. Nugent had testified, I don't believe the state would have been looking for a request in the initial trial, a continuance in the initial trial.

But what if the same delay occurred and at the conclusion of the delay, Mr. Nugent in fact decided to testify?

Would you still have a speedy trial claim?

And I think there would still be an argument regarding the anxiety and delay that it caused given the significant amount of time that

went on while they were waiting for Mr. Nugent to testify.

But in this case, obviously on a very specific case-by-case basis, the state is alleging that

essentially by the time we get to November, now we have to fill in the missing testimony at that point.

And they had had six months prior to indictment over the state of defendant's objection to potentially have a plan B in place.

Again, then we go from May until November without Mr. Nugent having any indication that he is going to testify.

The court is simply waiting for him to have a change of heart while the defendant is filing motions for speedy trial.

I would submit that in a case where there is a delay in that, that it is the appropriate prejudice when there is ample opportunity for

the state to be putting that in place and they were on notice, particularly in this case, that they may not be able to rely on Mr.

Nugent's testimony in their case in chief.

Are you saying this delay is partly the court's fault?

I'm not, your honor.

I'm certainly not saying that there isn't some appropriate delay when a witness refuses to testify.

That's not something that necessarily can be brought to the attention prior to-

But then you're saying this is an extraordinary case.

I mean, usually if witnesses are jailed because they refuse to testify, they don't hold out for as long as this fellow did.

Correct, your honor.

And further, that the state was on notice at that point to attempt to fill in the gaps of the testimony they believed they needed well beyond what was allowed.

And so that, first, the factor of that delay should be weighed against them since they continue to choose to rely on the testimony of Mr.

Nugent and request that he be held.

And then second, also, that that isn't appropriate consideration under the prejudice prong of Barbara.

To what extent should it weigh in our analysis that your client was not incarcerated the entire time?

During the time from July until November, he was not incarcerated.

I think that there's still an anxiety with regard to the trial continuing to depend repeatedly asking for speedy trial.

That date was given in November.

And again, he's given another trial date past that, given the court saying, okay, this is the speedy trial date we are going to use.

And then it's further delayed.

But coupled with the prejudice of the state specifically seeking this continuance for the strengthening of their case.

Thank you very much.

Thank you, council.

May it please the court, Nicholas Court for the state, I'll take questions anytime.

The defense council is correct that we couldn't cite any cases where an uncooperative witness was involved.

And as Justice Convoy's question suggested, this is presumably because in most cases where an uncooperative witness is available and is found in contempt and is jailed, he usually cooperates.

So defense also can cite no cases in which a court has found that the state should have known that a witness would not cooperate even though he was found in contempt and was put in jail with the keys to the cell in his hand.

This is an extraordinary case.

So that's why we don't believe this court should hold it against the state.

That it tried so much and so many times to get Mr. Nugent to testify.

Both he and Ms. Montero had knowledge that no other witness possessed.

It was only after making every effort to get them to testify that the state had to call several other witnesses, including Ms. Montero's stepfather.

You agree that the time that the clock starts ticking from the date of the arrest.

Right.

Right.

In this case, 21 months elapsed from arrest to trial.

Your opponent argues that points out that the superior court policy is that trials will occur nine months after indictment.

And that this isn't just, you know, a few weeks slipped by.

This is a significant amount of time.

And query, what's the use of a policy if situations like this are allowed to occur?

Because this is an extraordinary case.

These conditions cannot be foreseen as being common, certainly.

Both with Mr. Nugent who just kept refusing.

And again, as I said in my brief, the defense brief says they didn't call Mr. Nugent.

Well, yes, they did.

They called him as a witness just before they arrested.

They put him on the stand with the jury absent.

And once again, he refused to testify at the trial.

And so then, and only then did the state rest its case.

This doesn't happen that often.

And the same is true with Ms. Montero who was thoroughly expected to show up and to respond to a subpoena.

But when they tried to serve the subpoena, she wasn't around.

And they could never find her in time for the trial.

You're saying that no component of the delay should be held against the state?

That's correct.

And because these were highly unusual circumstances.

And as it turned out, the state could not call either one of them or get either one of them to testify.

And therefore, its case was weaker.

And it could only try to make up a little bit of the ground by calling witnesses who could produce circumstantial evidence

to prove what these two witnesses could have proved by direct evidence.

So could this stalemate have gone on for another year or two without giving rise to speedy trial concerns?

Well, obviously the state at one point felt that it had sufficient evidence to prove its case,

albeit much weaker than it would have been otherwise.

So it went ahead.

And in fact, it did get a guilty verdict.

But it had to work very hard to do so.

But this inability to get the witness to testify isn't a trump card that allows this to go on forever?

Well, it couldn't go on forever.

It has to be a limit somewhere.

But this case is so unusual, I don't think this court can say that it went beyond the limit here.

Thank you.

Thank you, counsel.

Case submitted.

Court will take a brief recess and will resume with State v. Maxfield.
