This is case 2014-0424, appeal of James P. Conner.

Mr. Krupsky.

May it please the court, good afternoon.

My name is John Krupsky, I'm with the law firm of Milner and Krupsky here in Conker, New Hampshire.

And I have the honor and privilege of representing Mr. James P. Conner in this appeal.

And we are here today primarily because of police standards and training.

Council misinterpreted and misapplied their own unilaterally promulgated rules.

Let me just stop you there for a moment and make sure we're on the same wavelength.

As I understand it, there's no right to appeal in statute governing police standards and training.

And therefore this is in effect a petition for

a writ of certiorari with the heightened standard of review that goes along with that.

Do you agree?

My understanding is this is an appeal under 541-6, and the appeal is directly to the Supreme Court.

Well, I'm not sure I agree with you about that, but let's go ahead anyway.

And we're here today to discuss the misapplication and

misinterpretation of their own unilaterally promulgated rules.

Primarily, the rule 402.02B provides that a police officer's certification may be temporarily suspended.

If that individual, as in the case of Mr. Conner, is indicted for felony,

unless, and the word is unless,

then there is no adverse safety to the public or

the criminal justice system is not adversely affected.

How could we reverse this?

Because once he was indicted, wasn't it a violation of federal law for him to have a firearm?

How could the police standards and training say this is, don't get me wrong,

it's not very sympathetic to your client, it sounds like frankly, he got screwed.

But how can we say that police standards and training can say it's okay for

somebody under indictment and who can't possess a firearm because he's violating federal law if he does, can be a policeman?

Well, Your Honor, I have to tell you, I don't know if it's violating federal law, but I can tell you that Judge Temple-

You can trust him on that.

No, I'm just telling you that Judge Temple was presented with the same question.

And Judge Temple said that he could maintain his firearm and continue working as a police officer, and that's in the record.

During his arraignment on this matter, Judge Temple told him that I'm not going to check off the box,

you can keep your firearm, and I'd like you to keep working, and that's contained in the record.

Did he address that under federal law, though?

He did not address, nor was it raised prior to Justice Lynn bringing it up right now.

But nobody had brought that up prior to this instance.

I didn't know about it either when I was on the bench, but when I did just that, I got a phone call.

To follow up on an implication of Judge Lynn's question,

how do we get behind the council's conclusion

that confidence in the criminal justice system was not affected?

Because you have to read, you know, we've got sort of a double negative thing going on here.

Suspension is required under the reg if the officer is arrested for a felony here,

unless confidence in the criminal justice system would not be adversely affected.

The council concluded that council confidence in the criminal justice system,

they couldn't conclude that it wouldn't be adversely affected.

How do we get behind that discretionary judgment?

I think they could, because this is the fact, Joanna.

When you look at what they said, they didn't articulate facts or positions why.

They simply said, because of a naked indictment, therefore the confidence is adversely affected.

And I would profit to you, your honor, that it's actually the opposite.

Really, because somebody is indicted does not mean they are guilty.

As we all know, indictments are a threshold inquiry.

And that threshold inquiry is only under a probable cause standard.

Whereas the rules under the police standards and training is under a preponderance of the evidence.

And it was evidence showing that there was no adverse

impact upon the criminal justice system.

And if I might, your honor.

What was the evidence of that?

What's that?

What was the evidence of that?

Oh, sorry, Judge Bassett.

Yes, the evidence was, number one, there was no public, there was no public outcry, okay?

Number two, you had the police chief, okay?

The police chief came in support of him saying you should not pull this certification.

Three, you had the board of select men, the board of select men who are bound to look out for

the interests of their constituents and the public, review it and say he should keep his job.

You had the temporal time period.

Remember, what happened here is the time period when the allegations occurred

in October of 2012 and January of 2013.

We're talking now April of 2014 where they're pulling his certification.

He had operated as a police officer for that entire period of time with no problems.

He also had operated as a police officer with no negative impact from 1998 on.

Was he, was he without pay, suspended without pay?

My understanding, your honor, is that initially he was put on administrative leave in March.

And then after he went to the arraignment and Judge Temple said you can keep your fire on.

He was put in, he was working, receiving full pay.

However, he was working in detectives and was not patrolling.

And he was doing investigatory work in detectives.

So I take it now, he's back on full duty.

Yeah, he has since been exonerated and his certification has been returned.

So he did not lose pay?

He did not lose pay.

Okay.

Then what remedy would you be seeking?

If he's back at work, he's been exonerated, he was paid.

What?

The remedy we'd be seeking, your honor, is twofold.

Number one is that we believe that police standards and training council made a mistake.

And therefore, because they made that mistake,

that these temporary suspensions should be taken out of his record.

So that should not be reflected in his record.

Number two is that I believe because of the nature of this rule.

But why wouldn't we remand?

If we agreed with you, why wouldn't we send it back to them?

Because they, as you argue, misapplied their own regulations.

Well, you could with direction of how to appropriately apply it.

And that would be a remedy that we could see too.

But at that point when we went back, he's already got his certification.

But if the council revisited the issue and in its wisdom said, wait a minute.

Back then, we have a police officer charged with serious felonies against his

wife at that time in our judgment.

Confidence in the criminal justice system will be impaired.

Even though other people might disagree with them, how is that wrong?

And couldn't they do it again and say, sorry, that was our judgment.

It remains our judgment.

We're here again because we hope it would not happen again.

When you look at the motion for reconsideration, the order on the motion for

reconsideration, it provides in that regard that also Connor is charged

with a felony assault, would so adversely affect the confidence in

the criminal justice system that his certification must be suspended.

So the mere charge, that rule 402.02B becomes a nullity.

It would be like putting a period before the unless.

Because they're saying the mere fact that you're charged, it's a fact.

But they're not deciding whether the charge is going ultimately to go away or

whether he'll be convicted of it.

They're looking at what he's been indicted for and saying to themselves,

you know, if this is true, we don't know if it is or not.

But if it is true, we're definitely certain that confidence in the criminal

justice system would be impaired if we give him back his certification.

And actually, the standard is even higher than that because we're dealing

with double negatives.

The unless doesn't say, unless confidence in the criminal justice

system is maintained or whatever.

It says confidence in the criminal justice system would not be

adversely affected.

For that unless clause to apply, the council would have to make an affirmative

finding that confidence in the criminal justice system would not be adversely

affected.

And what I'm saying to your honor is when you look at their first order,

they didn't even address after unless, okay, in their first order.

We follow the motion for consideration saying you have to address both

wrongs, both whether the safety to the public is adversely affected and

whether or not the criminal justice is adversely affected.

They came back and said, well, the criminal justice system because of the

nature of the charge we find would be adversely affected.

But they never even addressed whether or not there was a public safety

issue there.

And in fact, from our perspective, they couldn't.

And in fact, we believe that even in a brief, they said they chose not to.

So the mere fact that they chose not to even touch one of the elements,

for that reason alone, their decision should be overturned.

We also believe that in continuing to answer the question in regards to

this issue, in the transcript you look at it and they say,

this is almost a, and I think one of the commissions referred to it as a fatal

attraction situation.

The chief testified as to his belief in the high credibility of Mr.

Connor and the low credibility of the other person.

There was no evidence submitted whatsoever on the two prongs of

whether it would adversely affect the safety of the public or

whether or not it would negatively impact the criminal justice system.

No evidence other than there's an indictment.

It doesn't.

But doesn't the fact that there's been an indictment returned against the police

office for assault in a domestic violence kind of situation, doesn't that?

I mean, couldn't the council say, wait a minute.

We cannot have a situation unless, you know, maybe if there was some evidence

that, you know, the prosecutor was corrupt and he had some vendetta against

your client and, you know, that's when he went in and got the grand jury

to indict the Ham sandwich, so to speak, that kind of situation.

But absent that, can't the council say we cannot have a situation

where a police officer is under indictment and is working?

Not under this rule, Your Honor.

I put forward that under this rule 402.02B, it states that all of those

elements and a mere indictment itself is not enough.

Now, when you look at the facts of this case and you go back as I had stated,

the temporal proximity of the alleged acts and when the indictment came down.

The fact that he was subsequently, you know, and I know you can't look

at a crystal ball, but, you know, everything they said came true.

He was found not guilty and indictments were no prost.

This is an individual who, when you think about it, if the rule is,

anytime someone's indicted, you automatically pull their certification,

you're going to invite, if I might, people making those claims because it's

an easy way to get a step up in a litigation process.

Is there any way to purge his record, so to speak?

I mean, I understand.

He must be very frustrated.

He ultimately was found not guilty.

Is there some mechanism for him to argue?

Because I was found not guilty, I would like my record to be

purged of the suspension.

Not really.

And the other thing that's disturbing, at least in our mind,

in regards to this is that they also have a general exception to when

someone's certification may be taken or suspended or revoked.

And that's under a just cause standard.

And once again, we invoke that, and it was not even addressed.

And they said, well, obviously, just cause can't apply because he was indicted.

Well, if we keep going back to because he was indicted,

then all these rules mean nothing because if so fact that if indicted,

don't go anywhere else.

Mr. Krupsky, aren't there indictments and there are indictments?

I mean, they're not all of the same nature.

And there are some crimes for which someone could be indicted

that have implications very different than others.

So isn't that something that the council's entitled to take into account?

I think they can, but they need to articulate the particular facts

and look at the circumstances in here, both under, I would say,

appeal of Murdoch and under 541A35.

There were no findings of facts to support other than a blanket.

There was an indictment.

And it keeps just saying there was an indictment.

And there's not even, from our perspective, any facts to support.

This is why, once again, it leads to the presentation

that the more egregious an allegation is,

that means the less due process that a police officer gets.

And isn't that the opposite of our judicial system?

The more serious the allegation, the more due process you get.

So aren't you, in effect, saying that there

ought to be a probable cause hearing?

There should be something.

But I'm stuck with the rules I got.

And the rules that I have here talk about 402.02B, which

requires, in our mind, for the council

to do three things if they want to suspend somebody

after an indictment.

They have to prove they were indicted.

They have to prove that there's an adverse effect

upon the public safety.

And even though it's an or, because it says unless,

so it almost acts like an end,

that they have to prove that there is,

the criminal justice system would not be adversely affected.

Thank you.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Good afternoon.

May it please the court?

I'm Nancy Smith from the Attorney General's office

here on behalf of Police Standards and Training,

the Police Standards and Training Council, which I may refer to

simply as the council for gravity.

This case is about the temporary suspension

of Officer Conner's law enforcement certification

after he was indicted on felony assault charges by a grand jury.

And the contention of appellant that they just

stopped after finding that there had been an indictment

is not, we don't see it as being correct

if you look at the record.

They did, if you look at the transcript of the hearing,

it's very clear that the majority of that hearing

was spent discussing not the fact of the indictment, which

wasn't disputed, but the effect that that would

have on the criminal justice system.

Because if you look at it, the record.

Is Mr. Kropsky correct that there's

no way to expunge the record, roll back

the clock in this matter?

I'm sorry, I didn't hear that correct.

Well, is there a way to expunge the record

in effect to a null of proceedings?

Render them a nullity.

Roll back the clock.

The fact that his, I suppose, if he went through the process

to get the indictment expunged,

because the indictment is a public record.

That's pretty easy to do, though.

So if he did that, then he might

be able to go back and ask police standards.

What's the effect on him of having this in his record?

Really none.

Oh, there's got to be a reputational interest.

And we have case law that protects

reputations in New Hampshire, as you know.

There's got to be a way.

There's nothing specific in the police standard rules,

How about a stipulation with the state?

Has anybody thought about that?

I mean, it does appear that we may be hamstrung in terms

of being able to provide any relief to Officer Conner.

But it also does appear, especially

since he apparently kept working, even if he shouldn't

had a gun for a year and a half after all this started,

that he was not treated fairly, not by the system,

but by the claim against him that led to all of this.

Isn't there some way that the state and Officer Conner

could come to an agreement that his temporary suspension

record could be sealed?

I think there might be a concern about that,

that even though you have a person who is found not guilty

on one, if you start seeing a pattern, then down the road

somewhere, it might be relevant that they

have counted fire issues that you would.

You could seal it conditionally.

I assume that this was Officer Conner's first claimed attempt

to strangle his wife, right?

This had not been claimed by her before, right?

Had he ever been accused by anybody of anything like this

before?

I'm not that I'm aware of.

And as far as we know, he hasn't

been accused of anybody of anything like this since, right?

That's correct.

I'm still sensing middle ground here.

I can't say what the council would do

if they got a request, because that hasn't come up.

Are these records public?

In other words, can a member of the public

say I want to see the records of the council

and just get them?

They would not be able to see the entire record.

They would just get the fact that there

was a certification process and what the result was.

They would not have access to all of it.

Would they be able to know now?

If I went over to the council, it was just a John Q citizen,

and said, I want to know whether this officer was

ever suspended.

Would I be able to get that information?

I believe you would be able to get that bare information,

yes.

But it wouldn't be clear from getting that

that after he was suspended, he was exonerated

for the alleged crime that supported the suspension.

They would also get all of that.

They would get all of that.

I believe they would get that, because it would also

show that the certification was reinstated.

And the reason for the reinstatement

was that the charges were dismissed.

Well, doesn't this affect his employability in the future?

It did.

Doesn't this fact on his record

affect his employability in the future?

I don't believe that it should.

If you're getting at whether or not this would put him

on a lorry list, or it certainly hasn't affected

his employment with his current employer.

But isn't it pretty clear that if he

wanted to go to apply for another job in another police

department, isn't the police department going to say,

jeez, I've got two candidates here.

One doesn't have this in his record, and one does.

And even though I might think that he's been exonerated,

so there's nothing to this, why would I take the chance?

Well, I think he would have an obligation

if he went to another police department to possibly,

unless he had the arrest expunge,

to disclose the arrest, which makes it even more.

It's not going to have any different effect.

I think the police officers are held to a very high standard

because of the authority invested in them

to enforce the laws, to affect people's liberty rights,

and in evaluating them, there's a very extensive background

check that they have to go through.

We respect all of that and think

it's quite admirable, on the other hand.

Sometimes a little human compassion can go a long way.

If there were any reason to be, and as I said,

I think the law is going to compel

us in a direction that won't favor him.

I could be wrong, but thus far in my analysis, at least

to me, it seems that way.

I don't know anything about how my colleagues feel.

And if that turns out to be true,

then it seems as though he's gotten a raw deal from the system.

You don't see it that way?

You don't see it that way?

I'm not sure if I'm understanding your question

because whether it could be removed from the system,

it hasn't been a request to remove it.

So we haven't analyzed that.

That's not what we agree with.

Well, it wouldn't hurt if Deputy Rice were

to agree with you to file a joint motion with the council

to see what it might do.

Our opinion process takes a while.

There's nothing to prevent you from trying

to see if there could be some good to come out of this.

Yeah, I don't have authority to decide it for me.

But you've got some ammunition.

Our decision in state versus, well,

you've got the imprimatur of the chief,

but you've also got state versus veal,

which says that there's a constitutional right

to protect your reputation in New Hampshire.

And you could use that as force to come to an agreement

or to support an agreement.

I know we're not supposed to give legal advice.

Right.

But the council is also charged

with protecting the public and confidence in law enforcement.

And I think we wouldn't disagree with you

that at the time we didn't have the verdict of not guilty.

And so presumably, the council is doing a good job

in protecting the public.

And I don't think any of us would disagree with you on that.

We're being a little bit unfair, of course, to you,

because we're saying, well, now can't

is there some way we can fix this after the fact?

Because now it seems unfair.

It is a temporary suspension.

And that takes into account that they're not

making a decision on the merits.

They're not saying that he did anything wrong,

but just given the fact that it has gone through an indictment

process and found probable cause to be charged

with a felony, that the impact on having him,

and there would have been ways that I think

if you look at what's in the record,

if it had come to them with him still on administrative leave,

they might have viewed this very differently.

And that's in the discussion in the record.

It's like, OK, he's not engaging in activity

that's going to adversely impact the criminal justice system

while this is pending.

But that wasn't the fact.

By the time it got to the council,

his chief had already put him back to work as a detective.

There was discussion with the police chief,

well, what is he doing as a detective?

Is he working on cases?

And the answer was yes.

So that was the concern of why they felt that they needed

to take this step with these charges pending,

so that very clearly didn't stop at, oh, there's

an indictment.

We have to suspend him.

It was the current activity.

So there are ways that they would not just

automatically suspend.

They do look at that.

What's going on?

And that is borne out in the record.

So there is that factor that it's not

an automatic suspension with an indictment.

So just in other words, what you're saying,

if I'm understanding it correctly,

what you're saying is if the situation had been

that the town of Hudson had said, OK,

we're going to put you on limited duty,

we're going to take away your gun,

and we're going to put you on limited duty,

you can only work at the desk.

You can't go out.

And then the council might have said, OK,

given that understanding, we will not impose

any suspension of his credentials.

That's absolutely correct.

And there was quite a bit of discussion about that

in the record that this is different than what we found

comfort in, as I think the way it was.

We found comfort in some other cases.

We've heard recently that the officer

was on administrative leave or had been put into some other

capacity that he wouldn't be actively investigating cases.

And one of the concerns was that if he

is an integral part of an ongoing criminal investigation

against somebody else and is convicted,

then a criminal who may be charged, should be charged,

won't be able to be brought to justice.

And that was a real concern.

So what happened after that he was suspended?

He was still getting paid, but he wasn't coming to work?

It's going to vary from department to department

about what capacities.

But I do know in this case, he did get paid.

That's what I understand.

He was on paid administrative leave for some period of time.

And then that changed.

So then his credentials were suspended.

That meant he could not do any police work at all.

He could not work in a law enforcement capacity.

Some departments have non-unicorn positions

that they might have been able to keep him in.

That might vary from department to department,

particularly depending on the size of the department.

So just to address the one last point on just cause,

I think goes back to the same issues

that they found important related to the public confidence,

which is that this was not a needless gesture.

And that's what appellant relies on.

They didn't need to do this because of the full duty

status.

They were looking at the fact that he

was in full duty status as being of grave concern

to the impact on the criminal justice system.

So just from the point of what was appealed here

as to whether the council aired and exercising

its authority to suspend under these circumstances,

we would request that you affirm the police counsel's

finding.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Council may come forward in the matter of Celeste.
