This is case 2014-0028, Jonathan Deshaines Adal versus Hillsborough County Attorney.

Mr. Krupsky.

May it please the Court. Good morning.

My name is John Krupsky. I'm with the law firm of Milner and Krupsky.

And today I have the pleasure and honor of representing the petitioners in this matter.

Jonathan Deshaine, Matthew Chajuga, and Michael Buckley.

And we've submitted our arguments and writing obviously to our briefs.

And what I'd like to do this morning is concentrate on three areas that we think the trial court made,

specific errors that need to be discussed with this Court.

Can I just ask you first before we get to that, it's sort of a factual thing that I want to make sure that I'm understanding.

Is it your understanding that when somebody's name is put on this, and I understand it's sort of an informal,

but somebody's name is put on the lorry list, that that means that if the person is going to be a witness,

the prosecutor discloses the fact that the person's on the list to the defense.

In other words, that as a matter of routine that happens.

Yes, Your Honor. It's my understanding that if you're given a lorry designation and or placed on the lorry list,

and we believe the evidence shows that it is a formal list.

It's a formal list.

It's placed on an Excel chart.

It's shared with the Attorney General's office, which is the statewide law enforcement agency.

So it would cross county lines.

It crosses county lines, and it's a formal list.

But it's also confidential as among law enforcement people, until it has to be disclosed.

It's confidential. I don't think that there's anything that says it's confidential, that it's subject to 91A.

And I would also say...

You think it is subject to 91A?

Yes, it is.

And also, Your Honor, I would submit to you that it no longer is confidential once you have that first hearing,

and it's disclosed to once defense counsel, which then, as you know, it's a relatively small bar where it gets around.

Is it limited to information that is in the police officer's personnel file?

Or is it broader than that?

Let's say the personnel file, as in this case, doesn't contain any lorry issues.

But somebody thinks that lorry issues are involved with this particular officer's prior conduct.

Does that still get treated as a lorry issue?

That's the problem, Your Honor.

There's no set rules.

The closest thing we have to a set of rules is the Peter Heade memo that's in the record of 2004.

Shouldn't the legislature tackle this issue and make some hard rules?

Because the question is, and I know I'm asking a double question,

but the question is not whether someone's on the lorry list so much as why are they on the lorry list

and does it make any difference in any particular case in the future where the officer might be called to testify.

As I understand it, third question, there's no doubt that these officers have always testified truthfully whenever they've been called to trial.

Well, I guess to the first question, whether there's a place for the legislature in this,

I would say yes that there is a place for the legislature just as they did 105, 13B,

and made certain disclosures on the personnel file.

But as this Court has ruled in Theopolis, they said no, regardless of what the legislature does,

we have certain constitutional requirements that have to be followed despite what the legislature does.

So I don't think it's an all or nothing, it's for the legislature.

I agree, we created this problem in part.

So what I'm looking at this is we're here because of the possible constitutional implications.

But your position, I think, is that these officers were ultimately exonerated of claimed bad conduct.

Is that right?

Yeah, it's our position.

It's our position that they were exonerated.

Well, I'll say, I will use the word exonerated.

I will use the word that the Attorney General's office found that their actions were justified under 627-4 and 627-5.

Subsequent to that, they had an arbitration.

And the arbitrator also found that the facts as displayed showed that they did not use excessive force,

that they were using no word exonerated.

Were they prosecuted criminally?

They were not prosecuted criminally.

You know, I really appreciate your constitutional arguments.

But I wonder, Attorney Krupsky, whether this is the case where we need to address that.

And I say that because Judge Garfunkel's finding was very narrow.

He simply said he couldn't determine in the absence of specific factual circumstances of future cases

that the facts related to the strange brew incident should never be disclosed.

I took it from his finding that that's what you were asking him to do,

to make a finding that these officers would permanently be insulated from discussion

or identification of the strange brew incident.

All Judge Garfunkel said is, I don't know what the facts of those future cases are going to be,

so I can't give you the relief you're asking for.

I would disagree, Your Honor.

Okay, help us understand that.

Let me tell you why I disagree.

If you look at Judge Garfunkel's decision, he actually says in it,

I can relieve these people and take them off the lorry list,

because it's not going to impact anything.

However, I'm not going to do so because the plaintiffs ask for more.

We asked in our relief and our prayerful relief in the declaratory judgment,

number one, that they be removed from the lorry list,

and number two, that there be a protective order.

We did ask for a protective order,

and the reason we asked for the protective order is because the basis,

there is no basis upon which to say that their actions created any exculpatory evidence.

Well, can I just ask them, but can I ask them?

If I understand correctly, and this is again a critical point for me,

but there is no suggestion in anywhere in this,

in what happened resulting from the strange brew incident,

that somebody made a determination that the officers lied.

No, not in any way should perform.

So the only, even if you accept the view that what the arbitrator did

didn't sort of overrule what the chief's initial determination.

The only thing we have is that the officers engaged in an excessive use of force.

Allegations of force.

All right.

And I guess the thing, this is the thing that has troubled me about lorry right from the beginning,

is how does that possibly get into evidence, even if the officer testified.

Isn't that ranked 404B?

Well, officer, isn't it true that you coerced somebody into confessing, you know,

three months ago, and therefore we must believe that,

the jury must believe that you converse this person into confessing.

How does that, how isn't that ranked 404B evidence?

Well, you are, and I think the point that you make is well taken in terms of,

there is, all of the justices sitting here with the exclusion, I believe,

of Justice Bassett have sat on the bench and understand the.

He's catching on.

The lorry, but the lorry implications.

Let me interrupt you for one second, Mr. Kropsky.

I think I'm sort of thinking along the same lines as Judge Lynn,

but you can help me with this.

I didn't, I didn't read lorry this week,

but my embedded understanding is that it's all about credibility, right?

No, it's my understanding of lorry and theopolis, which follows,

is it's any exculpatory evidence, and the.

Maybe it was written too broadly.

What's that?

Maybe it was written too broadly.

Yes, we believe so, but the implication, if I might, Your Honor,

and I think this is played out, we produced evidence,

and we gave officer proof of it, lorry equals liar.

You go on that list, you're a liar,

and it really doesn't matter that, you know,

the next day you'll get exonerated.

But isn't there a difference between the obligation to disclose

to counsel and admissibility?

Because even though counsel, the state may tell counsel,

look, there's something in this officer's personnel file

that may be exculpatory, we're going to give it to you,

because I understood it's related to the personnel file,

a separate issue.

But the trial judge has the decision, the responsibility

to say, how is that relevant to this case?

Sure.

Right?

And so I took Judge Carfunkel's order to be,

I can't project into the future because perhaps there may be

a case in the future where the trial judge would make the

decision that it had some relevance.

But Your Honor, that's based on bear conjecture.

Well, here's the problem.

Here's the problem.

I agree with my colleague here that it's 404B and 99 times out

of 100 it would be excluded per se.

But what if an officer on the stand said,

no, I would never use excessive force,

then the door is likely open to the use

of this particular incident?

Number one, can you take number two?

Sure.

Doesn't the fact that these officer's names could be

Googled and the same information discovered,

Brenda, your claim moved?

No.

OK.

And the reason why it does not is because,

once again, in our estimation, if I might,

on the first instance, the trial judge found,

and we believe it's contained within the court,

that 627.4 and 627.5 applied,

and that there was justification for their acts.

There, under a common reading of the law,

their acts were justified, and therefore they did not

and could not, as a matter of law, use excessive force.

So from my perspective, that a blanket order is saying,

going in the future.

You're saying there never would be a case.

Because I'm justified.

There never would be a case.

They can't be a case.

I'm justified.

Other words, which you're putting on the prosecutors,

is any mere allegation or speculation

that they hear through the grapevine,

they're now required to disclose because they

don't know whether it's true or not.

In the fear of, no, what I was going to say

is to sort of follow that further,

that you could, if you wanted to sort of carry this

to its logical conclusion, you could say

that if a prosecutor listens to a police officer

on the witness stand, and the prosecutor believes

that the police officer was lying,

even though that's just sort of a subjective belief

of the prosecutor, he's got some obligation

to disclose that to cause the person

to be put on the law.

Even though there's not, you know,

I'm not talking about a situation where he knows,

but he just sort of...

I think that's the result of Garfunkel's order.

I don't think that's the law right now.

I think that right now the law is you have to have

a sustained finding of a lack of credibility.

But that was based on the AG's memo.

Is that the law of the case, the AG's old memo?

I think it's also the law of the land,

because if you look at, for example, 10513B,

it does have under section two, it talks about

if you don't know, go to a judge and a judge will tell you

whether or not this is exculpatory or not.

Under the professional conduct rules under 3.8D,

the second part of it says,

unless a tribunal tells you you don't have to disclose that.

Also, if you look at the Peter Hees memo,

it really was common sense.

It said, hey, look, you get an allegation,

take that allegation, and we put this in our brief,

take that allegation, look into it.

If you don't know whether it's exculpatory

or it's not substantiated, you don't have to disclose it.

You're not going to get in trouble

for not disclosing your allegations.

And in this case, it goes beyond that,

because in our view, they were justified by the AG's.

The AG's did a year-long report.

89 pages, 35 witnesses, and although they say,

well, that's just to the criminal aspect of it,

when you actually read the body and the lines of it,

they're saying under the circumstances, the totality,

they're not that they're justified.

You then have an arbitrator's ruling who says,

you know, they're free and clear.

But then you get a...

And there's nothing in the personnel file.

There's nothing in the personnel file.

The statute, anyway, refers only to the personnel file.

Only 105-13b. You're correct, Your Honor.

But we also brought it under the equitable action

and saying that, look, where else do they get redressed?

If you're placed on a list inappropriately, how do you get off?

If ever.

And for us, we're looking at this saying

it's a travesty of our justice system

that someone can make a mere allegation they're exonerated

and yet they're still living with the stigma

despite the fact that I understand

that we fully respect, Your Honor,

a defendant's right to exculpatory evidence.

My clients work day in and day out

making sure that people have these rights.

But the truth of the matter is,

is that exculpatory evidence isn't mere allegations.

There's got to be a little bit more need to it

and I think the cases stand for that.

That a prosecutor is not required to spring.

The other aspect that's somewhat disturbing, too, Your Honor,

if you go and you look at it, how does someone get on the list?

Well, a police chief can, you know,

in this instance, wrote a letter, he can go on the list.

That's all he had, but wrote a letter.

Then he wrote a letter asking for it to be removed.

He said no.

You started your argument wanting to make three points.

Have you made them or have we completely obliterated

your plan here today?

Well, mostly obliterated, but I don't know.

But I will go with, the last is, I think that

the trial judge made a critical error

in deferring to the prosecutor

and abdicating the powers that he has

both under the Constitution and under the law

to review and to make sure that the actions

and the evidentiary rulings are handled in a proper manner.

Can I just ask you one other question on this?

Your point about the, you know, the police chief.

I mean, it strikes me when you wear your other hat

of being involved in the labor law of matters.

I mean, isn't there a danger here that, you know,

for example, that somebody ends up getting on the lorry list

and a chief of police refusing to take them off?

Because, I mean, for example,

suppose that the officer that's involved,

I'm not saying that's the case here,

but suppose the officer that's involved

is somehow, you know, the union rep

and has been involved in friction with the chief

over negotiations or whatever.

I mean, it strikes me that if the mere fact

that the chief said you're not getting off the list

despite what the, you know,

despite what the arbitrator says

or the county attorney is going to use

what the chief said, that strikes me

that that's...

It strikes me, too.

And it's also, as I said, is it was pretty,

at least to my estimation, pretty bold

where there was a statement in the record saying,

hey, judge, you can order me to do it,

but until the Supreme Court tells me,

those people stand on that list.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Attorney Kirby.

Good morning.

My name is Carolyn Kirby

and I represent the Hillsborough County Attorney

in this manner.

I'm not sure how we're going to come out on the law here.

It's not a simple case.

But don't...

Could you agree that what happened

to these particular officers in these circumstances

is at the very least unfair?

No, Your Honor.

Why?

I wouldn't agree with that

because the prosecutor is vested

with a special responsibility.

And the ultimate objective here

is not to harm these officers,

but rather to ensure that a defendant receives

a fair trial.

And we would be remiss if we ignored the information.

Can I just ask...

I guess this is really disturbing.

Suppose, and I think this is...

maybe this hypothetical isn't all that realistic,

but suppose you have a police officer

in New Hampshire

who was charged with perjury

in California

and was acquitted.

Would you say that it's the prosecutor's obligation

to turn that information over

to the defense?

I would suggest that if that were the case,

then the prosecutor should at least be aware of it

and acquittal is a final action.

We don't have a final adjudication

in this matter.

Well, but don't you have,

to the extent that you're relying on the chief's

determination to...

that these officers use excessive force,

don't you have a final determination

in that the collective bargaining agreement

says that the way that chief's

disciplinary determinations get reviewed

is it goes to an arbitrator.

And the arbitration is final.

And that's what the city agreed to.

And the arbitrator said,

no, the chief was wrong.

That's what the city agreed to.

That doesn't negate a prosecutor's obligation

under 3.8d or under a lorry.

Well, okay, but so why can't you make

the same analogy with the acquittal?

Listen, that was the jury.

The jury decided that the person wasn't guilty,

but I'm the prosecutor

and I've got to turn this over.

Well, I think your underlying premise

is inaccurate, Your Honor.

And the arbitrator decided that the city

didn't need its burden of proof and that there wasn't

just cause to discipline.

And in the criminal trial, the jury decided

that the state hadn't met its burden

of proving guilt beyond a reasonable doubt,

but maybe the person's still guilty anyway.

But it was a discipline with just cause.

It was a different standard.

Well, if anything, it was a lower standard, right?

It was a lower standard for the arbitrator.

Correct.

And the county attorney was not a party to that.

The arbitrator's jurisdiction was limited

to the interpretation application

of the collective bargaining agreement

and the internal personnel practices

of the city of Manning.

What physically would have to be done

to take these officers' names off the

lorry list?

These particular officers,

I don't know that that can be done.

I think the decision has been made and that's why we're here.

I can represent to the court that there have been...

I'm saying, suppose we find in favor

of Mr. Krupsky,

what would the order say

and to whom would it be directed?

I can't speak for the attorney general's office,

Your Honor. I am only here.

They're not even here.

I am only here on behalf of the Hillsborough County Attorney.

Obviously, the Hillsborough County Attorney would adhere

to whatever order this court issued.

I would suggest that

in this instance,

you're assuming that in all matters

it's simply the chief of police

that makes the recommendation.

Judge Garfunkel's order, if you read it completely,

indicates that individuals' names

are forwarded

or as otherwise know.

And that's some of the instances that we deal with.

However, in addition to that,

it's very clear that there are certain instances

where police officers

have appealed to the county attorneys in the past

and the county attorneys have reviewed those matters

and made a determination.

That's in Hillsborough County.

To remove a determination to remove them?

They've made a decision.

I can't say that they have fully removed

what they may have said. Yes, you are.

You can be removed for this reason

but we will leave you on for that reason.

Judge Garfunkel seemed

to say,

I can't project into the future.

There may be a case

where

even under all these circumstances

where there was exoneration

the

circumstances around this event might be relevant.

Can you think of a case

where it might be relevant?

And admissible.

Admissibility is another issue.

And that's the point

that we have here, is that we are looking at

simply making sure that the prosecutors are aware of it.

The county attorney doesn't want a case

to be reversed or charges to be

dismissed based on the fact that

her staff didn't know about it.

Are you admissibility and leave that to the individual?

We're looking for an example.

An example would be

some kind of excessive force case.

May I just follow up

with my original question?

So it would have to be an excessive force case.

So

the county attorney

would then tell

the attorney

for this new defendant

that

there was this strange brew

incident

and the officers involved

are so and so and so and so.

And the record now

shows nothing in the personnel

file.

Exoneration by, we can use that word

pursuant to the collective

bargaining

process

and no criminal charges.

How would you envision

a prosecutor

in that circumstance

arguing to the trial court

that nonetheless

that incident

was relevant to this

new case?

I would suggest that at that point

in time the individual prosecutor

would turn over the attorney general's report

the arbitrator's report

and any other information that is in the public eye

that they are aware of.

At that point in time the trial court

would make the decision.

I don't know based on a hypothetical

what all the facts and circumstances would be.

So I don't think that I can

necessarily give you an example.

I can say that I think Judge Garfunkel

made the right decision saying that

we have to wait and let the individual

trial judges decide.

That's the follow up on that.

How can, except that

perhaps the circumstance that Judge Hicks raises

where the officer gets on the stand and says

I've never in my life

or I never would in my life use excessive force.

That may be a different, that may be an exception

but except for that

how could this ever

even in another charge of excessive

force against the officer

how could this ever be admissible?

Wouldn't it be ranked 404B?

No judge would allow a defense attorney

for that. And it may be.

And that's the point.

So why wouldn't the individual

trial judges make that determination?

On the other side of the coin why should

the individual officers have to carry this

around with them for the rest of their career?

Well the county attorney didn't create

this scenario and the county attorney

has to follow through with the

obligations that currently

exist under the existing law

and it may be too broad

but again I can only address

so the county attorney simply

has to comply with the law as it now

stands. But these officers have a

reputational interest that's constitutionally protected

correct? There is absolutely

no information in the record

to support the fact that they are unable to

pursue their occupational

livelihood. To the contrary

they continue to be employed

as certified police officers

they continue to receive a weekly paycheck

there's no indication that they haven't been

given certain

assignments. So your

answer to my question is yes

they do have a constitutionally protected

reputational interest.

You're just saying it hasn't been harmed.

Correct.

Further than that it's very important

to understand that

the county attorney didn't disclose

this information to the public

county attorney was not the party

so to suggest that

these officers now it's

are somehow impacted by

a reputational issue when

they themselves put it out into the public

they can't seek redress and they can't cry

file for their own actions. Can I just ask you

suppose that the situation here was not

that the chief

never got to the level that the chief

made a determination that the officers

use excessive force. Instead what happened

is that the

the people that the officers were involved

with in this at the strange

the individual that

they were involved with. He went to

the police department

and filed a complaint saying the officers

use excessive force and

there was no nobody made a

determination that in fact

that was true. The chief decided

that was not true. He believed the officers

or whatever their

justification was. Would the state

have to turn

that over

to the

so here's the thing I guess I'm having

the most difficulty with. If you say

the state would not have to turn that over

as sort of lorry information

now I agree it's different the chief

has said

I find that the officers use excessive force

okay but now that's

been reviewed

by a process

that the people involved

in

police officer discipline have and

the city have agreed to

and an arbitrator has said

chief you're wrong

so

I just don't understand

how that isn't

sort of binding

on the county attorney

in the same way that because if it's

not then I don't understand why

you don't have to turn over

to the defense the fact that

the

the alleged victim

here made a complaint to the police

that the officers use excessive force it just doesn't make

any sense to me why though why those two situations

should be

differentiate.

There's a lot more than simply

an arbitrator decision here

there is as has been noted

a 200 page actually

400 page investigation by the attorney general's

office and that investigation

while certainly

these individuals were never exonerated

the attorney general's report

is replete with references

that the reason that they can't bring criminal charges

is because a prosecutor has an obligation

to ensure that

they can prove a charge beyond a reasonable doubt

and based on the statutory sanctioned

justification defenses

they could not meet that burden of

proof that's what the

attorney general's decision says

sure but I guess I mean

but the arbitrator doesn't have a

there's no requirement of proof beyond a reasonable

doubt before the arbitrator that

I assume that's just preponderance of the evidence

right I mean that's just normal

normal civil and the arbitrator said

wait a minute not only could

the could the did the officers

you know was it was there no proof beyond

a reasonable doubt that the officers used

excessive force there wasn't even a preponderance

this wasn't 51%

that the officers used excessive force

the arbitrator's

ruling was limited he was limited to the

application interpretation of the collective bargaining agreement

and the internal personal personal

not the not the overall

theory of excessive

force and how it's defined in

under any legal theorem what would be

the basis upon which the arbitrator could

have said if if he had found

that they had used excessive force that

they should get no discipline

what would be the legal basis under the

collective bargaining agreement in which he could have said

that to say no discipline right

if he found excessive

force right he could not

have done that couldn't he could not have done

okay so he so he determined that there was

no excessive force and so all the

other niceties of the collective bargaining

agreement seem to me are

you know kind of beside the point well he

also determined that the process was frustrated

by the lack of witnesses and the only

witnesses that were present were witnesses

for the petitioners and that the city of

Manchester didn't have their witnesses present

that was one

of his frustrations if you read the decision

likewise

I would say with all due respect to the

Attorney General's office and

Attorney General Delaney that

while he

the while he ruled on justification

he is not the final arbiter

on the issue

of excessive force and so let's

let's say that in the future

a case arises

and

the lorry material is being

reviewed by a trial

judge

would that trial judge have to conduct

a trial within a trial

to decide whether

this information should

or shouldn't come in because

my worry is having

sat on many many trials

if I would have to

have a hearing an evidentiary hearing

before allowing

a jury to hear this

information

given these circumstances

wouldn't I have to have a

preliminary trial to say

notwithstanding the decision

in the collective bargaining agreement

notwithstanding the AG's report

there's enough here

that suggests

that excessive force was

used I'm going to have to spend

as a trial judge a lot of time

sorting through that

you're going to have to spend time as the trial judge

making the evidentiary rulings yes

and that is the job

and the only way I could do it

in this situation is to

hear the witnesses what I

not have to listen to

testimony from the witnesses

at the strange brew event

no I would suggest your honor that you would

review the documents that are out there

the documents that are in the public realm

and they are all in the public realm

whether it's the attorney general's report

the arbitration report

what is the legitimate

Hillsborough county interest

in keeping these gentlemen's names

on this lorry list

what legitimate interest is being served

interest keeping their names on the list

number one there is not

a so-called lorry list

that's going to make it very difficult

to decide this case I understand

but the vernacular use of the term

lorry list and simply

adopting the petitioners

statement that lorry equals

liar is inaccurate

and it is

it is inappropriate to perpetuate

that what there is is an internal

in our business it is perpetuated

maybe we should stop

it's an injustice to these gentlemen

it's an injustice to the public

and to the citizenry of New Hampshire

it isn't a list of discredited officers

it is simply an internal

mechanism used by the county attorney

to share information with her staff

but isn't it true that

if you I mean

I can't imagine that if you're the county attorney

and you have

two witnesses who can testify

to something that's you know

let's assume it's not sort of critically important

that you need that you want to have

two people say it but it's nonetheless

important enough that you want to have somebody say it

I can't imagine that the county

attorney wouldn't select

the person who's not on the lorry list

to be the witness in that case

you're right so I mean

it's so it's probably that that is

true are you saying

that if we issued an order

crazy order saying

these gentlemen's names are removed from the lorry

list we will have accomplished

nothing

I'm suggesting that there is no statewide

statewide system in New Hampshire

and that the order would only

apply to Hillsborough County

that we can speak to

and I also want to just

advise the court that you had asked

by fellow council about

the legislature weighing in and there is

a bill pending for the legislation

I'd like to follow up on just as Hicks's question

if we

ordered the names to be removed from the

lorry list there's no way

we can order that

the police chief or the prosecutor

can wipe from their

minds their knowledge

about what happened

so query would they

still have an ethical

responsibility to disclose

what they have in their heads

notwithstanding that the names

aren't on the lorry list

we believe so we believe that

the lorry list and the ethical obligation

are one and the same

thank you

case submitted the court will take a brief

recess
