This is case 2014, 0687, State of New Hampshire versus Dale de Maris.

May it please the court?

My name is David Rothstein, I represent Dale de Maris.

This case is about truth of the matter asserted, not truth of the matter asserted.

I'd like to try to distinguish this case from the Pelleteer case,

which is pretty much the closest one to this one, and then take the court's questions.

In this case, KD, the complaining witness,

personally vouched in her testimony, she personally vouched for

the truth of the stories that were discussed in front of the jury.

In Pelleteer, there were statements of the alleged victim that were discussed or

introduced, but they were discussed by a friend of the victim who did not personally vouch for the truth, yes.

Is it the difference here that all the victims said was,

I wrote them down in my journal or whatever, the content never came in at trial.

Isn't that a qualitative difference?

Because we don't know what she wrote, and presumably this was,

I think the court found, was in response to the suggestion by the defense that

the late disclosure bore on the legitimacy of the allegation.

So that's two points, those are the two prongs of the trial courts ruling the so-called open the door and then the hearsay quality.

Let me address the hearsay first.

I obviously agree that no witness literally shared the details of the stories.

But even so, the testimony about those stories in this case told the jury what was in those stories.

Everyone knew from-

So that's not hearsay yet.

Well, but everyone knew that there were stories that she wrote.

Or about abuse by her father.

I mean, everyone, you could not listen to this case.

Everyone knew that she wrote non, the character in the stories was not fictional.

That she was writing stories about abuse by her father.

Everyone knew that she gave them to the lead detective because the stories were, even though they weren't shown to the jury.

They were imbued with the stature and importance.

They were physically present in court.

Everyone knew the lead detective gave them the prosecutor.

But they were brought to court as if they were evidence.

So I agree with you.

She didn't say, well, let me read the story on one day my father did this and that.

Did the detective testify as to-

My understanding was nobody said what the words were in her stories.

Nobody said what the words were.

So why isn't it just conduct?

Well, because the content of those stories, and I know that nobody read those stories in evidence,

there could be no question, even though the stories were not read into evidence,

that there was, they physically existed.

Here they are in these pieces of paper that we have here in court.

And the alleged victim is on the stand personally saying,

I wrote stories several years ago in which I described the abuse by my father,

which presumably is the same abuse that I'm describing.

Why, I'm sorry, go ahead.

Why isn't that relevant for a non hearsay purpose?

In other words, the suggestion is made to the jury.

This is made up because it's now, it's being disclosed for the first time long after.

Why isn't it for a non hearsay purpose of saying there was a statement made about.

Let's accept what you're saying that this was really about the abuse.

There was a statement made about the abuse more contemporaneously.

Why doesn't that, whether it's true or not, why doesn't that tend to rebut the inference of your fabricate?

Because this court has said by analogy in the 404b line of cases, the mistrial line of cases,

there are statements that are so indelibly about propensity that telling the jury not to consider them for propensity is not effective.

Unlike Pelletier, where you have the person who wrote those stories herself and you have the discussion about the stories

and you have her description about what the stories were about, they are so imbued with truth or infused with truth

that you can't really consider them for any other purpose.

How is this different from a case where a victim's late disclosure is being challenged at trial

and the victim says, well, child, I told my best friend, but we agreed that we wouldn't talk about it because something bad may happen.

Without the best friend coming in and saying what she said, that would be hearsay, what would be objectionable about that?

This goes to the door rationale. First of all, I would argue here that the door was not legitimately opened by the defense

because it was the state that introduced and first introduced this matter into the trial and its opening argument.

Second, the defense did not create any misleading impression with regard to whether or not the victim ever wrote stories.

If the defense said you never wrote any stories about this, that would be obviously different.

Of course I did. So I would argue that this is qualitatively different from other cases in terms of its hearsay character

and that the defense did not open the door to it.

Thank you.

Good morning, Your Honor. Stephen Fuller representing the state in this appeal.

The argument on appeal, as I understand the defense argument, is about relevance, but that wasn't the argument below.

The argument below was about whether these stories were hearsay.

During the discussion of that argument, the state made it very clear we're not going to bring in the stories.

We're not going to show anybody the stories. The stories aren't going to be evidence.

All the state did was ask her how she dealt with it, how she dealt with the trauma before she disclosed.

Is that sort of a backdoor way of getting hearsay in?

I mean, because the impact, it seems to me logically, would be that the child wrote stories that accurately reflected what happened to her.

And, you know, isn't that really a backdoor way of getting hearsay in?

No, because we don't know the content of the statements. We don't know what the stories are.

I mean, there's no description of anything about the stories.

So there's no matter asserted that there's no truth of the matter asserted being presented by the state.

And so the fact that she wrote stories was brought in because the defendant's attack on the victim was mostly that she didn't disclose for years.

And she went to therapy and she didn't disclose to her therapist.

Is this qualitatively different from the atypical phrase, I told my mother but she didn't believe me?

It's not exactly that and it's not exactly Peltier for this reason.

In her testimony, she said, I wrote the stories but I didn't show them to anyone.

I hid them away. That's how I dealt with it.

So this isn't a disclosure to another witness who could testify to the disclosure.

Okay, but how is it relevant how she dealt with it?

Okay, I mean the question was how did you deal with it?

Why is that question relevant at all?

Was there an objection to the question?

How did you deal with it?

No, because during the discussion, I think the defense counsel actually says, I'm not objecting to how did you deal with it?

I wrote stories. He was objecting to a couple of things.

He was objecting to the content of the stories as hearsay.

He was objecting to, I don't want the prosecutor waving these pieces of paper around and putting them on the desk and showing them to the jury.

The defense never objected to it because it strikes me the question itself is objectionable.

What was your reaction? How did you emotionally deal with this?

Isn't that an objectionable question?

The fact that she wrote the stories at all showed that there was something to deal with.

It's relevant to whether the assaults had happened.

No, but I'm not there yet. I'm there with the question.

I'm just curious about that.

If a defense attorney had hopped up and said, I object to the question.

How she dealt with it is not at all relevant to whether it happened.

If an objection had been made, should the court have sustained it?

No, because it is relevant.

The fact that she was dealing with trauma.

Somebody's on trial for bank robbery and you asked one of the tellers, well, when they came in and pointed a gun, were you scared?

It would seem to me that your reaction of the victims would be highly relevant to the trial.

I don't think you could sustain an objection saying, if you asked a person, what was your reaction when they came in?

I was terrified. It would seem to me that would be relevant.

I suppose that if the evidence was, and I as a teller had to go through therapy for nine years after, that might be objectionable.

Or not.

Right?

The context is important.

Because the question was, what was your reaction at the time your father was her father assaulted you?

It was, how did you deal with it afterwards?

And in a vacuum or in a different case, I agree that could be an objectionable question.

When the defendant's attack is, you didn't tell anyone.

You may be misperceiving me because I'm wondering whether the defense waived by not objecting.

That's my point, so I'm giving you a hard time, but it goes to whether the defense waived.

Do you get what I'm saying?

Yes, and I realize I'm probably answering a hypothetical question because the context of this case isn't that context.

In the context of this case, where the defense's attack was several years went by, you didn't tell anyone, including your therapist,

then this becomes relevant to show that she was traumatized, she was dealing with it in her way.

I guess what I'm thinking is, suppose that instead of saying, how did you react to this?

That's sort of the question.

Instead of saying I wrote stories, the victim had said, well, after he left, every time after he left, I hid under the bed.

I mean, it would seem to me that that would be, I guess what I'm sort of saying is that the fact that this is committed to writing,

particularly where the writing is not introduced, I'm having a hard time seeing how that's really different than if the victim had said,

I went and hid under the bed.

I mean, presumably that would be relevant and could be admitted and there would be no question that there was any hearsay issue.

That's true.

And here the court controlled for the hearsay issue, which again, I have to stress, that was the objection below was the hearsay issue.

The court controlled the hearsay issue by basically allowing the fact that she wrote stories but none of the content.

There were no statements admitted that were presented for their truth.

There were no statements admitted from the stories at all.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.
