This is case 2014-0395, State of New Hampshire versus Seth Skillon.

Good morning, may it please the court. My name is Thomas Barnard. I represent Seth Skillon.

Intend to focus on the first issue in the brief due process. The State has broad discretion

to nullpros where there is a change in the expected evidence, a change in the law, or

the charging document is legally insufficient. But a nullpros entered solely to gain a tactical

advantage by delaying trial is an abuse of that discretion. It constitutes an unfair adjudicatory

procedure and thus violates due process. But wasn't, didn't that state take the position

that the indictments were in fact defective? That was the state's characterization and

I think the trial court agreed with that. That's not a fair characterization. The

indictments were legally perfectly valid. The fact that the state on the eve of

trial decided that it would rather charge a different variant of the offense does not

render the indictments defective or flawed in any legally cognisable sense.

Because you say it finally occurred to them they'd have a tough time proving the indictments

as drafted. And I think they would prefer a different variant. There was testimony

from two witnesses that Skillan used a knife or what they believed to be a knife. But the

state correctly believed that if its burden was to prove that the object reasonably appeared

to be a knife, then that burden was easier to satisfy and a lesser burden.

You know the state makes an interesting comment. They say, your argument is this

was a way of getting a continuance when the trial court denied a continuance.

Exactly. The state says that, oh no, this wasn't a continuance. It was a

discontinuance of prosecution. Are we just playing with words here or does that

have legal significance? I don't think it does. I think that that's placing

form over substance. The practical effect of the state's action of no

processing the case was to delay trial. That was the objective and that was

the effect. But he would have been released after the null process but for the

other charges, right? There was another related charge that was related to the

incident here and he wound up being held on that charge. If he wasn't

held on that charge, then he would have been released. But regardless of

whether he's released, the state still would obtain the benefit, the purpose

of its null process, which is to delay trial. So what happened here is really

no different than what happened in Jones, the Vermont case where we cite. The

state granted itself a continuance, a delay in trial that the court had just

denied. Essentially the state vetoed the court's denial.

Was that decided on federal due process grounds?

It was not. It was decided on the, I believe, the grounds of the state

court, the inherent authority to regulate proceedings. But I'd have to go

back and look. The state relies on Allen. Unlike in Allen, here there was no

change in the expected evidence. There was also no change in the law and as

I've said, despite the state's attempt to characterize the charges as

flawed or defective, they were perfectly valid. Now the time in this

case between arrest and trial was 11 months. Doesn't strike me to be over

the top. Does that make a difference in how we look at this?

I think it does. It is presumptively prejudicial under the under the

speedy trial analysis. And the state's, the reason for the delay

weighs against the state. The state was negligent here. It failed to

use due diligence prior to obtaining the indictment to ensure that the

indictment charged the variant that it intended to charge. And even after

that, the state did not seek to correct that problem until the day of

trial. That is, those are facts that make the delay weigh heavily

against the state.

I'm still having trouble with your due process analysis. Can you

parse it through for me?

Sure. Sure. It's the due process prohibits an unfair adjudicatory

procedure. It prohibits and under that, we argue, it prohibits the

state using a null process, which is a valid instrument, but using it

for invalid purposes, including to gain a tactical advantage by

delaying trial to obtain a continuance to which it is not

entitled. A similarly situated criminal defendant, one who, for

instance, at the last minute decides he wants to claim alibi or

self defense or insanity or decides he wants a new lawyer or

decides he wants a new lawyer. Another good example. He has, if

his motion to continue is denied, he has no opportunity to

override that decision. That trial is going forward unless he

pleads guilty and a civil plaintiff similarly has no

absolute right to enter a voluntary notice. And so you

say the facts on the ground here didn't change.

There was no justification for a continuance and therefore no

justification for the null process. Exactly. And the state

should not be treated differently from every other

litigant in every other type of case. If the court has no

further questions. Thank you, Councillor. May it please the

court, Jeff Ward, on behalf of the State of New Hampshire.

I'll take questions at any time, but I'll address the due

process argument. And the trial court addressed the due

process argument as well. And what the due process

argument really boils down to is prejudice. And what the trial

court holds is that the defendant is actually more

prepared for trial following the null process and that the

defendant suffers no actual prejudice as a result of the

null process. And you know, this has a this has a bad

feel to it. On the day of trial, you know, perhaps if it

had occurred a month before trial. But on the day of

trial, it is whoops, we may have some problems here with our

proof given how the indictment was drafted. No change in

facts on the ground. It makes me uncomfortable. I see that

we're talking about a total of 11 months. But is there

some is there some restraint on the state's power to

null process?

Not really.

That's how I read your brief. You say, oh, that's the way it

goes. They have total by the state has total power to

press. Well, but the I think the case line, I think it's

quartermarch does say that they're, you know, the court

can judge the effects of the null process when done. The

state's power to null process. The state can do at any time.

But it can have an effect that can affect where case

goes. And so I think that's, you know, so the answer is not

really, there isn't any check on that power, but there can be

an effect on the state exercising that power on the

case that they're that they're trying to go forward on.

But I think, you know, even in Adams, which I think I

address more specifically in the speedy trial claim, there

were 15 months, I think five different trial dates before

the state decided to null cross. Then there about there's

an 11 day delay and three more trial dates before it got

to trial 21 months later. This is not a significant delay.

The state did discover it on the trial, but I think it's

also important to recognize the state wasn't hiding the ball

here. The state went to the court and said, I just realized

this. I was just reviewing it this past weekend. Unfortunately,

that is sometimes the reality of trial practice in the

Superior Courts. But that can we amend it? I'll I'll

give them PR bail. Can we do anything along those lines?

Can we continue it? I'll indict right away. We can

try the case in December. The state wasn't trying to delay, you

know, for the foreseeable future. That wasn't the

overriding tactical advantage. They were trying to make

sure that the charge they had conformed to the proof they

had, and realized that they couldn't get a jury

instruction on the on the issue that they thought they

had with their case. So it did. And, you know, back

even in I think it's Commonwealth of Utah, the

state may null cross and vary the charge to make it

conform to the proof that they have. And that's what the

state chose to do at that point. It wasn't a lesser burden.

It's not even a lesser charge. It's a different variant of

armed robbery. Still a class A felony, whether it's is

actually armed or appears to actually be armed. And I

think it's important to recognize as well with due

process and a due process claim in the in the venue of

delay is that it's for Angie honest talks about due

process, having a limited role to play in protecting

against oppressive delay. And really what it protects

against is that actual prejudice to defend it under

these circumstances. And delay in and of itself, I think

eventually could turn into actual prejudice. Could it

ever become a due process violation? Yeah, and I think

that's what I independent of delay.

Actual prejudice. Absolutely. The actual

prejudice being that in that time period that elapses

you lose witnesses. Somebody dies, you know, not just

fading memories, but witnesses are no longer available.

That there's some there's some sort of actual prejudice

as a result of the delay. And here, as the trial

court recognized, the defense is actually better

prepared for trial. What the defense wanted was to

get to go to trial in a charge they thought the

state could improve and prevail on emotion to

dismiss, or they caught something that the state

hadn't. There's no constitutional right to

that. There's no due process. It seems a bit rich to

me to argue that the defendant was better off and

better prepared at the second go round, because the

proof was going to fail the first time around. But the

defendant and what the trial court specifically found

with respect to that was that they had more

information about a witness's testimony. And so

would be better prepared to deal with that witnesses

testimony at trial information they didn't

necessarily have on the eve or approaching the

first trial. So it would have won a battle. The

first time around it would have won the war.

Right. Correct. The state the state caught that and

was able to to cure that issue. There are no

further questions. Thank you. Thank you, council. Case

admitted. Court stands in recess. Thank you all

very much.
