This is Case 2014-0639, State of New Hampshire v. Robert Joe Baer.

Thanks.

May I please the Court? My name is Thomas Barnard. I represent Robert Joe Baer.

I intend to focus on suppression and specifically the nexus requirement.

The police may only obtain a search warrant to search for items that will aid in a particular apprehension or conviction.

Thus, there must be a meaningful connection between the items sought and the crimes suspected.

Here, any connection was trivial at best.

But you're saying, I mean, it sounds like that, as I read your brief.

You're asking us to basically overrule Warden v. Hayden, which says that you can search for mere evidence.

It's not that... I'm not asking the Court to overrule the principle that you can search for mere evidence.

Before Warden v. Hayden, the idea was the police can only search for contraband.

Contraband, instrumentalities, or fruits.

Right. And that was reject.

Evidence that has a meaningful connection with the offense can be the object of a search warrant,

even if it's not contraband, instrumentality, or fruit.

But there has to be some meaningful connection.

And here there was not.

No one accused Albert of photographing, videotaping, or otherwise memorializing any sexual abuse.

So there was no connection.

But isn't one of the things that would be prevalent that they could search for is that there might be a picture,

not a picture of abuse of a child, but they would be a picture of the child in his own.

Now, you say, well, that was, you know, that's trivial.

But I mean, the state can't force the defendant to concede that he knows the person.

At a trial of this case, the state would have to have the burden of proving that when the child said,

this is the person that abused me, he was telling the truth.

And one of the ways that you would do that, wouldn't it, would be to search his house

and you find that he has a picture in his house of the person,

even if it's not in an abuse situation.

It certainly establishes that he knows the person.

The problem with that argument is that it amounts to this unreasonably broad view of the state's power to search.

In any case where the accuser is known to the perpetrator, the police could search the perpetrator's home

for any evidence to rebut the possible defense.

But you say, rebut.

But you say, rebut.

The state has to prove that the defendant did it.

So when the juvenile gets on the stand and says, you know, he did it, isn't that,

and that's the person over there that did it.

Isn't it, the state has to prove that beyond a reasonable doubt.

So why is it, why is it inappropriate for them to be able to conduct a search warrant,

then some officer gets on the stand and says, yes, we executed a search warrant

and here we found in the defendant's house a picture of the juvenile.

Not in any sexual encounter, but a picture of the juvenile.

And then in closing argument you say, wait a minute.

It's not just the juvenile who said he was abused by this person.

And he, you know, his story is corroborate.

Look, we have a picture of the juvenile taken from the defendant's house.

I mean, why isn't that entirely appropriate use of the police power?

The state doesn't have to prove that the defendant and the juvenile had any relationship at all.

The state only has to prove the act of sexual abuse.

But doesn't that corroborate, I mean, when the juvenile says this is the guy that did it.

And let's assume you didn't have that evidence.

Wouldn't it be entirely appropriate for you as defense counsel to get up and closing argument

and say, wait a minute, the only evidence you've heard that he even knows this person

is that, is the juvenile's testimony.

You can't believe it for whatever reason.

As opposed to how do you make that argument when the state has now introduced the officer

saying the defendant, we found a picture of the juvenile in the defendant's house?

The problem with this view is that the power of the police conduct a search is only limited

by their imagination in coming up with potential defenses.

So say I say, you know, my neighbor assaulted me.

And I give a name.

I identify who my neighbor is.

And the police ask, well, can you tell us anything about what he was wearing?

I say, well, he's wearing a white shirt.

Now, does that entitle the police to search through my neighbor's dressers, all his belongings,

his entire home looking for any white shirt?

There's some facts that are so minimally corroborative of an accuser's accusation

that they don't amount to a meaningful.

Well, let's assume that your white shirt example would go too far.

Isn't this far different than that a picture of the juvenile in the defendant's possession?

That seems to me that's a lot different than a sort of generic white shirt.

It's not.

And I want to be clear about the facts here.

There were numerous adults who accused Jalbert of molesting them when they were children.

There was only one of those accusers who said that he took a picture of them,

an innocuous picture of them.

And with respect to that accuser, there was evidence that Jalbert had lived with his mother,

his family, for a period of years.

So there was plenty of other evidence that Jalbert knew that accuser.

I see my red light is on if the court has no further questions.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Good morning.

May it please the court.

Susan McGinnis for the State of New Hampshire.

Justice Linear is exactly right.

They can search for evidence that corroborates the claim and a photograph of the defendant with this juvenile

at the time the juvenile alleges the assaults occurs corroborates the claim photographs of the defendant with

and say for instance you have a photograph of this juvenile with another juvenile.

That might lead the police to a witness who could corroborate claims the juvenile has made.

The evidence has to only be something that would aid in the prosecution or apprehension.

Photographs of a bunch of juveniles.

This is a course of conduct type of case.

They're in the investigative phases.

And this is a defendant that they've got accusations of from multiple children.

He has appears to have molested six or more children over a period of 30 years.

And they have reason to believe he's molested additional children.

It says aid in the prosecution or apprehension.

I don't know why they can't search for additional victims when you have someone with a course of fraud.

A Ponzi scheme.

The police are allowed to use a search warrant to search for additional victims because there's probable cause there are additional victims.

That is the same thing here.

They have probable cause that he's a serial child molester and that there are other children they haven't spoken to yet

who have been assaulted by him or he he harassed some children and there had been restraining orders filed.

He had gone to children's houses when their parents were not home.

He had tried to connect with children on Facebook.

So there's a complete nexus between what they asked for.

They didn't ask for every picture he owned, every videotape he owned.

What they asked for was pictures of him with children.

And an unnatural interest in children.

Were they all introduced in evidence at trial?

Excuse me?

Were they all introduced in evidence at trial?

No.

Well, no, this was a trial for only one victim.

So what was introduced in trial is pictures he had of this victim.

In fact, he had still had pictures of this child.

Well, who was no longer a child in his wallet.

When they arrested him.

And when they searched videotapes, the defendant wants them limited to the known victims,

but there's no way to distinguish in videotapes unless a defendant labels them as my videotape of a particular victim.

They took only homemade videotapes because those are the only ones he could have made.

They didn't take any videotapes that were labeled as commercially produced.

They took homemade videotapes.

And as the court noted, the only way for them to know if there's evidence involving the kids they already had accusations about

is to review the entirety of those videotapes.

So they had to review the videotapes to find it.

So this is a case where there's a sufficient nexus.

And because this is a course of conduct over a number of years,

they don't have to be as specific as they would if they only had a single discrete crime.

The cases the defendant cited were where they had a single discrete crime, such as a homicide.

And the reason there was no nexus is because they didn't show any connection between that defendant and the particular homicide

or the evidence they seized in that particular homicide.

This is a completely different kind of case.

This is a serial criminal, such as someone who has a Ponzi scheme or a course of fraud or credit card fraud.

You can't treat this like a single crime with a single victim on a single occasion.

There's nothing further?

Submit on the briefing.

Thank you, counsel.

Okay, submit it.
