This is case 2014-0651 in the matter of E. Diane Shy and J. Ryan Billigas.

May it be the court that represent Mr. Justin Billigas, the appellant in this case.

This case is unusual in the sense that Judge Master Daltra made the decision changing forever

the authority of Mr. Billigas to make any kind of real input into the education of his children,

not for the school, but apparently till the 18th birthday.

Now, why did he do it?

Your worry conveyed through your brief seems to be that this is an end run around the original denial

of the motion to relocate by the mother, and this motion came only 10 months after the final decree.

That's really the nub of your argument, isn't it?

Yes, it is. Not only that, but that in fact, and I think the perception of the appellee in their brief is kind of enlightening as to how they see it.

They say for example, well, Master Daltra didn't take that much away from Mr. Billigas because he has the input,

and our authority would only come if they have a disagreement.

That's a simple way of saying you have no authority, you have no power.

They moved the children in the household 60 miles without court permission.

This was denied. During the period of time, my client is asking, we have to register the kids.

We want to go, we have to register the kids. No answer, as he tests.

No answer, no finally concerned with the fact that there's a limit in terms of when you have to register with schools.

He registers the school, the children in the school where they live.

Then the Master comes in and says, why did he get the...

There was an order, the original divorce decree said the children shall be registered in the town where the parent who has primary residential custody lives,

and that was Amherst.

And that's what he did. And I don't understand frankly the astonishment of Master Daltra when my client actually fulfilled exactly the order.

Could you just tell me where do both parents live now?

Amherst.

They both live in Amherst.

Yes.

So the part of this order that's candidly that concerns me the most is that the children go...

Given what the court found as the party's inability to agree, I'm not sure I agree with your suggestion that it was inappropriate for the court to say one of them.

And I understand you may disagree, maybe you think it should have been you, your client as opposed to your opponent.

I have the honor to disagree, yes.

Sure, but I could understand the court saying one of them gets to make the decision.

Except...

But I don't quite understand why it makes sense to say for either of them that this child goes from Amherst up in Canterbury,

and that seems to support the view that...

I mean the question that Judge Conboy was asking about getting the children sort of away from your client.

In fact, as I suggest, a year and a half from now if he comes and says the kids are thriving in this school,

but this two to two and a half hour ride daily is wearing them down.

So I'll sacrifice and I'll move.

What will the court then do?

They'll say no, get the kids out of there, bring them...

It doesn't make sense.

In fact, you present a feta complet.

And by the way...

The children are now going to school in Canterbury.

Yes, and my client can't take him there because he can't have a job that doesn't permit him to take two hours off in the morning or two hours off in the afternoon.

Mrs. Dr. Shea has more benefit in terms of her ability.

But let me ask you this, what would your reaction suppose?

And obviously I don't know what we're going to do, but suppose that we ended up of the view that the court's order should be affirmed

except that there should be a limit on your opponent's ability to select a school to some reasonable radius of Amherst.

You select a school wherever you want the child to go, you make the decision, but it's got to be within 25 miles, 20 miles of Amherst?

You know, Mr. Justice, we have presented all the time.

There are four very good schools in the Amherst area, both public and private.

There is no knowledge.

We have no expert opinion as to why the Shaker School is so much better.

They say that there's only 15 to a class.

My client went there.

He says there were at least 20 to 25.

Yes, yes, if it can be maintained.

We don't deny, we don't want to fight.

You know, by the way, that the judge found that most of the argument in the first decision was because of her control situation.

But if you can say to them, make a finding, put him within 10, 15, 20 miles.

Yes, 15 miles, 10 miles.

It takes six minutes now to drive the kids from the home to the school where they used to go.

Has your client driven the kids to school in Canterbury?

How can he do it?

He's gone there.

He's visited.

But how can he do it?

He has to be at work.

So the answer is no.

No, he can't.

Thank you.

Thank you.

May it please the court.

I'm Doreen Conner from the Primer Law Firm, and I represent Ms. Shea.

I will take questions at any time.

I want to begin, however, to correct the record that was just discussed with regard to what the divorce decree says about the children.

On page 19 of the appendix, Master Dalpre in the first divorce trial, because these parties could not agree, wrote,

unless otherwise agreed in writing and filed with the court, the children shall continue to attend the Country Village Montessori School.

Then he goes on to say, otherwise, the children shall go to the school where their parents reside.

But the default position has always been the Country Village Montessori School, which only goes to sixth grade.

So ultimately, a different decision was going to have to be made.

What is wrong with, I mean, I guess that the part of this that is troubling to me,

is not, as I said to Mr. Secular, is not that your client was given the sole decision making on this.

That makes sense to me in light of the fact that they couldn't agree.

But why would it be reasonable to say, okay, she gets to make the decision, but there's got to be some limitation.

She can't send the kids 60 miles away or whatever, where the impact of that is to really limit pretty significantly the child's time, children's time with your opponent.

What the court did is it did put limitations.

It said that there could be no relocation.

There could be no boarding school.

It did not limit the number of miles.

Shaker Road was discussed.

And contrary to Attorney Sakalaris' comments, his client has been picking up the children at the Shaker Road School.

There was a lot of discussion about why this particular school would be good.

In fact, Mr. Bigelis admitted it was and is a very good school.

And as a feeder school to the Dairy Field School, which is where these parties have discussed, they would like their children to go to high school.

The children are young at this point, right?

Correct, eight and six and a half.

You know, I must confess that at my age, I would find a full hours commute on either end of a day taxing.

The court found, based on the evidence that the commute was closer to 45 minutes, not six.

So we go from two hours down to one and a half hours.

But there was also evidence that a number of the children, including these children, if they were to take the bus and go to the public school, would also be on the bus 30 to 35 minutes.

So we were not talking about a huge difference.

And based on that, the court made a decision, which was certainly within its discretion in terms of selecting a school.

And as this court is well aware, it's not this court's job to second-guess those discretionary judgments made of the trial judge.

And I understand what you're saying.

What troubles me is we have a divorce decree that sets forth, as you have described, the Montessori School in Amherst.

Or a school, didn't you read that?

No, that's otherwise.

All position is the Montessori School, which both parents said they were having issues with.

I understand that, but it strikes me that the court had in its head the children were going to be going to school at the very least in the town where the mother resided.

So here's my question. You may disagree with me.

If we interpret the original decree that way, we have a decree that ten months later, arguably, radically changes that original order.

And query is that permissible under our existing statute.

Well, Your Honor, I don't believe this court has to struggle with interpreting the decree because the original decree was issued by the very same judge that heard this modification, Master Delpra.

He makes that very clear in this order that he was the one in 2012 that had to pick a school because these parties could not agree on anything.

I understand. There was a week's trial on the original divorce. Ten months later, there's a two-day evidentiary hearing on this issue, and he does a 180.

No, Your Honor, I don't think he does a 180. What he decides to ten months later is the default school that was selected is no longer suiting the children's needs.

The children want to go, if you're saying that the children are now what, in seventh grade? Well, ones in seventh and...

I don't know what grades they are. I only was able to figure out their ages. They're eight and six and a half.

You said the Montessori School only went to sixth grade.

Correct.

I assume that means that the reason they left there was that they're not.

No, Your Honor. They're younger than that. What I said is ultimately the default position was going to have to be changed because they would have to go somewhere else.

But that's some years out in the future.

Yes.

Right.

So again, Your Honor, we think that the underlying order is clear. This is not a matter of trying to do an end run around relocation.

The court order prevents that. It's simply a matter, as was in the case of In Ray Manion, when two parents can't agree, it is appropriate and within the court's discretion to vest that decision making in one.

So the court doesn't have to decide this annually.

Can I just ask you, did both parties represent to the trial court that the Montessori School was not acceptable? So was that off the table?

Both parents discussed the fact that the oldest child was having issues in the Montessori School.

I don't know that they specifically said the Montessori School was bad, but that it simply wasn't working.

And it's my understanding that's why the father unilaterally decided to try the Amherst public schools and enrolled the daughter without mother's consent.

So the parties were essentially in agreement and as much as the Montessori School wasn't working for the kids?

Correct, Your Honor.

Can I ask one more question? I know your light's on, but can I just ask one more question?

Certainly.

One of the things your opponent suggests is that the reason that the Canterbury School was acceptable to your client was that her work schedule is such that she doesn't have to sort of go to the office every day.

Her work schedule is such that driving 60 miles or whatever is not a big problem for her. Is that correct?

No, Your Honor. There was a discussion that she molds her work schedule around the time she has with the kids, but that was not the testimony with respect to why this school was selected.

This school was selected for its curriculum.

But I thought there was some information that she sent nannies up to do the pickup.

There was testimony that there were all kinds of options. There's a carpool, there's a bus, there are neighbors that use the same school as well as individual transportation.

The real discussion was that this school offers the extracurriculars on site so that the kids' school day is similar to what it would have been otherwise, but there's no driving after school.

And if driving is such a problem for father, the fact that everything happens on campus at one location is actually beneficial.

Again, there is objective evidence in the record to support this discretionary ruling, and we would ask this court affirm it.

Thank you. You're welcome.
