Good morning. Good morning. This is case 2014-0750, state of New Hampshire versus James LePray.

May it please the court. My name is Thomas Barnard. I represent James LePray.

I intend to focus on the evidentiary issue this morning. I'd be happy to take the court's questions at any time.

Do I understand correctly that a trial, the state took the position that relevance didn't matter?

It did. The state's position was that by making a statement and an interrogation, a defendant tacitly waves any objection to the introduction of that statement, regardless of relevance and regardless of prejudice.

Is it also the fact that the police brought up the appearance of the defendant's body part and pursued the questioning on that subject?

That was not initiated by the defendant, was it?

It was not. It was initiated when the police said, is there any reason that the alleged victim could be able to describe your penis?

And there was no evidence. That appears to have been a deceptive tactic. There was no evidence that the alleged victim could do so.

The evidence here was irrelevant and gratuitous. It served only to humiliate and demean LePray and to poison the jury against him.

May I ask for you to develop a statement you made in your brief that I'm not clear on? You said that on the state's argument that any error was harmless.

You're telling us that our case law establishes that we have consistently declined to find harmless error when the only evidence is the complainant's testimony.

Could you flesh that out a little bit more for me? Because obviously the complainant's testimony alone is sufficient to convict.

Right. Well, there's two possible questions. One is legal sufficiency, and that is whether a reasonable jury could find guilt based on the evidence.

And your Honor's correctly stated that an accuser's testimony standing alone is legally sufficient.

It's an entirely different question whether any error was harmless. The first prong of harmless error requires the state to prove that the alternative evidence was overwhelming.

And that's a much higher burden than simply showing sufficiency.

I was not able to find any case, and I don't believe the state cited any case in which this court held that that first harmless error prong was satisfied where the only evidence of guilt was the complainant's testimony.

In fact, I found several cases where this court found that the evidence was not overwhelming, where the only evidence of guilt was the complainant's testimony, but this court characterized that testimony as strong or detailed.

So in this case, the state has not satisfied that first prong of harmless error.

So you basically have two arguments. One is that the court's ruling initially was wrong because the court said, I'll let the information come in with the exception of the prostitute part.

And then the state, quote, accidentally brought in the prostitute part.

And so it's really, you've got a two-stage error argument that the mistrial should have been granted at that point.

Yes, yes. The state's inadvertent playing of the reference to the prostitute is relevant to the appeal in two senses.

First, it adds to the prejudice of the court's initial ruling admitting this line of questioning, although the court didn't admit the reference to the prostitute.

Had the court not made that error, the state wouldn't have been in a position to inadvertently play this reference.

But it's also independently relevant to this appeal because the court should have granted a mistrial at that point.

This was evidence that unambiguously conveyed the fact that La Prairie had committed a prior crime, not just any crime, but a sexually related crime.

It marked him as somebody who from an early age was engaging in sexually deviant and illegal activity.

And that's exactly the type of evidence that could cause a jury to harbor prejudice against La Prairie.

The court apparently found that the incident occurred decades earlier and that the public now was more accepting of prostitution.

It did. I think, though, that the court cited a magazine article from The Economist and I think that it's certainly true that there is a substantial portion of the public that believes that prostitution ought to be legal.

But there is also a substantial portion that believes that it ought to be illegal.

And it is illegal.

And La Prairie is entitled to 12 impartial jurors, not, you know, six.

And even of those who believe that prostitution ought to be legal, most of those don't believe that it's moral or that it's acceptable.

They just believe that it is impractical to criminalize it.

So even among those jurors, they're still likely to harbor prejudice against La Prairie as a result of this evidence.

Thank you.

There's no further questions.

Good morning.

May it please the court?

My name is Sean Locke and I represent the state of New Hampshire.

The state asked that this court affirm the defendant's convictions.

What is the relevance of this evidence, of the scar on the penis?

The relevance here is, I mean, it's indicative of the defendant's kind of state of mind during the interview with police.

Throughout the interview, he takes steps to, as the officer described it, to deflect attention.

You know, you made that argument and I have looked at the transcript and it just does not support that.

I mean, he was specifically asked, this wasn't like, you know, they asked him what time is it and he tells him how to make a watch.

They specifically asked him about this and he answered the question.

But you know, how is this, you know, deflecting, trying to deflect responsibility?

So, my review of the transcript suggests, or I should say my law clerk's review of the transcript suggests that there are other places in the transcript

which might properly be characterized that way, but not this one.

It doesn't seem to me that it has anything to do with, you know, trying to deflect responsibility.

I would disagree with your Honor's assertion of what the transcript reflects.

I mean, the question he's asked, and I have it up right here, is specifically, or at least with respect to the statement that is objected to on appeal.

The whole segment discussing what, you know, the fact that his penis may have a scar and it was not objected to it,

it's simply the statement that he received the scar after being bitten during an oral sex encounter.

And the officer simply asks, there's a scar on it and then instead of saying, yes, he goes into detail explaining how he received the scar

and the questions kind of evolved from there.

I thought the objection was that this whole discussion about whether there was a scar on his penis should not have been introduced.

I mean, my understanding of the defendant's argument in his brief, I mean, it says,

by admitting evidence that a woman once bit the prey on his penis leaving a scar the court aired.

That was my understanding of the defendant's argument on appeal.

They referenced the entire, they discussed the entire conversation at points, particularly in the reply brief.

But the objection...

So what is, I mean, do you have any argument that this is relevant other than what you say is it sort of, you know, it demonstrates deflecting attention,

deflecting, you know, the officer's questions?

I can't think of one at this moment.

I suppose your argument would be weightier if during the interview the defendant said it wasn't me who assaulted this kid.

There were three other men who were exposed to her.

It could have been one of them.

That strikes me as much more supportable.

But to answer the officer's question and then go off, perhaps on a tangent,

I don't know that that really is sufficient for a jury to conclude he's not credible.

That's my concern.

I mean, to that extent, I mean, again, I think it goes to the, I mean, I think it does kind of reflect a bit on his credibility.

Because again, it does, it's another, it's another, it's kind of taking, I mean, you describe it as a tangent,

but it's taking the police officers down a rabbit hole that isn't addressing the allegations.

When the officer's asking that, I mean, I could, I certainly could see that, but when the officer's asking,

I mean, it wouldn't, you know, it strikes me that if he, that you could have it both ways here.

If he were, if the officer asks a question and he doesn't answer it, then you're, then, you know, the claim is that this is,

he's sort of trying to deflect, but he asks him a question that seems to be irrelevant to anything.

I mean, if he had said, you know, if during the course of this interview, the officer said,

hey, who are you going to vote for in November?

Trump or Clinton? And he gave an answer.

Would they say, hey, listen, he answered the question.

We're going to, we're, you know, it should be admitted in the, as part of his statement.

Well, and that may not have been irrelevant.

I mean, some of the, I mean, but there's much, I mean, in any interview there's information that's going to be discussed

that isn't necessarily, may not have a point, may not be relevant to the issues at play,

but there's still the balancing of.

Sure, but here the claim, I mean, I don't disagree with you.

That's, you can't, you know, you can't sort of really carefully parse every question and answer that's, that's,

but here there's an objection that this part really is, you know, is another, is evidence of another crime.

Even without the prostitution part, it's, so maybe it's not a crime.

It does, doesn't the defendant have a good argument that it does sort of suggest that, you know, it's not, it's not,

it is, I would seem to me that a jury could easily think that if the, in the context of, you know, a sexual relationship,

somebody ends up with a scar on their penis that this probably was, you know, at least a kinky and maybe something,

maybe much more than that, maybe, maybe, you know, a sort of violent, which is obviously not going to characterize the defendant in a very,

a very good light.

At the same time, I mean, I guess there are two parts here.

I mean, let's, okay, I mean, you're offered references kind of a kinky sexual relationship.

And, you know, that, I mean, that's not into, if that were the case,

and that were the jury's conclusion, that's not indicative at all of the fact that the defendant is, you know,

he is prone to engage in sexual assault.

And then I get in kind of a more general sense, well, the defendant raises one potential conclusion, another potential.

I mean, this is the, or the defendant characterizes as his first oral sex encounter.

I mean, it's easily, I mean, accidents happen in these circumstances and I'm sure.

Well, but the court's reasoning was that this indicates the defendant knows how to find an alternative source of sexual outlet

other than allegedly sexually assaulting his daughter.

It establishes he knows how to find another source for his sexual appetites.

How does that go to whether, in fact, he assaulted his daughter?

I mean, I understand what the trial court's reasoning here was.

I mean, I think that would have been particularly relevant if the entire statement, including the part about the prostitute,

had been admitted.

That's why I didn't really go down that road in my own argument because I don't see how that connects to this particular statement alone

or read in the vacuum when you read it within the part that the state inadvertently played.

I think that argument would probably hold more weight in the sense that it shows if this were done as kind of a lonely or anything like that

or just seeking a sexual outlet, he knows how to go and find an outlet as opposed to having to rely on the only e-mail that's around, which is his daughter.

All right, thank you.

You're welcome.
