This is case 2014-0725, State of New Hampshire versus Tyler Boyer.

But the record should reflect the fact that Justice Lynn will participate in this appeal,

and I'm going to be confused for the whole rest of the day.

May it please the Court.

Nicholas Court, representing the State in this State's appeal,

I'll take questions any time.

The defendant had resided at 27 Main Street in Ashland

until he was charged with domestic assault against his girlfriend who lived in the same house.

As a condition of bail, he was ordered to have no contact with his girlfriend,

not to interfere with her at her residence and to refrain from going within 100 feet of her.

He was also ordered to reside at 56 Doe Town Road in Ellsworth.

He was arrested while he was in the house at 27 Main Street with his girlfriend.

The Supreme Court in the Rackus case stated flatly,

quote, wrongful presence at the scene of a search would not enable the defendant to object to the legality of the church.

So does the state concede that if Ms. Newcomb had not been there on that day at 27 Main Street,

that Mr. Boyer would have standing to object to the search?

We don't concede that at all, but this Court need not address that issue.

There's no question that the defendant's presence in the house was wrongful.

The only issue is, if he had any expectation of privacy in the house,

whether society is prepared to recognize that expectation is reasonable in this case.

The defendant can cite no case in which any Court has reached such a result on facts similar to these.

And this Court should not be the first.

I emphasize that this rule of no standing due to wrongful presence is a very narrow one.

It doesn't make a difference when you talk about wrongful presence.

What comes to my mind is Birgler, someone who doesn't own the premises or lease the premises.

There was no dispute here that this was Boyer's home.

The records what we were given seems to suggest that in fact it was his home

and his girlfriend lived there with him.

So doesn't it make a difference in our analysis that this was in fact his home?

So when you talk about wrongful presence, true, he shouldn't have been there

because the girlfriend was there.

Restraining orders said you can't come within 100 feet of where she may be.

But nonetheless it was his home as opposed to someone else's home.

Does that make any difference in our analysis?

Not in this case.

This Court need not address that issue of whether a bail order or a protective order like this one

should always be read to forbid the defendant from going to the victim's residence

because in this case the victim was in the residence and the defendant was within 100 feet of her.

He was in violation of the express terms of the order.

It's axiomatic.

The Fourth Amendment, and by analogy Article 19, protects people, not places.

Regardless of whether his name was on the title, this house was no longer his home

because he was ordered not to make contact with the victim whose home it was.

But that sort of blurs the line between no contact order

and an order to not be present in the home, period, doesn't it?

Isn't that an important distinction here?

No, because she was there.

Because she was there, this defendant had no more legitimate expectation of privacy

in that home at that time.

Well, you say because she was there, but I asked you the question before.

If she wasn't there, don't you agree that he did have an expectation of privacy

and you say that doesn't matter?

It doesn't.

I don't agree, even it doesn't matter anyway.

Let's take a hypothetical.

Let's say before the defendant was arrested and then subject to the restraining order,

he had a den in the house.

I'm just thinking hypothetically.

He had a den in the house and he told his girlfriend,

I don't want you going in my den, and she never did.

And he said to her, these are private things.

I don't want you in there.

So do you say that if the police arrive, as they did in this case,

that because he's subject to the restraining order,

he no longer had a privacy interest in his den

and they could go in there and search the den?

My immediate impression is I don't know and I don't care.

I neither should this court.

Is that because you're retiring in the fall?

No.

That is not this case.

And I would submit that if you insist on my answering it,

my answer would be no.

He can't have any expectations.

Because you're saying this situation is really almost suey generous.

The particular facts drive the result here.

Sure, because if she's in the house,

she's within 100 feet of that den, he can't go there.

So how can he have any expectation of privacy

while she's in the house?

Did she testify?

I don't believe she did.

There was no trial.

This was dismissed because the evidence was suppressed.

That's why it's a state's appeal.

There is no issue before us as to whether she,

her permission to the police to go into the house

was voluntary or not.

That's the issue in front of us.

Am I correct?

That's correct because we didn't file a cross appeal.

The only issue is whether the defendant

had a reasonable expectation of privacy in that house,

notwithstanding that he was in there wrongfully.

That is the kind of strange issue that's before us.

Nonetheless, it has nothing to do

whether she gave voluntary permission.

That's right.

So the question the fact pattern begs, though,

is whether or why the police officers,

upon noticing his pickup, didn't just get a warrant.

Can't answer that, and our position is it doesn't matter

because he has no standing to object

to a search of a place where he has no right to be.

Even the defendant takes a lot of time in his brief

trying to distinguish the facts of the cases I've cited

and of saying this court should not follow

the one case where the facts are exactly the same.

So if he did have standing,

this would be an illegal warrantless search, correct?

Very likely, yes.

So the case that you say that we shouldn't follow...

I don't say.

That he does die, is that what you're talking about?

Isn't die distinguishable because in die,

the court found that there was no ownership interest

by the defendant?

No.

Early in the case there's a statement that

there is no ownership interest.

They simply said, as it happens,

the search in that case uncovered the contraband,

not the defendant.

He wasn't present there.

The result of the case was that he had no expectation

of privacy in a place where he had no right to be

because the person he had no contact order with was there.

But didn't the court also say that as a matter of fact

he had no ownership interest as a owner or a leaseholder as well?

I don't remember that.

And isn't that a critical difference?

I don't think it's critical.

Well, that sort of begs the question.

That is the question.

Whether that's critical or not.

No court has ever said it.

It was critical.

In the die courts the only one that has said it's not.

Is that right?

What they said was that it was not critical

that he had not been ordered expressly to stay out of that house.

Its decision had nothing to do with who owned the house.

The decision was that the defendant's argument

was that I have standing because of my contacts with this house

and because I was never ordered to stay out of it.

And the court said you have no standing regardless of the fact

that you were never ordered to stay out of this house.

But only because you were ordered to have no contact

with the person who lives in that house.

You have no expectation of privacy in any house

that is the residence of a person

whom you have been ordered to have no contact with.

Regardless.

It didn't mention title as being part of that analysis.

But it is one of the facts in the case.

That there was no ownership.

I don't remember.

Because you say it doesn't matter.

I don't think it matters and no court has ever said it does.

We're talking about a constitutional provision

about unreasonable searches and seizures

which is intended to protect the person.

It doesn't...

So did he forfeit that protection

by wrongfully being in the house?

That's essentially your argument.

Which strikes me as very significant

because it means if you violate the law

then you forfeit any protection

that may arguably flow to you.

I'm very concerned about that.

The point here is not just that he was violating the law per se

but that he was violating the law by being there.

In his own house.

It's not his house in the sense that...

It wasn't his house because he was ordered not to go there

but it was his house up until the moment

he wasn't supposed to be there.

So we've got a real conflict of interests here, don't we?

Because the home is what we guard under search and seizure

very protectively.

It strikes me that it does make a difference.

If this was his girlfriend's house

and he didn't live there at all,

I get what you're saying.

And that's what DAI is.

Well, again, that wasn't part of the court's analysis in DAI.

They didn't say title is crucial.

What they said was,

you may not have been ordered to stay out of this house

but you were ordered to have no contact with the person who lives there.

And that means you have no expectation of privacy in that house, period.

But you do agree that prior to the entry of this no contact order

that Mr. Boyer had an expectation of privacy in this location?

Sure.

And that it didn't dissipate when the order was entered?

In your view, it dissipates when he's in the house

within 100 feet of his girlfriend.

Is that right?

That's not my position.

My position is it dissipated when the order came down.

I'm saying this court need not decide.

So regardless of his location, he could be here

and he lost his expectation of privacy in the house

as soon as that order came down?

Is that what you're saying?

I'm saying that, but I'm also saying this court need not address that issue.

This court need only address the issue

of whether he had a legitimate expectation of privacy in the house

when the victim was there, which is what happened here.

My position is that he has no expectation of privacy in that house

as long as this order is in effect.

This order tells him he can't live there.

He has to live at another specific place.

It tells him he can't have contact with the person who does live there.

It tells him he can't interfere with her in the residence.

So would he have no expectation of privacy

if she is 100 miles away and he's in that house?

Doesn't he have a right to be in the house then?

But you're arguing that as soon as the order was entered

he had no expectation of privacy.

I would say he has no right,

but I'm also saying this court doesn't need to look at that question.

I'm just curious.

Does the record reflect whether the lease was in his name only

or both his and his girlfriend's name?

It wasn't clear to me from the briefs.

It wasn't clear to me either, but the court didn't think it was important.

The court didn't think it was important.

Okay, well maybe we're going to think it's important.

The court only thought what was important was that this had been his house.

And therefore it said

because the order didn't expressly tell him to stay out of this house

he still had some expectation of privacy in it.

I'm only asking this court to rule that when the victim was in the house

he could not possibly have any legitimate expectation of privacy.

He may have an expectation of privacy.

The question is whether it is one which society is prepared to recognize as reasonable.

So in my hypothetical to you, even if the girlfriend was prohibited from going into a den

as soon as he was ordered not to go near the girlfriend

then he gave up any expectation of privacy he had in a den

that maybe he protected for 10 years before and she always respected.

That evaporates.

I think so, but this court doesn't need to talk about it.

He certainly had no right to be there if she was within 100 feet of the den.

And therefore if he was in the den

even though she was prohibited from being there

if she was within 100 feet of it, he would be there wrongfully.

He would have no more status in that den than a burglar would.

And therefore if they searched the den and found him in it, that would be legal.

And so you say there's no difference between a no contact order

and an order to stay away from that location.

That's a material difference.

It's not material in this case because she was there.

Thank you.

Thank you.

May it please the court, Christopher Johnson on behalf of Tyler Boyer

and I'm happy to take the court's questions at any time.

My plan is to make a couple of points about standing law,

a couple of points about the bail order

and a couple of points about wrongful presence.

Beginning with standing law, the law says that it depends on a person's connection with the place.

It doesn't depend on where that person is.

And the law also indicates that the connection with the place

is defined by the authority to exclude outsiders.

It can be a shared authority.

She also had authority to exclude outsiders, but so did he.

And he didn't lose that from the bail order.

The bail order is also, or the standing is not defeated by the fact that he was committing a crime there.

People commit crimes all the times in their houses

and are in some sense wrongfully present when they're doing that,

but they don't forfeit standing for that reason.

With respect to the bail order, I think to defeat standing,

it would have to sever that connection.

And I can imagine the terms of a bail order that would do that,

but this bail order didn't.

So for example, if...

But it changes according to the state.

The situation has changed because society wouldn't regard his presence there as reasonable

and be willing to respect that because everybody agrees he shouldn't have been there,

even if it had been his house.

Right.

Well, but I mean, a couple of points about that.

I mean, one could say that about a great many crimes

and we don't, defendants don't lose standing because they're committing crimes.

And specifically to the point of the bail order,

for example, if he knew that she was on vacation a hundred miles away

for a three-day weekend, nothing in this order prevented him from going there.

That's right.

And that would be a different case

and probably the police would have been wrong under the circumstances.

But it's not different in this respect is that he has a right to go there under that circumstance.

He's not like a burglar.

He has a connection with this place.

It is his home.

So he can go there if she's not there.

Well, maybe it isn't so much standing as whether there's a reasonable expectation

that he, that was, there's protectable that society will accept.

I mean, this guy was committing a crime.

Right.

Right.

But you know, as I strive to emphasize,

committing a crime doesn't in itself deprive a person of standing.

That's a separate question.

No, but the state is concentrating on the reasonable expectation

of privacy prong of the problem.

Right.

And I think they make a good point when they say,

you know what, he had no reasonable expectation

because he knew he wasn't supposed to be there.

Well, I think, for one thing, I think it's a little bizarre

for a position to be that he has standing in a place,

a reasonable expectation of a privacy in a place,

as long as he's not there.

But as soon as he goes there, he loses it.

This is a very strange case.

Well, but I also think actually it is in a sense,

but it's not in a sense because if this court rules with the state,

it is open season on the homes of people who have bail orders

or protective orders because the state can do a search

or the police could do a search however illegal.

And there's nothing a court can do about it.

Let's take another hypothetical.

Let's suppose that a defendant homeowner is foreclosed upon

and there's a final judgment ousting him.

Yes.

But he stays in the home.

Yeah.

And he's in the home wrongfully because there are final orders

saying you do not own this home anymore.

Right.

Does he lose his expectation of privacy in whatever is there?

Yes.

I think he does because there is a judgment of law

which has ended his connection with the place.

He's no more than a trespasser in that instance.

That's different.

Mr. Boyer is not a trespasser.

He is not supposed to be there.

He's committing a crime when he's there,

but he is not a trespasser.

He's not committing that crime when he's there.

And so that's a crucial difference.

You draw a distinction in your brief between a no-contact order

and a no-entry order.

Right.

Why is that important to your argument?

Because I think, as I've said,

I think wrongful presences, I'll get to in a minute,

even if it is a no-entry order, it doesn't defeat his standing.

But the importance is I can envision a no-entry order

along the lines of what Justice Convoy just suggested,

which does defeat standing.

It's an order that says, not only can't you go there,

you can't be there and get your stuff out of there,

you know, you're done with that place.

You have no ongoing connection with it.

That isn't what this order said.

I wonder if there's a distinction here between standing

and the likelihood of succeeding on the challenge.

So even let's just assume for the moment that we agree with you,

and he has standing to challenge what the police did.

That doesn't necessarily mean he's going to prevail

given the terms of the restraining order.

Right.

Right.

I mean, it might be.

Yeah, I mean, so there's two separate questions.

One, does he have standing to challenge a search?

Question two, is the search unconstitutional?

And that comes back to the state's position,

which is let's assume without deciding he's got standing.

He wasn't supposed to be there,

so there's no reasonable expectation of privacy

that society would recognize.

I think the state's position is actually the opposite.

They're saying let's, you know, assume it's a totally unconstitutional search.

He's out of luck because he doesn't have standing,

is what they're saying.

I didn't hear it quite that way, but you may be right.

At least that's the way I understand it.

Because they didn't appeal the other issues that might have.

And it was never litigated.

In other words, the trial court did not say,

well, assuming standing, you know,

I find that the search was either proper or improper.

We never got there.

I think he did get there.

He said, because he had to, the trial judge had to.

He said, first, Mr. Boyer has standing.

So then the question is, is this or is this not an unconstitutional search?

And the trial judge says, yes, it's an unconstitutional search.

So the motion to suppress is granted.

And it couldn't be granted unless it's an unconstitutional search.

The state has chosen to leave those issues off the table for this appeal

for very good reasons, I think.

But they've just said, we're just fighting this.

Well, but does that preclude us from considering it?

In other words, could we say, well,

even though the state is only challenging standing,

the trial court in fact addressed the merits

and the defendant loses on the merits.

Is this a tempest in a teapot?

Do we have to do it?

No, I think you can't because they haven't brought those issues to this court

and there's no such a doctrine as reversing on alternative grounds

because they're the appellant.

So if we were to rule their standing,

could we send it back for another hearing?

I don't think so.

No, because they haven't appealed the merits of the trial court's second ruling,

which is I further find this is an unconstitutional search.

But haven't they really?

They haven't because they didn't brief it.

So do I understand you correctly to argue

that if this were a no entry order?

Right.

That your position would be different or the same?

I'm a little confused.

I have a more difficult path than I do have,

but I still would win because this gets to my final points,

is the wrongful presence doctrine I think is not as broad as the state says.

It is not a doctrine that says

if you were in a place you're not supposed to be, you don't have standing.

It's a doctrine that has two conditions.

It applies when first you have a defendant

whose only basis to claim standing

is that they happen to be there when the search happened.

And that's not what Mr. Boyer is relying on, or certainly not exclusively.

His reliance is on his preexisting connection that this is his house.

And secondly, the wrongful presence doctrine only applies

when that person who lacks the authority to exclude outsiders.

And my position is even with this order, no matter how you characterize it,

no entry or no contact,

if the police had come to Mr. Boyer, for example, in jail

or when he was somewhere else and said, can we search that house?

And he had said yes.

He absolutely had authority to consent.

And if they'd searched it

and found something that incriminated the girlfriend,

she'd be out of luck at her trial because he has authority.

And if he has authority to consent,

he has authority to say no.

And I think he had an authority to exclude outsiders

to be sure shared with her,

and she had an authority to invite people in.

That's true, too.

But that's not on the issue before this court now

because they didn't appeal that.

The question is, standing depends on his authority to exclude outsiders.

He had it.

Therefore, he had standing,

even if he wasn't supposed to be there.

The only way that no entry order cuts off standing

is if it amounts, as Justice Convoy's hypothetical would,

to an eviction.

You're done.

Do you agree that die is distinguishable

in that the defendant had no ownership interest in the...

I mean, I think...

House?

Department?

I don't recall that part of the die case either.

But I don't...

I mean, none of those cases hold what...

You know, this court would be out in front

of all those other courts

if it held what the state is asking it to hold.

Because in all those other cases

other than maybe die, and I don't remember,

but I had forgotten that if he owned it.

Potentially that is a distinction.

But in those other cases, the court also says

and this guy had no...

was an overnight guest, or was not an overnight guest.

Therefore, even if he has no basis to claim standing anyways,

despite that order.

And so they aren't...

None of them holds what they're trying to hold.

And I think if, in the state's argument,

would extend even to the jail inmate example

that I give in my brief,

if he's, Boyer could be in jail and not there

and they do a search and he doesn't have standing

based on that bail order.

And that's just not, you know,

that's just not the way this court has ever interpreted it.

People who are arrested can't be in their homes,

but that doesn't mean they don't have

standing to challenge searches of their homes.

So you're saying that the state is arguing

that even if he was in jail

he would have no standing back?

I mean, that's what I understand Mr. Court to say

is that even if, he also says to be fair

that you don't have to reach this.

But I understood him to say that if anybody

who's arrested is in effect ordered,

you are to be in jail until you're released.

And those people are not allowed to be in their houses

because they're supposed to be in jail.

And so if the police could just go into their houses

and search them and, you know, quite illegally

but the guy in no standing,

so no motion to suppress.

And that can't be right.

Mr. Court has other questions asked to affirm.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Okay, submitted.

The court will take a brief recess.
