Good morning.

This is case 2014-0480, John Farrelly versus City of Concord at all.

Mr. Meyer?

Thank you, Madam Chief Justice.

May I please the Court?

My name is John Meyer and I represent the plaintiff John Farrelly.

I've asked to reserve two minutes for a possible rebuttal.

I would like to take approximately 30 seconds to state the issues in this case and then

I would welcome questions.

You're a real optimist.

There are only, well, what makes it somewhat easier is that there are basically only two

principal issues in this case.

The first issue is whether the trial court aired in utilizing a recklessness standard in

a case involving law enforcement officers who abuse their law enforcement authority

for vindictive purposes.

The second issue is whether the trial court aired in taking away from a jury the question

of whether or not there was recklessness as opposed to negligence.

And I'd like to address those questions in reverse order starting with the second question.

The trial judge's opinion is basically one paragraph.

It's found on page nine in which he finds recklessness as a matter of law.

Now he does that solely based upon the testimony of the officers that at the time they engaged

in the action question, they believed that they were following the law.

He says that those statements are agreed to, which in fact there's no evidence in

the record that they are conceded or agreed to.

In fact, they're vigorously disputed.

Which statements are disputed?

The statements by the officers in their depositions that they believed at the time that they

made the arrest that they were following the law.

So that depends upon the credibility of the declarers?

It depends on credibility, but it depends upon also more importantly I think in this case

upon other circumstantial evidence.

I think the first mistake that the trial court made is it looked at the issue purely

in terms of the officers intent.

But if you look at the Everett case, the court talks not about recklessness just

in terms of the state of mind.

The court says recklessness the manner of their activity.

That's that manner of recklessness.

Now clearly an important component of recklessness is state of mind, but you can also infer that

state of mind from the way in which the officers acted.

Let me see if I understand you.

You weren't, are you saying that their recklessness consisted in failing to carefully

parse the footnotes?

Well, it wasn't a matter of parsing, I guess we'll say several ways.

First of all, yes in part, the recklessness involved, first of all the fact that they made

blatant, they failed to follow, blatant, I mean the language of either the harassment

statute and the arrest statute.

And I think the court can infer and has indicated in the past that it's relevant

how much of a violation was it.

Is this a minor violation of a technical point or is this a more fundamental misreading

of the statute?

So as to that point you say it was reckless of the officers not to carefully

parse the footnotes.

Well, but Your Honor, I know you have a multifaceted argument, but it starts with their failure

to do that.

Yes, Your Honor, but it wasn't a matter of carefully parsing the footnotes.

Officer Pichler testified that even though he's a criminal justice graduate, even

though he's been to the police academy, he's been an officer for a number of years,

he never considered the annotations.

Period.

It wasn't a matter of parsing them.

We're not talking about footnotes, we're talking about the annotations.

We're talking about what this court's opinions are.

And he said it was his practice never to consult the annotations.

So you say that's reckless.

We are saying yes.

I'm saying they're saying it.

At the very least I'm saying that's a question for the jury to determine.

But you say that also in connection with that the trial court applied the wrong

standard.

Correct.

The Everett case is not the standard.

It's the Huckins-McSweeney case.

So when you look at what you say to be the trial court's application of the wrong

legal standard, you lay that on top of the court's conclusion about recklessness.

You say this has got to go back.

Correct, Your Honor.

I'm saying both.

I'm saying that even if recklessness were the right standard, which we don't

think it is, that it was a jury question here whether the officers were negligent

as the trial court found or whether they were actually reckless.

And that's an issue that shouldn't be decided by a finder of fact, not on a motion for

summary judgment.

And Your Honor, it's not just a question of failing to read the annotations.

And in terms of the second statute, the arrest statute, just completely ignored the

fact that the statute says in the language of the statute there has to be evidence

of the current credible present threat to safety.

I mean, this is the basic arrest without warrant statute.

And he said he didn't think there was a credible threat.

At least he said it during his direct examination deposition.

But nevertheless, he wasn't aware that the law required that.

So we said-

Well, was that assertion that he believed there was no present credible

threat in hindsight?

In other words, at the time that it all went down.

No, he said at the time he did not think there was a credible threat.

When they went to arrest him, he did not believe-

The reason he went to arrest him because the client was apologetic.

The guy said I've been drinking too much.

In any event, the emails, certainly the language is coarse.

But there's nothing in there but any type of physical threat.

So the officer said, he changed his testimony when he was examined by his

own counsel.

But when I examined him in deposition, he said no.

When I went there and the guy was apologetic, I did not think he-

And so your point is that while he may have changed his testimony

across examination that the court was required to accept the version most

favorable to you in terms of ruling on summary judgment.

Right, for the purpose of summary judgment.

But the other-

And the worst thing, can I just clarify, the worst thing you say that he said was

happy 30th, you lying, cheating, et cetera, et cetera.

And you look at that and that cannot be interpreted as a threat.

Right.

Client may basically two things that might be called threats.

One is he said several times these emails, I'm going to sue you.

You've stolen my money, I'm going to sue you just wait until you get to my

summits, which is not a physical threat covered by the statute.

The second thing he said is, by the way, the same time you have your 30th

birthday at this Chinese restaurant, I'm also been invited to a party in

the same place.

And when I go there, I'm going to embarrass you by telling your friends

that you gave me herpes.

Now again, that's not a nice thing to do, but it's not a credible

threat to anybody's physical safety.

It's clearly not covered by the statute.

And the officer more or less acknowledged that.

He simply said, I wasn't aware of the statute.

But on the issue of recklessness and whether or not there's a jury question

on that, the most important evidence is not the number of mistakes

made or even the extent of the mistakes.

The most important evidence is the fact that after my clients

arrested, they taunt him and say to him, this is what it

happens to you when you've, you know, for effing with a 30-year

Concord Police Department veteran.

I think a jury could reasonably infer under these facts that the

officers were so intent on punishing my client on getting back at him

for his perceived insult on the principle.

Can I just ask you about that?

I mean, that's a very good point.

The only question I have on that though, I mean, if that's the theory,

then why do they talk to him at all?

Why don't they just go to his place and arrest him?

Why do they have a conversation with him about what happened?

Well, first of all, because by asking him, did you write these emails?

They then have, you know, from their point of view, level of

corroboration.

But, you know, I'm not saying that I'm not asking for a finding

of recklessness as a matter of law.

You're just saying you want, you're just saying you want,

you're just saying you want.

The defendant has arguments, but I'm saying those are arguments

that should be made to a jury.

Now, in regard, going back to the issue of standards.

And those arguments should be made, you say, under the proper

legal standard for an alleged intentional tort, which is the

standard articulated in Huckins.

Your Honor, and again, that takes me, segues me back to

where I want to go, which is back to the first issue, which

is the appropriateness of the standard.

And let me qualify.

But do you agree with her so I can stay with you?

Do you agree with her?

No.

Well, mostly.

But let me say one more time, you would see my would.

I thought that's what you were saying in your brief.

Judge, I think you're, well, I don't disagree, but I think

you're going a little further than I would necessarily go.

I'm not necessarily saying that Everett

doesn't apply to any intentional tort.

What I'm saying is that Everett, there are two things you've

got going on here.

One is you've got the intentional tort,

and secondly, two intentional tort.

Secondly, you have the vindictive motivation.

And I'm saying regardless of whether Everett can be

applied to intentional torts, and maybe you can draw a

distinction for some intentional torts between

recklessness and negligence.

It cannot apply in a situation where there is substantiated

evidence of a vindictive intent.

Because in Everett, it was reasonable for the court

to say that recklessness is worse than ordinary negligence.

Why can I just ask you, why shouldn't we basically say

that the federal standard under whatever fits Gerald

or whatever that case is, that is the conduct

such that an objectively reasonable police officer

should obviously, how I forgot what the exact language is,

but it should clearly have known that this was unlawful behave.

Well, I think there's a really crucial point there,

which is there's an important difference

between the Huckins standard and the federal standard.

In other words, the federal standard

is a purely objective standard, as Justice

you just articulated.

The Huckins standard.

Two prongs, right?

Yeah, the Huckins standard is both a subjective

and an objective basis.

In other words, the officer has to have a reasonable belief,

but he also actually has to believe it.

Well, wait a minute, are there federal cases that say

even if the officer was subjectively had bad motives,

that it doesn't matter?

In other words, if the purpose of the officer

is to arrest the defendant because he's African-American,

he says, that's why I did it,

because he was African-American.

I didn't really care whether he was guilty or not,

but it turns out that there was probable cause.

Would we say, that's okay?

As a civil libertarian, it's hard for me to,

I don't wanna say yes to that,

but yes, there are some federal cases that say that.

And that if you take a purely objective standard

literally, that that's where it leads you.

But this court has been consistent in terms of,

and the statute, which in a sense Huckins relies upon,

makes it clear that there needs to be

an objective component.

There needs to be.

What do you want us to do?

You want us to send it back to the trial court

with an instruction, A, to apply the correct standard,

and B, with a us saying that this record cannot support

a finding as a matter of law

as the court found no recklessness.

Yes, Your Honor, that is what I do wanna find,

although I would qualify,

but if you send it back with the correct standard,

then recklessness is no longer the governing issue.

The issue is then it was.

Then it's sufficient.

Yeah, the question is.

It will be sufficient in your view

for us to send it back with instructions

to apply the Huckins standard.

Correct, because in terms of a reasonable belief standard,

I don't think it's any way.

I mean, even the trial court here,

I mean, the argument was made to the trial court

to grant essentially municipal immunity,

which would have involved the Huckins standard,

and the trial court wouldn't do that.

Because the standards here,

the mistakes here are so gross

that I don't think any reasonable basis

for applying the Huckins standard.

But help us understand precisely what you want us to do.

If we say the court aired in not applying Huckins,

we send it back to reconsider the motion

for summary judgment in light of Huckins rather than Everett.

Is that what you're looking for?

Yes, Your Honor, the Huckins standard applies,

and again, I think it's also important.

And if we do that,

we don't have to decide as a matter of law

whether the alleged conduct is or isn't reckless here.

Right, and I wouldn't ask the court to decide

as a matter of law that the conduct isn't reckless.

My point is that the reckless issue

should be a question of fact for the jury.

But I-

Then why are we remanding just for another exercise

by the trial judge?

Well, because the case needs to go to trial.

But maybe I'm still misunderstanding.

I thought that you were asking us two things

that seemed to be redundant.

One, to reverse and have the trial judge

apply the correct standard for summary judgment,

but you're assuming that then the trial judge would find

that recklessness is a jury issue.

What if it doesn't?

Well, Your Honor, if the trial court

is instructed to follow Huckins,

then it would not be applying a recklessness standard.

Because recklessness, I mean the issue

would no longer be where the officer's reckless.

The issue would be whether the officer's

had a good faith belief objectively and subjectively

that their conduct conformed with law.

And I think that's the appropriate standard.

And when the court said redundant,

I guess what I would say in a sense

is the two arguments are alternatives.

In other words, either, I mean,

again, I think that the broader argument

is to get the trial court on the right standard.

But if the court didn't want to go that far,

and sometimes this court, in my experience,

goes for the narrowest grounds for decision,

the narrower ground for decision

would be that even if you were to follow Everett,

even if Everett were to be applicable here,

it wasn't properly applied

because the trial judge made a finding.

But it strikes me that that's exactly the reverse.

In other words, the narrower way for us

to deal with this is to remand

for application of the correct standard,

not to talk about recklessness.

Yonah, I think it's a matter of technically,

I think the court is correct, I would agree with that.

When I said broader, narrow,

I simply meant in terms of the scope of the issues

in a sense.

But I agree that technically,

that probably the narrow way is to go back to the court

and say this is the standard that needs to be applied.

It seems to me that we can't not decide

the Huckins issue.

I think it would be hard not to decide the Huckins issue

because then the court's going back

and continuing to work on the wrong standard.

Right, so we gotta do it.

I think part of the problem here

is the standard that the court is following

is a standard which is,

with the trial court as far as standard,

this court is basically essentially

deemed to be unconstitutional.

So the presumption is always to interpret something

in a way that makes it constitutional, not the reverse.

Thank you.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Ms. Elliott.

May it please the court.

Samantha Elliott on behalf of the city of Concord,

Walter Carroll and Eric Pickler.

Take questions at any time.

This court should affirm summary judgment

in favor of the defendants.

Judge Smuggler correctly applied the law

as this court developed it in 2006

in Everett versus General Electric.

That was an negligence case.

It was an negligence case,

but there's nothing in Everett

that states that it only applies to negligence.

Well then, how do you distinguish it from Huckins?

In Huckins, this court was faced with a statute

that gave unfettered immunity,

complete blanket immunity

for all intentional torts for municipal actors.

That's not the case with official immunity.

Official immunity has already constricted,

the officers already need to show

that they were not wanton and reckless.

And I would argue that that standard seems more just.

I'm not sure how it is just given

the reasons for immunity.

How does just require an officer

to show that he was not negligent

in order to be immune on an intentional tort?

There should be some recognition.

Well, it makes no sense.

It makes no, but that's precisely

the standard that's being argued.

The officer must show that he was objectively reasonable.

That's a negligence.

But how can we say,

I guess the thing I'm having some trouble with is,

how can we say that it can be objectively reasonable

for an officer to not know

that a statute is unconstitutional?

I mean, I guess the,

what, you know, why should that,

doesn't that mean that officers,

I mean, I understand that they're not lawyers

and we can't expect them to be lawyers

or to be having these kinds of arguments.

But this seems to me to be pretty basic.

But even lawyers,

though the members of the bar would be embarrassed

to admit it,

submit pleadings to this court and other courts

that fail to take into consideration case law,

fail to consult the pocket part.

Lawyers do that,

and they're trained to do,

to understand the law and to apply it.

And when they do it,

we talk about negligence.

We don't talk about wanting and reckless.

And if it's only negligent,

if anything, for a lawyer to do it,

can we really expect police officers to consult the case?

But aren't there two prongs here?

One is the lack of knowledge

that the statute that they were operating under

was unconstitutional.

But the other issue is whether there was a threat,

an imminent threat.

And then we have deposition testimony

that says at the time we made the arrest,

we did not believe there was an imminent threat.

It seems to me that's the stronger argument.

I agree if the deposition testimony supported that point.

You say it doesn't. No.

And I would ask the court to read the testimony very carefully.

On page 103 of the record,

the testimony is about Officer Pickler's understanding

of the law at the time of the arrest.

And he admits at the time of the arrest,

I did not know that was a part of the law.

And I can read the follow-up question from Attorney Meyer.

Attorney Meyer asks for clarification's sake.

He says, Officer Pickler says,

based on my understanding of it today,

it would appear that way.

But at the time, no.

And Attorney Meyer says, you were not

aware that this requirement of a credible present threat

to safety was a prerequirement before arresting

without a warrant.

I was not.

I was under the impression that harassment alone was

included under the abuse definition.

He was never asked directly, did

you believe that Mr. Farrelly presented

a credible present threat?

He wasn't asked that directly until he was

asked questions by his own counsel.

And when he was asked those questions, he was unequivocal.

He believed at that time that Mr. Farrelly presented

a credible present threat.

There was no change in testimony.

There was a change in question.

And that explains it.

And so I agree that if the testimony supported

the point being made, that would be a problem for us.

But I don't think that the testimony does.

So I would just ask the court to look at that case.

Well, it seems like both lawyers did their job,

which was to elicit testimony that would support

their case, and that that's what trials are about.

And to the point of whether the recklessness standard applies,

assuming for the sake of argument that the recklessness

standard does apply, that Everett is good law,

and it applies in cases.

It's been used in a workable way in the lower state

and federal courts for intentional torts.

Assuming that that standard applies, this is an immunity.

In the Everett decision, the court

was very clear that the purpose of the immunity

was not just immunity from liability,

but immunity from suit, from trial.

So if in these cases, recklessness

is a question for the jury, then what

is the purpose of the immunity?

If, as a matter of law, these officers were not reckless,

how could the plaintiff possibly

prove malicious prosecution?

It's clear that Huckins was argued to the trial court.

But the trial court did not apply Huckins.

What do we do with that?

If you look at the, and I would say that Huckins

was not argued to the trial court with regard

to official immunity.

If you look at the submission concerning Huckins,

it never mentions any immunity other than 507B.

507B had been argued in the motion for summary judgment.

It was one of the issues before the trial court.

It was appropriate for Attorney Meyer

to alert the trial court that there had been some case law

developing the statute.

And that was done.

And Judge Smokler didn't use 507B.

So he had no reason to know that there was going

to be an eventual argument that the standard, as explained

in Huckins, would apply to official immunity.

He was never given an opportunity to consider that issue.

There was no motion for reconsideration raising

that issue and clarifying that there was an intention.

But presumably the court would have read Huckins in connection

with the statutory argument.

Yes.

And so do you say Huckins only applies to the statute?

Not to the overall concept of official immunity?

I do.

Because official immunity already constrains the availability

of the immunity.

So what you're saying is you want a decision from us

that makes it clear that you look to Huckins only

when you are examining the statute

and not when you are making a determination

as to whether official immunity applies.

Yes, because the question in Huckins

was whether 507B5 was constitutional.

That's the decision.

And so in order to find it constitutional,

the court read into the statute this requirement

that the municipal actors show that they

had a reasonable belief in the legality of their actions.

There's nothing in the Huckins decision that

implies.

But if that's what the Constitution requires,

why doesn't the Constitution require

whether there's a statute or not?

Well, I guess that's the decision for the court today.

The question is, does the Constitution

require some constraint on immunity

and is wanton and reckless sufficient?

And I believe it is.

And actually much more tailored towards intentional

towards.

Because if you want immunity to be available so that our

police officers can continue their jobs without interruption

if they should, then it should fit intentional

towards.

If all you have to show is potential negligence

to get a trial on an intentional tort,

it doesn't seem to me that the immunity is fitting the cases.

And I would argue that if you are going

to apply the reckless standard, or if the court does that.

Can I just ask, can I just follow up

on the credible threat thing that Justice Conbauer was

asking you about?

What is, let's assume, and I understand

that you have a dispute with your opponent

about exactly what you can draw from the deposition testimony.

But let's assume we construe the deposition testimony

the way you suggest.

I guess I'm still left with what is the credible

immediate threat.

Isn't Mr. Myers correct that, sure,

this was very crude language and some things

that any of us would be very offended about

if the plaintiff here was to do that,

do what he said he was gonna do,

but where's the credible threat

that I'm gonna harm you right now?

Well, I think we have to look at this

in the scope of what the officer was facing.

This is a domestic violence complaint.

And RSA 173B and the officer's training

had taught him to err on the side of the complaint.

But that can't, you know, I read that in your brief

and I have to say it was really disturbing.

I mean, does that mean that any, you know,

any time somebody uses the word domestic violence,

we just sort of say the Constitution

is kind of, is really out of the window here.

Where is the, you know, where really is the suggestion

from the evidence that this was gonna be violent behavior

right now?

Okay, so Ms. Coralus had met with Officer Pickler

for at length.

She had described her relationship with Mr. Farrelly,

the communications that he had sent,

his threats to come to the party, which was...

Well, when you say threat to come to the party,

what does that, you know, I suppose that's true.

I threatened to, you know, I threatened that,

that I'm gonna, you know, see you tonight

at a restaurant that you're going to.

Okay, I will do that, but is that,

what's the threat of violence?

No, and I agree, I'm getting to that.

So he had, she had talked about the email,

she had given him the emails,

and she had told him that she was afraid

he was going to come to her party

and hurt her and her daughter,

physically hurt her and her daughter.

And then when he met with Mr. Farrelly,

all but that one thing was confirmed.

But you know what, but he has no reason

to doubt his problems.

Here's the problem, when it may be that,

I think we have this in many times

in domestic, in these domestic cases,

she may have been absolutely right

in saying that was subjectively what she felt.

That's not the test though, isn't it?

I mean, isn't it whether the fact

that she might have felt threatened

with physical violence as a result

of something that doesn't reasonably lead to that,

that can't be the reason to arrest someone, can it?

Well, if all of the facts

that she tells him are confirmed,

except for that one,

and he has no reason to doubt her veracity,

and she had explained that Mr. Farrelly

had been physical with her in the past,

though I know that's not the total standard.

We have past physical violence

with a specific fear of an upcoming date

that she expressed to him.

And I think it's important for the court

to remember that at this stage,

the question isn't whether a domestic violence

order should issue.

The question is whether Officer Farrelly

was wanton or reckless in applying that standard.

Was he wanton reckless in making this arrest?

That's the question.

So perhaps there was not enough

of a credible present threat to support a conviction.

But was there enough for him to make the arrest?

I think that we have too many examples

of officers ignoring evidence of domestic violence

and they're put in this difficult position.

And why isn't it a jury question

about whether it was reckless to do that?

Again, because this is an immunity case.

So I don't think it's a close enough call.

The purpose of the immunity is to be immune

from the lawsuit, the interruption, the difficulty,

and also the chilling effect.

But don't you have, you know, the other thing

I guess we haven't really talked about is you had,

this is not, we have this other gloss on this

of what the officers say.

I mean, at the time of the arrest, you know,

you mess around with, you mess around

with somebody from the Contra PD or,

I mean, can't, you know,

doesn't that give rise to saying, well, wait a minute,

you know, even if we, even if we are gonna apply

the recklessness standard that you're sort of talking about,

wait a minute, now we hear this,

this sort of suggests that this was beyond reckless,

this was, you've got, you know,

you sort of got a really marginal,

maybe more than, maybe even less than marginal,

but you've got a marginal argument

of a credible threat, and now you have the officer

making statements that suggest that,

maybe he wasn't thinking that this was a threat at all,

he was just thinking, I'm gonna help out my,

you know, the daughter of my buddies

at the Contra Police Department.

It's hard to see why that doesn't,

why the jury doesn't get to decide.

Well, so obviously taking the facts

in the light most favorable to the plaintiff

on the summary judgment standard

and admitting for the sake of argument

that that statement was ever made,

if the statute were constitutional,

that statement would be irrelevant.

So why does that statement matter?

If the police officers were not reckless

in applying the law, that statement

shouldn't come into play.

It's not relevant.

If I arrest you for murdering somebody,

I can call your names after the arrest

and it doesn't change the fact

that you were arrested for murder

and that arrest was valid.

And I don't think it should have any effect here

and Judge Smuckler, I think correctly found that.

In his opinion, he discusses that

it says due to the belief,

the subjective belief of the officers

that they were correctly applying the law

at the time of arrest, that statement doesn't matter.

It was after the arrest was made.

But query, doesn't the statement after the arrest

go to the reasonableness of the conclusion to arrest?

I think it would if there were any argument

that the officers actually knew the law

and refused to apply it.

But because everybody agrees

that the officers did not know

that that law was unconstitutional.

The officer testified he did not know

that he needed to find there was a credible present threat.

There's no argument

that these officers willingly misapplied the law.

And therefore that motive that's what is the fact.

But I mean, couldn't a jury hearing

that what the officer said,

say, you know, we don't believe,

we don't believe that they didn't know what the law was.

They, you know, they said this,

but here it is in black and white in this,

you know, the Supreme Court has said it was unconstitutional.

If you just look in the annotations, it's right there.

They say they didn't.

And maybe if all other things were equal,

we would say, okay, so we don't expect police officers

to go researching the annotations.

But here we have this other evidence.

Gee, couldn't a jury say, you know,

I don't really believe that officer

when he said he didn't know the law.

I think he really did.

And he was helping out,

he was helping out his friends on the police department.

I don't think that a jury could say that in this case

because the plaintiff has never argued that.

Never argued that they willingly misapplied the law.

They have always agreed

that the officers did not know the law.

And so how can a jury make the leap to say

these officers are perfectly-

Well, I'm sorry, they've, I'm sorry, they've,

are you saying that the plaint,

that your opponent has conceded

that the officers at the most,

that they didn't act intentionally?

I mean, they, that they didn't act intentionally.

I want to hear from Mr. Myers on that,

but I'm not sure that he will agree with that.

Reading the pleadings and the briefing,

I don't know what attorney Meyer will say today,

but reading the briefing and the pleadings,

the argument has always been

that they were reckless and wanton

by not consulting the case notes.

It was never that they were reckless and wanton

on purpose by ignoring a law that they understood.

And so I don't think that the jury could find that.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Mr. Meyer?

Just to respond to Justice Lynn's question,

it's clear that attorney Elliot is basically

misrepresenting our case at a 360 degree point.

I'm not saying intentionally,

but our position is absolutely

that they chose to ignore the law

because they're so out to get Mr. Farrell.

They didn't care about the law.

Whether they knew the law or didn't know the law,

they didn't care about the law.

Their only concern was to get him

and they would get any legal pretext

they could to get there.

Factual clarification.

The two officers actually consulted the statute

before making the arrest.

Your Honor, they claim they did.

We do not accept the veracity of that testimony.

Their testimony is completely inconsistent with each other.

One of them says we looked at it before.

That's why I'm asking.

That's why I'm asking,

because I read it both ways.

That has been their testimony,

but we have made clear that we do not believe

that it's credible and that we think

there is a jury question based on the contradictions

and their failure to have a consistent version

of what occurred.

Basic differences in chronology

as to whether what they're saying is believable.

From our point of view,

that is an after-the-fact rationale.

We absolutely do not believe

this is simply a matter of a simple mistake.

We think this was an intentional act on their part

because they didn't care about the law

because they were so motivated one way or the other

to arrest Mr. Farrell.

Mr. Mayer, can I just ask you this question?

One of the things that you both seem to be assuming

is, and I think this probably comes from the criminal law,

is that there's no question in the criminal law

if the police stop somebody,

for the example I gave before,

they stop somebody because the officer's subjective intent

is because they stop somebody

because he or she is African-American,

but in fact there's reasonable suspicion

or probable cause to stop.

The criminal law would say,

you're not gonna grant a motion to suppress

if in fact there was reasonable suspicion,

even if the officer had a bad motive.

But I guess I wonder,

that makes sense in the criminal law

where the state has the interest

of prosecuting the criminal law.

But if the question is in a civil suit,

should the officer be liable?

Your Honor, he should be liable

and that's the fundamental difference.

I mean, that's what I was gonna say.

Why isn't that a different stand?

But that's the fundamental difference

between state and federal law.

In other words, in federal law,

if the officer has the objective basis,

it doesn't matter what is,

I mean, at least that's what the argument is.

Under state law, it's clear

that not only does the officer have to be objectively,

have an objective basis,

and I didn't suddenly disagree

that that's a negligence standard.

It's more than that,

but there has to be, or less than that.

There has to be an objective belief

in the reasonableness of the conduct,

even if negligent.

But also there has to be a subjective belief.

But the last point I wanna make

is this case is about domestics.

True, but it's nothing to do with violence.

And if you, in fairness to my client,

if you look at the transcript.

Your time is up, Mr. Meyer.

I'm sorry, but anyway,

there's no violence, no past violence

or present violence.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Case submitted.
