This is case 2014-0493 in the matter of Glenda J. Ball and Frank A. Ball.

Council.

Good morning. Chief Justice, may it please the Court. My name is Jared O'Connor. I'm with

the firm of Barrow and Macalester O'Connor. It's my pleasure to be here representing

Frank Ball who's here with me in the courtroom today. I would like to begin by reserving

one minute of time for rebuttal if I may. And I'll take questions at any time.

Did we go too far in Scott and Pierce? No. You did not go too far in Scott and Pierce.

Wasn't the Massachusetts decree in that case also subject to modification in Massachusetts

just as you have here? It was, but the issue in Scott was not child

support specifically. The issue that this Court addressed in Scott was the modification

of college expenses. And what's particularly interesting is if you read Scott closely,

what it says is that the Massachusetts statute that governs college expenses, payment of

college expenses, is exactly the same statute that governs payment of child support. It's

exactly the same statute that we're talking about here, Section 28. That section, Scott

found, was modifiable under New Hampshire law through UFSA because it was permissible.

What the statute specifically says is that page excerpted at page six of my brief says

that the Court may make appropriate orders of maintenance, support, and education of any

child who has attained age 18, but not age 21, further provisions, and extends it up to

23, actually. But what Scott recognized was that that may language is permissive. It's

not mandatory. And so because of that, New Hampshire substantive law could apply to

allow the Court to modify and apply New Hampshire substantive law to payment of

college expenses. Isn't there, I guess the question I have, Mr. Conner, is this, isn't

this case also distinguishable from Scott, in that here you actually had a trial Court

in New Hampshire approve the modification? Yes, that is true. There are a number of

different distinguishing factors between this case and Scott. And there's also a few

holdings of Scott that are helpful with regard to this. So I mean, I guess what I'm

saying is even if we assume that the Court was wrong, let's assume for a minute that it

wasn't modified under Massachusetts law, but the parties come in and they have an

agreement and they say to the Court, you know, we agree to this, we agree to modify

this. And the Court says, Stamford's approval, I so ordered, I agree, you know, it's

now approved. Doesn't that mean that even if the Court was wrong, that's no

different than a Court being wrong in any other thing. If there's no appeal, and

nobody did appeal at the time, that's, that's the law. That's certainly one of

our positions. I mean, frankly, that's our fallback position, which is why I

raised judicial estomple in, in my brief, which is that as of 2008, the parties

came from Massachusetts and everyone was here in New Hampshire and they stipulated

at that time, everyone had counsel, they stipulated to the Court that

New Hampshire law would apply going forward. At that point, yes, it

comes in New Hampshire order, so that in 2013, when there is a motion to modify,

it's New Hampshire modifying a New Hampshire order under that argument.

UIFSA doesn't even come into it. And that agreement affirmatively said that the

party separation agreement that, that the paragraph in the party

separation agreement is stricken and that paragraph is the one relating to

emancipation. That's exactly right. They actually addressed that issue. They

specifically addressed the issue. They specifically agreed in 2008 that the

emancipation provision would be stricken entirely, that New Hampshire law would

apply. It says so explicitly in the stipulation. Well then, why isn't

that the end of the story? Well, we think it is the end of the story. The

trial court disagreed because the trial court read in Scott versus Pierce

and there is this line in Scott versus Pierce that says that the original

issuing state under UIFSA, if there's a non-modifiable provision of law in

that. Well, sure. I understand what Scott says. Sure. But my point, I guess,

is the parties are free, it seems to me, to change the terms of their

agreement and basically cut the old agreement out, which appears they

did here. We certainly think so. I mean, I have no quarrel with that. If there

had been an intervening agreement in Scott such as the one apparently extent in

this case, then Scott might very well have turned out differently. Yeah, that

certainly may be. I mean, what was interesting in Scott, that played out

a little bit differently because in Scott, the parties actually, their choice

of law provision in their final stipulation was that Massachusetts

law would continue to govern. Scott said that was not applicable because

the parties were here in New Hampshire and New Hampshire had a

greater interest in monitoring what was happening. So at least one of your

arguments is the trial court failed when it looked at Scott to really look at

the unless part because Scott said the original timeframe for support is not

modifiable unless, the court quoted that part, but Scott went on to say

unless the law of the issuing state provides for modification and in this

case, Massachusetts law does provide for modifications after children reached

the age of 18. So even aside from the 2008 agreement, you say that in

itself would support what the ability to modify. That's exactly right.

Under section 49 of UIFSA, it specifically says, this is not just Scott

interpreting this, the statute says under Roman three of 49 that the

tribunal of this state may not modify any aspect of a child support

order. That may not be modified under the law of the issuing state.

So there's this phrase in Scott that, well, duration is non-modifiable.

That's going a little too far. It's sort of using duration as an example,

but the actual law itself, the statute says that what you're talking

about is whether or not the law is modifiable under the issuing

state. So again, yeah, Massachusetts makes support payable

till 18 on a mandatory basis. If the parties in this case,

it stipulated as a matter of New Hampshire law, not that they

could, but if they had stipulated that child support would end at 17,

that would not be enforceable by the New Hampshire court. But because

Massachusetts law allows modification anywhere between 18 and 23,

then it's modifiable under New Hampshire law. And you know it's

modifiable under between 18 and 23 in Massachusetts, in part because

of the language of the statute. And you saw that even in

Scott and Pierce itself. The parties in that case originally had

a stipulation in Massachusetts that support would be payable

till 21, then they modified later on while they were still in

Massachusetts. They modified and made it payable till 23, had that

approved by a Massachusetts court with no issue. So again, you know

that after the age of 18 to 23, you're in this discretionary

period. So because of that, we think that's where the trial

for made its first mistake was under interpreting Scott or

reading Scott to literally not looking specifically at the

language of the statute. The fallback position is that the

rule of Scott and its interpretation of a 49 under UF may

not apply at all because what 49 says is that it's modification

of child support of an order of another state. And what 49

requires, and this was the situation in Scott, is that you

have a party in New Hampshire, a party in some other far flung

state, and no contact anymore with the original issuing

state, which in that case was Massachusetts. So that was the

case in Scott, you had mother and child out in

California, you had father in New Hampshire, mother and child

petition for modification in New Hampshire. That's where 49

applies. If you look at 51 section 51, that talks about

jurisdiction to modify an order of another state. When all

individual parties reside in the state, that's what happened

in this case. And that's not Scott. That's another

distinguishing factor is that under 51, it requires that all

the parties be in New Hampshire, and that the child not be

in the issuing state. And that again is what's happened

here. And under 51, it talks about it specifically provides

in Roman two that a tribunal of this state applies not only

its procedural law, but the quote substantive law of this

state to the proceeding for modification. That is a

jurisdictional provision under UFSA that allows New

Hampshire to make and to apply its own, its own

substantive law, that kind of language does not appear

anywhere in 49 and wasn't addressed. So I think based

on Scott itself, I think that there was a mistake

made, but I think there could have been a further error

in that 51 is actually the provision that applies

here. And if that's true, then New Hampshire had additional

authority to make a modification. If there are no

other questions. Thank you, ma'am. Good morning. If it

pleases the court, my name is Glenda Ball. I am the

appealing in this case, and I am representing myself.

I'll apologize in advance. I am not a lawyer. So that's

okay. I don't muddle through this as best I can. That cuts in

your favor. This case was brought into the New Hampshire

courts back in 2013. I was represented by council. The

argument was brought about the modification of child

support. And the argument at the time was the Scott

versus Pierce case modified the amount of child

support, but not the duration of child support. And my

case was based pretty much solely on the Scott versus

Pierce case. And that's the smart place to base it,

except how do you answer the question related to the

agreement you apparently made that when you were all

here, New Hampshire law would control and the duration

provision of the old proceeding was stricken. How

do you respond to that? Well, the response that we had at

the time in 2013 was that the whole motion wasn't

stricken. It was a line that was stricken within that

motion that said going forward, the parties would

agree under New Hampshire law. According to my attorney at

the time, he said that that was an error that was

made and should not have been put into effect. But it

became part of a court order, didn't it? It did

become part of a court order, yes, in 2008. Aren't we

stuck with it? Well, he argued the case in 2013 with the

courts and the courts found in favor of continuing the

child support for one child that is now, she's now

20, but at the time she was 18. But at the time, I

guess, I mean, it wasn't at, I think what Justice

Delaney or the chief was asking about is the, the, the

thing that was approved by the court was earlier when, when

you submitted the request for modification and to have

New Hampshire, you know, take jurisdiction, and you

agreed to that and the court, the court approved that

agreement. So isn't, isn't it that, I think, I think

that's what the chief was talking about, isn't, aren't

we stuck with that agreement? There was no appeal

taken from that agreement. No, there was no appeal. In

2008, I petitioned the courts to just have the

divorce decree brought to the state of New Hampshire

because both parties live in New Hampshire. In the course

of those proceedings, there was a modification of child

support and there was also a modification of

visitation. Because there was a modification of those

two, they had stricken the original child support

order. And going forward, we kept that child support

order from 2008 until 2013, when I received from

his counsel looking to stop child support once the

children turn 18. At that point, I wasn't sure who

was right, who was wrong. I obtained counsel and he

argued on my behalf under the different cases that

he cited and his argument won. Then it went up for

an appeal and again, the appeal was denied and

the case was state. So now here we are again today

to appeal the case to the Supreme Court. And, you

know, my lack of resources to research this

information and come up with anything further than

we already have in front of us today, I don't have

that. Well, it strikes me that it may simply be a

question of law unrelated to your resources to

argue and that's our responsibility is to look

at the law and make a legal decision. Right. I

mean, quite honestly, I've been told that this

case, it's 50-50. You can look at Scott versus

Pierce and see one side and you can look at Scott

versus Pierce and see the other side. At this

particular point, I'm at the mercy of the five

of you to determine which is right, which is

wrong. The only thing that I would respectfully

ask there was question of retroactivity pursuant

to a decision being made today that it would

go back and be a retroactor from 2013. I'm just

asking the court to not consider retroactivity

from 2013 to now, if you find in favor of the

appellate, just from the simple fact that I don't

have the resources to pay him back for that

support. I don't believe I have anything

further. Thank you, ma'am. Nicely done. Thank

you. Okay. Submitted court is in recess.
