Good afternoon. This is case 2014-0343, George C. Conkey II versus town of Dorchester.

Mr. Decado. May it please the Honorable Court, my name is Peter Decado. I represent George C. Conkey II.

Just a brief interlude when I came in today. I saw the quote on your wall from Justice Kenneson that said in part that the Supreme Court and the judiciary

will continue to maintain and guard its house of justice for the humble as well as the poor and the powerful as well as the rich.

I represent a gentleman who for many years was the elected road agent in the town of Dorchester and he was removed and we discharged for what we believe was no good cause.

If the lower court's decision stands Mr. Conkey's without a remedy, I was very surprised to know for example when Mr. Conkey elected official was removed that he couldn't draw unemployment even though we thought he was fired for doing something he was likely to do.

Can I ask you Mr. Decado, wasn't he offered a hearing before the selectman and apparently didn't take advantage of that?

He was offered an appeal. He was never given a pre-termination hearing.

Right, but isn't the case law generally that accepting really, really rare circumstances. I think the only case I can think of is Goldberg vs. Kelly at the U.S. Supreme Court.

Pre-termination hearings are not required. Usually as long as you have a post-termination hearing, assuming there's a due process, post-termination is good enough.

Well I think we're left without, well I want to answer your question, but let me just say we're left without a record.

In the first instance because there was no pre-termination hearing, I might point out that the minutes of the selectman do not reflect a vote to remove Mr. Conkey.

We learn about why when they sent him a letter which basically said, we're removing you because you did two things.

You dropped a pile of what we say was worthless ditch fill and you knocked it over in Hurricane Sandy.

You're correct. We did not take them up on their offer for an appeal, whatever that may mean.

We felt that we would rather go to a court of equity and present our case.

I can certainly understand that you would have preferred to do that, but turning down the offer of a hearing seems to me that that is a significant step on your part.

If you were entitled to a hearing, they were willing to give you one and you didn't take them up on it.

Why isn't that sort of the end of the map?

Because I think we have a right to go to the Superior Court, somebody who's objective and look at these facts.

The court noted, however, that you didn't make a breach of contract claim, arguing that the town did not have cause, which is the language of the statute.

That is true. We didn't call it a breach of contract. We called it wrongful discharge. I think we're probably in the right church.

We may not be in the right pew, but what we said was you did not have a right to discharge us.

Now, the town has said, well, you should have called it a breach of contract.

But I have reference in the record by Selecman Burdette at the November 2012 Selecman's meeting where he said anybody in town can get ditch fill.

And then secondly, this road that he was on is adjacent to Cross Road, which is a public road.

There were several piles of that ditch fill that were keeping water from going into drainage ditches, so he knocked it over.

So in answer to your question, I thought, as his counsel, that bringing a wrongful discharge claim was a breach of contract under the statute.

I didn't say it was 231-65. I just said, look, you discharged him for doing what he was supposed to do.

So that sounded to the trial court like a wrongful discharge of an at-will employee.

And the trial court said, well, he's not an at-will employee.

He has rights under the statute, and the statute says he can only be discharged from Cross.

I agree, and I understand the judge has deemed that why he deemed us to be an at-will employee.

Again, I would bring up the basic unfairness of this.

He was elected for a three-year term.

I would say in rebuttals that he was treated as if he was an at-will employee because they discharged him for doing his job, basically.

The Selectman have said that anybody can have the ditch fill, and we all would think that if he's knocking piles of dirt over to protect a public road that that's within his bailiwork.

Well, clearly the Selectman thought he wasn't doing his job and that he had ignored a directive from them.

So there's a difference of opinion on that, right? There's conflicting testimony?

Well, the November hearing, if you look at the Selectman's minutes, I was actually there.

In November, they were asking him, why did you put gravel? Why did you take valuable gravel and give it to a taxpayer?

And Mr. Konke answered that and said it wasn't gravel.

And if you follow the record, what happened is one of the Selectmen, I believe on his own, not acting as a Selectman,

but identifying himself as a Selectman complained to the New Hampshire State Police.

Trupa Muzzy then responded and did an investigation, determined that there was no criminal action.

And then when we, and I didn't come to the next meeting, but the next meeting, I believe, was December 6th.

At that December 6th meeting, they went into executive session.

They said the reason was personnel matters and matters that would otherwise affect somebody's reputation.

When they came back out, there is no vote in the record saying they were removing Mr. Konke.

What happened is the next day, they did, I believe the record show, remove his health insurance.

The next day they gave him the letter of removal and then in that letter of removal,

they basically indicated he had delivered valuable material and that he had knocked over the piles.

So it felt like us that even though we may not be an employee at will,

we're being treated as if they can discharge for no good reason.

The reasons that they can discharge are clearly set forth in 231.65.

In terms of your point, there was never a written directive by the Selectmen as to what to do or not to do.

There was a meeting on November 20th where there was a discussion.

But isn't Justice Bass's point, I think, is that you may be right.

Maybe that's true, but these are factual issues that if you had taken advantage of the opportunity to have a hearing,

presumably there could have been some kind of record and there would have been presumably witnesses.

And the board would have had to make some kind of determination of who we believe, who we don't believe,

what the evidence is, but we don't have any of that.

And it sounds like we don't have it because your client didn't say I want to hear it.

I understand what you're saying.

At the same time, I believe if the record is clearly read,

the Selectmen feel that that meeting in November where I happened to be there with my client and that discussion was the hearing.

They held no, they didn't hold a pre-termination hearing.

So I say with respect to Mr. Conkey, I would have thought as an elected official that he would be on the same status as an appointed road agent.

You can't draw unemployment, the appointed one can.

He can't sue for wrongful discharge because he has a fixed term, the other one can.

He can't sue for wrongful discharge even though they are arguably removing him for reasons that aren't in the statute 231-65

and he isn't entitled to a pre-termination hearing even though many other people are under a different statute, I would say 41.

This is probably neither here nor there, but is there any impediment to him running for election at the next cycle?

No.

So he could throw his hat in and become the road agent again?

Related to that, is there any impediment for him to file a breach of contract claim now?

I think the only impediment is if somebody says, well you should have, when you sued the town, you should have had all of your claims in there.

I think we are still, I think we are still within the statute of limitations.

Well, it might not hurt to weigh in on that subject just in case it should ever be useful to you before the statute runs.

I don't know how we are going to decide this case, but if he still has the possibility of a remedy, it might be worth taking.

Yes, I may take that risk.

But I want the court to understand that when we sued, we said we need a pre-termination hearing because we weren't, we didn't have one and there is no record

that we think it was arbitrary if we didn't, if we weren't.

Not in title determination hearing then we were suing for wrongful discharge, which is some form of a breach of contract.

I have looked as carefully as I can at 498-1 and 491-7.

498-1 says that the Superior Court has equity powers and has the power to hear a case where there is no plain, adequate and complete remedy at law.

The statute 231-65 does not provide a remedy.

I am arguing that Mr. Konke doesn't have an adequate remedy at law of any kind to my knowledge and that that statute would give the Superior Court jurisdiction.

I would say 491-7, and I confess I am on the fringe here.

I truly don't know what quo warranto means, but as I understand it, it means something about.

A few people do.

Okay.

And I thought it has something into the inquiry, into the authority for which a public office is held.

So to the extent Mr. Konke was saying, look, I just did my job, I thought that might be a possibility.

But I think what this comes down to with respect to the first issue is can they, they can remove us for some things.

I think the converse is they can't remove us for other things.

Well, if they can't remove us for other things, isn't there a gatekeeper someplace that we can go to?

That's what I'm saying.

I don't want to forget the public right to know issue just for this reason.

There were four requests by Mr. Konke.

He said, I'd like copies of any concerns regarding Smith Drive.

They said it wasn't applicable.

We want an analysis of the soil that you say is gravel.

They said it was not applicable.

We would like copies of directives regarding the disposition of the soil, not applicable.

And we'd like to know where you get the monetary value of the Ditchville.

And they said not applicable.

It wasn't until we added that as count three that they said none of those things exist.

Well, if you look at what doesn't exist, they have, they have no information as to directives of the disposition of Ditchville soil.

And there is no monetary value they can attach to Ditchville.

We did attach to our objection to motion for summary judgment and affidavit for Mr. Foster of Foster Materials in Hennacher.

We examined a portion of the Ditchville and said it was worthless.

Those requests sound to me more in the nature of interrogatories than requests for documents under 91A.

I mean, if there's a document that's responsive, arguably it should be produced.

But if there's not a document that's responsive and these seem to be sort of asking for information, not documents,

shouldn't that inquiry have been made in discovery rather than using 91A?

I actually didn't file that. That was filed by Mr. Konke himself.

And I don't think it was, it wasn't part of our lawsuit.

Well, maybe shouldn't it have been?

Not when they answered not applicable.

You know, the question was asked that they answered and said...

Well, what it means could mean is, well, we don't have any document that does that,

because all you're supposed to do is turn over documents that might be responsive,

as opposed to answering a question like, how did you calculate the damages or the value of the fill?

Those are different things.

I don't have the exact request, but I believe it asked for any documents in which, you know,

that you had that estimated the value of it.

So when we added it to the third count, we simply said, we asked for it.

You said it wasn't applicable. It is applicable.

And then later on, they corrected the record and said that we really don't have them.

That's all I have.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Ms. Elliott.

Thank you. Good afternoon.

Samantha Elliott on behalf of the town of Dorchester.

The town can only defend against, and the Superior Court can only decide the claims that were actually alleged.

And we can only do so using existing statutes and case law.

There are three discrete, simple questions in this case.

It's not a breach of contract case. There are no breach of contract claims in this case.

Is it too late?

Is it too late for the plaintiff to bring a breach of contract claim?

He's within the statute of limitations.

I'd have to review the case law, but I would argue that he should have brought those claims before,

and we now have a final decision on the merits.

And if he does, you will so argue, I suppose.

I'm sure I will.

I'd hope for the opportunity to.

But there is no breach of contract claim in this case.

There was actually no due process claim in this case either.

The case asks three, the appeal asks three discrete, simple questions.

The first is whether RSA 231.65 provides for de novo review.

It doesn't.

The second.

What is the remedy for a violation of 231.65?

If the select men have no, if they don't comply with that statute

and that the road agent hasn't done anything wrong or ignored a directive,

what's the road agent to do if he's been wronged?

I think the first thing would be to take the select men up on their offer of an appeal.

We would start there and depending on the record.

But that doesn't appear anywhere in the statute, is that right?

It doesn't.

The statute doesn't require it.

I was speaking to, in this case.

So wouldn't our case law mean that he was left with a writ of certiorari

or even core warrant or some other imaginative device?

I suppose that's possible or a breach of contract claim.

And one could see why he might not be inclined to take an appeal to the group that just fired him?

Yes, but a number of statutes require just that.

And in this court has decided a number of cases that provided for that type of remedy from the beginning

that there's a decision and then you appeal to the very same group that made the decision

and then you move to the Superior Court for an administrative appeal.

That's what most of the state cases, how most of them proceed.

And so it's not outlandish to ask him to put his arguments in front of the very body who made the initial decision.

Well, it might not be outlandish to ask him to do that,

but it might be troublesome to penalize him for not doing it

and say he's tough luck, you missed your chance.

So then even if we weren't going to require him to go through the appeal in front of the select men,

he could bring a cause of action in the Superior Court.

What he asked for in this case was a de novo review.

With no basis for giving the Superior Court jurisdiction over de novo review,

he's asking for the Superior Court to decide anew whether he should be reinstated.

So what's the cause of action he should have brought in Superior Court?

A breach of contract action.

And you say that in your brief.

You say the proper vehicle was a breach of contract claim in Superior Court.

Would he have done that?

Would he have gotten an evidentiary hearing?

I believe that he would have.

And I guess the breach of contract as an elected official, what's his contract?

His contract is the statute because it governs the length of his employment

as well as the terms that are required for them to terminate him.

So he can only be terminated for cause.

He can only be terminated for cause.

Intentionally or deliberately refusing or neglecting to comply with lawful instructions

of the select men or intentionally or deliberately refusing or neglecting

to carry out the duties prescribed by law after written request by the select men.

And I take it it's the select men's position that they complied with that

and that he intentionally or deliberately refused their instruction.

Is that right?

It is.

So presumably he had greater rights under this contract established by statute

than he would as an at-will employee.

Well, the interesting thing in this case is that the wrongful termination claim

would be very similar because of the wording of the statute

that he can only be terminated for failing to follow lawful instructions.

So it's actually very similar to a wrongful termination claim in that sense.

But yes, in some ways he would have greater rights

and that's typically contract employees typically do have greater rights

than at-will employees.

He says that no matter what you call it,

he described the situation to the Superior Court

and it shouldn't matter that he didn't label it breach of contract.

And that brings me back to my initial point

that we can only defend against the claims that are actually alleged

and the Superior Court only has an opportunity to decide those claims.

We can't be put in a position to guess at all of the possible legal claims

in every case and try to make sure that we cross our T's with each of them.

Unless the court has any other questions, we'll rest on our brief.

Thank you. Case submitted.

Council may come forward in the matter of...
