This is case 2014-0801, appeal of the City of Concord.

Mr. Kennedy.

Hey, please, to court.

My name is Jim Kennedy.

I'm counsel for the City of Concord in this matter.

I'm open for questions at any time following just my presentation of the issue presented,

and I do reserve three minutes for a rebuttal.

This issue, the issue in this case is about whether a retired employee may file a grievance

under a collective bargaining agreement that that employee is not a party to.

Now, in this case, we have a collective bargaining agreement that was ratified by the party.

If he's certainly an intended beneficiary, he may or may not be an intended beneficiary.

That issue is not before this court.

And to the extent that the retired employee seeks redress or relief as to whether or not he's an intended beneficiary,

that retired employee can seek relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.

So why isn't it arbitrable?

It's not arbitrable because under the 2013 collective bargaining agreement that the parties entered into on December 19, 2013,

there's a definition of employee.

And that definition adopts the RSA 273A definition of employee, and that's employed by an employer.

Doesn't the language also say, in the way you quoted in your brief, it says retroactive to January 1 of 2013 employees.

And so, I mean, it seems to me that there's at least a question about does that mean that employees that were employees then are employees for purposes of this agreement?

Well, I think that goes to the merits of the question presented.

But I would just state that I infer that it's got the capital letter employees, that capital letter employees is defined by RSA 273A,

and it's restrict and under the grievance procedure it says only employees may file grievances.

I would also refer that for purposes of the merit question, which I don't want to get into.

The employee didn't file a grievance here, did he?

I thought the city of Concord did.

Well, the grievance, just to take you back factually, a moment, your honor, is that the grievance was filed by the union on behalf of the employee who had retired 14 months prior in the city of Concord.

When that grievance was filed, it's somewhat confusing here, because when that grievance was filed, the city of Concord denied the grievance.

When the city of Concord denied the grievance because he wasn't an employee and not permitted under RSA 273A,

the collective bargaining agreement by contract to file a grievance, we filed an unfair labor practice at the PELRB.

And the PELRB ultimately ruled in this case against the city of Concord that this matter was arbitrable under the Rochester case.

The PELRB made the finding that public employees do not lose their rights to pursue grievances based upon events that transpired during the scope of their employment.

And that's something necessarily that we don't disagree with.

The problem is here is that when Mr. Ledger retired, nothing happened during the scope of his employment.

He was under the status quo doctrine of the 2012 expired collective bargaining agreement.

Any dispute that would have arose during his agreement, during his employment, would have come under that collective bargaining agreement.

Did you make an argument, was there any argument made to the PELRB that the agreement should be construed the way you say it should be construed

because there was a sort of economic component to this.

In other words, that in reaching this agreement and coming to this bargain, the city said,

well, okay, we're willing to come up with these dollars to fund this new contract,

but it's limited to only a certain number of employees.

That is the current employees as opposed to some people that are, as opposed to people that are retired,

because I assume the Concord Police Department is not that large.

I assume that there were not a tremendous number of people that retired in that whatever the window was, the 11 month period.

Right.

So we have 100 employees in the Concord Police Department and there weren't a number of a lot of employees that retired at least during this phase.

Our status quo period was January 31st to December 19th of about 11 months.

So I mean, if that's the case, it wasn't really sort of, you know, if you were coming in here and saying,

listen, we made a bargain here and we made an economic decision that we didn't mind funding the raise and all the other bad, whatever it was,

you know, as long as it costs this much, but now it's costing this much.

But you're not saying that.

Absolutely not.

And it strikes me that it's a pretty, that's probably the difference between the two.

It's pretty small.

Yeah, but that's not the issue presented here, Your Honor.

The issue is much bigger than that.

The issue is whether when you retire and leave service at the City of Concord, can you then file a grievance one year, two year, five years later down the road?

Because you think you have a right.

Well, but you could have put, you presumably, if you wanted to prevent that from happening, you could have said in the agreement,

when we say employees are entitled to a retroactive raise, we mean only employees that are employed today,

not the ones that were employed during the period of the retroactive raise.

We did do that, Your Honor.

We adopted the 273A definition that says employees are currently employed, and so not retired employees.

And it's also over that a wage provision is nothing more than math.

It's one plus one equals two to get a wage provision.

And it also limits it to employees.

Sorry, let me make sure I'm understanding.

Did the collective bargaining agreement actually contain in the collective bargaining agreement some definition that says employee means this?

Yes, it adopts.

Employee means what the statute says.

Absolutely, yes.

And that's in the brief.

It expressly adopts 273A definition of employee.

All we're saying, Your Honor, this employee may be entitled to the retroactive benefit.

This employee, however, has no means under the statute to file a grievance with the city of Concord.

There's just no way for him to do it.

So to the extent that any third party has an issue and thinks that they have some right under a collective bargaining agreement,

they can go file a lawsuit somewhere else.

But they can't employ the grievance procedures and subject the city to arbitration proceedings when they are not identified as having that right to do so.

You can't just have any third party with a right to file an arbitration proceeding against the city of Concord when that person thinks they have a right.

This is somebody that walked in off the street.

This is somebody that was an employee during part of the time when the retroactive raise was affected.

There were, and I would have, again, that goes to the merits of the issue as to whether or not he's entitled to it.

And that's not what we're here talking about today.

What we're here for today is whether or not he has entitlement to bring a grievance when he's retired.

So he's retired.

There's no question.

Look at the timeline.

January 31st, he retires.

14 months later, they bring an arbitration proceeding under an agreement that he was never a party to.

But more importantly, he's not an employee on March 13th, 2013.

He's not an employee.

So to the extent that he has some type of right that he has, he can bring that in small claims court.

What we're saying, let's not open the door.

The floodgates open to anybody.

We know on top of that.

I mean, really, was it really this employee or was it the union that brought the grievance on his behalf?

It's this employee and the union's bringing it on his behalf.

And they wouldn't have, I mean, if they, if the union thought that they had some valid basis, for example, let me go back to my economic analysis.

If the union said, you know, look, we know when we, when this bargain was entered into, we know that the city made that, you know, we and the city both came to this decision that the dollar amount was based on only current employees.

And we can't, in good conscience, you know, ask for this raise for, for this other employee.

They would, they would have had the ability, would they not to say, we're not bringing this on behalf of the employee.

And they might have, I suppose they might have faced a claim of, you know, unfair, unfair representation by the employee.

But they would have had the power to say, we're not bringing this grievance.

Certainly they could have, and that's kind of goes to fair representation.

And I think Mr. Kropsky litigated that in the Enray Johnson case as to whether or not they could or had a duty to bring it or not.

But the issue is very simple here.

You're telling us, if we look at the collective bargaining agreement, the new one.

Yes.

It has a definition of employee.

Absolutely.

And that definition, and I'm sure you've pointed it to us in your brief, that definition says current employee.

That definition adopts the 273A definition of employee, which says employed by a public employer.

Can't Rochester be read a little more expansively than you're doing it?

I don't think so, Your Honor.

And that's a very good point.

Rochester, and I think that's where the PLRB aired here.

They're looking at Rochester and they expanded it beyond the scope.

Right.

We're within the scope.

What Rochester did was we had some schoolteachers that filed a grievance while they were employed under a collective bargaining agreement that was in effect while they were employed.

Then they retired before the decision finally got.

Exactly.

So we had this prolonged litigation.

And during that litigation, the question came up, can they continue to maintain that grievance in this litigation while they are in retired status?

And this court answered yes.

They were employed at the time that the grievance was filed.

I think also significant is that the union declined representing them.

The court also recognized, I'm not sure who asserts the holding of that case, but the union also declined representing them in the continuing matter in that case.

But the main point of that case is that they were employed at the time that they filed the grievance.

And they were employees and therefore had the entitlement to file the grievance.

Let me ask you this, given what you just said.

Would you be taking the same position if Mr. Ledger retired after December 19, 2013, but before he filed the grievance?

Absolutely.

He needs to file the grievance while he's in employee.

So it doesn't matter that it was during the status quo period.

No.

It matters that it was a day before he or after he had retired.

Very good question, Your Honor.

And I would agree that you have to be an employee in order to bring the grievance.

Absolutely.

That's what we bargained for.

This is contract law.

That can't apply in all circumstances.

Because what if somebody is terminated?

What if the city terminates somebody for one reason or another?

And they don't know that's coming.

So they can't file a grievance until after they've been terminated.

And so what you do is you look to the collective bargaining agreement.

In our agreement, you can't file a grievance determination.

You have to go to the follow the personnel rules in the city.

Well, I suppose it's not a disciplinary determination.

Suppose that the city says we're having a reduction in force.

And you are the last person on the seniority.

So you're out.

And so you're out.

Right.

And so the next day, he says I'm filing a grievance on whatever basis he might have.

You would say he can't file a grievance.

They would have to bring some type of...

I think that would fall under the city's personnel rules.

But unless you're an employee, you would have to...

You're subject to the grievance procedures.

That's what the party's bargained for.

So terminations, those are dealt with outside this proceeding.

To the extent that you have some other dispute with the city,

following employment with the city, you're no longer an employee.

You have...

It's not to say that you don't have relief here.

You have relief.

You can go to the district court, superior court.

If it's a federal claim, you have relief.

The party's bargained for this specific grievance procedure to imply to employees.

If they wanted to expand the scope and the definition of employees,

it would be available to those persons.

In this case, they simply did not include retirees as being eligible to file grievances.

Thank you.

May it please the court.

Good afternoon.

My name is John Krupsky.

I'm with the firm of Milner and Krupsky.

And I'm here today on behalf of the Concord Police Supervisors Association.

I'd like to clear up one thing before I begin my presentation.

And that is that the term employee is clearly defined in the collective bargaining agreement,

meaning only current employees.

Because in fact, what Judge Justice Linn said is correct.

For example, under the article on annual leave, when it talks about what you get after the leave it says,

an employee who retires a response from service of the city or is terminated or discharged,

no fault of the room shall be entitled to a lump sum of all the cumulative relief.

As Justice Linn said, that would only occur or vest after or when they retire.

In regards to recall rights, once again, they use the term employee.

So how can an employee vindicate their rights under the contract if it does invest until after they retire?

Well, can't they go to court?

Actually, no, Your Honor.

They can't because what would happen is under the primary jurisdiction of the PLRB,

when a collective bargaining agreement has a grievance procedure,

it's assumed that the parties have negotiated and will proceed under the grievance procedure.

But the point here that the city is making as well, they're not in the grievance procedure.

They're not employees.

So your argument was, well, they have to have a right, so they should be able to file a grievance.

The city is just saying, well, they have a right, but it's not through the contract and the grievance procedure.

It's in court.

Well, there's two points to that, Your Honor.

The first is that the PLRB did find that he was a public employee as well as an employee of the city of Concord

during the month of January 1st to January 31st of 2013.

That particular provision that the grievance was brought was retroactive until January 1st of 2013.

Simply because the contract was signed in December of 2013 doesn't mean the rights can't go backwards,

which the parties did negotiate.

And so you would say Mr. Ledger was an employee in January and the CBA was retroactive to January,

therefore the fact that he retired after January shouldn't be an impediment.

It should not at all.

Even under the city's reading of the definition.

Even under the city's reading of the definition.

And in addition, I would point out to the court, the public policy of the state of New Hampshire,

as dictated and as delineated in Rochester and followed through in the case of Wolf Barrow,

in which the regulatory and statutory framework of RSA 273A creates a comprehensive statute in which there is a resolution of matters.

One of the things Rochester warned about was a proliferation of litigation, inconsistent decisions coming out of superior court

in regards to a contract which is between, in effect, the union and the city.

Is there not a tension between the statement in the new collective bargaining agreement

which says effective this day going forward and the provision about the pay raises being retroactive.

Just let me finish my thought.

I take it the collective bargaining agreement did not say this entire agreement is retroactive to January.

It did.

Then what is meant by the collective bargaining agreement is effective this day forward?

The term of the collective bargaining goes back to January 1st of 2013.

The entire agreement?

The entire agreement.

And then, if I might, Your Honor, and the effective part, unless there is specific language, like in a wage claim,

like in a wage issue that says it is retroactive, it goes forward.

So that if there is specific language contained within the contract under the article for wages, that would go retroactive.

But that creates somewhat of an ambiguity which is for the arbitrator.

That is exactly my point.

In other words, there seems to be a tension between the retroactive provision on wage increases

as opposed to the effective date of the collective bargaining agreement.

And that's why it needs to go to an arbitrator to determine the intent of the parties in that regard.

And I also point out that my opponent brings up the idea of the grievance procedure.

Let us not forget that when we're talking about the grievance procedure, we're talking about procedural arbitrability.

And procedural arbitrability, this court in Hillsborough County said, is the province of the arbitrator?

And it should go to arbitration to determine whether or not that particular grievance is correct.

So what you're saying is you're acknowledging this arguably ambiguous tension here between the effective date of the CBA

and the retroactive pay increases.

And you say that's a decision for the arbitrator.

But the intent of the parties as to what they meant by that needs to be garnered out in a full-fledged evidentiary hearing

where both sides talk about what happened at the table, what did they mean,

what proposals were traded back and forth, et cetera.

But of course, Mr. Kropsky, the city's argument is forget about all this retroactive stuff for effective date stuff

because even if he had retired on March 12, 2014, on March 13, 2014, he wasn't an employee.

So don't get confused or distracted by that.

There's one question, was he an employee on the day he filed the answer is no case over.

What's wrong with that argument?

Well, what's wrong with that argument is it doesn't comport with the case law in the state of New Hampshire.

Excuse me?

You mean Rochester?

In terms of Rochester.

And I listed about 12 cases where individuals were either terminated and or they were seeking back pay in a retroactive contract

and they weren't even employees at the time the deal was made, but they were allowed to make that.

And it's listed in my brief with the different cases because when you think about it,

what really happens here, it's not when you file for your arbitration or when you file for your grievance.

And in this case, I will point out that the parties did reach a stipulation which said the union filed the grievance

but the union and Mr. Ledger filed the grievance.

That was in our supplemental stipulations where both parties filed the grievance.

When you look at the overall, the argument of the city is this, which I don't believe is the intent of this court.

Because you separated employment, you cannot file a grievance because you are not a public employee.

But we have in this jurisdiction allowed individuals to file grievances who were not public employees

including every termination case, including the Dillman case, the Dillman case which is set in our brief

which talks about an employee who was terminated after termination wanted to file an appeal of the termination.

The union said no and this court said the individual can't file that.

It's a non-delegable duty of the union to pursue that.

This is well after that individual was separated from employment.

So are you saying in this case, I didn't want to get you off track,

are you saying in this case that it doesn't matter that Mr. Ledger filed a grievance as long as the union is in,

it's arbitrable and there is sufficient party?

It matters according to the language and what the party's history was and the interpretation of the grievance procedure.

But when you look at the grievance procedure, you'll see at some points it says employee,

at some points at step two it doesn't say either party, it just says you may move it forward.

And on arbitration it says the union.

So it seems to me your point is this agreement, you cannot sensibly read employee

to mean current employee at the time you filed the grievance because there would be so many circumstances

in which a person would no longer be an employee

even though they're complaining about something that happened when they were an employee.

Absolutely, Your Honor.

And even the federal court and I point out that under the NLRA it actually has a provision.

Our law in defining a public employee says employed by a public employee.

Well, but wait a second.

You just agreed with Judge Lynn that this is live through the arbitration process

so long as the employee is complaining about something that happened to him when he was an employee.

When Mr. Ledger was an employee in this case, he had nothing to complain about.

That did not arise until almost a year later.

Right, but his rights because it went retroactive, he's entitled to receive that.

Your Honor, because in other words it's where the cause of action

because when you're looking at it and you may not know, for example, in a severance payment,

you get your severance payment and it's wrong.

You don't know, okay?

But presumably your severance was supposed to have been calculated properly.

The moment you were an employee and then became not an employee.

I mean there was a set of facts on the ground at that moment.

Are you saying that could change 12 months later?

That could change, yes.

Because the deal was changed later?

Because the deal was changed later, depending on what the parties negotiate.

I can tell you that what happens often is that there is a negotiations.

Negotiations, as you may know, and it's in the record, go on for months, sometimes years.

And there is a retroactive application.

And that retro application sometimes includes retirees, as originally did in the Johnson case.

They're not prohibited.

The CPSA, and that's what they're arguing, is not prohibited from representing retired employees.

Because even under the federal law, as I was saying, Your Honor,

it says it's a permissive subject of bargaining for you to include retirees in a collective bargaining agreement.

Having them being permitted to be represented by the union is different than the city agreeing

that they could be part of the union for the purposes of this agreement.

And that all this negotiation occurred for months and months,

and the union apparently did not get a broader definition of employee.

Isn't that a problem the union has to work with?

Your Honor, we don't know that.

Because this was a threshold issue presented that we didn't get to the merits,

as my opponent said, that we didn't get into what was exchanged, what was talked about.

What did the parties agree?

It was a threshold issue based on the papers that were submitted.

So we don't know.

No, we know what the contract said.

What said?

We know, do you agree that the contract, the definition of employee in the contract

is the one from the state statutes that Mr. Kennedy identified?

No, I don't.

I believe that it has a recognition clause,

and it says employees as defined under 273A,

which also included under Rochester where the unions could represent retired employees.

In fact, unions who were decertified could represent employees.

Right, but having the power or the ability to represent retired employees

isn't the same as having a contract that does represent past employees.

In fact, like I said, it does because there's several sections which, you know,

in a recall and reduction in force, it uses the word employee.

In terms of the separation payments, it uses the word employee.

You don't know if you're going to be recalled until you're separated from service.

Well, I agree with Justice Conboy that sometimes it could be calculated ahead of time.

Often it's not, and you receive it later.

And in fact, the law doesn't require you to receive it until your next regular paycheck,

it could be after you retire.

So all of these rights would be lost,

and they would not be able to enforce the collective bargaining.

The other scary part about that is that if the city is right here,

does that mean that, as was pointed out, every terminated employee,

they're no longer a public employee?

So as a matter of law, they can't be represented according to their theory.

You know, can I just ask, even I don't have the statute right in front of me,

but I would be curious, even the statutory definition of employee in 273A1,

does it say current employee?

Or does it simply say an employee is an employee?

Employed by an employer, a public employer.

So it doesn't say a current employee.

No, it does not.

Well, but isn't the termination situation different?

Because an employee who alleges he was wrongfully terminated under the CBA,

the moment he's terminated, technically he's no longer an employee.

But the rights that were violated were rights he had while he was an employee.

And so it strikes me that the termination situation is not analogous at all to what's going on here.

But that's not their argument, though, is because he's not an employee under the law.

He has no right to pursue a grievance.

So it's not, although they try to shape it in terms of what happened at the time, that's not what they're saying.

They're saying that because the law, in their reading of it, says he's no longer a public employee,

no longer avail himself of the rights under the collective bargaining agreement.

Which, quite frankly, in my estimation, my review of the law has never been the case.

And quite frankly, has been the opposite.

What the courts have looked at is, is there a nexus between the collective bargaining agreement and the individual?

And I'll give you an example where they-

Your time is up.

Okay, thank you.

Okay, submitted?

No.

Did you reserve time?

Oh, my gosh, you did, didn't you?

Do you need all three?

No, I think I could be really quick.

Go ahead.

I'm sorry.

Just really quickly, just to hopefully point this in the direction I understand the city's argument,

is that this is a statutory construction argument.

It's construing the terms of a collective bargaining agreement argument.

What did the parties agree to?

But isn't that something that, construing the terms of the collective bargaining agreement,

is exactly what the arbitrator is supposed to do?

Not when it comes to whether or not there's jurisdiction for an employee to file an arbitration proceeding.

We're construing, to get in the door here, to get in the grievance door,

you have to meet the requirement of a term that the parties agreed to,

and you have to be an employee.

That's the fundamental term that you have to satisfy.

Once you're in, then construing those terms of the collective bargaining agreement are subject to arbitration,

but you cannot initiate grievances until that you are deemed an employee.

Doesn't the union have sufficient standing to grieve this issue all by itself?

Absolutely not.

They need the employee.

The employee under the terms of this collective bargaining agreement,

and you have the entire grievance procedure with you,

that demonstrates who is entitled to file the grievance.

And its employee then files that grievance with their supervisor,

and it goes up to the chain of command from there.

We don't have a means for a retiree to come in 14 months removed from the city of Concord

and file the grievance with their supervisor.

To the extent that there's any type of right claimed here,

that employee has a right in a court or wherever outside of the collective bargaining agreement grievance procedure.

They may be entitled meritoriously to this agreement.

We would have heard that they're not, but that's a meritorious issue.

We're just saying as a matter of law, retired employees who are not recognized in that employment grievance procedure,

looking at that section of that procedure, it's not available for them.

It's simply not there.

It's a matter of contract interpretation, but you all imported a definition from the state statute, right?

Absolutely.

We've got to look at the state statute and decide whether it's current employees or something different than that.

Right?

I think, yeah, absolutely.

Under these circumstances, because the circumstances result in different answers to that question.

What constitutes an employee?

And under any provision, if there's a severance issue or anything like that,

and somebody discovers 10 months down the road that their public employer left them out

and didn't, well, if they have a grievance procedure like the city of Concord,

if it says employee, your relief is in a court.

It's not through the grievance procedure.

And the fair representation point, that's an issue.

Does the union have to represent the retired employee in that court action?

Well, that's an issue that this court, I think, looked at in Enray Johnson.

That's not the issue here today.

The issue is construing the term employee.

And how do we properly construe that term in order to determine whether or not

any other third party beyond an employee can file a grievance with the city of Concord?

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

The court is adjourned.
