This is case 2014-0378, state of New Hampshire versus Sean Gilley.

May it please the court, Sarah Newhall for Mr. Gilley.

The issue in this case is whether the term dwelling of another,

whether a residential structure that has an owner, but no identifiable occupant at the present,

or future time can be considered the dwelling of another for

the purposes of enhancing burglary from a class B to a class A felony.

Under first, the plain language of the statute, and second, the purposes of the sentence enhancement,

a vacant, unoccupied structure does not constitute dwelling of another.

Now, do I remember correctly that this was a home that had been occupied by someone who

had gone into what, assisted living, something like that, or died?

I don't recall if the record reflects the stipulated factor that it had been put up for sale.

And no one was living there at the time.

No one was living there, and it was vacant of all personal belongings at the time.

And where was the person who was putting it up for sale?

Not there, obviously.

No, not there.

Living somewhere else.

It seems to me, don't worry about that.

I'm just checking the stipulated facts, I don't think it's in the record.

All right, well, we'll have to look for that.

But it seems to me, just as a matter of common sense,

that if a person has put a former dwelling up for sale

and no longer lives there and doesn't have any intention of coming back,

then that building is no longer the dwelling of another.

I would agree.

Does it change your analysis if the house were under contract for sale to a third person?

I think that under looking back to the common law, as I did in this case,

that if it's under the contract of a sale, so if we have an identifiable occupant

who's about to occupy it but has not yet started to occupy,

I think it is still not yet the dwelling of another.

I would suggest it becomes a dwelling of another

once that person actually begins to reside there.

Well, what if the person were going to move in the next day?

It certainly creates a rather, your client certainly created a rather risky environment.

A risky environment in what sense, Your Honor?

For purposes of enhancing the offense.

I agree that certainly with a vacant home or vacant apartment,

it's likely going to become occupied again at some point,

but until it actually becomes occupied by another,

until we have dwelling, so it actually lived in place,

occupied by an identifiable other.

So they have to begin to reside there.

What do you say about the state's argument though that the case law seems to suggest

that this needs to be a sort of categorical approach

and that one of the things that would favor that is that if it's,

you know, categorically a dwelling, then that's something that if you adopt

the categorical approach, then you've sort of,

the defendant is kind of unnoticed from that, that if this is a dwelling,

then it doesn't really sort of matter whether there's somebody in it or not.

This is sort of an enhanced, if you do this, you're running a greater risk

than if, for example, you go into a building,

you go into a business.

So two things, I'd ask the court to look at the entire phrase which is dwelling of another

and contrast that with the other phrase the legislature used in this statute,

which is occupied structure.

The legislature, when it wrote this paragraph on the sentence in Hanff-Smiths,

did not use the term occupied structure, chose to use dwelling of another.

An occupied structure would include structures such as your honor mentions

because it includes places adapted for the overnight accommodation of persons.

So occupied structure includes potential habitation, the dwelling of another.

Isn't Justice Lynn right?

If we were to decide that the categorical approach is correct

and that this building is a dwelling because it's a house, right?

It's a residential house.

And it doesn't belong to the defendant.

Isn't it necessarily the dwelling of another because it's not his?

I would argue that no, that what this statute intends by dwelling of another

is an identifiable occupant because a dwelling is a place in place someone lives.

So a comment on in the model penal code in the commentaries

where it repeatedly talks about burglary of this type,

this is the original common law idea of burglary,

nighttime dwelling of another, that it's a crime against habitation.

Why isn't there an identifiable occupant here

because there is an identifiable person who owns the property

and they have the right to come back any time they want?

There's an identifiable owner.

There's not an identifiable occupant because that person has ceased to occupy

and has no intent to return to occupant.

But you agree that occupancy, somebody being there is irrelevant to this issue, right?

Physically being there at the time of the incident.

Physically being there at the time of the incident, yes.

But where that comes into play is if you have a person

who is physically occupying a place and leaves vacation

or say it's a vacation home, they leave temporarily intending to return.

In this case, the owner of the building and part of the stipulated facts

is that they had no intent to return.

So there's a turn on the intent then in your view?

Yes, the test that we're proposing that there be an identifiable occupant

who has an intent to return an occupant.

So let me ask you this.

So the facts here, let's say it's my house.

I put it up for sale because I've been transferred to Florida.

Your view is can't be a dwelling of another under those circumstances

because I've shipped my stuff to Florida and I'm headed to Florida

even though I own it.

What if my employer calls me and says,

hey, you know, we don't want to transfer you.

So in fact, you're not going to go to Florida.

So in my mind, I know I'm not going to go to Florida.

So the next night, does that change?

Does that become a dwelling of another that fits the bill

because my intent to move to Florida has changed?

I think arguably it does.

I think that at least could certainly

be presented to a jury to determine if it meets that test.

But from the defendant's standpoint or an intruder's

standpoint, the state tells us that if we look

at the purpose of the statute, which is deterrence,

we need to consider what information is

conveyed to the intruder.

Does it make sense to say to a potential intruder,

you better look in the window to see first

if the furniture is still there so that you can make

a decision as to whether you want to commit a class A

or a class B felony.

When you look at the policy behind the extra penalty,

does it really make sense from the intruder's standpoint,

who the intruder is the one we're trying to deter,

to slice this analysis as finally as you want us to?

So two things on that.

First, I would dispute that the entire purpose of the sentence

enhancement is deterrence as opposed to simply punishment.

I think that when you look at the commentaries,

the idea is that it needs to be more severely punished

when we have a vulnerable person sleeping in their home

at the nighttime or a person where people are supposed

to feel the most safe and secure, their castle,

as we often call the domicile, the person in place,

the person is actually living.

If my office building were burglarized,

I would feel upset and maybe a bit insecure,

but that person would not have committed a class A felony

even though I'm upset.

But if we draw that line, then wouldn't we say,

look, the test of whether it's the dwelling of another

should be of whether there was somebody really there or not.

That if you break in and you're lucky enough

that nobody was home at the time, it's a class B felony,

but if you break in and there was somebody there,

then that would seem to be what would follow from

if we carried your argument to sort

of its logical conclusion.

We're not asking the court to take that step,

but rather to a draw on the body of law

that tells us that if there's an intent to return,

we know there's a person who considers

that they're home in their safe place

and that that person, because of the way

they consider that home, going to Justice Bassett's

intent question, that they consider that they're home

in their safe place, that this enhancement

is a perfect home.

Well, I would bet if you ask the person

who put the house up for sale, do you have a home?

They'd say, yes, I have a home.

It's for sale.

So how could they not be regarding it as their home?

I think that gets into the way we use words, frankly.

They may say, yes, I own a home.

I don't live there.

I doubt they would say, I live in that home.

They would say, I used to live in that home.

And that's the test, right?

They don't intend to continue living there.

But you know, can I just ask you on that point

about they don't intend to continue living there?

Was that, I guess, was that really developed?

In other words, I understand that the person had moved out

and they put the house on the market

and they were somewhere else.

But I just sort of wonder if that was, for example,

had the person actually bought another house?

Do we know that?

Because for example, if the person hadn't bought another house

and was just renting, and let's say this house didn't sell,

you said they had no intention of returning.

But it seems to me it could be the circumstance

that I move out of my house and tend to go somewhere else.

I put it on the market.

I think it's going to sell.

And it turns out it doesn't sell.

Then my intent, even though I may not

have had an intent to return when I first put it

on the market, if it doesn't sell,

I really do have an intent to return.

Or at least I may have an intent

that I'm not going to just sort of let

this property waste away.

So I'm going to have to do something with it.

And I guess the concern I have is

that if we have to start drawing these sort of fine

distinctions at a trial, it's going to have to be,

tell us all about the circumstances of your house

that you've put on the market.

What would you do if it didn't sell?

And did you buy another house or were you

living in an apartment?

How far away did you move?

How easy would it have been for you to come back?

It seems to me that.

Well, that gets to hypothetical intent to return.

I think what needs to be the test here

is actual intent to return.

And what the stipulated facts reflect

is that the property remained unoccupied until it was sold.

And it was sold before the stipulated facts

trial in this case.

Going back to Justice Conway's question

about how it needs maybe to look to the intruder,

in this case, it looks like a single-family home.

But so does my dentist's office, and so

does my real estate attorney's office.

And you know what, I know people who live in structures

that used to be barns or churches that from the outside

still retain those structural qualities of a barn or a church

that have converted to be apartments or single-family

dwellings.

We also have commercial spaces,

like a storeroom above a storefront that's

now converted to a studio apartment.

So if we're just going to go on the test,

the state suggests how it looks, that it looks,

or has the essential character of a family home,

that just creates even more confusion.

But looking at the actual testimony that can be presented,

in this court in Timberie, which was an arson case,

but looked at the previous burglary statute,

the court in that case made factual findings

that actually support what we're urging this court to do,

in this case.

The court made a factual determination

that the vacation cottage had not lost its character

as a dwelling house.

They didn't tell us what that character was,

but the factual determinations included

that while it was rarely slept in,

there was, at the time of the burglary,

a pending plan in place for someone to be occupying it

on an upcoming, I think it was, holiday weekend.

So they looked at, was there an intent for someone

to stay there?

And that place, from the description in the case,

didn't look very much like a single home in African windows.

The jurisdictions are split on this issue.

I agree that the jurisdictions are not consistent,

but I think when you're looking at this court's jurisprudence

in Timberie and going forward, and what I would urge

the court to find to be the more persuasive adoptions

from other jurisdictions, I think this test makes sense.

Was there a foresale sign out in front of this house?

I know that State submitted a picture, or maybe I did.

I don't think we have that in the picture.

I don't think it says that there's a foresale sign

out in front.

But again, that goes to how it was discussed.

Would that make a difference?

Because that proclaims to the world this house

may or may not be occupied?

I think, again, I've recently sold my house,

and there was a foresale sign outside the whole time

I was living there until I actually moved out.

So I don't think that subjective test helps us.

But this is an objective test, not hypothetical intent

to return, but actual intent to return.

And what's the importance of the furniture being gone?

Because you can have a house for sale with the furniture there.

It doesn't matter, does it?

I think the furniture being gone,

it's simply one factor to consider in this case

to support whether or not there was an intent to return.

Well, it's simply assisted your client

in deciding to cut out the copper piping

because he probably wouldn't have done that if the furniture

was still in the house.

He may amount of, and in which case

he may have believed he was committing a class B felony

to the extent he's aware of any of this.

So and that's all we urge this court to do

is to reduce this from a class A felony to a class B

and a remand at Furby's sentencing.

Thank you.

Thank you.

If it's the court, my name is Stacy Kalen.

I represent the state in this matter.

The state relies on the plain meaning

and the context of the statute and urges the court

to use a common sense approach that best promotes justice

by promoting the intended deterrent effect

of the penalty enhancement, where the legislature intended

to protect against criminal invasions that would most

likely terrorize persons through penalty enhancement

of the dwelling and deter, prevent,

or would be burglar from invading a home.

Do you really think that the person intent

upon breaking into somebody's dwelling at night

and stealing something from inside

knows anything about A and B felonies?

Well, I think that there are kind of two ways to look at it.

I think that the intent behind the statute

is boils down to basically what we want to promote, where

do we want to promote one, our would be burglar standing,

observing the curb appeal from a distance

with a dwelling definition that is more categorical

or recognizable and puts them on notice.

What do we want them peering in the windows

to determine whether there's an identifiable occupant

or an intent to return?

And I argue that the latter in practical terms

doesn't make sense.

We don't want to promote someone

going and peering into our houses.

And I think as a practical matter

requiring that kind of a test is contrary to the policy.

But also, it either encourages a burglar to peer in the window

or, in effect, it's basically forcing

a retrospective analysis which would.

But aren't you asking us to add the word occupied

to a statute where it doesn't exist?

We tend not to do that.

Adding occupied to.

Occupied dwelling.

Because this so-called dwelling was not occupied.

Well, I think it was temporarily unoccupied.

What's the difference?

So I'm glad you asked that.

So I think we can look to states such as Maryland

and New Hampshire which adopt an idea of whether or not

a dwelling retains the character of being a dwelling.

I think it is in line with case law

that we already have an existence in the Timbsbury

factors, which were logical criteria setting forth

different ways to determine whether it

is a dwelling, whether it was previously occupied.

And in this case, we know that it was as a home.

It was completed.

We know that he lived there.

It wasn't abandoned.

It was on the market for sale.

It clearly wasn't abandoning it.

And there's no evidence that it was changing character,

being sold to the commercial property

or anything like that.

So in this case in particular, the question

becomes whether it retained its character as a dwelling.

And I think Maryland and New Hampshire both

have cases that explore that.

So Maryland, in Hobby v. State, the court

really draws a distinction between temporarily

unoccupied and abandoned.

But that was the apartment building case, though, right?

Hobby?

No, actually, this State v. Hobby, wait,

she lived, the occupant lived there for about two years

and then moved out.

The home was be, excuse me, there was no testimony

that the home was abandoned or that it was ever

going to remain forever vacant or unoccupied.

There was no, the windows were intact.

The doors were locked.

It was on the market intending to be sold.

And what the court did was they drew a distinction

between abandoned and temporarily unoccupied, which

I think is in line with our statute where we have

an affirmative defense for abandonment,

specifically articulated.

So here, that dwelling retained the character

because it did not lose it.

It was not abandoned.

It was simply temporarily.

So other States apply a pretty complicated test,

as Justice Lynn was suggesting.

For example, if the home were under construction,

is that a Class B or an A?

Right, and I think.

And does it depend upon how close to finished

the construction is?

Well, and I think when you take

the test that the defendant is urging the court to adopt

where there's an identifiable occupant or intent to return,

it becomes very ambiguous, where Justice Lynn suggested,

well, what if there's a contract for a sale?

What if it was sold but no one had moved in?

And even at the basic level, where

if you're determining, as in Kentucky and Indiana,

where they oftentimes use whether or not

there are belongings left behind,

if you use that as a determinative factor,

well, where do you draw the line?

So is there a mattress?

Does that mean someone's going to return?

Is there a toothbrush there?

Does that mean someone's going to return?

So I don't think that's a practical way

to deal with the question of what is a dwelling.

And I think that this court has

addressed a perfectly applicable way

to do that through State v.

Timsbury in setting forth those criteria

in helping to determine whether a dwelling is, in fact,

whether the building is in fact a dwelling.

Let me ask you about this scenario.

Before I got on the bench, I represented a fellow

who was in a divorce.

He wound up without a house,

so he lived in his office for many years.

He slept on the couch.

And so if someone breaks in there, is that A or B?

So I think on any case-by-case basis,

you're always going to have the outlier cases

that are particular, such as that.

But I think in keeping along the lines

with the intent behind the statute,

that as a practical application,

it just makes more sense to interpret it

as a category of buildings that are easily recognizable

and would put the defendant on notice.

So I think maybe in that situation,

Bergler would not be on notice

as to the fact that that was a person living-

So what about the scenario

that council raised a converted barn

or something like that?

Is it gonna turn on some architectural assessment

that a Bergler needs to do,

pull out architectural digest

before they decide whether to break in or not?

Well, no, and I'm not suggesting

that that's what a Bergler is really doing

in that complex of an analysis

when they're casing homes.

But I think there's also a number of reasons

to adopt a test that's not having to identify

the occupant or intend to return,

such as for reasons of protecting the community,

both defense and the state have briefed

in their brief cases where they deal with apartments,

where the focus was on the policy

that the members of the community should feel safe

in returning and there's a high turnover rate

with respect to those apartments being moved into.

And I think those same protections

should also be extended to the residential setting

of a more traditional standalone house

in those communities.

We also don't want Berglers creeping around

and casing those homes either,

and I think the best way to ensure that

is by defining dwelling as not such a narrowly

defined and particular definition.

I'm not being facetious,

but what if someone lived in a tent?

Would that qualify as an A felony

if someone entered the tent?

I think in some ways that we could look

to State v. Timsbury and go through the factors there

to try and answer that question.

I mean, they're really logical.

Was it put to another use?

Okay, so we don't know it's a tent.

Is it abandoned?

Well, I don't know, are there belongings in it?

I guess I don't know how you determine whether a tent

is abandoned.

It will have blown over.

Right, it'll blow over.

So I think there are always going to be

these outlying cases with respect to the tent,

and that's why having more of a four criteria

for the court to determine is probably

a better practical way of determining that

rather than the identifiable occupant.

If we accept your argument,

are we going to be joining the minority

or the majority of states that have considered these issues?

I think the cases most in line that I found

were Maryland and New York,

and I think there's a number of different ways

in which the states choose to deal

with the situation differently.

For example, they use different language

in the statute, habitation, residential,

intermittently occupied, some use sleep,

and those aren't terms that we have in our statute.

So I think just in focusing on what we have

to work with in our statute,

I think that the idea of particular with this case,

that this is a temporarily unoccupied home

that has not lost its character

of being a dwelling is appropriate,

particularly the New York case that I cited

in my brief, I think is very applicable.

It's a, so it was a home that was

two months before it was burglarized,

the owner moved out and it was listed

with a real estate broker.

So it was unoccupied, and there were in that case

some personal belongings left behind,

but the court's focus was not

on those personal belongings being left behind.

The court's focus was actually

on the essential characteristic of being a single family home,

of being located in a residential area,

and while temporary unoccupied would be considered

as a building that would be usually occupied

by persons lodging at night.

And I think similarly here, the court should find

that the character of this dwelling was not lost,

simply because it was temporarily unoccupied

being put up for sale.

Is the state's view that status can never be lost

in terms of if you put a house up for sale

and then it's for sale for years and years

and you've moved to Florida and it's still for sale,

is there any time where the status

as a dwelling of another changes?

Well, I don't think so.

I mean, I think if really behind the intent

is a statute is to deter would be burglars,

I mean, why would it be?

I mean, we want people to have an easily noticeable,

recognizable class of buildings

that they're less likely to burglarize.

Well, presumably at some point,

it arguably, if it changes status, it could be abandoned.

Is there any case law construing abandonment?

Well, exactly.

I mean, I think abandonment is the affirmative defense

so that would be really the line that's drawn.

I don't have a case law at my fingertips right now to cite,

but I think that therein lies the distinction

where a building, as I discussed earlier with that one case

where the windows were locked and you're not broken,

I think those are easily recognizable signs

showing abandonment.

So I think that, again, that's kind of in line

with the whole concept of just being on notice.

Should it be relevant to our inquiry

as to whether someone, the taxes are being paid

or their current or the utilities are being paid or?

Well, I think that's the kind of hair splitting

after the fact retro analysis

that it actually muddles the water

and I think it just creates an ambiguous,

and the entire penalty enhancement intent to deter

is lost in that consideration of these after the fact

points that your burglar approaching is never gonna know

whether it's, whether they've paid their taxes or not.

So I don't think that's really a salient fact.

Thank you.

So in some, I think I just would say that

the state argues, urges the court to reject

the defendant's proposed tests

with respect to identifiable document or intent to return

and advocates with respect for would be burglars

to keep them behind the picket fence.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Now, because uncharacteristically,

there were five cases scheduled for this morning session,

the court needs to take a second recess.

However, it will be brief

and we will manage the remaining two cases

before we break for lunch.
