Thank you, Ms. Hausmann. You knew what I was wrong.

This is case 2014-0085, State of New Hampshire v. Vincent Boteto Jr.

May I please the Court, Stephanie Hausmann, on behalf of Vincent Boteto? I want to make two points.

First, the State failed to establish the foundation of the document from which the detective testified was a business record.

And second, the error was not harmless.

Now, this document I take it is not really a document.

It's 1200 pages, accumulated pages of this cell phone information, right?

It is a document, but the record does indicate that it's 1,800 pages, yes.

So the argument below was that those 1,800 pages either had to be brought to court and testified

to by Ms. the person from the...

Yes, rule 8036 indicates that there's at least two ways to admit business record hearsay.

One, you admit the document through the testimony of the custodian, or the proponent can self authenticate it through rule 902.

Both of those methods require the State to turn over the document and discovery pursuant to rule 98, which the State failed to do here.

And so the State instead relied on Ms. Houghton's testimony about the creation of a list and the inference that the list that Detective Cody received was the same list.

So at the bottom of your argument is there was no evidence that what the detective reviewed was in fact the list of the pile of documents that Houghton testified to.

That's right.

And the State doesn't cite to any case that allows for the admission of business record hearsay through this kind of an inference.

So there's admitting the document through the testimony or self-authentication and there's no new Hampshire case that discusses admitting business record hearsay in this manner.

And the State's inference was not airtight.

The two witnesses called the cell phone company by different names.

And neither witness testified that Ms. Houghton gave the list to Detective Cody or the State police or that there was no other way to connect that the list that Detective Cody received was the list for which Ms. Houghton had laid a foundation.

Second, the error here was not harmless.

Isn't it true that at some point the defense was given the opportunity to look at the 1200 pages and if there was some kind of problem then defense counsel could raise it with court?

During the lunch hour, I believe on the second day of trial, the defense was given a chance to look at this 1800 page list to determine whether Detective Cody's proposed testimony about the cell tower locations was accurate according to the list he consulted.

The defense were set on the record he didn't have a chance to look through the entire list for all of the, I believe it's about 15 calls that Detective Cody testified about.

And so because that list hadn't been turned over in discovery, defense counsel hadn't had a chance to verify it.

Second, the error was not harmless because the cell phone tower location testimony was the only evidence that Mr. Boteto was in Berlin at the time packages were thrown over the fence at the prison.

And each of the indictments-

But was that necessary?

Each of the indictments alleged that Mr. Boteto was the person who delivered the items.

The State's harmless error argument points to no other evidence that places Mr. Boteto in Berlin at the time that the crime occurred.

But the calls were recorded, so we have the recordings of the calls and Gothier's voice was identified.

Yes.

And the jury could have found that the recipient of these calls was Mr. Boteto.

But the calls themselves don't establish that Mr. Boteto is the one who's going to Berlin and is the one who's throwing the packages over the fence.

And the jury-

You say the jury could not have inferred from the substance of the calls that he was the person?

No.

And the State makes no argument that the substance of the calls establishes Mr. Boteto's location in Berlin.

How does the cell phone tower evidence make it any more compelling that he was the person throwing the item over the wall than the testimony that you're not contesting?

The cell phone tower location evidence established that the person with that phone number traveled from the lakes region, called it on several towns,

and then was in Berlin at the time that the crime occurred, and then traveled back down to Berlin.

But that doesn't place him any closer to the wall.

I mean, it's put him in the same town.

But it was the only evidence that Mr. Boteto was in town at that time.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Ms. Woodcock.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Good morning.

Elizabeth Woodcock for the State of New Hampshire.

I'll take questions at any time.

The evidence introduced in this case, there was sufficient foundation laid for the testimony that was given by the police officer who compared this document to the cell phone records that he had actually obtained.

Ms. Houghton's testimony was sufficient to lay the foundation that the document that the police officer was using was the same one that she was talking about.

Well, how could that be if she didn't have the document?

How can it lay the foundation that this document is the same as this if she didn't identify this document?

Well, I think that the foundation is established by the fact that she described how the document was actually made, what it was used for, how they used it in their billing process, that the cell phone towers appeared in the billing documents.

And then the police officer's testimony is essentially the same thing.

When I looked at this document, it has this location of the cell phone.

I compared it to the cell phone bill.

And so it's essentially the same thing.

So what you're saying is that given the descriptions of this 1,200 pages of material, there isn't another document that it could be confused with.

Correct.

So we're not talking about a one-page, one piece of paper, and maybe it isn't clear whether they are all on this same page.

But were the magic words said that this is a business record and kept in the ordinary course?

It's part of our business to keep such records?

I'm not sure that Ms. Houghton said that in exactly those terms.

She talked about it as being a document that they maintained in order to prepare their billing records.

So are you saying that when the court says that this is admissible under the circumstances of this case, the court is implying that the business records exception has been satisfied without necessarily going through all the steps?

I think that the State went through all the steps, or the witness went through all the steps of establishing that this was a business record.

Because she talked about how the record is maintained by checking on the different cell towers and how it is repeatedly updated.

The tower is somehow out of commission or something, then the document is revised and let it is used to prepare the bills that are sent out to people who have cell phones with the company.

So that seems to me to be a business record.

If it is error to have admitted it, how could it be harmless in this case?

Well in this case the initial telephone call comes from Mr. Gatier and he says, is Vinny there?

And the person who answers the phone says yes.

It's clear that they know each other.

The defendant and Mr. Gatier were friends.

Mr. Gatier is telling the person who's answering the phone and the phone that he's calling is a phone number that the defendant gave to the prison as his contact number.

He identified it as his own telephone number.

So the calls are going to this same telephone to people who know each other and the plan is hatched that you will get these packages, you'll prepare them in such a way.

That person is agreeing who is the defendant, the person is agreeing to prepare these things and then lo and behold, the packages as described appear at the prison.

So your argument is that even without, let's just not consider these cell phone records, the evidence was sufficient for the jury to conclude that it in fact was the defendant

who threw the material over the wall.

I think it's without question.

There's no one else who is involved in this plan to hatch throwing these things over the wall.

The packages appear as Mr. Gatier requested them.

Well, the challenge here isn't to all the cell phone records, it's just to this tower document.

The other records came in without objection.

Is that right?

Correct.

And so the cell phone records do help sort of track the person going north.

But if you...

What you're saying is the State did not need to have evidence of the defendant's location.

The substance of the conversation established the agreement that Vinny was going to do the drop.

And the drop happened and so that was sufficient evidence that he was in fact in Berlin.

And there was other evidence that tied the phone number to the defendant.

Correct.

Correct.

If you think about this case, if we had tried this case before, there were cell phone towers and cell phone records.

And you had the same conversation of wrap these things up.

I want you to put them in a certain package and then, lo and behold, they appear.

You know, if this case had been tried in 1850 and you had those conversations going on, the jury could have still convicted the defendant.

Thank you.

I see my red light is on.

I would ask these to be submitted.

Thank you, Council.

Case submitted.
