Councilor May it please the court. My name is Dorian Conner and I represent Richard

Calvin in this appeal. Mr. Calvin raised several issues but we want I would like

to focus the court's attention on the prenuptial issue, an issue which we just

heard about. This is prenup day. This is prenup day. This court has said to

establish duress. The other party must show that it involuntarily accepted

the party's terms, that there was coercive circumstances, that the other

party exerted pressure wrongfully, and that under the circumstances the party

had no alternative but to accept the terms. The court in this case found no

wrongful pressure, found no involuntary act, found no coercion, and therefore the

court's invalidation of the prenup on grounds of duress was legal error. The

court in this case presumed duress based solely on the timing of the

execution of the final draft. And yet this court said in Yenoffo that it was

rejecting a per se invalidation based solely on timing. So again the trial

court committed legal error and the prenup should have been enforced. I

will take questions at any time if you're holding them. No we don't ever

do that. We're just trying to think of some questions. All right the court's

conclusion of legal duress based on the timing was insufficient because in

Yenoffo this court said there must be something coupled with the timing in

order to constitute duress. See it was only a matter of time. Let me just ask

you this. I sort of had the same question for you that I had in the

last case. If this is duress for your opponent's client to have signed

this agreement because of the time pressure. If the agreement hadn't been

signed why wouldn't it be duress for your client? In other words why couldn't he

come back now and say wait a minute we never really were married. I got

married under duress because I wanted it was a condition of my getting

married that the prenup be signed. She wouldn't sign it but we had all

these plans and all this stuff. I had to go through the wedding but I

wanted to know it because you know this was duress. Why isn't it the same duress?

Well in that case we're not dealing with a contract that's going to alter the

party's division but the arguments about duress you're right are the same on

both sides and that's why in Yenoffo this court said the threat of not

going forward with the wedding that threat is not duress. It's not a

proper ground because that's always going to exist. That's why you have

prenups and the choice is either we sign it and we do the wedding or we

postpone the wedding. Now the only time this court has invalidated a prenup on

these types of grounds was in the Holland case. The Holland case as you

heard a little bit in the prior argument is dramatically different than

what was here. The pressure that this court found in that case is you

had a very young inexperienced unemployed fiance who was living with

Mr. Holland. In addition to the fact that the wedding was going to have

to be canceled. If she didn't sign this prenup she was out on the street. She

had no place to live. She had no job. That's not this case. We're dealing

with two people in their late 30s both highly educated both self

supporting. If the wedding didn't go forward they were both going to be

able to live on their own perfectly fine. So there was no none of this

disparity or this pressure about if I don't sign this something awful is

going to happen. The only thing that was going to happen is the wedding

would have to be postponed. I also want to talk a little bit about the

timing. The court was focused on the timing of the execution of the final

draft. Not the earlier draft. So we don't even have the situation of a

collapsed time. In Yenalfa which this court approved the draft was

shown for the first time two days before the wedding. In this case the

final draft is shown a week before the wedding. You go back you have

the third draft some 18 to 23 days before the wedding and then you go back

further and the wife is executing the financial affidavits with her

citizen's account number 40 days before the wedding. So it is not

also even if timing were a critical factor. It's not as dire as the

trial court made it seem to be. I also point out the very first time

this court dealt with a prenup in McFarland. The prenup was sprung

on the wife for the first time three days before the wedding. This court

did not have a problem with that because the wife could say I'm not going

to sign it. I'm not going to get married. We need some time. Another

thing that's kind of important in this case is Ms. Lorette testified she

never said I'm not going to sign this. Mr. Calvin said I didn't think

we were going to have a problem because we had talked about it. This

was just part of the deal. We're going to get married. We're going

to have a prenup. It seems to me if she has a problem with it, she

needs to let him know sometime along the way instead of going

along with it, signing it agreeing later on in their trust

documents that there's this valid prenup. It only becomes an

issue when they go to get divorced. And that's just not

a ground. There was also an issue raised about whether or not

she had counsel or time for counsel. Again, the timeframe

was such that she did. She could have done it in the 40 days

after the financial exchange. She could have done it any time

during that month when they're exchanging drafts. In Yanalfo,

even though the parties only had two days, this court said we

refused to presume on the evidence presented that the petitioner

had insufficient time to consult with an attorney had she

decided to do so. Ms. Lorette provided no testimony about

picking up the phone to call any one of the attorneys that are

in the green book to say, hey, I need help on a prenup. All she

did was talk to somebody at work who happened to be a nurse

and a lawyer. That person said, apparently, I can't help you.

She then took no further steps. She signs on the dotted line.

She moves forward with the marriage. Can I just ask you a

question regarding the one of the other issues in the

case? Sure. I'm a little bit confused actually as to what, by

both of the briefs in terms of what your positions are on the

value of the business. If you both seem to say at some points

that the court did not, that the court improperly considered

the, improperly failed to deduct the value of the loan

that was taken out in sort of violation of the anti-hypothecation

order. But yet, at other points, you seem to say, well, the court

actually did value the business at $1.3 million or something like

that and then deducted the $700,000 for the indebted. I'm

not quite clear. I understand your position. Sure, your

honor. Mr. Albright, who testified for the wife,

starts at $1.3 to $1.5 million. He deducts the debt, gets to $7.43

which is more or less what the court accepts. The problem with

that is Mr. Maloney, who testified, well, if we're

going to start at $1.3 or $1.5, this dental practice is

selling for more than almost any dental practice in the

entire country. It's not a valid number. The court,

though, accepts that number. The debts come off, but then

the court says to back up her number. It's also just like

Maloney's without the unauthorized debt. Well, Maloney starts at

$7.88 and he says that's in line with everything across the

country. He takes out the $600 debt. We get down to $1.88.

The problem was the court's suggestion and the narrative

that she's coming to $700,000 because it's both consistent

with Albright and Maloney. It can't be because Maloney's

number is inflated. So you're saying the trial court's

decision, really, it reflects some confusion on the part of

the trial court. Exactly. So we don't really know

whether the trial court thought that the value of the

business was $1.3 or whatever, minus $700, or whether it

thought that you just shouldn't count that the

value was only $700,000 and you

shouldn't deduct anything for the debt. That's exactly right

because court used both bases for supporting $700,000.

Let me ask you this. If we agree with your position concerning the

prenup, does your client then effectively

get away with, in quotes, violating the anti-hypothecation order?

No, Your Honor, because the lower court took him to task on

several occasions with respect to that. If this court concludes,

as we have articulated, that there was an error in

invalidating the prenup, this goes back down and the

marital estate is to be distributed in accordance

with the prenup. And that's important because

counsel below waived any issue with regard to the prenup,

except her duress on the day of signing the prenup, and that's in the

transcript. So what we are asking this court to do is to

vacate the property distribution and remand it for a distribution in

accordance with the prenup. And so that way, if we were to do

that, that would then allow the trial court to the extent that

your opponent was harmed in some way by the courts, by the

by your client's violation of the anti-hypothecation order,

the court could grant some relief for that.

No, actually, my client was the one to have violated that order, Your Honor.

No, no, that's what I'm saying, Your Honor. But the trial court has already addressed that throughout

the case. I think the trial court, I'm not sure how it all sugars off here,

but the trial court counted that against him,

but what I guess I'm wondering, and I don't have the

all the appendix documents here, is if he prevails on the prenup,

and I presume that means he gets the business,

right? He gets the business and he gets, he gets basically what he came into

the marriage with, which was north of a million. But along the way,

he arguably harmed the interests of his

then wife, but now it all goes away because he

gets the business. No, Your Honor, because the court found that there'd been no

dissipation of the marital estate despite the actions that he took, because

the money was still there, but just in a different form.

He sold one home, he bought another home. He could be otherwise sanctioned

for violating the court order. He could be

required to pay attorney's fees. He could be, but none of that

was ordered by the lower court. Well, I understand that, but

if we do, as you say, and enforce the prenup, it strikes me that

that's a separate issue from his violating a court order.

It is totally a separate issue, Your Honor. And the court would have

total freedom to sanction your client as it deemed appropriate.

Your Honor, I think that would be difficult since the court didn't do

that in the first instance, and that's not tied to whether the

court order invalidating the prenup was legally flawed.

Well, why couldn't the court say on remand, if we said the prenup was

enforceable, why couldn't the court say on remand, well, okay.

If at least one of the court's interpretations is correct that the

court sort of discounted this $700,000 mortgage because it thought

that violated the anti-hypothecation order, couldn't the court say, well,

that was the relief I granted for the violation of that order before.

And now, in light of the Supreme Court's reversal saying that the

prenup is enforceable, I've got to grant some other remedy

to your opponent, and the remedy I grant is attorney's fees.

I believe that would be inappropriate because if the

prenup is enforced, then the assets at issue belong to my client.

Furthermore, the prenup provides-

Yeah, but he's not entitled to decide that.

I mean, that may be the ultimate decision that we make,

he's not entitled, just as anybody else would.

He's not entitled to decide, well, I'm going to win this case anyway,

and therefore it's okay for me to violate the court's order.

That is correct, Your Honor, but I would also note that with regard

to attorney's fees, the prenup provides that if it's enforced,

the party who wrongfully challenged it is responsible for the fees.

And so that would be a contrary position to that.

Can I just ask a matter of clarification?

Was the $255,000 loan carried, taken into account as a marital asset?

It was, Your Honor, but it was counted twice.

If you go to the court's description at the end, page 5556 of our brief,

when they come up with a $3 million total, it is a component,

so it's counted there.

But the problem is, is it's also counted as part of the business value, the 700.

Both experts put that loan in the business valuation,

so the court, in essence, counted it twice.

But isn't it a liability of the business?

It's a note payable to the marital estate, isn't it?

It is, but it was taken from marital funds,

and that's why the court listed it there, but the court counted it twice,

and that was the point of that particular issue.

But your opponent tells us that that 225 figure has to be sliced further

because there was 100,000 of those funds that he transferred back to himself.

And so he says, neither party testified to the remaining 150,000,

although by my calculation it would be the remaining 125,000.

Well, the problem, Your Honor, is that the court counted it as a 255 loan,

and it was counted at that figure twice by the experts in their valuation

of the businesses and then as a standalone source asset by the court.

So I see that my light is on.

If there are no further questions, again, we would ask this court vacate

the decision and remand this case for distribution in accordance with the prenup.

Thank you.

May it please the court?

Patrick Sheehan representing the respondent, Connie Lorette.

Your Honors, Dr. Calvin is essentially asking this court to conduct a de novo review of the

facts and circumstances surrounding the prenuptial agreement and conclude that it was not the

product of duress. Whether a prenuptial agreement is the product of duress is a finding of fact

for the trial court, and it should be upheld unless it's lacking in evidentiary support.

Now the court concluded after hearing all the evidence in this case that, quote,

there is no compelling evidence to suggest that serious and frank discussions regarding

material terms of the agreement ever took place in an environment outside of the moment of the

wedding. Now I would emphasize their use of the word compelling, okay? The court here was in

a position to hear all the evidence and decide what facts they thought were compelling

and what facts they thought were not compelling. And opposing counsel and Dr. Calvin can

argue the case, re-argu it. But what is, what is the, I guess, I mean the problem I have,

I don't disagree with your, with your recitation of a legal standard, but the problem I have is

finding the evidence that supports it. I mean it does, it does seem like there was a fair

amount of time here for the parties to negotiate this. Your client, if I understand correctly,

your client's handwriting is found on the, on earlier drafts where she's making suggestions

about things that need to be, need to be changed. It's, well, okay I can address that because

there was a significant dispute of fact as to whether or not her handwriting was on our documents

and she testified that she was not provided with a copy of the document until the Sunday

before the wedding. The court was not able to reconcile that fact other than to conclude

that there was no compelling evidence of negotiations prior to the, up until the moment of the wedding.

Now the handwriting that was on the documents, first of all, there was no draft of the document

that ever existed, was ever prepared by any attorney until 28 days before the wedding,

okay. This is a wedding that had been planned for over a year, okay. Now-

But how is, but you know, to the extent that you make the argument that the, or the court

found that this was, you know, sort of undue pressure on your client, why isn't, wasn't,

wasn't your opponent's client subject to the same pressure? Presumably if they love each other,

he had the same, you know, desire that the wedding go forward as she did.

I disagree because I think, I think he had more to benefit from the prenuptial agreement.

So the pressure for him actually decreased as you got closer to the wedding. The pressure

for him was, if you give her a prenuptial agreement six months before the wedding,

five more months before the wedding, then she has an opportunity to push back.

And maybe, maybe it won't go your way. But as the wedding gets closer and closer and he knows

the guests are coming, the dress has been ordered from Barcelona, he knows that the

closer you get, the likelihood that she's going to be able to do anything to fight back

is diminished. And, and I think that's the point here in Holly, you're supposed to do it.

But I guess, I guess why, I guess the question I have is why, why do we say that? I mean,

why isn't it, why isn't it just as true that she, that he would be saying, geez,

we're not going to get married. If I give this to her at this late date, we're not

going to get married. I'm going to be embarrassed. Nobody's going to come to this wedding.

I guess I have, but, but he's controlling the agenda here. So if that's true, then

he went to a lawyer in 16 months, he went to a lawyer 16 months before the wedding,

before he even proposed to her about a prenuptial agreement. He controlled the timing and the

agenda of this all along. So if you follow Hallett, none of this should have happened.

You had plenty of time to prepare a draft, to send it to her and say, hey, look, you need to

get a lawyer. Okay. And none of that happened here. And it's all avoidable.

Attorney Connor suggests to us that Hallett is very different because your client is not the same as

the putative bride in Hallett because she wasn't a bartender. I mean, I know she's more sophisticated.

She's got her own assets. She's got a place to live. I think that gets thrown out a lot that

somehow if somebody's a bartender, they don't have sophistication. If somebody's a nurse,

they have a lot of sophistication. I think the, the, the essence here was that she's a nurse

anesthetist with a PhD. Right. And her testimony was that this was provided to her

a week before the wedding. She had a pit in her stomach and she couldn't even bring herself

to read the document. But she knew it was coming. They talked about it a year earlier.

I don't believe that that was her testimony. I don't, she does not agree that that, that

is what happened. And we know that no document ever existed until 28 days before the wedding.

That was sent from his attorney to Dr. Calvin. Now Dr. Calvin testified a lot about

discussions that he supposedly had with my client. But again, the court found that there was no

compelling evidence of any significant negotiations up until the moment of the wedding.

Well, what was your client's testimony on that point? Did she say, no, we never talked about

it at all? Yes. She said she didn't receive, didn't know that a prenuptial agreement was

coming until, until the Sunday before the wedding. So, so they, her testimony was they had never

discussed the need for a prenuptial agreement. Correct. Okay. Now the, the, there was evidence

about this handwriting, which was dubious in and of itself. There was original handwriting,

one of the original handwriting samples was supposedly on a draft of the prenuptial agreement

that was dated September 5th. And it also was photocopied onto one of the exhibits

in a draft of the prenuptial agreement that was in August. Okay. So, the, the, the, the evidence

surrounding the handwriting was not as clear cut as they would lead the court to believe.

I'm not, you know, I saw that in your briefing. I'm not quite clear. I mean, I, I understand

you say that it was, it was sort of copied onto another, an earlier document, but I'm not

quite sure I understand this thing. So what? So it was, so it was copied onto another document.

I mean, what, what do we, or your, what should we draw from that? You're suggesting that wasn't

her signature? We're not talking about nothing was, there was no signature, it was handwriting,

it was a handwriting sample of, of, of two Himalayan cats and the word anesthetists.

And she, she said, that's not my handwriting. She said it appears to be your handwriting,

but she did not recall ever signing or looking at any documents prior to the, to the, to the

letter. But if she, but if she said, I mean, doesn't that, if she says that appears to be

my handwriting, doesn't that suggest that to the extent that she says I don't recall,

that all it means is I don't recall, not that I didn't do it. Well, there could be other

ways in which it got on there. I don't know. The court did not make a finding. The court,

the best the court would say with regard to the handwriting, it is assumed for the most part

that it is hers. Okay. But they did not make, it did not make a definitive finding that

that's her handwriting and she wrote it on some certain date. And, and the dates do matter because

the one that was photocopied potentially onto the earlier copy would, would be, would be put there

to show that they had discussions earlier than they actually had about the prenuptial agreement,

as opposed to the, to the draft that existed into September. But even September,

is how many months before the wedding? It's less than 30 days. The wedding was

September 23rd. And Hall at the court said, you know, throughout that, you know, 30 days

would be a benchmark for providing some. So you're, so you're saying this, what,

what we should draw from that thing about the Xeroxing is that the, that your opponent was

trying to, that, that could support an inference that your opponent was trying to make a better

case, was sort of fraudulently trying to make a better case for his side than actually existed,

which I guess would be consistent with the other. There was, wasn't there a witness that testified

that he came, a witness, a witness that was a patient of his that came and, and he said,

tried to say to her, you know, it would be nice if you didn't remember.

Correct. And those were the two witnesses that testified that they spoke with my client

on the Sunday before the wedding, six days before the meeting, and that she was emotionally

distraught, and that she had told them that he had just presented her with a prenuptial agreement

for the first time, and they corroborated her story, and, and he, yes, he told one of them to,

to pretend that you don't remember. But isn't the only inference you can draw from the,

the notation about Himalayan cats that they're down to the, the, the details of such an

agreement, of an anti-nuptial agreement? If, if the court had made a finding that, that,

that's what happened, but they didn't. Okay. They didn't make the finding. I mean,

they can sit here and argue and say that, you know, that definitively showed that there was

definitely a communication, there was definitely negotiation on that date, and it was, it's

definitely her signature, but, or definitely her handwriting, but the court did not make that

finding. And again, even if we assume for the sake of argument that this draft was

potentially negotiated within 28 days of the, of the wedding, you know, that's already too late

under the, the, the heightened standard that was set forth in Haulett, because in Haulett it says

you have to have opportunity to review, to go to counsel. Why, but why is 28 days too late? I

mean, you know, if the, if the, if the basic idea is that, yes, there's a heightened

standard, but these are contracts, and contracts should generally be enforced unless there's,

you know, something that's, that's, that's kind of really out of the ordinary. Why is 28 days

not enough time? Because, because you have to look at the totality of the circumstances,

and you have to look at each case individually. And here, where the, where the, the engagement

was so far out, he knew so far in advance, uh, that he wanted a prenuptial agreement,

that under this set of facts, there was ample time for him to do this correctly. And, uh, Haulett

sets forth the heightened standard, and it changed the rules in New Hampshire the way people practice

in this area. And this case, you know, this was signed before Haulett. But if this court says,

hey, we're just going to find, uh, a reason why this is okay, I think it sets forth a

regression from Haulett, where people need to know and understand that they have to deal with the

highest good faith, and this could, again, could have been done well in advance.

Sure, but is that, I understand that, but is that, in other words, is that, should the

tests that we adopt be, well, could they have done it, done it better than they did? If,

I mean, if that's the test, I agree with you, they could have, they certainly could have done

it in a, you know, in a way that would have been better than it was. I have no doubt about that,

but is that really the test? Well, I think it's, didn't meet the heightened standard of good faith,

and I think if you, if you know you want a prenuptial agreement, 16 months before

wedding, and you know your fiance is going out and she's, you know, planning the wedding,

her dream wedding, at some point in time, you know, you have to say to her, wait,

hold on here, before we get too far down the road, I just want you to know that, you know,

this prenuptial agreement's coming, here's a draft of it, go see with, review it with council,

and let's get this done properly, but when you wait until 28 days before, and the die has been

cast, and this woman is having her dream wedding, it's naive to suggest that, that she's not

going to be, you know, emotionally distraught over this, and she's not going to be in a,

in a position to negotiate this thing properly. You seem to find that it's significant that he

knew way in advance he wanted a prenup. Let's take a hypothetical where a husband is planning a wedding

with his fiance, and two weeks before he's having lunch with his accountant, and the accountant says,

you know, I think maybe you need a prenup, why don't you call your lawyer, and so he says,

okay, well I didn't really think about it, but maybe I will, calls the lawyer, and this stuff gets

pulled together relatively close to the wedding. Do you say as a matter of law those kinds of

agreements are out the window? Well I think you have to look at every case individually,

so as soon as there's a hypothetical of different facts, I think it may change

what the standard would be. If there was two weeks, I guess it would depend in that situation,

did the, did the, did the fiance or whoever, I don't want to assume it was the wife, would

be signing this thing, did she have counsel, and what were the facts and circumstances in that

particular hypothetical, but, but again here, I think the totality of the circumstances of this

case were such, and the trial court made the finding on that, that he knew about it,

and once you know you want it, then the standard of what is good faith from your

perspective changes, you know you want it, okay, you're expecting her to sign it,

and you're letting her go along her way, planning this wedding, and you're not presenting it to her,

and that's, that's problematic, and that's, that's not the utmost standard of good faith and candor,

and, and that didn't happen. If we disagree with you, we enforce the, the pre-nup, what do we

do about the violation of the non-hypothecation order? Well I think that would have to be,

you know, remanded back to the trial court to, to determine what would be appropriate.

Attorney Conner is telling us that under the pre-nup, if we enforce it, your client is responsible

for the attorney's fees, for the entire litigation? Is that your understanding of the attorney's fee?

That's not my understanding of it, and that would have to, that per clause of the pre-amperial

agreement would have to be determined at the trial court level, so, I, I, because I, you know,

I wonder whether, whether these are two separate issues, and maybe the trial court would have the

authority to sanction the husband by saying, you don't get your attorney's fees? Well I think

certainly that would be something that the remanded of the court would have available.

I did want to make a point about the, the $255,000 issue that, that a question was raised.

The balance on the books, on the date that this app, that the businesses were, were valued was

$149,000. It was not $255,000. So if you just look at the balance sheet on December 31,

2013, when these, when the business was appraised, it was down $249,000. So the, the, the claim that

it was $255,000 is simply incorrect. Secondly, but you know, whether, whether, I mean, maybe that's

right, maybe it was $149,000 rather than $255,000, but doesn't that at least mean that at least as

to $149,000, the court counted the $149,000 twice? No, because if you look at the analysis

for the expert, they, they both valued this, the business based on a, on a income, from an

income approach. Neither of them deducted the, this $149,000 that was remaining as a legitimate debt

when they deducted it for valuation purposes. And then when they did their actual formulaic

calculation of the, the value of the practice, they valued it, again, based on the income.

So their expert took a percentage of income, but there was no evidence presented below

that the amount of cash that was on the books of the business had any impact.

But, but, but, I mean, I guess I don't follow that because that, when, whatever, whatever the

approach that you use to valuation, you still have to in the end deduct the debt. I mean, that,

the, the, would you say that the court, that the court was not required to deduct the,

the loan from Bank of America or whatever it was that, that violated the anti-hypothecation

agreement? The court had to deduct that, right? I don't think it had to. I think the court

had the discretion to say, we're not going to deduct an asset, a loan that you took out

after the. Would you finish your, your point about the use of the income approach?

Okay, so they use the income approach and they run a formula. And the income of the business

is the same regardless of whether there's $19,000 in the, in the bank accounts or $149.

And so the, the, this money was just being parked there, but when you look at the formula and

you really look at the analysis of the, of the experts, they didn't say, well, that this has to

be increased in value because there's $149 there. And technically, if it was $149 that was owed,

then it was owed to Dr. Calvin. And then he would, he would be, it would still be a

marital asset that would have to come back. But the evidence here was it was just being

parked in the business and it wasn't necessary to generate the cash flow of the business.

So I see my time is up and thank you.

Thank you. Case submitted. Court is in reset.
