The record should reflect the fact that Justice Lynn is disqualified from this case.

May it please the Court, Christopher Johnson on behalf of Christopher Boyver.

There's two issues in this appeal, and my intention is to begin with the first,

the sufficiency issue, and get to the second, the jury instruction issue time permitting.

My plan with regard to the sufficiency issue is to address what I see as the three disputed

points of law. First, to dispute about the content of the element that the State has to prove.

Second, to dispute about the characterization of the evidence as direct or circumstantial.

And third, to dispute about the rationality of the alternative conviction,

a term of conclusion consistent with innocence. Happy to take questions at any point.

Are you referring to the fact that you don't think there was sufficient evidence

of a false statement or a misrepresentation?

Yes.

All right. There was plenty of evidence that he was at the apartment on a daily basis, wasn't there?

That's right. And that gets to my first point. So the crucial thing that the State had to prove to convict

is that Boyver lied when he said he was homeless. It is not enough to gain a conviction for them to prove

that Gray lied when she said he was continuously absent.

Even if they had evidence that Boyver knew she was lying about that.

To convict him, they had to prove that he lied and what he said was homelessness.

And so they had to prove that he lied when he said he was homeless.

But in your view, that's only a lie if he didn't regularly sleep at Gray's home.

That's right. That's right.

And I wonder about that. In other words, you say that your alternative rational conclusion under

a circumstantial evidence test is you say, although the defendant may have regularly spent

time at the apartment, he didn't regularly sleep there. And I wonder that you've got a sleeping

test for living at the home as opposed to homelessness. And I wonder whether that is the test.

I think that it is. And I would refine it slightly to say it's a nighttime residence.

Whether he sleeps there is not as such the rule, but it's a nighttime residence.

And we're two points. I mean, I don't understand the state to have disputed that definition of homelessness.

I understand them to say, homelessness is not the issue.

But secondly, I got those definitions from a New Hampshire statute and a federal statute

which defined the condition of homelessness quite reasonably, I think.

And so, you know, and that's what the state stuck with.

If he'd asserted something else other than homelessness, we wouldn't be having this conversation.

But since he asserted homelessness, they have to prove that's a lie and we have to have

some understanding of what that means. And the concept, you know, accepted in New Hampshire

law in, you know, associated context that homelessness means you lack a fixed and

adequate, a regular fixed and adequate nighttime residence, seems to me the right definition.

But if I understand the facts correctly, Mr. Boivere was the father of Ms. Gray's children.

They were young children. He was there all the time. She got benefits by claiming she

didn't have someone living with her that amounted to thousands of dollars.

And his way of assisting her, arguably, the jury could have found was to claim he

did not live there. Right, right. I don't disagree with any of that.

And again, I'd say the state undertook a difficult prosecution. The prosecution of Gray is not

that hard because she has represented he's continuously absent. And proving that he's

continuously absent would not have been hard in this instance. He never represented that.

So they can only convict him if they find that he lied. And he may well know she's

lying and he may well know she is getting benefits because of this lie.

Well, and he's benefiting from those benefits.

And he may, exactly. And he may well benefit from that. But they have to prove that he lied.

He's not guilty of this crime if he doesn't lie, even if he knows she's lying.

So let's just hypothetically say that he's there seven days a week.

And he's there all day. And he's there until midnight. And then he goes to a buddy's

house and sleeps on the couch and is back at the house at six o'clock in the morning

when the kids wake up and he can have breakfast with them.

Right. How do we begin to sort that out and make a test that's workable?

Well, I think the statute that I've cited that defines homelessness is the guidepost

when that's the issue. And I think it would be true. Like if the evidence were

that he could stay there if he wanted to, but simply chose not to, maybe this is a

different case. And maybe there could also be a question of staying there until

midnight covers a lot of nighttime hours. Maybe that's a nighttime residence,

even if you're not there from midnight to 6 a.m.

Okay. So let's give him a little more benefit of the doubt. Let's say regularly

he is at that house all day. And at 9 30, after the kids are in bed,

he goes to his buddy's house, sleeps on the couch, comes back at 6 o'clock in

the morning. He's there to feed them breakfast. That's right. Right. If he says

I'm homeless, you say what? I'd say, well, it gets to, there's two different

issues here. One is what is the definition of homelessness? And then

the second related issue, and this maybe gets to my second point, which I

think is where you're getting, is what is their evidence that he's lying?

And then that raises the question of whether their evidence is direct or

circumstantial. And an item of evidence, the characterization of an item of

evidence as direct or circumstantial depends on what it's offered to prove.

So the same testimony could be direct if offered to prove one thing and

circumstantial if offered to prove something else. So the evidence here

that he's there all the time during the day, he's regularly seen there,

gets his mail there. That is direct evidence that he's not continuously

absent. As is the fact that he was arrested there.

Yeah, direct evidence that he's not continuously absent. But it is only

circumstantial evidence that he resides there at his regular nighttime

residence. To have direct evidence of a regular nighttime residence, I think

you would need somebody who can say, some witness who would say, from

direct knowledge, he spent the nights there. And it could be somebody

who was in the apartment, it could be a neighbor who says, and I guess to

your question, a neighbor who says I take the dog out every night at

11 and I saw his car and then I come out to get the paper at 6am and the car

would still be there. I think that would be direct evidence that he's there

at night. But they don't have anything like that. They have a bunch of

people who interact with him during the day. They have a manager who's not

himself there at night who interacts with him during the day. They have

these forms which are consistent with the use of this place as a

mailing address, especially when you view Boybear's annotation of one of

those forms that says that explicitly. That's all circumstantial evidence

that it's direct evidence that he's not continuously absent. So your

position really does center on your argument to us as to what the

meaning of homelessness is. Yes. And the jury asked, I guess, for the

court to define homelessness and the court didn't do it. That's right. So

the jury was left with figuring that out on its own and applying its own

definition or, you know, I don't generally understood definition of

homelessness. So was the court's error in your view not giving the jury a

definition of homelessness as you have argued to us? I think it would have

been helpful, but that's not the error I'm arguing. I'm arguing because... Well,

so does that make a difference then? If you're not criticizing the judge

for giving the jury the tool it needed, then have you waived your

position on the definition of... Right. No. As the defense waived it

because it's too late to give the jury a definition. I understand. I

think if an instruction inconsistent with my definition had been given, I

would have a problem on the sufficiency claim. But there was no instruction

given that was inconsistent with the idea I've advanced. I'm sorry. Go ahead.

I'm sorry. And I think it was the defense's argument in closing. I mean,

this was the spirit of what they were saying. So they weren't saying all

these people are lying. He was never there. The defense position was,

yes, he was there, but he didn't lie when he said he was homeless

because he didn't have that place as his home. And so I think, you

know, I think it's right. If an inconsistent instruction had been given,

I'd have a problem. But no instruction that was inconsistent with the point,

the way I'm arguing this was... But I'm still struggling with the jury

has no definition. And so, presumably, it's going to apply a generally

understood definition of homelessness. It hears evidence that the fellow

is there every day, almost, playing with his kids and all of that.

Is it an error for the jury to apply a generally understood definition

of homelessness to arrive at its conclusion? Well, the other thing I

guess I would say in answer to that is I think the definition I have

proposed is a generally understood definition of homelessness. People

don't have to sleep under the stars to be homeless. I think everybody

understands. There are homeless people who are couchsurfing. And

there are some homeless people who are in shelters. And there are some

homeless people who live under the stars. Was there any evidence of

that? I understand your client did not have any burden of proof or

production. Yeah. But was there any evidence that he was, in fact,

homeless? Well, yes. I mean, there was evidence that on the

financial affidavit, which the state introduced in evidence, he had

written this apartment and said mailing address only. And then

he'd said something to the effect of staying with friends

physical and he'd given another address. And I think that's

consistent. The idea that he was couchsurfing and that's

where he was. Is there anything to the notion here we are sparring

back and forth about what homelessness means? And the crime

here is intentionally false statements. So if we can't

figure out what homelessness means, how could the defendant

make an intentionally false statement? I mean, that's a

fair point to I think that is their burden. They have to

prove that he lied. And so in some sense, they have to

prove that he what he meant by it. Homelessness was not

consistent with his reality. And they have not been that he

lied for the purpose of aiding and embedding great, right,

right? But the element were particularly challenging

sufficient because I am not I'm not saying there was no

evidence that he knew she was lying. I'm saying there's

they did not prove that he lied. And it could be

consistent with with him knowing that she's lying and

even hoping her lie succeeds, perfectly consistent with the

state not being able to prove that he lied when he said he

was homeless. The third point, so the sufficiency. So the

question is, the court is if this evidence is

circumstantial, as I suggest that it is, because there's

no direct evidence that he said I'm spending my nights

there and nobody saw him spending their nights

there. Nobody who testified said that. The rational

conclusion consistent with innocence is that he wasn't

lying. He was homeless. He was staying with friends or

he was doing that. He was spending a lot of time there

taking care of his kids, but the relationship was such

or that, you know, he was not welcome to stay there

overnight. And that would be consistent with his

statement being the truth. Regardless of what his

motive or hopes about her statement, they don't

prove that he's lying when he says he's homeless. They

have not earned their conviction. It's just very

briefly on the on the jury instruction issue. The

point I guess I would like to leave court with on

that is that by enacting the words aid in a bet,

the legislatures made a choice that and that choice is

that it requires for a conviction that an aider or

a better, particularly the word bet requires proof

that the principal had a criminal mens rea. The

legislature could have chosen different words. It

could have defined this statute such that it's a

crime to obtain attempt to obtain or cause another

to obtain the benefits. And then it wouldn't

matter what her mental state is. But having chosen

aid in a bet as the words, the legislature is stuck

with a consequence of those words, which is the

necessity to prove that that the principal had a

couple of men's men's rea. And that instruction was

not given. And that instruction was not given.

Well, but what wasn't it? Didn't the state point

out that the defense actually objected to any

information about gray? So we have an inconsistency.

I don't think so. And I've addressed that in the

reply brief, which more fully than I'll probably be

able to address it now. But I think first the state

didn't preserve that in the trial court and it had

an obligation to do so if it saw to if the

prosecutor had two inconsistent positions in the

trial court in front of it, it had an obligation

to raise that. And it did not do so. And secondly,

what the invited error doctrine is about is taking

an inconsistent position in the trial court from

the one one takes on appeal. Even if it doesn't fit

the parameters of invited error, isn't isn't really

there an issue here? I still don't think so

because the defense says, wait a minute, I object

to anything about gray and then takes the

position. Well, the state had the burden to

prove what Gray's men's rare was. Well, they

objected to her her welfare application forms

coming in. And so, but I think that if the

state thinks that it could have gotten that in as

a statement of a co-conspirator, it should have

said that. And it didn't say that. And so, in

that respect also, it didn't preserve a

response. So the defense is entitled to make

an objection. And if it wins it, I don't

think winning it forecloses the defense for

making other arguments about other issues

later in the case if the state hasn't hasn't

raised the issue below. As the court

has said, the defense is entitled to

reverse. Thank you. Thank you.

Good afternoon, Your Honours. Elizabeth

Woodcock for the State of New Hampshire. I

want to make one brief comment and then

I'll take questions. And my comment is very

inauspicious. I have realized in going

preparing for this oral argument that

either pages seven and eight are missing

from my appendix or I have

misnumbered the pages. And I just

realized that as I'm sitting in this

court's library and I'm not

certain which the problem is, but I

will file an errata. I don't want

the court to be sort of confused

looking for something that isn't

there. And I'm not certain that it

isn't there. We probably won't look at

it today anyway. Well, thank you,

Your Honour. I appreciate having a

little time to

respond to my

own error.

In this case, the evidence was

sufficient. The defendant said that

he was homeless and he was

at the house all the time.

What about

his asserted

definition of homeless, this

nighttime residency?

Well, then that would mean that

anybody who worked a graveyard shift

was homeless.

It makes no sense to

set up a situation which you

say, well, you have

no nighttime residency

and then require the state

to prove that the person is

actually sleeping in the house

at night. That would be,

I can't

imagine Big Brother pales in

comparison to what the state would

have to do to prove this. In this

particular instance, the man was

there a lot of the time. Well, it's

really not that hard to have a

witness who testifies, well, I

saw him at 11 o'clock at night

or I saw him go in at midnight

and leave at four in the morning.

That's not that onerous. Well,

it first of all presumes that

he wasn't. I mean, that would

really be kind of voyeurism.

But you do have evidence that

he was there at night because you

have the police officer conducting

surveillance on the house at night

and seeing people going in and out

and seeing him there.

There isn't anything that

counters that impression.

I'm sorry, would you clarify

what there was evidence that what?

There was surveillance of

this man on one night. I think

he was there.

Okay.

I will say that just this as an

aside, there was no actual proof

introduced that the defendant was

dealing drugs.

So I want to sort of step back

from that.

There was they did introduce the

charges brought against him.

When I was talking to Mr. Johnson,

he thought that perhaps those

charges had been redacted, but

nothing that I got from the

record. That's a problem.

Police were conducting surveillance

because of suspected...

They were conducting surveillance

and they saw people going in and

out and in and out and he was

there all of the time.

So that was one evening.

You have him outside playing

with his children.

You have him there

at various times, various

neighbors see him coming in

and out. The person who runs

there, a great deal of the time,

that is sufficient for the jury

to determine that he was not

homeless.

Now, whether they have to,

the suggestion somehow is that

somehow the state has to prove

that he was living there.

I think that that's not true.

I think if the state proved

that he was living at Trump's

towers, that would say he was

not homeless. So the false

statement is that he was

sufficient to say that he was

actually living there because he

was there all the time.

But the fact that you're visiting

your children someplace doesn't

turn that into where you live.

It wouldn't necessarily, but

he is listing this place as

his residence on various court

documents. So it's not as if

he's mailing address.

He's at least asserting that he

gets his mail there.

On some of the documents, he

is after...

And again, I'm not

certain which of this evidence

may have been redacted, but

he's charged. And then he writes

on one of the forms that he's

only using that as his mailing

address and he's actually

living with friends. Well, if

the actual charges went back to

the jury, it would have been

fairly clear that the reason

that he wasn't living at the

house, that he was charged

from being there, that the court

said, you can't live there. You've

committed assault and false

imprisonment. So, I mean, I

think that he takes two

different positions for the

purposes of the court. He says,

this is my residence. This is

where I live. For purposes of

aid to families with dependent

children, he says, no, I'm not

there. And the fact that he

puts down that he's homeless

and not sleeping with a buddy

or something like that, you know,

staying at a buddy's house or

living someplace else is

important because homelessness

carries with it a whole bunch

of kind of underlying

assertions. Most people don't

voluntarily become homeless.

They are homeless because they

don't have any money. And part

of the purpose of this

statute is to aid the children

who are relying on a single

parent. So, the lie

that not only to the way

the Department of Health and

Human Services sees this person

as a contributing father, it

also suggests that there is no

way that he can contribute to

his children's welfare and that

therefore, they need child care.

They need medical benefits.

They need extra money

for food because

this man is incapable

of providing for them.

Well, under your definition, if

they don't have a place that they

rent and they go from

friend to friend's house,

are they homeless or not?

I think it would

depend.

I think that if you were,

if you had sort of a regular

schedule, I'd stay with

buddy number one

one week and then the next

month I move to buddy number two

and the next month I move back

to buddy number one, I think

it's something that you should

try to explain to the

Department of Human Services.

If they say, if you say

I'm homeless, that suggests

I'm going to a homeless shelter.

I'm living under the stars.

I'm sleeping in my car.

Well, doesn't it, couldn't it

also mean I don't have a right

to go to a door and turn the key

and walk in and say it's my

place? I have to ask somebody

to stay there. Why isn't that

going to happen?

I don't think it's going to

happen under certain

circumstances. I suppose

just as passive, but the

problem here is that when you

write down that you are

homeless and you don't offer

any explanation and he didn't

offer any explanation and

there's nothing on the record

that suggests that he's going

and crashing at a friend's

house other than his

association with these charges.

Everything else that you have

says that he is there.

But isn't it circumstantial

evidence? Well, some of it is

circumstantial evidence. There

are circumstantial inferences

that can be drawn from some of

the things, but in reality if

the police officer says I was

there on December 16th at

9 o'clock at night surveilling

the house and he was there

and I saw him the entire time

in the house. If you look at

the court document and he

signs his name and says this is

where I live, that's direct

evidence. That's not

circumstantial evidence. The

latter is an admission.

And he signed a court

document before knowing what

the charge was?

Because your suggestion is once

he knew what the charge was

then he had to be careful about

how he indicated where he was

and he had to be careful about

how he indicated where he was

because it's nobody that says

comes in and says I was at

court and this is how this was

all filled out. There isn't all

that kind of discussion. But I

think that if you look at the

document which isn't in my

appendix, that is not the

missing pages if there are in

fact any missing pages. If you

look at the document he lists

his address and then he says

what happened was that he

filled out the document before

the charges were

announced to him in bail or

conditions of release or

anything else was set. But it

given the fact and as I say I

don't want to go out too much

on a limb because I'm not

certain that this stuff was not

redacted but the copies I

have weren't. If in fact

the charge was simple assault

and false imprisonment and it

wasn't the case that I was

in my life then staying with

friends would be an explanation

of no I'm not staying at the

house where I'm not supposed to

be. Which is what that's the

inference that I drew from it.

But the court documents reflect

that this is his residence and

if you look at all of this

there's nothing that says

he's not there. Other than

you know just sort of an

argument well nobody saw him

at three o'clock in the morning

watching. When you say there's

no evidence that he was not

there isn't are you shifting

the burden. No I

think that I'm I think that I'm

responding to the argument that

that's made that the state

failed to meet its own

burden. If there was

something if for example

there was something that they

had introduced registrations

for cars or something like

that. Well this is this is a

different address and it

countered the weight of the

evidence in the state then

then there would be some reason

to sort of question what the

state had introduced but there's

nothing of that sort. Other

than the representations he

makes to the Department of

Health and Human Services

saying that he has no place

to live. Should should in your

view should the defense have

to define homelessness for the

jury's purpose.

That's an interesting

question. I

I

I tend to

think no and the

reason is that

homelessness is is sort of you

know it when you see it.

Particularly in light

of this particular

statute which is talking about

basically children who are

deprived of the support of one

of their parents. This the state

is stepping in in a certain

sense to fill that void.

So when the when the jury looks

at this and says well

the the children are

entitled to these benefits

because the father is an

absent father and this man is

saying I'm not just absent I'm

homeless. I have no money I

have nothing to give these

children I can't even provide

to the jury can understand what

the meaning of homelessness is

and I

I don't like it when jurors

get over instructed on things

that are really matters of

common sense. I see my yellow

light is on if the court has

any further questions for me I'd

be happy to take them otherwise

I'd ask that the case be

submitted. Thank you case

submitted the court will take

a brief recess.
