Good morning. I think everyone did get the word that we're shifting the order a bit.

The weather has caused some delay for some counsel.

And so we are starting with the second case on the list, state versus the

ferrier. This is case 2014-0275, State of New

Hampshire versus Franklin Ferrier. May it please the court, Stephanie

Hausmann on behalf of Franklin Ferrier. The trial court aired in

remanding Mr. LaFerrier's de novo appeal when he was late for jury

selection. The facts upon which the court relied were legally

insufficient to show that Mr. LaFerrier waived his right to a jury trial.

Do you say that the standard is that the court must find, according to a

Massachusetts case that you cite, the court must find that the defendant

consciously disregarded the duty to be present?

I think that's right. So there has to be something more than mere

absence. And so assuming that's the standard, I

don't know if that's going to be the standard or not,

your argument is that could not have been decided

without an evidentiary hearing giving the defendant an opportunity

to explain himself. I think the court points out

an important distinction between New Hampshire and Massachusetts

and the Massachusetts cases upon which we rely. And in those cases, the court

doesn't remand at the time of the failure to appear, but instead

defaults the defendant and then later has a hearing

about the circumstances of the defendant's failure to appear.

New Hampshire doesn't have that practice in their de novo appeal

system and so therefore it's a question of what facts are before the

trial court. Are they legally sufficient to find that the

defendant was inexcusable in his failure to appear and that he

can be deemed to have waived his right to a jury trial?

Well that's what I'm getting back to. In other words, the standard you just

articulated is somewhat different than the standard

consciously disregard the duty to be present.

So I want to know from you what your position is because it seems to me it

makes a difference. If the standard is did the defendant

consciously disregard the duty, we have to hear from the

defendant. Do we not? I think that whichever

standard the court chooses, so this court has

has looked at whether there is an inexcusable failure to appear

and whether the defendant can be deemed to have waived his rights. I think

under either standard it's very hard to make that

determination without hearing from the defendant. And here

defense counsel offered an explanation to the court which the court

didn't take into account or didn't find was untruthful.

And so here counsel represented that Mr. LaFairier was genuinely confused

about when he needed to next be in court. The trial court

instead relied on the fact that Mr. LaFairier had been present in

court three days prior and also about the notice that

had gone out two months earlier. However...

But don't we make a... I mean you say the court didn't make a specific

finding and I agree but don't we sort of assume the court made the

findings that would support his decision? So I mean the court

understood what his position was right? I mean we're not saying that the

court didn't understand that it just it just denied the

motion. In order to rely on Mr. LaFairier's

presence at the hearing and the notice the court needed to

make a finding that Mr. LaFairier had received the notice

telling him he needed to be at jury selection and I think

given the circumstances of the case needed to make a finding about

what had transpired at that last hearing and whether it was fair to

assume that Mr. LaFairier understood what had happened

and consciously disregarded or was inexcusable in his failure to appear

three days later. At the time the court made its ruling

was it aware that as the defendant represents he was

in the courthouse going through security or was that known or

unknown to the court at the time? When the court

issued the remand initially the court was aware through counsel's

representations that Mr. LaFairier was on his way to court and was

do there any moment and then the court remanded Mr. LaFairier

filed a motion to reconsider representing that he had arrived

was going through security at the time the court issued a

three-man order. Do you agree that the the defendant

can be deemed to have waived his right without

having a purposeful intent to waive the right?

Yes I think so and I think there can be a

level of negligence. So in Busquette this court held that a defendant who

failed to appear in Superior Court on his de novo

appeal and did nothing for 10 months after that

was fairly deemed to have waived his right to a jury trial

and there you know a person may not appear on a given day because of

some you know they were they were delayed because of traffic or a

medical emergency or something like that but

you added together enough days where the defendant could have and should have

acted and that is fair then to base the finding of

waiver on that conduct. I just want to make clear the state relies on the

hearing that had occurred three days earlier

the defendant had filed a motion to continue that was discussed at that

hearing partially in open court and partially up at the bench without

Mr. LaFairier present and the court's ruling on the motion to

continue is not clear it's sort of discussed at various

points in open court and I and I think it's fair to conclude that Mr. LaFairier

had some confusion about when he next needed to be to

to court and was waiting for a call from council. Thank you. Thank you.

Good morning and may it please the court my name is Sean Locke and I

represent the state of New Hampshire. We begin with defense council's

final point regarding the clarity and the motion the hearing on the motion

to continue. In the transcript there on the

very second page page or labeled page three

the trial court clearly says so we'll have jury selection on March 7th.

The next page page four the trial court clearly says I'm denying the motion to

continue and keeping it on the trial track again without

prejudice to the defendant's ability to re-raise the motion to

continue. After that point the defense

after that point they have a side there's a sidebar conference discussing

leave it discusses witnesses it discusses the motion to continue a bit

further and it discusses the consolidation of new felony charges

that are being brought against the defendant. So it's clear from the very

beginning in open court the trial and the defendant

was told by the trial court jury selection will begin on March 7th

2013. To what extent should we consider

council's representation that the substitute council

told the defendant you'll be hearing from me.

Does that make a difference? It doesn't in this situation even if

we were even if this court were to credit that assertion as a valid assertion

in the miscommunication was a valid miscommunication

it doesn't excuse the defendant. The defendant has chosen to take on the

burden of prosecuting this appeal. He has an obligation and he had the

ability to confirm with his trial council

or the court to determine the upcoming schedule of the proceeding

and especially given the fact that he was told mere days before that

his next proceeding would occur on March 7th he still retains that

obligation and should be checking with someone

either his council or the court about what is the next step in the process

that aside he was also advised in the notice that he would have

that was sent to him in January of that year

when jury selection would occur and the consequences of failing to appear

for jury selection. So your position would be that even if

even if we could sort of fault the attorney the attorney said you know

I'll be in touch with you even if we could sort of fault the attorney

for not being in touch with him it's the defendant still has a

responsibility if your attorney if you hear that your case is jury

selection is going to be on March 7th and your attorney says I'm going to call you

and the attorney doesn't call you your your responsibility as a defendant is

to call your attorney and say hey you said you're going to call me what's

going on. Exactly and especially in this type

of a situation this would be different if this were

perhaps an initial felony trial where the burden is or the state

carries the burden to pursue and prosecute the appeals

zealously prosecute the appeal here the defendant has taken that

responsibility upon himself by pursuing the de novo appeal.

That would be the distinction I would draw between those two situations.

Can I just ask you if my understanding of the record is right

the court said it would wait until 215 is that right? Correct.

And at 220 the court dismissed the jury and entered default is that right?

Correct. So we're talking about five minutes between when the court

said it would wait until and then when the court took that action.

We're for that with respect to that particular statement yes but we're

talking about almost five hours after the defendant had the

responsibility to appear in court that morning.

But doesn't it matter are you're saying it doesn't matter we should look at

the five hours not the five minutes. Yes.

But if he'd shown up at 215 all would be well.

Correct but his case was the last case for jury selection.

Right. His case was the last case for jury selection and at this point

his failure to appear has caused undue delay or caused delay in confusion in

the sense that the trial court is now holding a jury

or holding potential jurors for this case. What about

consideration of lesser sanctions because what the court did was the

ultimate sanction could the court have and should the court have

considered lesser sanction such as paying for

the appearance of the jurors for the afternoon.

The trial court could have considered lesser sanctions.

There are obviously myriad of options that the trial court could have pursued

but at that point that becomes a discretionary call of the trial court

and it's a question of whether or not it's within the trial. But as a legal

matter do we tell trial court judges before you

impose the most drastic sanction you should at least consider

lesser sanctions. We've done that in other contexts.

And I would say and in other contexts that may be appropriate in this context

again the defendant has taken this burden upon himself

to pursue this appeal and his failure to participate in the

entire process he was aware of the punishment that he or the

penalty he could face for not appearing

and there's it's not a question of whether or not. Did his counsel ever

suggest any say to the court you know well look

wait a minute judge don't do this this is too drastic don't do this

he'll pay for the jury you know he'll pay for the jury to be here an extra day

or he'll pay for for you know whatever the added expense was.

It doesn't appear the record doesn't reflect that any other options were

brought forth by trial counsel on with the respect to the idea of

the defendant paying for jury or paying for the extra jury time that would

not probably be an option since the defendant was homeless and

indigent but there are there are still other options that could

have been pursued in this situation but even then none of them were requested

by trial counsel. But the court I guess didn't ask counsel

you know counsel tells the court he's on his way

we have somebody from our office driving him because he's homeless

did the court say anything further such as

well where are they have you been in touch with them

How long is it going to take them to get to the court?

I see my light is on may I please um there were there were questions brought

back and forth between defense counsel and the trial court with respect to

how long it would take for the defendant to arrive I

believe when the proceeding initially the chamber's conference

initially started the defense counsel made the representation I believe

it's either half an hour an hour before the defendant would arrive

and that's when the 215 deadline was set

and at that point the defense the defendant still hadn't arrived in court and

there had been no further communication that the defendant is

10 minutes away five minutes away he's almost here thank you

thank you
