Good afternoon. This is case 2014-0081, Bradford-Dutton versus the town of Salem.

Counsel. Oh, you're not a lawyer. You're representing yourself. Is that right? Mr.

Dutton, nice to see you. Thank you. My name is, for the record, my name is

Brad Dutton and I'm the plaintiff. I'm here today as an owner of a parcel of

land in Salem, New Hampshire, on which I've had to build a new house to replace one

that was destroyed when the trees came down. This land next door has been owned by

Salem for the better part of six years. And those dangerous trees that remain

are less than 50 feet from my new house. So I just say that by way of

introduction. I have three main points to support my appeal that this court should

remand this case back to the Superior Court for trial. First, that there were

genuine and material facts in dispute at the trial court. So it was wrong to grant

summary judgment. This is probably a more minor point of all that I'll

make. And in the interest of time, I plan to rest on the content of my

graves on this particular point. Secondly, that summary judgment was not

appropriate because the decisions or lack of them by Salem made about addressing

its premises liability on the two lots that owned next to the plaintiff's

lot were not of a discretionary nature. And that is required for discretionary

function immunity. And thirdly and fourthly, that the statutory and act of

God weather defenses involve asking the court to find facts. And that is not a

matter for the court, but for the jury. You sound like a lawyer. Thank you.

No, I say that by means of compliments. Thank you. I've had to become one.

And I've become fascinated by the law.

Mr. Dunn, can you clarify to me what do you say is the notice that the town had of

the condition of these trees? Did you affirmatively give them notice? And if

so, when? I gave them notice in 206 when during a previous wind event, I had a

tree from the adjoining property come down on my roof and cause substantial

damage. I went to the town of Salem, the health officer. Was this before the town

owned the property while the taxpayer lost it for a period of time? Yes. At

what point was that notice given? Yes, to answer your question, it was in

206. The town took over the property in approximately a middle of 09. So you went

to the town and complained about this hoping for what result at that time? That

they would take it upon themselves to eliminate the defect on the property.

But it was still owned by somebody else. It was still owned by the former

owner. So by what authority would the town do that? Because ordinarily it would be

the responsibility of the owner of the property? Yes. And I must say that because

the former owner had not done anything about it, I was not familiar with the

exact process by which the town would take. But I felt that that was my

recourse. Had you complained to the former owner? Yes, I had. And nothing

happened? No. In fact, in the record, I believe you all have seen the markings

that were on the trees in some of the photographs. So they had been marked years

ago for removal by a professional outfit. There were metal markings that

were indicative that had not been done by a layman or by the owner. And those

markings remained when the town took over the property? Yes, sir, they did. And in

fact, in one of the photographs, you can see that the tree number one, which in

the record of the arborist, from my perspective, and I think I did as

good a job as I could in providing to the court in the briefs a very detailed

explanation as to how the arborist stated in his report that it was tree number

one. So the evidence was that there was only one tree from that joining

property that fell into your property taking down healthy trees on your

property. And on the adjoining property that the town owned. So it was one

tree? Yes. Was that one tree marked for cutting down? Yes. At the beginning of

my long sentence, I was saying you can see in the record if you look at, I

believe it's photograph nine or ten, you can see that that tree number one, that

was a defective tree, according to the arborist report, was marked for removal

and the arborist indicated in his report that it was dead. And it was also

defective. It was bifurcated about 20 inches up, and that's where the two

pieces that caused all the damage came down. How do you know? Oh, excuse

me. I'm sorry. How do you know why the tree was marked and by whom? What's the

state of the record as to when the tree was marked, by whom it was marked, and

for what reason it was marked? I would only say that the arborist when he

came to inspect the properties as part of making his report, he gave me

no, there was no discussion about those were not professional markings on that

tree. So the arborist is the source of your information? Yes. And that's the

expert that you hired whose report we have in the record? Yes, sir. Okay. And

so we don't know who made the marks or when they made, when the marks were

made, right? That's correct. In fact, it's not included in the record. I

only happen to know relatives of the original owner that live in the area

that told me that, but it's not part of the record. Can I just ask you, sir,

it's the, did tree number one, when tree number one, what you refer to as tree

number one fell, did that directly cause damage to your house or was, did

that cause tree number two to fall and was it sort of an indirect

damage or did it directly fall on your house? Two quick answers to that. Yes,

it was the one that was, had the largest mass and essentially cut my house into

diagonally when it finally fell. But as it fell, according to my explanation of

the Arborist report, which I thought was objective and it's in the record, step by

step, what the Arborist said in his report was that as it came down, yes, there

were live trees that fell during the wind event. But as that tree number one came

down, the defective tree, it did hit other trees. I don't have the numbers

right off the top of my head, but they're in the record. Photograph, photograph,

yes. And two trees that are, that were on the town's lot that also fell on my

house. And then yes, two trees that were on my property up next to the road. But

again, the Arborist indicated that this was all part of these two branches of

this tree that were bifurcated about 20 feet up and that as they came

down and toppled those other trees and then landed on my house. I mean these

were trees, this tree was of great mass. So you would say that the tree number

one either directly or indirectly caused, was a contributing cause to the damage

to your house? And the reason that I believe this is so important is because,

you know, the defendant has raised the issues that was the one dead tree,

but that the others that came down were alive. But if you read the Arborist

report closely, I believe it indicates that it accounts for why those other trees

came down and that the cause was that first tree.

Did tree number one break off while above the ground?

Yes it did. It broke up. I used the term bifurcated. What the Arborist

didn't repeat in his report, but what he told me is that these white pines,

when they get, they can get infested by a moth of some sort. So oftentimes if you

look at white pine forest, you'll see these, they're split and it makes them

very dangerous. There's another one that's on the property just like that

that's twice the mass of this tree that came down. And what happens is the moth

eats the white pine early and then as the white pine grows it bifurcates.

It's very weak in that joint.

Is there any information in the record other than the bifurcation of the tree

that would indicate in any way prior to it snapping that it was an unhealthy

tree or a tree in distress that would have given the town some notice

of its vulnerability? I don't see it in the expert report.

Right. And looking through it. Right. The tree was dead.

It is not, in my recollection, it was not the worst tree in terms of a layman

looking at it and saying it was dangerous. But the condition of the tree

might very well be a material fact. Absolutely. And my argument is that

when you look at this lot as a whole, it is obvious, and I think the

Barber's report bears this out, that this lot is filled with dangerous trees.

I understand that the defendant's position is that there was a tree

that I was especially concerned about when I gave notice to the town.

It is currently leaning at a 30-degree angle. It's held up by a very

small other white line. I have a new house on this property.

And I'm afraid to move into the house, especially after what happened to me.

Is that number 10? That's right. Number 10.

And between the time that these proceedings started and now the angle

on that tree just continues to increase. If that falls, it's going to

break my currently new house in half. Have you got insurance on this one?

I do have insurance on this house. And I do want to just make the statement

that I know it's difficult for people to understand about not having insurance

on a home. In fact, just by way of explanation, I had insurance on the

home. I have three children and I'm still under a family court order

to support. I went back. I had just gone back into the court and I had had

an increase in my support order. I went back. I did a budget and I did

drop my house insurance about six months before that tree came down.

Well, we just think it's unfortunate that you didn't have it.

We don't care why you didn't have it.

As I understand it, Judge McHugh found that under the statute, the town

was not entitled to summary judgment. So this case, I guess, rises and falls

on the discretionary function immunity ruling.

Well, I think the defendant would perhaps differ with you on that.

You know, he has brought up the act of God defense in the statutory defense.

But I agree. I mean, the main reason for me being here today is to argue

the discretionary function immunity.

Do we have any idea how much the removal of the dangerous trees would

have cost the town? It's not the typical discretionary function

immunity case because the town says, well, it's discretionary function

because we have to manage our financial resources. But I take it we don't

have any finding of how much it would have cost the town to remove these trees.

Just a couple of points that I made in the record and that is the fact

that if you were to take Judge McHugh's decision to its logical conclusion,

you would have to say that it would eviscerate, if that's the right word,

to a large degree the premises liability that this court has established

under 507.

Does all towns have financial challenges of balancing what to pay for

and what not? Exactly. And the second point that I made

concerning this was that if you, I brought up the issue of RSA 8076,

where there is an out for towns when they seize property.

And it doesn't put them, in other words, if they believe through a very minor

due diligence that they do not have to take that property because it

represents a risk that they don't want on to take, then they have the

option of not seizing that property. And I brought up the point that

Salem has not just seized this property once, but they've seized it twice.

And they've done that once, the second time during these proceedings.

Is there any evidence in the record that either time the town performed

any maintenance on the parcel? None. And in fact, I bring up the point

that the fire chief complained about a hazardous building on the other lot

that they own right next door to the one that's at issue.

24 is at issue here, 22 they also own. And he's been out to inspect

that property four years ago and complained to the town manager that

there were dead tall trees on that lot as well as well as a hazardous

building, it's never been removed. So I bring up that point about the

planning function. It appears that there's no planning function that

this court in Tarbell versus the city of Concord said you need to

have a planning function or there's no foundation for discretion.

Your time is up, sir. Thank you. Well, I'm sure my colleagues will

agree with me that for a lay person that was a better argument than we

hear from many counsel. Thank you very much. I actually thought your

brief was excellent. I wrote a note to myself, I wonder if this was

written by a lawyer, ghost written, but it wasn't. It was your work.

It was my work and it was again a long process and I appreciate the

compliment and it brought me a real good appreciation for the law and

the work that you all do. I saw you in Salem as part of the

preparation for this and maybe a little bit more less nervous today.

Thank you. Council. Now I'm going to follow that.

You're up to it, Mr. Poulin. We know you can do a good job too.

Thank you, Your Honor. And may it please the court. I am Chris Poulin

and I represent the town of Salem, New Hampshire. What Mr.

Dutton is asking this court to do is to impose an affirmative duty

on municipalities to inspect town parcels of land for potential hazards

and a corresponding duty to ameliorate these hazards when such a duty

does not exist under New Hampshire common law and it cannot exist

under discretionary function immunity. Well maybe or maybe not.

I don't see this as the usual discretionary function immunity case

because the town is saying, well the reason we don't have to do this

is because we have to juggle the finances of the town.

We don't frankly often hear that as a justification.

It strikes me that in the end maybe the town prevails

but I think that Mr. Dutton's point is well taken

that this case shouldn't have been decided by summary judgment.

If it would have cost the town of Salem $100,000 to take these trees down

that might have been a different analysis than it would have been

if it cost them $500 to take these trees down.

Well respectfully, Your Honor, I think what the court needs to look at is let's just talk about negligence.

Okay. Because the original action that was brought

by Mr. Dutton was negligence. And just a common law negligence

he needed to show that somehow that

the town was unnoticed or was aware of a particular

different. But you know what, that's not the grounds on which the trial court

granted the dismissal. The trial court granted the dismissal on discretionary function

immunity. And so I mean is that

you know, I guess I'm not quite sure how

we, if you're getting into was there negligence or not

how can we... That claim is still alive. Yeah. How can we kind of decide that?

Well I guess I'm leading to how the court

can affirm the superior, how this court can affirm the superior court's

decision on discretionary function. Would the negligence... Based on the facts...

Would the nuisance claim disappear too if you're right?

Yes. And it's my understanding that those claims

are not before this court. Right. So the superior court action is

still alive except for a couple of pieces of it for which it seems

to me anyway. Facts need to be found. For example, the

town never filed an affidavit in opposition to the motion for summary judgment, did it?

Oh yes we did, Your Honor. We had two affidavits,

one from our fire chief and one from Rick Russell who was the director of public

work because at issue here is that Mr. Dutton below

had the burden to show that the town was on notice of

a problem and that it failed to enact

any remedial measures. But that's not what happened. There were

no disputed facts at the superior court level. The trees

fell, the tree or trees in question.

Mr. Dutton failed to sustain his burden to show that the town was on

notice of a particular tree that was dead of disease that

caused his problems. And I think it's important to point out.

I guess the thing I'm not clear on is,

as I understood it, correct me if I'm wrong, the affidavits that were

filed said nothing about discretionary function immunity.

In other words, they didn't say well, we the town of Salem have a plan

that we do this and we do this and this is why we didn't

do it. So that is correct, Your Honor. So how can the court

grant a, on summary judgment,

a discretionary function, grant a

summary judgment for the town on the basis of discretionary function

immunity where really the only thing they have

that supports discretionary function immunity is your argument.

There's no affidavits that said look, we went through a

process. This is our process for deciding

whether we'll inspect properties that we acquire

by tax sale. And we followed that process and because of

financial reasons or whatever, we can't inspect every problem. But there's nothing

like that. So how do we know that this was a discretionary

function? That the town made

an exercise to a high degree of discretion in deciding

not to inspect this property. Good question.

I guess my response to that is that what Judge McHugh at the superior

court level looked at were undisputed facts. There was a significant winter

storm that knocked over trees and there was a negligence claim that was brought

and the applicability relative to the town arguably could be

5072 just for straight negligence. But there were undisputed

facts that the town was never put on notice that the parcel

that it had for a period of time had a damaged or diseased tree

on it. Where does the notice requirement come from?

Well, I'm just talking a common law negligence, Your Honor, that at common law

that a particular landowner would need to be

put on notice. But doesn't 507B2 arguably abrogate the common

law? Well, yes it would relative to municipalities but I guess I'm drawing the

parallel. In this particular case, whether it's a common law or whether we're talking

about 507B2, there wasn't any evidence at the superior

court level that was proffered by Mr. Dutton to show that

there was a particular tree on the town owned parcel that was taken by the

tax execution and that the town was on notice of a defective

or diseased tree. Would that have been his burden?

He says to us that he complained to the

town when the prior owner had the property but he

complained about problem trees in general. Well,

and I guess, Your Honor, based on the Mr. Dutton's

expert report, his expert didn't put that together.

The complaints that were made in 2006 when the actual parcel was

owned by a former co-defendant, Barbara Hegner,

his expert did not say that that particular tree in 2006

was the very tree in 2010 during the severe storm

that led. Would that have been required? In other words,

would it have been necessary for him to complain about

a particular tree as opposed to telling the town

I think there are a number of problem trees on this property.

Well, I think that it's required that the plaintiff would have

been required to at least put the town on notice that there's a problem with the premises.

But as we had supported in our motion for summary judgment along with our

Rafa Davis, the town was not aware of any defective

or disease tree or hazard on the property that it temporarily owned.

But isn't the test now or should have known? I would agree with you, Your Honor,

but even in either case, I mean, they didn't know

or should have known of any particular problem on that particular property.

What are you going to do about tree number ten?

That's about to fall on his new house. Well, tree number ten, we can talk about tree number ten.

No, actually, Your Honor, we're not.

Mr. Dutton's expert did not in his report

tie tree number ten to tree number one in his report.

No, I'm talking about the next storm that takes tree number ten down

and it breaks open the new house. Are you going to come back and say

sorry, discretionary function immunity would have cost us a million dollars

to take down tree number ten? It's his problem. Well, I think under that

doctrine, I think that is worth putting down.

You should never have taken this property enough. Well, I mean, the decision was

to take the property, but, Your Honor, I actually, I guess I'd liken that to

if town is on notice of potholes, which I'm sure the town of Salem is going to have

thousands of them in the spring, and they're on notice of a defect

in potholes and a road, it does fall within discretionary function

immunity for them to decide how are we going to allocate our town resources

to be able to fix 50 out of 100. And you may be absolutely right on that.

My worry is that this was decided on summary judgment

and there was no affidavit that

talked about policies, procedures,

executive decision making on

how we handle properties that we take for taxes.

Nothing like that. Now, there may well be something like that.

There may well be lots of evidence out there about such

policy decisions, but there wasn't anything like that before

the judge on summary judgment. So you may well prevail

at trial, but my worry

is that just summary judgment says

no material issues of fact, and what we're missing here

is some indication that

the Salem has, doesn't even have to be

a formal written policy, but somebody sat down and said

look, this is how we spend our resources, and unfortunately

we cannot survey every single property that we take

by taxes, and there may be great merit in that

argument, but all we had was counsel's argument.

Well, I guess my response to that, Your Honor, would be that I don't

see in the case law where this court has imposed that particular

duty on a town to inspect all of its parcels of land

for potential hazards, and then to clean up the hazards.

So you would say we could decide this as a matter of law that such

issues such as inspecting land taken for taxes

doesn't, you know, there's

no liability, you want us to find that as a matter of law? No, I don't want to

paint that broad a brush, Your Honor, I think I want to keep it really to the

facts of this particular case. The case and the facts at the superior

court level were very, very clear. Trees fell over on Mr. Dutton's

property, it was due to an extensive winter storm, that is absolutely

undisputed. Mr. Dutton, in whole or in part

the act of God issue strikes me as one that might require

some fact finding too, because if these were dead trees then the storm

is not the cause necessarily. Your Honor, I agree with you on that point, but

my response to that is that Mr. Dutton in bringing this

case retained an expert who did not offer any opinions that it was

caused in part. In fact, he made no opinion on causation other than

to look at the trees that were on the town's property and Mr. Dutton's property by the way

because there were trees, healthy trees on both that fell during the storm

but his expert didn't make any opinion

on causation. But the basis of the court's opinion

wasn't a failure to prove causation, the basis was this

discretionary... And it was your Honor, and that was

our argument that if there was a claim that the town

had a parcel of land with potential hazards on it

that I think the superior court correctly decided

that the town would have the ability to make the decision based on its resources

as to whether it would implement a plan of cutting

or trimming trees on property. But they had no such

plan and I understand if they did then that

takes this case and puts it into ministerial functions which I believe

would be issues of faff of the superior court to decide

but that is not the case here. It's absolutely undisputed because

the plaintiff presented no other evidence that storm

caused trees to fall. Town had no notice of it

and that's the case. That's undisputed. So based on those set of facts

I think that Judge McHugh correctly decided that discretionary function

immunity would apply. That if Mr. Dutton is trying to say

that the town had a duty to inspect its land for all potential

hazards. I guess I'm confused. You seem to be

saying that there was

really no evidence to support a negligence claim.

Correct. And I thought what Justice Conway

was saying before and maybe Justice Bassett also is that might be true

maybe that would be a basis at some point

for either granting some re-judgment or granting a

directed verdict or whatever. But that's not the grounds on which the court

I'm having difficulty making the leap which

you seem to make between there's no evidence of negligence

and discretionary function immunity because discretionary function

immunity that would apply whether there was evidence of negligence

or not. So I guess I'm just I'm not seeing the

I don't see the link that you seem to be making. Well I guess

I'm saying that you get to the same result

whether you do the negligence analysis or not

even if the town had notice the

town would have the ability based on its resources to make a decision

as to whether it's going to inspect its town parcels of land

or to eliminate hazards. Are you saying that if this were a private landowner

and not a town none of this would apply and there would be simple negligence and or

nuisance liability? You're on it correct. I mean it really

would not apply to a private landowner. But you're saying

there's no negligence just on that point. I mean this court

has established even in cases of private landowners that

there still is a requirement by plaintiff to show that the defendant

would have been on notice of a defective condition especially with a defective of

disease trees and that's the case

of this court recently. That's a toro.

You've just argued to us that the Salem

would have the authority to make the decision that it could not

inspect all these properties

and I tend to agree with you the town would have that authority but isn't

the question did the town in fact make

that decision? Isn't that the difference?

It surely has the authority to make such a policy

decision but did it? That's what I'm struggling with

because there isn't any evidence that the town

had a policy or a view even though

it has the authority what drives this analysis is

did it have such a policy? Well Your Honor my only response to that would be

and this was the basis of our cross appeal

that under 507 B2B that when you're talking about the

statute that kind of accepts out the snow, ice and other weather hazards

that there's a presumption that the town is

adopting and following a weather or inclement weather

policy. So that would be my response to that.

And that was again an alternative basis for why I believe

that this court... But neither was there evidence that there was

in fact such a maintenance policy. You're saying we go on a presumption only

for both the statutory claim

and the discretionary function claim? There should be a presumption?

Well in this particular case there wasn't any

evidence that the Superior Court entertained that there was a particular policy

in that somehow in implementing that policy that the town of Salem

did that in a negligent fashion. Quite to the contrary

it took this particular parcel. It wasn't

on notice of any particular defect. A storm came, trees fell

in here. To just clarify the trespass and nuisance claims are

not alive, are they? The court dismissed those claims.

That has not been appealed. That is correct. That is not before this court.

Thank you. Thank you. Okay. Submitted

Court is adjourned.
