Good morning, folks. Good morning. You may proceed.

This is case 2014-0745, state of New Hampshire versus Samuel J. Coffey.

May it please the Court, Stephanie Hausman on behalf of Samuel Coffey.

I want to make two points about the first issue and a final point on the sufficiency issue.

One, the Court aired an excluding relevant evidence because of its fear that the jury

would think the prior sexual assault had not occurred.

I have to tell you, I was really struggling with the relevance argument.

Would you make it a little clearer? Why did the defense need this?

This evidence showed not only that she had a motive, the prior incident where she had been

hospitalized for alcohol consumption gave her a motive to provide some reason for why

she was again seven months later in the hospital for alcohol consumption.

What you're arguing about is the other assault which the defense did not

challenge as to truthfulness. The other assault showed her knowledge that when she made this

kind of an allegation she would receive positive support from her friends, her family, and the

school. The thing that I have trouble with on this is isn't this sort of the little kid with

the milk and cookies. If Johnny goes into the cookie jar and eats all the cookies, well,

Mommy is likely to be pretty mad at him. But if Johnny goes in and eats all the cookies and then

says, oh, Mommy, I've got a terrible stomach ache, Mommy's likely not to be so mad because she'll

be sympathetic. Isn't that exactly the theory here? And so my question is, why do you have

to use the incident of sexual assault of an earlier sexual assault? Couldn't you have simply asked,

you know, you know, Ms. Witness, that if you were in trouble on this occasion and you know

from getting in trouble on prior occasions, whatever it might be, with Mommy or Daddy or

your friends, that if you can put yourself in a sympathetic position that you also got hurt in

some way, you'll generate sympathy? As the state often argues in these types of cases and did argue

in this case that people aren't likely to make a sexual assault allegation because it's such an

involved process and the prosecutor here argued why would she lie because she'd have to continue

lying to all of the people that she talked to throughout the investigation in the trial.

But the prior sexual assault was relevant to show that at the time she made the charged

allegation, she didn't think that these allegations would result in a prosecution in a trial because

it had not in the prior instance. And the trial court did find that the evidence was relevant,

but excluded it. Well, wait a minute. So you wanted, let me just make sure,

because maybe I was misunderstanding something, you wanted to elicit not only that there had

been a prior sexual assault, but that there hadn't been a prosecution. So that, I mean,

isn't that seems to me that that, I guess I didn't understand that, that you wanted to go that far,

but that, doesn't that suggest, you know, I mean, isn't that even another reason why the court would

was appropriate to leave that out? Because the jury's now left with the inference. Wait a minute.

She made another, she made another claim of sexual assault. It wasn't prosecuted. Hmm,

what does that mean that this, you know, that this one is that this one didn't happen

either? The defense wanted to get in the prior sexual assault in the response that she got as

a result of making that disclosure. And that included that it didn't result in a prosecution.

How is that, how is that something that would, you know, would sort of tell her, would give her

a motive, a motive not to lie here? It directly rebuts the state's argument that you don't make

this kind of a false allegation because it involves, it necessarily involves a thorough

investigation. Assuming we agree with you ultimately, the state argues that even if this is error,

it's harmless. We've got DNA evidence. I understand the defense's position at trial was he didn't

do it. So we've got DNA evidence. They used condoms, the beer cans, the footprints in the

snow and the victims got a BAC three hours later of 1.6. The defense at trial was consent. And so

none of the evidence that the state points to goes. I misunderstood that. Am I wrong on that? I,

my memory is that the defense was, it never happened. Didn't happen at all. Mr. Coffee said it

didn't happen to the police, but the defense at trial was consent. And so none of the state's

evidence that they point to goes to that central conflict in the case. I misunderstood the brief

then. Second, the state charged him with 16 charges and the jury only convicted of five,

two of which Mr. Coffee conceded. So we know the jury had doubts about Ms. McCready's testimony.

And finally, because the state capitalized on the exclusion of this evidence in making that

argument in closing about why would she lie, she has to tell this person and this person and

this person. And this person, the evidence was directly relevant to that argument. I know your

light is on, but I'm actually more interested in the second issue. And that is whether there

was sufficient evidence of anal penetration. The state concedes that under O'Neill, when she

says inside the butt, that doesn't, that doesn't constitute anal penetration. And they concede

that what she said about the anus of the hole was that she tried to. So we have to find

that the nurse's testimony was sufficient. The state is making a circumstantial evidence

argument. They do not cite the standard for sufficiency of circumstantial evidence and they

don't argue that it's evidence excluded the reasonable conclusion consistent with Ms.

McCready's testimony that there was no anal penetration. As I understand it, there was no

testimony from Ms. Abonado that in her opinion, there was anal penetration. The most she says

is that the anus was tender to palpation, correct? That's right. And then they're asking the jury to

make the further inference. They're asking the court to allow to consider that circumstantial

evidence as sufficient. Thank you. Thank you. Good morning and may it please the court. My name

is Sean Locke and I represent the state of New Hampshire. I'll take questions at any time.

Start with the second issue, because frankly, I'm more impressed with the argument on that

one than I am on the first issue. Okay. So with the second issue, the testimony, the victim's

testimony coupled with the testimony and findings of the sexual assault examiner are the two pieces

that work together to make to provide the sufficient evidence for the jury to conclude.

So if we just looked at the victim's testimony under state versus O'Neill, that would be

insufficient. Yes. So we've got what presumably saves this is the nurse's testimony. Correct. Is

that enough? That should be enough. I mean, the nurse testified and the victim testified that

during the sexual assault examination, they both, she experienced pain and tenderness

while the sexual assault examiner was palpating. But I thought that her testimony was the

defendant made the effort, but he was not successful. That was her testimony. And part of, I mean,

I don't want to get too far into trying to read into what the victim meant by the testimony.

But that could have meant that you have a variety of different meanings. It doesn't

necessarily mean that it doesn't necessarily entirely exclude that penetration, albeit even

slight penetration did not occur, which is all that's necessary under the statute. It doesn't

require any sort of anything beyond slight penetration. But you agree that contact is not

enough? Contact would not be enough under the statute. But again, even just the slightest

penetration is enough. And contact alone is unlikely to cause the tenderness that was

experienced later on. But other things can cause the tenderness. Couldn't they? I mean,

they weren't excluded and that wasn't developed through testimony.

Other things could have caused the tenderness. But yeah, but nothing,

the victim, or at least the sexual assault examiners notation and findings were that this,

what she found was consistent with sexual assault. It was also consistent with consensual sex,

but it was consistent with sexual assault. Did she say that? I mean, I didn't see that

in anything that I saw here. It seemed to me, as far as she went, was just that it was

tender to palpation. And if I'm recalling correctly that her testimony may have only

been limited to the signs of vaginal penetration. But I do recall her testifying that

her findings were consistent with both consensual sex and sexual assault.

Was it not clear about what was tender? I mean, not to get overly graphic,

but these cases rise and fall on penetration, however slight. I don't remember either brief

saying that the nurse actually got into what was tender.

I believe there was nothing beyond her description that the area around the victim's

right was tender to palpation. And I don't know, there may have been slightly more specific

statements to that point, but nothing, not a detailed description.

We don't have to undertake a statutory construction here. It seems that everybody agrees

that the statute and O'Neill, I believe it is, set the standard, the framework we're applying,

right? So it's just applying the facts to that. Correct. And apparently the trial court did

struggle with this because am I mixing this up with another case? The trial court immediately

or ruled that there was insufficient evidence and then took his time, went back, looked at testimony

and changed his mind. That is correct. So this is not a slam dunk by any means.

It was definitely a close call, which is what this court resolves best. And certainly, but

the state does believe that the two pieces of evidence coupled together

provide sufficient evidence. And turning now to the first issue just briefly before my time expires,

the trial court properly concluded that or sustainably exercised its discretion when it

excluded the testimony or the cross examination of the victim regarding the prior sexual assault.

It provided two reasons for doing so. The unfair prejudice that would be experienced

by the victim, should this be inquired into? And the great risk of misleading the jury and turning

this into a mini trial about the prior sexual assault and whether or not the allegations are

true versus false. Do I read the record correctly or the briefs correctly that the court

accepted the notion that it was relevant and probative? The court, to a certain extent,

did find that there was some probative value to this evidence, but the state would argue or submit

that the probative value here is very limited, particularly given the fact that when the victim,

I see my light is up, may I briefly finish? The victim, when she previously consumed excessive

amounts of alcohol, she experienced no negative ramifications from her family

or negative social ramifications. So her motive to lie in this second instance

was minimal based on prior experience. And so the probative value was very limited as well.

And with that, yes, the case be submitted. Thank you. Thank you.
