Good morning. So before we begin, two things. The first is that one of this morning's appeals

was continued late yesterday, I think. So we will take the three remaining morning appeals

in order without taking a recess. And one other thing before we begin, the New Hampshire

Supreme Court today wishes to acknowledge that our first case of the day will be the

final oral argument for Attorney Nicholas Court on behalf of the state. If Attorney

Court seems comfortable here at the New Hampshire Supreme Court, there's good

reason. He served as a law clerk to Justice Brock from 1983 to 1984, and he

has since gone on to brief and or argue 177 appeals for the Attorney General's

office. That impressive number does not include all of his 3JX arguments, but just

might qualify him for his own volume of the New Hampshire reports. Attorney

Court's first oral argument concerned the appeal of the Ribblesdale

Incorporated at 128 New Hampshire 370 back in 1986. He ends his career now in

2015 with volume 167. Mr. Court, we thank you for your long-time commitment to making

the very best arguments possible for the state, and my colleagues and I wish you

well in your retirement. Thank you very much. Now we can announce the case.

This is case 2014-0698, State of New Hampshire versus Trevor D. Glodgett.

Attorney Houseman. May it please the Court. Stephanie Houseman on behalf of

Trevor Glodgett Keen. The issue here is whether a person can be convicted both

for burglary charged as entering with the intent to commit theft and receiving

stolen property for retaining the property from the burglary. RSA 635-1

for prohibits convictions for both burglary and the offense intended

during the illegal entry unless that offense is a class A felony which does

not apply here. Robidu says that the second conviction that is prohibited by

the statute is the intended offense charged in the burglary indictment. Here

Mr. Glodgett was charged with burglary for entering with the intent to

commit quote theft and quote. Now I understand that receiving stolen

property is classified in the theft section of the statute, but as a

practical matter when I was a trial judge I always thought of that as quite

different from the theft itself and that would seem to be the crux of the

problem here. Well yes and so one would look at the text of RSA 637-1 which

indicates that an allegation of theft can be proven by any of the variants

of theft contained within that chapter including receiving stolen

property. And this court considered that statute in McNally and considered the

legislative history, specifically the model penal code of that statute. But in

McNally the court only considered one of the two listed purposes or results of

that statute. And there are two purposes of that statute, one beneficial

to the prosecution and one beneficial to the state. As the McNally court

found, one of the purposes of RSA 637-1 is that the state can't bring one

variant of theft charge and then have the defendant defend it by saying I didn't

commit that variant, I committed this other variant. So that makes

prosecution easier and that is the way in which the statute benefits the

state. What would have been the result in your view if the defendant

here after the burglary taking the watch had tossed the watch in the trash can as

he was leaving the house? What result then? I would say that if the court

accepts the state's argument then that can be charged as burglary and

receiving stolen property and he can be convicted twice. The state's argument

here hinges on the purported significance of the possibility that

the evidence here would have shown that the two crimes were committed on

two separate days and in different locations within the state or within

the city of Concord. However, the state doesn't have to prove the date

of the offense. That's not an element and the indictments here didn't

allege and they didn't need to allege the specific location and to

accept the state's argument would allow multiple convictions.

Is there a, I mean, does the transcript of the plea hearing contain an

offer of proof that says, you know, and our offer of proof is that he broke

in and he stole this and he stole this property and that's all. That, you

know, sort of nothing else. I mean, because I think I shared the same

concern Justice Campbell had. Suppose that, we don't know this, but

suppose that there was another, that there was an accomplice and what

happened is after they stole the property, he gave the stolen property to

the accomplice for a while and then the accomplice gave it back to him. I

would assume that would be, that could be two crimes and so I guess what

I'm really asking is, do we know that that could not have been the case

from the record? The offer of proof was that the burglary occurred

on or about, I think it was July 5th and that on July 9th when they

executed a search warrant at Mr. Glodgett's home, the property was at

his home. So we don't really know, I mean, what those other things were and

so I mean, I guess, and this is maybe sort of a part of this is, don't

we have a situation where, you know, this could be two crimes and the

defendant agreed to this? So doesn't he waive, you know, he waived

his right to a trial and he waived his right to proof beyond a

reasonable doubt and all the other things that go in. Didn't he waive

his right to say these are the same crimes? Well, I do want to address

both of the justice's concerns or questions that deal with the concept

of the unit of prosecution. So does the legislature intend that a

person could be convicted for burglary and then for receiving, for still

having the property in the front yard of the burglarized residence? And

this court looks to legislative history to determine the legislature's

intended unit of prosecution. And here, that legislative history

through the model penal code makes clear that there is a preference

against cumulation of such offenses, both in the burglary and in the

theft chapter sections of the model penal code in those

commentaries. That can't be waived? The answer to the next

question is the issue of waiver. So if the legislature did not

intend such smaller, discrete units of prosecution, then it

would be an illegal conviction and an illegal sentence which can't

be waived, even if the defendant agreed to the sentence as part of a

plea agreement. But I would also say that the issue of waiver was

not argued or raised by the state, either below or on appeal.

Right, but I guess what I mean, what I'm wondering is, I would

agree with you that if the record would permit only one

conclusion, that is that the possession they were talking

about was the same possession that resulted from the

burglary. I would tend, especially if there's no argument on

waiver, I would tend to agree with you. But what I'm really

saying is how do we know where the indictment for the receiving

says it happened on another day at the person's home, and there's

nothing in the record that suggests that he had it in his

possession all the time. Wouldn't we have to sort of make

up or sort of assume that that must be true?

I think it's safe to say the state would have made that argument

had the facts supported a conclusion that this was a

separate possession four days later that was distinct from the

possession inherent in the burglary.

Should it matter to us that this is four days later in a

different location? What if it were three years later in

another country? Doesn't matter then either?

Well, in terms of the way these two charges were

indicted, again, it does have different dates on the two

indictments, but the state doesn't have to prove the dates.

So he could have been convicted for possessing or retaining the

property in the front yard of the burglarized residence. And

the locations charged are the same.

Is there any dispute that it wasn't that he in fact took

the gold watch or the watch during the burglary? I mean, he

was convicted, there was no dispute about that.

That's right. There was no dispute that that watch was

the watch from the burglary.

And so the second charge was retaining, not receiving,

right, because it's clear that under our law that he can't be

convicted of the burglary and the actual taking of the gold

watch, right? Under our law, I can't be convicted of both of

those crimes. Yes.

So the crime he was convicted of was retaining it. Yes.

So it's an interesting question as to if he can't get

convicted of burglary and taking the watch, how quickly

does he have to dispose of the watch before he can legally be

charged with retaining the watch? Right. And this concept that

a person can be convicted both of theft and the variant of

receiving stolen property that only charges retaining comes

from McNally. And the McNally court failed to consider all

of the relevant portions of the receiving of the model penal

code upon which our statutes are based. And the relevant

portions indicate, as I had said earlier, there are two

purposes of 637-1. One is favorable to the prosecution,

but one is favorable to the defense, that a defendant cannot

be convicted both for theft of an item and retaining,

receiving, disposing of it later as a receiving stolen

property charge.

Is it clear that retention is a subset of the receiving

offenses?

The crime is called receiving stolen property and a defendant

can commit it by receiving, retaining, or disposing of the

property. But a thief necessarily receives the

property. And disposing of it. So let me just follow up on

that. So if he can be charged with disposing of it, then I'm

having difficulty with our law that says you can't be charged

both with burglary and the theft. Yes. But if he was guilty

of the burglary, took the watch, and then threw it in the

trash almost instantaneously, he can still be charged with

disposing according to the state's theory. Yes. Yes. So what

does that do to our law that says you can't be charged

with burglary and the underlying offense? I think

again, it goes down, goes to a unit of prosecution question,

which is a statutory interpretation question. And

legislative history through the model penal code acknowledges

that a thief necessarily receives property, and also

necessarily retains it for some amount of time after the

theft, either or two.

Would we have to overrule McNally, though? And if so,

you know, then is there, I don't think you did a

start decisis analysis.

No, I did not. I think that McNally can be limited to the

situation where the defendant was convicted of larceny in a

different state and then is charged in New Hampshire with

receiving stolen property. Because the primary basis of the

McNally holding is the unique interest that New Hampshire has

in not allowing people to use it as a haven for their stolen

goods from other places.

Similarly,

what about going across town lines then? What about you have

mass the Massachusetts border in the way in McNally? But what if

you you committed the burglary and theft in Salem, but then

retained and or disposed of the property in Exeter? It's the

same rationale, isn't it?

I think then the court would look solely to the dual

purposes between behind RSA 637 one, which is that the

defendant can't defend by I committed a different variant

and also the state can't charge with to under under that

chapter can't convict for both of those in Salem and Exeter.

It's the same state interest, isn't it?

It is the same state interest. Yes.

I think a burglar necessarily enters with an intent to take

property into possession, but also has the intent that

they retain that property as they leave the building. In

most instances, the primary intent is going to be the

keeping or retention of the property when they leave. But

the state doesn't have to parse these distinctions when they

charge a burglary because RSA 637 one indicates that they can

charge a burglary solely as intent to commit theft. And that

expedient, however, then prevents a second conviction

for receiving stolen property. We're asking this court to

vacate the court's order imposing a portion of Mr.

Glodgett's sentence on the receiving charge. Thank you.

Thank you. Mr. Court.

Please the court, Nicholas Court for the state. I'll take

questions anytime. As I argued in my brief, the key word in

the burglary statute is there in the statute says that

defendant cannot be convicted and sentenced both for burglarizing

a house and for the crime that he intended to commit

therein, which in this case was theft by unauthorized

taking. The fact that he may also have intended to commit the

crime of retaining stolen property is simply not germane to

the analysis. This case is directly controlled by McNally

and Robodeau. This court has made it clear that if a burglar

intends to commit more than one theft crime, when he enters

a home illegally, he can be prosecuted and sentenced both

for burglary and for any crime except the one referenced in the

burglary indictment, which is you say in your brief that he

committed the burglary in the victim's home, and then he

committed the receiving or retaining stolen property in

his home. And you say that makes all the difference.

Query, what if he had taken the watch, he burglarized the

home, took the watch and said, I don't want this for

whatever reason and tosses it in the trash can in the

victim's home. Different analysis?

I'm not sure it's all that different, really, because

because your argument in your brief really centers on the two

locations. So I'm wondering about if we follow your

argument to its logical conclusion, then that suggests to

me if he stole the watch, intended to steal it for whatever

reason changed his mind, tosses it in the trash in the home of

the victim. Does that change it? Does that change the analysis?

I'm not sure it does. I just think that the fact that the

locations are different simply clarifies the analysis

because it makes it very clear that there are two different

crimes. You know, the case that's most directly on point

here is the Pennsylvania case that I cited, the Downs case.

In that case, it happened that the receiving, they called it

stolen property, took place in a different county because he was

actually leaving the scene of the burglary and was in a

different county when they stopped his car and found the

stolen items in it. But there's no significant difference

between that case and this one, even though the two locations

are in the same city.

What is the, I guess the thing I don't understand is, is this

does that mean that you could put burglary aside if somebody if

somebody if somebody steals, you know, steal something steals

a watch from your pocket. And that happens today. They keep

the watch tomorrow. Can you charge him with, you know, with

receiving or retention of stolen property tomorrow? And they

keep it the next day. And the next day, I mean, his eat is, I

was under the impression, and I think that there's a sixth

circuit case on this dealing with, with, with that kind of

scenario with a felon in possession of a gun. And I

think it's, it's kind of become a leading case on this

that says, it's one possession, you can't sort of

divide it up. And so if that's true, why, why wouldn't that

same analysis apply here?

You can't leave the burglary aside because the key here is

the burglary statute.

The crime in burglary is not stealing. It's entering the

house with the intent to steal or to do any other crime.

What the statute says is that you can't prosecute and convict

a sentence, both for that crime and the intended crime.

So you, you argued in your brief that the receiving the

retention was not the, to use your words, sole crime

intended by the defendant when he entered the home. But I'm

thinking of a case where let's say a different defendant

says, I know, I know that this victim has a very valuable

watch. And I'm going to burglarize with the intent to

take only that watch. Does that make a difference?

No. No, that doesn't make a difference because he intends

to steal the watch. But if he also intends to retain it,

that's another crime. And this seems like a metaphysical

difference that, that I'm having trouble with figuring out

whether it controls here. If I, if I burglarize, because I

want to take a watch, how is that different than my

wanting the watch to keep the watch or keep it to sell it

or whatever? I mean, you made the point to us in your

brief that the statute is effectively allows two crimes

because you said, and I made a note of it, that the receiving

was not the sole crime intended by the defendant.

That's language taken straight out of Roboto.

Understood. Understood. So, so you say in this case, there

was evidence that he intended to steal other things other

than the watch. But I'm thinking about a hypothetical

about, well, what if somebody intends only to steal the

particular item for which he's later charged of receiving

and retaining? Does that does, does that make sense to punish

for both? I wasn't talking about his intent to steal

other items. I was talking about his intent to retain

the watch in addition to stealing the watch. I see.

I misunderstood apparently your brief then. Okay. So, so when

you commit a burglary, you, you have an intent to commit

the burglary. And you also have a separate intent to keep the

fruits of the burglary.

It's not a question of intent to commit the burglary. It's a

question of whether the burglary, which is the entry

into the house, includes an intent to do something else

illegal, in this case, to steal.

But isn't, isn't the problem that unless, I mean, unless the

person, under that theory, unless the person, you know, after

they commit the burglary calls the police and turns the

watch over, if they do anything else, they've either retained

it or disposed. I mean, what else can they do besides

retain it or dispose of it? Or, you know, I mean, what else

would they, what else would they do that would not generate

another crime, except maybe call the police and say, listen, I

just stole this watch.

They can fail to steal the watch in the first place. You can

be prosecuted for burglary. If you enter a house with intent

to steal, and it turns out the object isn't there.

Right. But that, but that, but that doesn't read the

portion of the statute that says you, you know, that the, the

object that is, that is the intent of the burglary can't be

prosecuted separately.

Oh, no, I don't think so.

The statute, but the statute says a person may not be

convicted, both for burglary and the offense, which it was

his purpose to commit.

So

But in Robidow, this court said it's entirely possible that

he could intend to commit more than one. And

clearly if

Well, how would you prove that at trial? I intended to

burglarize the home and take silverware. But while I was in

there, I saw a watch and I stole that. So he, so the

silverware retention crime can't be prosecuted separately,

but the gold watch, the watch crime can be. I don't

understand how the state or the defense would present a case at

trial for such a fine distinction.

Well, I doubt that they would for a distinction like that.

But it's a lot easier for a case like this.

I'm sorry.

And I was going to ask is do we know, I sort of have the

same question for you that had for your opponent. Do we

know that the evidence would not that the circumstances that

occurred here were not that the that the defendant was

actually out of possession of the watch for some of the

stolen item for some period of time between the time of the

burglary and the time of the

No, no, there was no evidence as to

What happened to the watch between the time it disappeared

from the house and the time it was I guess the thing I mean, I

guess the thing that I'm the troubles me about this is, let's

suppose that the state doesn't didn't have that evidence. They

didn't know either, you know, at the time of this plea, they

didn't know either what happened to it. But they believed

that these were two crimes.

And, and so they made their offer of proof as to what the

as to what the evidence was and the defendant knows that

actually I didn't have possession of it for that whole

period of time. And so it's entirely, you know, there are,

even under the defendant's theory, there are two crimes. And

so pleads guilty. I mean, I guess I'm not, it's not clear to me

why he should now why we should now have to kind of say,

assume that the that the facts were only that that that

there was no break in possession. I'm not quite sure

why we why we should make that assumption where the

defendant has pled guilty to two offenses.

Well, I think your question points to one of the reasons why

this rule should apply. Sometimes the state can't prove

that a particular defendant was the one who actually stole

this particular item, for instance, if he's committing

the burglary in conjunction with somebody else. And the

other person is the one who actually took the watch out of

the house, but then gave it to him. Afterward, you can still

charge him with burglary. But you can also charge him with

possession or retaining possession of the watch later.

And it's even there has to be proof of that. Sure. But it's

even possible theoretically, that somebody a very ingenious

defendant could present evidence that he didn't intend to

steal anything. He was just helping this other guy go in the

house. And he didn't know that the guy intended to steal

something. But if the watch ends up with him, he can be

charged. So in the end, following up on Justice Lynn's

questions to you, if because this is based on a plea, the

the burden kind of shifts. In other words, I think what

you're saying is because this is a plea and not a trial.

It it makes sense to find that both sentences were legal,

because this was within the defendant's knowledge as to what

his participation was. And he chose to plead to both crimes.

And because it's possible, then we can't conclude that there

was an illegal sentence. That's essentially what you're

saying. This was this is different than it would be if

there were a trial.

I'm not sure if there's a really big difference. But I do think

that those facts do support the idea that this should be

considered two crimes, simply because there may be in either

this case or some future case, a difficulty in proving intent

to steal, but not improving retention of the stolen

property.

And should it should it matter to us the location and the

length of time between burglary and being picked up and

charged with possession?

I don't think it matters a great deal. I think it just

points up the distinction that this occurred four days

later and in a different place. That's nothing further.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Council may come forward in Brentwood distribution versus
