This is case 2014-03-06, Shepherd's Hill Homeowners Association, Inc. versus Shepherd's Hill Development Company, LLC.

Mr. Ryan?

May it please the Court? I'm Attorney John Ryan, and I represent the appellate in this case.

The central issue in this case is whether the plaintiff, I'm sorry, whether my client, the developer, and the declarant legally converted the remaining convertible land in this condominium.

Prior to February 25, 2013, on February 22, 2013, the plaintiff recorded the 24th Amendment to the Declaration, along with a site plan entitled Shepherd's Hill Condominium Site and Floor Plan for land units 1, 2, and 3.

The amendment declared that the remaining convertible land become three land units.

But the trial court basically said, come on now, we all know that in the reality of condominium world, a unit is some place where people live, not just an empty space of land.

How do you answer that?

Because land units, Your Honor, in this state have been recognized as legal units.

For even condominiums?

Within a condominium.

But when you say have been recognized by who?

Well, they've been recognized by all the convincing bar.

They were recognized by the Attorney General's office.

They've been in use for many, many years.

I've done many of them.

But aren't these particular ones contrary to the initial declaration?

Pardon?

Aren't these contrary to the initial declaration?

No, they're not.

Why aren't they legal?

Let me get to that.

Take your time.

All right.

What is a land unit?

The condominium statute 356B does not require a building to exist in order to have a condominium.

Land unit condominiums, as I said before, have been recognized and I've provided you with a couple of examples of same in my appendix.

Well, I'm looking at the appendix and you've provided us with vineyards at Stratum and land area units.

There are plenty of them identified there.

You're holding that out as an example of what you're talking about.

That's an example.

There's a second one, too.

Right.

And they're pretty small parcels that arguably could ultimately bear one unit there in the same general dimension as a condominium unit in that development.

The problem I have is these land units that your client has separated out are much larger than any reasonable argument could be made that their units that will be developed as one condominium or one dwelling unit.

There are going to be dozens or hundreds of them.

So that's, to me, that seems to be the departure that's most troublesome here.

And I bothered the trial court, too.

Let me try to answer that, your honor.

First of all, a land unit comes within the definition of unit under the statute.

If it is designed and intended for individual ownership and use.

But isn't that a problem right there?

You are not proposing with these three land units to develop three condominiums.

No.

You are proposing to develop 100 or more than 100.

So these are not designed for a unit.

They're designed for multiple units.

Yes.

If this is a legal land unit, if each of these are legal land units, the 24th Amendment goes on to provide for the ultimate use of the land units as individual physical units.

Let's assume we agree with you that there is such a thing as a valid land unit.

Doesn't that recognition conflict with the timing, the deadlines here?

As I understand it, the absolute deadline here was February of 2013.

That was the end of the second extension.

So if we said, well, okay, we recognize a land unit, does that not open the deadline?

Does it create an open-endedness?

It vitiates the deadline.

In other words, well, when are the land units going to be further developed this year, next year, 25 years from now, ever?

Well, let me answer that to a respect, your honor.

The statute does not require that any unit that was converted under the convertible land provisions be constructed within any given period of time.

And when you come to what happened in this condominium, I maintain that it is entirely consistent with the declaration.

At the time of the declaration and as of the recording of these 23 prior amendments, none of the units actually existed at that time.

That occurred later.

Page 5 of the Association's Appendix contains a copy of the 23rd Amendment, which was the latest one.

It says in part that all such sites depicted within the condominium land are illustrative only and do not constitute submission of any unit site so depicted to the condominium.

And what happened physically, as well as procedurally in this condominium, as each of these got recorded, these 23 amendments, the development of those units occurred later on.

The association has no problem with that.

So there was a recognition going from the beginning throughout this condominium that units would be declared and built later on.

We declared these as land units.

But isn't the problem, I mean, it seems to me that you might have an argument if what happened here was three days before the 10-year thing ran.

You actually said, okay, not that we're creating three land units, but we're creating 100 or whatever we are.

We're creating 100 units in the remaining convertible land, and here's what each of them is going to look like.

Then arguably, there's nothing further to be done in terms of, except building.

But here, you've got to do more.

You've got to make some further filings to change those three big land units into 24 or 100 condominiums.

Let me answer that directly because the statute covers that.

You cannot declare a physical unit unless it physically exists.

You can't put on record an amendment to a declaration that declares units that don't exist.

Well, wait a minute. I thought you just said that you could do that.

I'm just telling you what the history of this condominium was.

By using the land unit concept, you have a legal land unit.

But let me just ask you this. Let's go back to the very beginning.

Are you saying that when the first, this condominium complex was first built,

at the time that there was a declaration of the first units, whatever those were,

that before that declaration was filed, the units were already all built?

No, they weren't all built.

All right, so then I guess I don't understand.

If you don't have to have them built, why isn't what I said before, why doesn't that apply?

Well, the fact that they weren't built throughout this declared but not built

is a historical fact with respect to this condominium.

The reason I used the land unit concept was that's the only way you can achieve a legal condominium

by using the land unit approach.

No, that's what I'm saying.

Why if it was all right to make an original declaration?

I'm not saying it was all right. I'm just telling you that's what happened.

But isn't your position here that if put aside the bricks and mortar,

say that no actual building was ever put on here,

your position is, as I understand it,

if you had had units, land units of one-third of an acre,

you could have put them all over this parcel

and the fact that nothing was being built is not an issue.

It's not material.

That's right. You would still have a legal condominium.

And isn't that exactly the scenario that Justice Lin was positing,

that he's saying what would make it different here is instead of creating this

at the eve of the deadline, a 10 or 50-acre unit or whatever it is,

that you could do that exactly again,

have these 100 units that are one-third of an acre each.

And you would say that those would be fine, right?

If you parse the 24th Amendment, Your Honor,

you will see a progression, the declaration of the three land units.

And then what flows from that are provisions of the statute

which allow for subdivision and further development.

And that's all in the 24th Amendment.

So at the end of the day, you wind up on your feet

with legal land units subdividable and convertible into buildings.

The way I look at the association's brief,

the association argues to us that the deadline was February 25, 2013

to build or begin to build.

So when I read that statement,

it occurred to me that maybe what is permissible

under the law and these declarations is

that you could have by amendment declared the remaining 126 small pieces of land

and as long as you took a shovel full of dirt out of one of them,

you had begun the project.

Am I looking at this wrong?

I don't think that's the position of the association at all.

I guess the association about that

because that's what I was wondering when I read its brief.

But is that what you mean by land units?

That may make sense.

What's important here is the conversion statute

which says once you have convertible land,

here's how you get to convertible land

and to get to the point of no convertible land.

That is you do nothing or you declare units.

What you've done is declare that the subdividable three units,

land units, that will carry us forward through the building process.

Now the trial court said it is clear that the amendment,

that the units created by the amendment are not intended

for individual ownership and use.

Do you disagree with that?

Well there could be, I suppose,

but what the 24th amendment projects is the use

of those land unit areas

for further subdivision and ultimate development

consistent with how the condominium was set up

and progressed throughout time.

So do you agree that it would require additional action

or subdivision in order to make these

for individual ownership or use?

Yes, and that's also provided in the 24th amendment.

But the 24th amendment can't amend the statute.

But the statute authorizes land units.

If you are convinced that we have created legal land units,

that's all I'm asking for because that gives me,

takes me out of the time period that I have to do something in.

I maintain I've created three legal land units.

I also maintain that I've created a system

that allows those land units to be developed.

And there is no time period that binds you once you...

In the statute says anything about a time period.

Or the original declaration?

Nothing's not on the declaration either.

Where am I getting you get to do it to have two amendments?

Where am I getting that from?

Getting what from?

I've made notes here that you're allowed to amend twice

to give a 10-year time period to develop convertible land.

Where am I getting that from?

That simply extends the time period when you have to do something

to go from convertible land to units.

Isn't that what we're talking about?

In your view, what does the 10-year time period relate to?

Before the end of that time period,

you have to do something in order to protect your rights.

I maintain that the something that we did,

consistent with New Hampshire practice,

is to create land units that are legal

and are subdividable and developable later on.

Nothing in the statute and nothing in the declaration prohibits that.

Well, how would this...

If what you did is correct,

why wouldn't it just be alright for you to say

three days before the 10-year thing?

You know, we have this 10-year limit

that's running two days from now.

We're going to build more condominium units on the remaining land.

And that would be alright, too.

Why wouldn't it be alright?

Well, because if at the end of that 10-year period,

you haven't built all of the units you want to build,

then you would not be able to build those.

Okay, but under what I was just asking you about,

you haven't done that.

But under what I was just asking you,

you haven't built all the units.

We don't need to if we take advantage of the land-use concept,

of the land-unit concept

and are able to defer that

because we've created a legal unit.

All that's required under the conversion statute

is we create a legal unit,

and we've done that.

Thank you.

Thank you.

May it please the court.

My name is Edmund Allhock.

I am counsel for the Shepherd Hill Homeowners Association.

I think where I'm going to start is with the 24th Amendment,

I think the overall overarching problem with it

is I think it vitiates two provisions of the New Hampshire Condominium Act.

It's the time limit, which actually is a five-year time limit

which can be extended successively.

And interestingly in this case,

when the condominium was first created by the developer in 2003,

on day two of the condominium,

the developer itself recorded a five-year extension,

which isn't at issue here.

I think it's short practice

because the developer wound up with a ten-year time limit

for conversion when the statute provides for a five-year.

Section 54 of the New Hampshire Condominium Act

allows for this extension,

this five-year extension

by a vote of two-thirds of the unit owners

if the timeline has not yet expired

and then four-fifths of the unit owners

if it actually has expired.

So I guess a revival.

But you aren't arguing that the extension was invalid, are you?

The initial extension?

No, I am not.

I am not.

But what the 24th Amendment does

is in addition to saying that the developer gets

to create rights into perpetuity

beyond the five years, beyond the ten years,

it also vitiates that right of the homeowners

to actually vote on whether or not there's an extension.

I would argue there's a reason in the statute

for the time limit,

and that time limit is for conversion,

creation of units or limited common area

on convertible land,

and then if anything goes out beyond that time limit,

there's a reason that the legislature has the unit owners

have the ability to vote on that.

And if this 24th Amendment is allowed,

we're creating a roadmap to throw away the time limit.

You can just do this in perpetuity.

I appreciate that argument,

but I made a note of a statement you made in your brief

where you say the deadline was February 25, 2013

to build or begin to build.

So let's just hypothetically say that what happened here,

the developer began to build one condominium.

Does that do it?

No, Your Honor.

I do realize the statement in my brief.

I took it, I believe verbatim,

from the trial court's decision.

I think what the trial court was envisioning.

And if we get into the 24th Amendment

and you see what the scheme is,

the 24th Amendment says you've got

three land-only unit condominiums.

Now I don't think our statute contemplates land only.

I'll get into that one.

Do you agree that there are other circumstances in New Hampshire

where practitioners apparently create land unit?

Apparently there are a couple of examples

where it's been done.

Would this be in a situation where, for example,

you have detached units instead of apartment styles?

Possibly, or it could be a campground condominium.

But I don't know that there is no court case

that has blessed these, and I don't think it's possible.

Can I get back to my original question?

Yes, Your Honor.

Do you regard that February 25th, 2013 as a deadline

by which all of the remaining 126 units had to be built?

Yes.

Because you don't say that in your brief.

What I did was I copied the trial judges wording,

and I think I know where she was going.

Because if you look at the 24th Amendment,

the developer creates three land-only units.

Then he gives himself the right by using another portion

of the statute called convertible space.

And convertible space pursuant to that provision

is how they are going to create the 126 units.

Convertible space under the statute

is defined as a portion of a structure,

a portion of a structure within the condominium

which may be converted into units,

common area, or limited common area.

So the plan here was I'm going to call these land-only units

and then I'm also going to define those land-only units

as convertible space.

And there's no time limit on convertible space.

So I think what the trial judge was saying,

when she was saying at least having built something,

and I see this as a possibility but maybe

for future argument on some other case,

I could envision a scenario where a developer

before the 10 years or 5 years constructs a shell,

like this, and then says I label all of the space

in there convertible space.

And then I'm going to have the ability

to construct 18 units within that larger physical shell.

Well, what about, instead of doing that,

what happened here was that the developer

before the 10 years converted,

filed the documents to convert the remaining convertible land

into 100 units.

And now it hadn't started building,

but said specifically, I'm building 100 units

and here's what each one of them are going to look like.

Would that be enough?

You mean 100 campsites, if you will,

or 100 land-only units?

No, no, no.

What I'm saying is in other words,

suppose that before the 10 years,

the developer filed the paperwork to say,

I'm now declaring that in this area

here are going to be the 100 units

that are going to fit in there,

and this is what the plan is going to look like.

And he did all of that.

The only thing he didn't do was to actually start construction.

I think that's a problem,

because I think the units have to be substantially completed.

Well, but here's the problem I have with that.

If you interpret it that way,

why should it be any different?

Because the definition of unit isn't any different.

Why should it be any different with the original declaration?

If you can make an original declaration of condominium

before they're actually constructed,

which I think you can,

then why should it make any difference for the extent?

I think whenever somebody creates a condominium,

there has to be a physical unit in existence.

So this is a phase condominium,

and when it was initially created, there were 100 units.

And I think under the convertible land provisions

or a phase condominium,

you give yourself the right to construct additional units

within, I guess, the five or ten-year period.

What I'm asking you is if you're building a condominium

and you're going to make your first declaration,

are you saying you can only make the first declaration

after all the condominiums are built?

No, I'm saying there has to be at least two units

physically constructed when you create a condominium.

Is there any case law to support that,

or anything you know to support that?

No, but not in New Hampshire, sadly.

But I don't think you can have a condominium without a unit.

And my reading of definition,

I think the trial court's reading of definition of a unit

is something that can be individually owned and used.

Can I just have a clarification from you then

to understand your position?

Do you say that by that ten-year period,

February 2013,

every single one of the 126 units had to have been built.

That is your position.

In order for them to have legal existence, yes.

Okay.

Now, obviously the declaration recognizes

the developers under no obligation to construct.

Oh, I understand it, and if he doesn't,

you say they drop off the end and too bad.

That's correct.

So if he only gets to build 50 of them,

but you say that two-year period is the period

we look at the project,

and if he has not, the developer has not built out

those 126 potential units,

then legally the only units in existence

are the ones that have in fact been built out

by that deadline.

That's your position.

I would say built out and recognized

by an amendment to the declaration.

So what they have to be is they have to be substantially

completed, and then the developer,

as they did with 23 prior amendments,

has to create an amendment to the declaration,

phasing them into the condominium,

giving them a percentage of ownership,

and recognizing them as actual units

that somebody can live in.

So if we were to agree with your position here,

what happens to these three parcels?

Do they revert to the association?

They always were part of the association.

When by definition under the statute,

convertible land is by definition common area.

Okay, so this would become additional common area

for the association?

It's always been.

The only thing that's being terminated, Your Honor,

is the declarant's right to enter it and build on it.

So your opponent says this would be very unfair

because the developer invested in the roads

and the infrastructure and all of that,

and the association now gets this common area,

and if the group decides they can build it out

and they get the financial advantage

of already having the infrastructure in place,

he argues this would be unfair.

Well, what I would say to the developer is

this was his choice.

He did not have to create a convertible land condominium.

He could have done an expandable condominium

where the land stays outside of the condominium,

he builds on it, and then he adds it in.

He could have actually, and there is language

in his declaration, reserve the right to withdraw the land

right before the expiration of the time limit,

but they didn't do that properly.

They call it convertible withdrawable,

but under the statute, you have to state the time limit

by which you are going to withdraw it.

They didn't do that, so they couldn't exercise that option.

Unfortunately, and the developer never promised

to finish the project at all.

In fact, if you look at the public offering statement,

you look at the declaration, it says,

we will create up to but not be obligated

to create 400 units.

And interestingly, that 400 unit number sticks with me

because when you're talking about this land-only concept,

they create three land-only units,

and then the right to create 126 additional units

within those land-only units,

which brings your number to 403,

which is beyond the maximum permitted.

Unless what the argument is,

is that once you create the convertible space units

in the land units, that the land units somehow disappear,

which to me would just be further evidence

that this is not a proper construct.

That this construct, at least in this instance,

should not be allowed.

Now, I know in the appendix items

that your honor has referenced,

in each of those cases,

the land-only units were referred

as existing from the outset.

The original declaration say,

we are creating land units.

These are land units in the two examples.

Here, and again, the statute also requires,

I believe it's section 18,

requires the declaration to state

if you have convertible land

what those units are going to look like

once you exercise your convertible rights.

So your bottom-line position is

you don't challenge that it is possible

to create land-only units,

but you say,

given the terms of the original declaration in this case,

that isn't valid.

Absolutely.

I could argue that our statute

doesn't contemplate land-only units

for all the reasons I've articulated,

but I think in this case,

even if it does,

they shouldn't be allowed to do it

because the statute says

you have to identify

what these are going to look like.

Are they going to be architecturally similar?

And in fact, the declaration says,

yes, they're going to be architecturally similar.

Does the statute talk about it being architecturally similar?

The statute says

that you have to say,

are they going to be architecturally similar,

and if not, what are they going to look like?

Or what are they going to be?

Here, they took the option,

and I believe that section...

I believe that's section 18, your honor.

Here, they took the option

of doing architecturally...

I'm sorry, it's section...

it's section 16.

16...

16-2-D.

A statement of the extent to which any structure

erected on any convertible land

will be compatible with the structures

on other portions of the submitted land

in terms of quality, of construction,

materials to be used in architectural style.

And here, the declaration says

they're going to be substantially identical.

And I would argue that three land-only units

are not substantially identical

to 174 townhomes and duplexes

that had been constructed in the preceding ten years.

Now, interestingly, I think also

the developer knew of these timelines.

The developer knew of the initial five-year timeline,

which is why they went out and extended it

on day two to get the ten years.

So, your honor says it's unfair.

They got ten years.

Not my argument, his argument.

I'm sorry, but most developers get five years

they got ten years

right out of the gate.

And they created this structure

that arguably allows them

to even go beyond that

into perpetuity that, quite frankly,

conflicts with their own language

in their own declaration.

Your argument time is up.

I'm sorry. Finish your sentence.

I just wanted to point out that in 2011

they asked for the five-year extension

and that's what actually fomented

the land-only unit construct.

Thank you. Thank you.

No, you didn't reserve any time.

You're done. Case submitted.

Thank you.
