This is case 2014-0793, Robert C. Michele et al. versus Joseph Bremner et al.

Welcome back.

Thank you. It's been five months. Good afternoon, Your Honor.

If I may please the Court. I'm Mark Johnson. I represent Linder and Joseph Bremner in this action.

This is actually, as of course, aware of the third case that's made it up to this Court over the season between these parties.

With a close permission, I do have a bit of a chalk.

That's Exhibit 22, which is found on page 32 of the appendix, just to give you an idea of what we're talking about in terms of the land.

What's in green is the easement.

The easement is an easement on Gilmore Pond.

The Bremner's property is right over here on the other side of the road.

And the Michaels own this property up here, and their house is up in that area over there.

That gives you an idea of what we're talking about in terms of the easement right along the pond.

May I just ask you just an overarching question first.

The easement language in this case is very broad. No question about it.

It says, the defendants have exclusive use of said parcel of sure frontage for whatever purposes they may desire.

Your opponent tells us notwithstanding this general language, it does not grant fee ownership rights in the easement.

So it seems to me there's a tension here between fee ownership rights and the rights granted under this very broadly stated easement.

What do we do with that? Because it strikes me that your clients are looking for fee ownership rights.

We recognize that this property is owned by the Michaels.

The Michaels also recognize that we have this easement.

And in fact, on that exhibit in the upper right corner, and this was a plan prepared for the Michaels,

is the language that the Michaels own the land subject to an exclusive easement to the Bremlins.

We have that right. The Michaels own the property, but they own it.

They don't have all their incidents, if you look at it as a pile of sticks.

If you have all the sticks, then you get to do whatever you want with it.

They'd given up when they bought the property, and they knew they bought the property,

and they testified at trial that they had affected their purchase price.

They gave away certain of the sticks, and they gave it to the Bremlins.

And the Bremlins have a right to exclusive use of the easement for whatever purposes they may desire.

Can your clients keep the other, can they say you can't, to your opponent, you can't go on the property?

They may not be able to say you never can go on the property, but clearly the Michaels

can never do anything that interferes with the Bremlins' exclusive use of the property.

Now, this easement is actually very similar to an easement in the Hertz case.

And in the Hertz case, it was an easement which gave property the right to use property

of another at all times for all purposes.

But we've, but even in such broadly stated easements as yours appears to be, we have said

there is a test of reasonable use of the easement.

And I would suggest that the reasonable use of the easement is, in some ways, came up

in the looser, I think it's the looser case.

And in that case, this thought was faced with a utility company that wanted to put

in additional underground lines.

And this court held that the easement was broad enough that they could put in additional

underground lines, but did, but did state in that case that you look at reasonableness

and it would be unreasonable if the underground lines caused damage to the health.

If it, you know, gave off, if it gave off something that would affect the health

and welfare of the holder of the fees.

How should it affect our analysis here that this isn't a access easement,

but rather a broader easement?

It's not just access to the lake.

Now, that's great, but this easement, if you take a step back and say that you have

the exclusive use of a parcel for shoreline frontage for whatever purposes.

So you're right up against the water and that's the easement that was granted.

Can you put a bench to look at the water?

Can you plant some flowers?

Can you store some personal property as you're using the water?

I would say that that is very minimal impact on an easement area.

If you have a right, and I would suggest that those rights are much less intrusive

as the rights in our city, which was a right to pass and repass

and was held that you could fill in wetlands, you could change the topography

of the land and you could pave roads.

I mean, here, if you keep in mind that the easement holder, being the Bremners,

have the right to make improvements reasonably necessary to enjoy the easement

and that's what this Court stated in Bremner too.

Could you expand on the facts a little bit?

What did your clients precisely want to do?

Put a concrete bench in that would be there all year

or one of these little portable numbers?

They wanted to put, like, a park bench on the ground,

not sitting on the ground, a park bench.

A park bench meaning made of very heavy duty material?

A park bench made of some metal and some wood.

I mean, to be able to look at the water.

But what I'm saying is it's not a bench they take in when it starts to rain.

Ideally, they would like to have it there for the season

and then they would take it back.

They wanted to plant some flowers and they wanted to store

some equipment that they would use in conjunction with the use of the water.

Which such as?

I mean, such as some life vests,

some equipment that might go on to a boat that's docked there.

The idea would be they would be there for the season?

They might be there for the season.

It might be a box where you put some items in.

Now, what's interesting is when I asked Mrs. Michaels

whether or not de Bremne's use of the easement is any different

than the way they use the shoreline land,

she indicated that it wasn't.

And the trial testimony was that these are items that are all around the lake.

But isn't there a problem?

I mean, I understand that the language here is exclusive use of the easement.

But all of the cases that I think you've cited in your brief,

including the one about the utility lines.

It seems to me that in all of those cases,

and maybe this is really inherent in the word easement,

doesn't the word easement, when you sort of think about that,

it implies not a possessory interest,

but an interest in using the land to get somewhere else.

I mean, isn't that kind of inherent in the word easement?

Why else would you grant an easement if it wasn't to get somewhere else,

in this case, to the water?

Well, no, I would disagree, Your Honor.

Easements are used for all different purposes.

Well, give me an example of one that's not used with an ultimate premise,

even the utility lines.

It's to get the power to wherever it's going, isn't it?

The easement is a right to use land of another.

You may have scenic easements,

which prevents somebody from interfering with a view of property.

You may have an easement along the beach or along water

to be able to use the beach and use the water,

which is what you have here.

I mean, you may have a driveway.

I mean, maybe I guess I'd want to think a little more about the scenic easement,

but even the example you give of the beach,

the purpose of the easement is to get to something else, the beach, isn't it?

I mean, the water.

No, I would disagree.

I would say that the purpose of an easement

is to utilize the land of another for purposes that are consistent.

And again, you look at the location of it,

which is right along the water.

You look at the length of it.

This is about 2300 square feet.

It does get to the water,

but it's an easement to use the property of another,

in this case, for whatever you want to do.

It doesn't say that it's a right to use the property

to get from point A to point B.

And the problem with the court's analysis below

is that the reasons they found

why the easement was not reasonable

went along the lines of,

well, the brenders could put a bench on their own property.

I would suggest that that doesn't come into an analysis

as to whether or not what rights they have

to utilize this particular easement.

Or that an easement,

you don't have a right to make any changes to an easement.

And I would suggest that if you have an easement,

you have a right to do what you need to do to utilize it.

But would you suppose that your opponent said,

their client said, listen, we want to put a bench

right where your client is putting the bench.

Would you say that they could not do that?

And I'd suggest that under the terms of the easement,

they couldn't do that.

But the fact that the brenders could enjoy trellises

and a bench on their own property,

which is one of the findings the court below made,

I think is not relevant to what the brenders' rights are

to use this particular easement.

Can you just develop your answer to the question

just as Lynn just asked?

You say that the Michels would not be able to put a bench

in this easement area.

I would suggest that the Michael...

Michels.

I'm talking about the Michels, the owner of the property.

They wouldn't be able to put a bench in there.

I would suggest under the terms of this easement,

they may not be able to.

It may depend on where they want to put it.

But it goes to the question and I think the analysis

is not what they can do in the easement area,

but the analysis is what the brenders can do

within the easement area.

Because if the brenders have an easement

along a body of water to enjoy it,

and no limitations on it,

it wasn't an easement that says you can only go

from point A to point B.

In effect, what the lower court has done

is they've rewritten the terms of the easement.

So the exclusivity of this easement, you say,

not only relates to third parties,

but it also relates to the fee owner.

In other words, it excludes the fee owner

from the easement area?

I don't believe we can exclude a fee owner

from the easement area.

That's what I'm getting at.

But I believe that the language exclusive right to use

means exactly what it says.

The brenders have an exclusive right to use.

Right.

And so the Michelle's would not be able to

give a third party the right to use that same area.

Absolutely not.

And they can't interfere.

Right.

So I'm just trying to figure out,

so that's different, is it not,

from the Michelle's right to use that property?

I think it may be, but at the same time,

any rights the Michelle's may have

cannot interfere with the brenders' rights

to use the easement.

Well, let's say this.

Let's assume that this was all complied with zoning

and all this and that.

Suppose that your opponent said,

we want to pave that easement

because we want to use it to back a trailer down

so that we can put our boat in the water

over your easement.

Could they do that?

Let me take a step back.

I don't believe under the terms of this easement

that says an exclusive easement,

the Michaels have a right to do that.

I think what you have here is an exclusive easement

that the brenders are the only ones that can use this easement

subject to certain reasonable restrictions

on what the brenders can do within the easement area.

And you would then take it one step farther

and say a bench, an equipment box,

and maybe a trellis, which strikes me as probably not

a necessary thing to have this war between the neighbors over.

But a couple of items that they would like to put there,

you say that's a reasonable use of that.

I would say that's very reasonable.

And to maybe re-answer the question,

can the Michaels come down onto the property and use it,

I would say under the terms of this easement,

the Michaels would not have a right

to come onto the easement and use it.

That would interfere in the easement.

Then what's the difference?

If that's true, if they can't come onto the easement

to use it, what's the difference

between that and fee ownership?

I think there is a difference there

because the brenders use is still subject to a reasonableness.

The Michaels own the land.

So the brenders can't go onto the property

and take hazardous waste onto the property.

They can't go onto the property and clear cut the trees

and sell the trees off.

Mr. Johnson, let me ask you this question.

Looking at the last two pages of the order,

the court talks about it's not reasonable

to leave personal properties such as a trellis

furniture in the easement area.

But on the last page it talks about, in its conclusion,

it's unreasonable to install personal property.

Is that a difference that we should be paying attention to?

The difference between installing

and leaving personal property on the property?

The court uses different words.

The court uses different words.

I think the intent may be that he's treating it the same.

So what's installation mean?

What do you think installation means?

Does that have any import beyond just leaving a kayak

on the property?

If you plant flowers,

maybe that's considered an installation.

I would think that if you have an easement like this,

you can plant some flowers within the easement.

I suppose there's a difference between planting flowers

and installing flower boxes

that are measured three by three feet.

There is a difference,

but I would suggest that in terms of an easement

and the rights that the brems have under the terms of the easement,

which I think is already found is not ambiguous,

that it's such a de minimis use of an easement area,

especially in light of other easement cases

which talk about installation of roads.

Let's say we agree with you.

Are we going to be back here next year

when perhaps your clients might say,

gee, what we'd really like to put in

is railroad ties that create a nice border

with flowers and very pretty things.

Are we going to be back here arguing

over whether the installation of railroad ties

in connection with flowers is reasonable or not?

First of all, my client has never brought suit against anybody.

We're defending in all cases.

I understand that.

I can't tell you if we're going to be back or not,

but one of the reasons why we filed this appeal

was we don't want to keep coming back.

We think that putting in Mr. Brown to testify

as to what use he's made

and what use he wants to make.

And is he content to limit it to the articulation

of his projected use in this lawsuit,

or does he say this is just an example

of what I want to do?

This is what he got sued for doing.

Now, this is an easement that gets passed on

from owner to owner.

And one of the dangers here is that you can't look at

what the subjective, you can't look at this subjectively.

I mean, you can't look at what is the effect

on the Michaels for doing this

because it's not a subjective moving target.

I mean, this is an easement along the lake

for the exclusive use to enjoy the land

in conjunction with the lake.

That's something that has to be clear.

If people think that they can, you know,

buy property with an easement with this language

and then someone can come in and say,

yep, you have that easement,

but you can't put some flowers down

and you can't put a little box...

Well, don't we have to be somewhat concerned

that as I recall the record

from maybe it was from the earlier case,

your client's, or I'm sorry,

your opponent's predecessor and title,

the common owner of both parcels

actually tried to subdivide this property

to give your client's predecessor and title

ownership of the...

And the town said you can't do that.

Is that right?

So I guess what I'm wondering is, I mean,

don't we have to be at least somewhat concerned

that the quote-unquote easement that your client has

can't be construed so broadly that in effect

your client owns the property,

because that would be in violation of the...

Absolutely, and that's why I'm saying there are

limitations which goes under the

reasonableness line of cases.

We're doing something that affects

the health and welfare.

You can't do that.

If we're committing waste on the property,

I would suggest we can't do that.

If we're committing hazardous waste onto the property,

that would not be reasonable.

If we start fear-cutting trees, that's not reasonable.

It is not tied back into the enjoyment of the property

under the terms of the easement,

and you have to look at the location.

I mean, this is different if this was not along the water,

but this is something that's along the water.

Is it unreasonable for the breamness to want to sit

on a bench and look at the water?

Is it unreasonable for them to put up a couple flower pots?

Your time is up, sir.

Good afternoon. May it please the court.

My name is David Wayman.

I represent the Michaels in this case.

I hate to go back to ancient history,

but Justice Linn was correct.

The initial case, the Claritari judgment case,

was brought by the Michaels to say

that this was an illegal attempt

to convey a fee-simple interest.

We had an affidavit from the lawyer at that time

representing the predecessor and title

who said that's exactly what he tried to do.

He tried to convey fee-simple interest

to exclude everybody, including the Michaels predecessors

from the easement area.

And this court said no, it was an easement.

You can't do that.

They were turned down by the planning board

for trying to do that.

So if our test is reasonable use of this broad easement,

what is unreasonable about a bench and an equipment box?

It was, first of all, it was a bench.

It was a trellis.

Well, the trellis is gone, right?

Well, it's gone now, but he wanted...

Right, but it's gone now.

I'm sorry.

So if what the Bremners assert they want to do

is put this park bench there

and maybe a box to store their life vests or what have you,

what's unreasonable about that?

The trial judge, first of all,

this is a case where the trial judge

applied the correct legal standard

and he found facts saying the uses

that Mr. Bremner talked about were unreasonable.

Those factual findings are entitled to deference.

It doesn't matter that this court might find differently

from what the trial judge found.

But he didn't say why they were unreasonable.

Yes, he did.

What did he say?

He said a lot of things.

He said it's not reasonable to leave personal property

like a garden troll as a furniture in the easement area in kayaks.

Why?

Because of...

Because the property owners, the Michaels,

have the right to decorate their property

and see to it that the property is done in a proper fashion.

There was testimony about liability.

There was testimony about privacy and security concerns.

There was testimony that this easement was heavily wooded

and it was only an access way to the pond

that the court wanted to took a view.

Were the trellis and the bench attached to the ground?

Were they fixed to the ground?

Or were they types of things like

the lawn furniture that you'd take in on Labor Day?

The bench hadn't been put in yet.

They were talking about a bench.

But what the court said, what you read

was the last page of the decision.

The court sent the page before.

Lastly, the court finds it is not reasonable

for the Breveners to leave personal property.

Well, that's the distinction that I was pointing out.

I read both sentences because it's

arguably inconsistent with what's on the last page,

which talks about installation.

I find this to be part of his ruling.

I would argue that it's part of his ruling.

It seemed to me that at the bottom of the court's ruling

was this statement.

I made a particular note of it.

He said these projected items would interfere

with the plaintiffs, that is, the Michel's ability

to control the appearance of their property.

Yes.

So it really strikes me that what the court was looking at

was not the reasonableness of a pretty little flower box,

but a broader view as to what a property owner

should be allowed to do to, quote,

control the overall appearance of property it owns.

That's correct.

And it strikes me that that's the bottom line here.

And that's what we have to decide.

Legally, is that a sufficient interest

of a property owner to prevail over an easement owner?

And the, my opponent was offered the opportunity

to try to come up with a case law that said that

there was something wrong with that and he couldn't do it.

I think that that's a legitimate concern under the test.

The leading cases are a CD and Flanagan.

And under the Flanagan case.

And you get to this in every case,

especially where it's unrestricted like it was here.

An unrestricted right-of-way is subject to a determination

of reasonable use when the uses of a deeded right-of-way

are not specified or restricted in the deed.

And I would argue that's the same thing we have here.

There's no use restricted.

The uses to which easements may be put are questions of fact.

To be arrived up and considering all the surrounding

circumstances including location,

the uses of both parties' properties

and the advantage of one owner's use

and the disadvantage to the other owner caused by that use,

the 12-core may consider extensive evidence

when asked to determine the extent and reasonable use

of a right-of-way.

And I think if you read the decision,

the court finds in various places,

and there's testimony, and I've cited it in my brief,

where the effect on the Michaels,

the benefit to the Bremners were taken into account.

The judge took a view.

He looked at where the Bremners property was vis-a-vis our property.

Again, as Judge Lin was getting at before, earlier on,

an easement is a non-possessory interest in the land,

and you cannot exclude the owner.

And it's not, you don't have ownership rights,

and usually there's something like access.

This doesn't give them the right to do anything

because it's bounded by the rule of reasonable use.

So as you just drew our attention to,

this is a highly fact-specific inquiry.

So the courts looked at trellises and benches,

but this isn't going to address uses in the future, is it,

in terms of reasonableness?

I think the judge is saying in his order,

and that's the way I read it,

and he was trying to avoid the situation.

Well, I know he was trying to,

but my thinking is that because it is so inherently fact-specific

for all the reasons that you just read to us,

it's hard to go beyond the facts on the ground

and make some grand pronouncement

because it's a reasonableness inquiry.

And I think what the court says is it finds it's not reasonable

for the Bremer's to leave personal property,

and he says, such as.

But he doesn't say that doesn't mean anything.

So would it be your position that if the Bremer's

brought kayaks out for kayaking

and left them there for the afternoon

while they're out on their dock

that that's a violation of the easement?

They tied it, they were talking about tying the kayaks

to the...

I'm talking about leaving them on the ground,

leaving them on the beach.

That would be a problem if they left them there.

I think if they brought them there

while they were using it during the day,

it would be one thing,

but I think they can't leave them there.

So if they left them overnight in your view,

that would be a violation of the easement?

That would be a violation of this order that the judge wrote.

So I think that there are, you know,

there's liability, don't forget the...

Michael's his owners of this property insured

and they have liability issues.

And that's another reason why an owner's rights

are governed from an easement holder's rights.

They have to worry about that.

They have to worry about security concerns.

I do think an owner of a property

has a absolute vested interest in, you know,

controlling the appearance of the property

as opposed to the easement holder.

So under the view that you're advocating,

aren't you, in essence,

turning this into an access easement?

You can't really use the land

except to get to the water,

but that's not what it is.

And that's how it was, first of all,

that's how it was traditionally used.

It is, the judge is saying,

I don't think he's saying,

I think they could stand on the easement.

I think they could look out at the pond.

But I just don't think they can install

or leave personal property on the easement.

You can put the little folding chairs

that we all carry in the back of our cars in the summer.

I think they could use them while they're down there.

Yeah.

And they can't leave them there

because that has an effect on the appearance.

That has an effect on liability.

And those are legitimate owner concerns

as the trial judge found.

And I think that's...

So if the Bremners had a big party

and, you know, 40 teenagers

brought lots of portable furniture

and a portable fire pit and all of that,

you say that reasonably the Michels can say,

that interferes with the appearance of our property

if it's left out.

Correct.

So the next morning after the party

when there's all this furniture is strewn around

and a cooling fire pit is there,

you say your clients have a right to complain.

Yes, I think that's right.

And I think that's what the trial judge had in mind

when he wrote his order.

And I think that's the difference between...

You made findings that the dock was reasonable.

The cutting down the trees to get to the dock was reasonable.

Those were reasonable uses of the easement.

He made factual findings that these other uses were not reasonable

and those were entitled to deference.

You know, the question is, could a reasonable person

in Judge Kissinger's position have found the way he did?

I'm still not comfortable with the discussion we've had

about the court's use of the term

installing personal property in the last page of the order.

You seem to be the interpretation that you're offering to us

would read out the word install

as having any separate meanings

so that it just would mean leave something on the property.

But the court did use the word install.

I think that's something you could certainly deal with

but I think that the judge clearly used the word

leave personal property in his decision.

I think you've got to look at the order as a whole.

I don't think he's looking for the last part of it.

What he requested was a park bench that would stay there

and a trellis which would be installed.

What Mr. Bremner actually said during his testimony

when I asked him was he couldn't think of anything

that he would have to consult with the Michaels on first

before he could do it.

He thought he couldn't think of anything he couldn't do

with the property that a fee simple owner could do with the property.

He believed he could do anything given the brightness of that easement

so this was meant to address those types of issues.

This order was meant to address those types of issues.

He couldn't find any restrictions whatsoever on what he could do.

Another thing about this easement is it's only 2,850 square feet.

I can't square root that off the top of my head.

It's 118 feet by maybe 20 feet or something like that

so it's a pretty small area.

I understand that this is term exclusive use in there

but I guess I keep coming back to this idea of

it still being in essence an access easement

and I guess what I'm thinking about is suppose that there wasn't a pond here

and that this easement wasn't designed to allow your opponents to get somewhere.

Would it make sense that you would grant

if you wanted somebody to be able to use some part of your property

that they didn't own, would it make sense

that you would refer to that as an easement

or would you in effect say I'm going to lease you for some use purpose?

I mean it seems to me that easement is a kind of awkward word

for the relationship between these parties

if you didn't have the pond as a place that it leads to.

I think it is an awkward word and I think it's the only reason it was done

the way it was done was because they tried to convey the fee simple interest

and to subdivide the property they weren't allowed to do that

and in essence they wrote an easement that is completely

in my view unusual to try to effectuate the purpose

that they were not allowed to do by virtue of the planning board's decision

and I think that's why it's an odd situation.

I think that they did try to exclude the Michaels.

They did try to exclude everybody else

but what exclusive easement means is it means that they can't give

it's exclusive to the Bremners or their predecessors

but they can't give an easement to anybody else to use the same part of the property

I think that's what this court decided in the initial case.

And apart from the reasonable use doctrine

the fee interest remains in your clients, correct?

Absolutely and my clients pay the insurance

and they pay the taxes on this property

and they have an interest and they have to worry about liability

and that's why the judge one of the reasons

the judge I believe based on the testimony found as he did

What's the line of sight from your client's property to the easement area?

Well actually my clients own the shoreline right up to it.

To the right? Right.

Like 600 feet down so it's said

and their dock is actually pretty close to where the Bremners dock is

so it's not far away at all.

What if, let me just give you a hypothetical

what if the Bremners were very fond of pink flamingos

and they temporarily put them out on nice dates.

They didn't put them out when it rained.

Would your client be able to say

we hate pink flamingos as I do personally?

And it interferes with our ability to control the appearance of our property

because it makes it look tacky.

Your clients have the ability to prohibit that?

I think under this order they're not allowed to leave the pink flamingos out there.

I think that's what the intent of the judge's ruling was.

But they could leave the pink flamingos in the easement

as long as they themselves were sitting on their portable chairs.

They could bring their pink flamingos down and talk to them

and whatever they wanted to do with them.

Well, apart from all this, it seems to me a terrible shame

that these folks can't be friends and neighbors

over something like this, but that's neither here nor there.

I appreciate that comment.

I'll pass the line, but I think Judge Kissinger tried to resolve this

once and for all when he wrote this decision

and I think it should be affirmed for that reason.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

The court will take a brief recess.
