This is case 2014-0791, state of New Hampshire versus Jamie F. LaTarte.

Mr. Johnson?

May it please the court. Christopher Johnson on behalf of Jamie LaTarte.

The issue in this appeal is the admissibility of witness Gifford's testimony about the threat to make a false allegation.

There's three arguments in the brief. There's what I call the Ellsworth argument, which I plan to talk about.

There's the reliance argument, and then there's a van de Bogart argument.

If I can get to that third one, I will, but perhaps not given time.

And I'm happy to take questions.

So can I ask you, Mr. Johnson?

I think if I'm remembering correctly, I think you were counsel in a case that was argued not that long ago,

maybe two, I think probably in September, maybe it was in June.

Mr. Remembering, but in which you, I think, drew a very important distinction between

when 608 evidence is being offered to sort of attack someone's general, 608B evidence,

being offered to attack someone's general credibility on the one hand,

and when it has some other value, like to show bias or whatever.

And I think your point in that case was that the trial court in the case we were talking about,

and I don't frankly remember the name, but had sort of treated it as if it was a general attack on credibility,

whereas you were saying, no, this was really designed to show bias,

and that therefore the limitation of no extrinsic evidence shouldn't apply.

And I mean, I thought at the time you had a very good argument at that point.

My question is here, isn't it here not for any purpose other than showing sort of general credibility?

In other words, you want to say the victim is lying here because she lied before,

not because she's particularly biased against this defendant or whatever,

because in fact the claim is that she was biased against some other person that she was making a claim against.

So I mean, I guess if that's true, wouldn't that suggest that extrinsic evidence should not be admissible?

So I think you're right, and I think I also remember the case you're referring to.

What I think this court has done in the Ellsworth case and in the line of cases that followed

and perhaps preceded it is has carved out a very specific doctrine relating to prior false allegations

of sexual assault in sexual assault cases.

And the concept supporting that special doctrine is that this is such a particular kind of lie.

And yes, it may be about a different situation or a different perpetrator,

but it reflects on her credibility.

And I think in the Ellsworth case this court referred to it both as a 608B doctrine and as a 403 doctrine.

And I think in Ellsworth the court talked about a kind of a motive.

But Ellsworth's argument was a constitutional argument.

It was confrontation, right?

In part, so yeah, because there's two pieces to all of these cases.

And that's why we carved out the exception because of the constitutional claim that resided within the Ellsworth argument.

And then of course there was Mello, where we found another exception,

but that was because Mr. Mello wasn't smart enough to lie, not lie on the stand, and so he opened the door.

And then we get up to Van de Bogart, which to me is it may be the lynchpin of this case.

And it strikes me that in Van de Bogart we may have carved out another exception,

but I'm not sure we should have done that because first of all, I don't know whether it was material or collateral.

And it seems to me that that is key here.

And secondly, it was something that would benefit the state in the Van de Bogart case.

And we've never cited it.

It just sort of sits out there being ignored by everybody.

Probably because it's not good law.

However, if it is good law, then your case seems to fit within it depending upon the material collateral issue.

Right. And now I understand maybe your question better as well.

And so this is what I would say about Van de Bogart, that particular doctrine, is I think your description of it is accurate.

For the present purposes, I think it's not bad law.

And there is a kernel in there that...

No, because it fits your position.

But here's what's different about it.

So in Van de Bogart, the question is whether the defendant...

It's not about general credibility and it's not even...

It's not about substance.

It's about impeaching a particular statement in testimony.

And so it's not...

It doesn't undermine the general rule that you don't get to introduce extrinsic evidence to impeach general credibility

because it's not about impeaching general credibility.

It's about impeaching a particular point.

It's also...

The second thing I would say about Van de Bogart...

But isn't that...

But I mean, how is that...

I guess how...

I mean, doesn't that prove too much?

Because if that's the case, you could...

You're in a robbery case.

You ask the witness, well, didn't you lie to your brother about going to the bar three weeks ago

and the witness says no.

And you say, well, I really want to introduce extrinsic evidence to impeach.

The witness is answered to that question.

I'm going to bring in the brother who'll say, yeah, that's what he told me.

Well, and all I think I can say...

If I may develop on your comment, Justice Lynn,

what if a witness said is on trial for robbery

and there's evidence from another witness that I like to rob stores owned by immigrants.

And I'll do it every chance I get.

And this is about a robbery of an immigrant.

It seems to me that's what you're focused on.

You're saying it's not...

This statement I like to rob stores owned by immigrants,

you're not offering it for general credibility,

you're offering it because it goes to the very issue on trial.

That's how I understood your brief.

That's what you're saying, right?

I think there's two different arguments,

and it's important to keep them secret.

So that's what I'm saying with respect to the Ellsworth argument.

I think the Vande Bogard doctrine is a separate thing which has a very narrow use.

And if I can turn to the Ellsworth point,

I can maybe clarify what I see expressions of confusion.

The only issue now on appeal with respect to the Ellsworth...

So even if I lose the Vande Bogard,

the only issue on appeal with respect to Ellsworth is one unresolved question of law,

and that's whether the clear and convincing burden applies

because if it does, because that's the only argument the state has made,

if it does, the state wins because we didn't meet clear and convincing.

If it doesn't...

Clear and convincing evidence that the statement was made?

Right, and so that's the question.

How about clear and convincing that it was false?

That's right. That is the crucial distinction.

Is the burden the same for demonstrating that a prior allegation was false

as for demonstrating that a prior allegation was made?

Doesn't that raise another question, and that is who gets to decide that?

In other words, is the...

It seems like you are sort of...

Maybe the parties have not really sort of joined this issue,

or at least that you are conceding that it's for the court,

the trial judge as opposed to the jury?

Well, no, my point is when the question is whether the prior allegation was made,

clear and convincing is not the standard that the judge applies as a threshold matter.

So should there have been a voir dire of the witness at all?

Well, I think it was all right to voir dire the witness to confirm that the proffer

that the lawyer made was consistent with...

That defense had a good faith basis for making proffer.

That's right.

You say that should have ended it.

Right.

Well, right, and...

Right, exactly.

Because even if the standard was beyond a reasonable doubt,

if you have a witness that says the victim said this to me,

a jury could find beyond a reasonable doubt.

They believed the witness and that was...

Precisely, precisely.

And so what this court has carved out for one very narrow and specific circumstance

that the trial judge is a clear and convincing evidence gatekeeper,

but that circumstance is when you're using prior false allegations

and the question is whether the allegation was false.

But there was no allegation here.

Yes.

If memory serves, the statement that was at issue had to do with a threat to make an allegation.

Yes.

Not an allegation.

Yes, yes.

So isn't that even less material?

No, it's...

I mean, my position is it's functionally the same thing

because the only difference between threatening to make a false allegation

and making one is in the first instance you were trying to intimidate the targeted individual

and then the second instance you were trying to punish them.

But both alike involve a demonstration of a willingness to be in complete disregard of the truth

to either threaten or, you know...

But, you know, can I ask...

Maybe I'm confused about that.

Are you conceding that the trial judge gets to decide,

I find that there's clear and convincing evidence or I find that there's a preponderance

or I find that there's proof...

Or is that what...

Does the trial judge make that credibility determination?

In other words, can the trial judge say...

Let's say the witness says, the victim told me this.

Can the trial judge say, I don't believe the victim.

I don't believe the witness.

I'm sorry.

And therefore it's not coming in.

Right.

No, I don't concede that.

I only concede it for an issue that's not at issue here.

Like when that question is whether this prior allegation was false,

this court's case law says it's clear and convincing and the judge is a gatekeeper.

But when the issue is not that, and here it wasn't that,

it was whether she said this threat,

the judge shouldn't have performed that gatekeeper function

and certainly not to that standard of proof.

All the...

You say all the judge had to do is to answer the question,

is there a good faith basis to put this witness on

and allow the jury to make the decision on credibility?

Yes, yes.

And so I need to talk about the case law that the state cites on this point,

because they cite Gordon.

So Gordon was a case...

So my point about Gordon and Wyden Miller is this court has never decided

the proposition that the state is asking this court to say now

that you have already decided.

In Gordon, as a formal matter, it was dicta

what the standard should be for extrinsic evidence,

because that was a cross-examination case.

In Gordon, the court didn't discuss what should be the right standard

for whether an allegation was made.

They just cited White.

And in White and in Miller,

both of those cases, this court was entirely focused on the question

of what should be the burden of deciding whether the allegation was false.

And there's good reasons for a high burden

and a threshold showing in that circumstance,

because in that circumstance, there's a risk of confusions

if the jury will be then confronted with two different assault allegations,

the one on trial and this other one,

and both of them are genuinely contested,

and it's only if the other one is clearly false that it's relevant.

And so the court has a place...

the trial court has a place as a threshold gatekeeper.

That concern doesn't apply

when the only question is, did the person make the allegation?

Because there is no other assault for the jury to get confused about.

It's a simple question, and juries are exactly the right entity

to make these decisions is, did she make this threat or not?

She says she didn't. He says she did.

Nobody is saying it was true if made.

But I mean, in terms of the trial within a trial,

now we have a trial over this other allegation.

No, but that's the crucial.

When there actually is a dispute about whether the other allegation is false,

I'd agree 100%.

Then you have a whole trial about whether the other one is true or not,

and then within the trial about whether the charged one was true.

I think...

But we don't have that.

This problem is precisely a 608B problem,

and the rule says you can't do it

unless there's a specific exception.

And we all agree that there are a couple of specific exceptions,

but I still don't see how they apply to the circumstances.

Well, but this court has sort of carved out

one of these exceptions is for this kind of evidence,

prior false allegations.

And my point is when you have a dispute,

and I understand nobody says there was a prior...

But you know what, I guess the question I have is,

I mean, you describe it, and maybe,

and perhaps accurately, that there is this sort of

sexual assault victim exception to rule 608B.

And I'm just kind of wondering, does that, you know, why...

In other words, for example, if a person was lied about

something other than something to do with sex,

we would...

And it was just offered to sort of attack general credibility.

We would say, no, you're limited,

you can ask the witness, but you're limited.

But now we're going to say that, you know, if it's a lie

that has something to do with sex, I mean,

isn't that sort of counterintuitive?

Wouldn't that be sort of, you know, if it's, I mean,

if it's sort of true, everybody lies about sex?

Should we, you know, should this be the rule

that we're going to say this is the one area

where you can introduce extrinsic...

Well, I think the reason is the doctrine is very narrowly constrained.

And so a few things, conditions have to exist.

So for example, this other allegation

has to be similar to the charged allegation.

And nobody in this case disputes that.

And indeed the state doesn't dispute this point

that there is this doctrine.

They just say I've set the burden too low.

Can I return to my hypothetical about a robber

of a store owned by an immigrant?

Would the state, in prosecuting that case,

would the state be allowed to introduce the testimony

of a witness who said,

this defendant told me he doesn't like immigrants

and he would rob the store owned by an immigrant

at any chance he had to do that?

Would the state be able to get that in?

So I suppose, I mean, the way it would go through

the 608B analysis, I suppose.

And so the first question is,

can you cross-examine about it?

And so in this court in Miller,

it's all these factors that the court goes through

to decide whether you can cross-examine about something.

And so maybe if I had more information about the hypothetical.

I'm just curious as to whether it makes a difference

whether it's offered by the state or the defense.

I don't think the rules of evidence in this context

should vary depending on who offers the evidence.

So no, if that's the, no.

But I guess that goes, it narrows it.

It takes it out of the sexual assault arena.

And I'm interested in the state's response to my question

because that could be very relevant, right?

Well, yes, I think it could be.

On the defendant's credibility, if he says no,

I didn't rob the store owned by the immigrant.

I think that's right.

I think the underpinnings also of the sexual assault

that may or may not apply to other contexts

is that it's a particular kind of lie about an event

that wasn't observed in general.

Sexual assaults are generally committed in private.

And so there's a particular power to the false allegation

where there's not such a power if you're saying

somebody falsely robbed me on the street.

Well, there'd be a lot of other witnesses.

And so it's this kind of allegation

justifies this particular doctrine.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Good morning, may it please the court.

Sean Gill for the state of New Hampshire.

Happy to take your questions at any time.

Would the state be able to get, in my hypothetical,

would they be able to get in statements

that the defendant made to a witness saying,

I don't like stores owned by immigrants

and I'll take my opportunity any chance I get.

And he's on trial for robbing a store owned by an immigrant.

Put it out of the sexual assault arena.

Would the state be able to get that in?

I don't think under Rule 608B they would be able to get it in.

Now, perhaps under Rule 403.

Sure would try, wouldn't they?

Well, they might try, yes.

And there might be another avenue to do it.

The Ellsworth case started when you read Ellsworth.

Most of the discussion in that case was about 403

and it kind of ended in 608.

But if it was another bad act or wrong

that went to motive or some other purpose perhaps.

Just a statement that he threatened,

he threatened to do a bad act.

Not that he did the bad act,

but he threatened to do an act that was very similar

to the one he's on trial for.

Okay, well then I would say that that may go,

that may be relevant evidence of motive,

motive, intent, purpose in the life.

And so why doesn't that analysis apply here?

The argument was exclusively under 608.

608 talks about the limitations that are going to be

on the types of evidence that can be used.

I said you could cross-examine this victim

until the cows come home about whether she made this statement.

But before we get far afield into extrinsic evidence,

the rule says you can't go there.

And this court has, in Ellsworth and Miller and Oaks

and other cases-

So should the court have even done a voir dire?

Yes.

To accomplish what?

To make the initial determination.

The requirement for the Ellsworth exception is

that there's a prior allegation of a similar nature

that is demonstrably false,

which this court has said repeatedly means

clearly and convincingly false.

But there's a difference between allegation of conduct

and allegation of a threat.

There's clearly a qualitative difference.

So I'm struggling with how you apply the standards

in Ellsworth to a threat as opposed to conduct.

I think that's an interesting question.

But I think, Justice Camboy,

it's sort of a second-order question here.

No, it's not.

If the state is saying Ellsworth controls here,

I don't think this is an Ellsworth case at all.

And neither do I.

That's why I'm asking- I'm pressing.

Shall we count votes here?

I mean, really, how can- I mean,

how would Ellsworth possibly apply to a threat?

That's what I'm saying.

Whether a threat is equivalent to a prior

false accusation of sexual assault

is an interesting question,

but it's not the one that the court rested on

in making its decision.

And so maybe the court made a mistake,

and that's why I'm asking whether

Wadir was even appropriate.

Well, I don't think the court made a mistake,

because I think the court's responsibility here

as the gatekeeper, as this court has said

in Gordon and in White.

So why wouldn't the trial court say

to the defense, okay,

tell me what your evidence is.

We're not talking about a Martian arriving

and doing the crime.

Tell me what your evidence is.

And the defense says,

I've got the grandfather who will say X.

And as long as counsel is making

a good faith representation

as to the testimony of the witness,

why do we even need a Wadir?

If the court then can conclude

based on what counsel tells the court,

okay, you've got a good faith basis

for wanting this information in,

and now I'm going to let the jury decide

whether that statement was actually made.

Well, I would rely on the court's decision in White

where the court said credibility

is normally a question left for the trier of fact,

but a trial court in these cases

must make an initial determination

or else risk admitting evidence

of prior allegations without a showing

that they are demonstrably false,

resulting in a trial within a trial

and confusing the jury.

But I would, to your basic point,

I think there probably is a qualitative difference

between a threat to make a false accusation

and making a false accusation.

And Ellsworth and Miller and all those cases,

and all of those cases,

a given in the case was that

a false accusation was made.

Of conduct.

Of conduct.

Right.

So those cases are way different from this one.

Because the defense in those cases

had made the initial showing

that a false accusation was made.

You seem to be sideways from the way I'm seeing this case.

Here, the defense said,

I didn't do that.

This never happened.

What she's claiming never happened.

And part of my defense is

that I have evidence

that she knew

that she could get me out of the house

by claiming that I did something that I never did

because she threatened to do that to her grandfather.

Well, except in this case...

And nothing ever happened.

I mean, I don't know whether this defendant

committed this crime or not.

But we do know, I think,

that whether or not

the grandfather ever did anything to this child,

what she said was,

all I have to do is claim that he did and he's out.

Can I just to reset sort of where I'm going

to go back to what the actual Mr. Giffords claim was

and just preface it by saying

that the victim denies ever making the statement,

the recipient of the statement, her mother,

by offer of proof denied that the statement was ever made,

the state never conceded the statement was made

and I'm not conceding that here.

Our contention is no statement was made.

But there's only one place...

Yes, there's only one place in the record

where that statement is expressed

and it's Mr. Gifford during the vaudeer,

thank goodness for the vaudeer,

where he says, we had a quarrel,

I stepped out of the room into the kitchen,

I overheard her say to her mother,

quote, all she needed to do was call the police

and tell them that I had sexually molested her

and they would take me out of the house.

The defense argument at the trial was all that

this is a false...

a threat to make a false statement

and it all goes to her credibility,

if you look at the actual statement

that Mr. Gifford wanted to testify,

that doesn't reflect on credibility,

now it might reflect on some cunning

or some sort of manipulation or something,

but it would be a true statement

that if I told the police,

which it's uncontroverted,

she never did,

she's never accused Mr. Gifford of anything.

She says, if I told the police

he had molested me,

they would take him out of the house.

A year after,

the accusations against her biological father

surfaced

and as a family matter he stayed out of the house.

A year after.

So she knows from knowledge in the earlier case,

one might infer,

that a consequence of making an accusation

is the person would be removed.

And that's the defendant's defense.

She said this because she didn't want me there,

I never did anything to her and she got me out.

But the temporal part of it matters

from your perspective.

That's the fact, it's after the fact.

So it's not going to this shows

when she made the accusation against her biological father

that there's some evidence

that she's got this motive

or she knows how to manipulate the system

or to do this.

That's not an element here.

They said it all goes to credibility, credibility, credibility.

In a strictly clinical sense,

there's nothing that's not true

about that statement.

Now it would be...

It's certainly relevant

to her assessing her testimony.

It would reflect on her credibility

if she made an accusation against him that was false.

Which she did not do.

But threatening doesn't matter?

Again, I would say that

it may for other reasons

other than credibility.

So you said the defense is stuck

because at trial all they argued

was credibility.

You say maybe they should have thought

creatively about another way to get that in.

Perhaps.

But as the argument that's been developed

is strictly 608B, as I understand it,

it's not Constitution, it's not...

You're saying if I understand it correctly

that because this other thing came after,

it can't really be argued

that based upon

the experience that she had

of this other allegation

which would have been true

if it came before the allegation

against the defendant.

Based upon that experience

she learned that

if she made an allegation

the person that she claimed against

would be removed from the house

because she couldn't have

at least as far as we know, she couldn't have had that

experience at the time

of the allegations against the defendant

because this other thing happened later.

Yes, sure. I think that would be a different case.

It might be a stronger case for the defense to show

she knows how to be manipulative

and to get the result she wants

as evidenced by the fact that she went to the police

and accused Mr. Gifford

of something that was not true.

Was the

defendant here

removed from the house

initially based on

her allegation?

The evidence is that the victim

told her adoptive parents

immediately after the event

that her adoptive mother called the defendant

who is her son at work

and told her don't come home

and that he never asked why.

So, in fact,

based on her allegation

the defendant

was asked to leave the house.

He was told not to come home.

The defendant was not a full-time resident in the house.

He describes himself as a couch surfer.

He was there on occasion.

And without asking the reasons

he did not return home after the request was made.

So you're saying the statement that she made

was based on the knowledge that she gained

from this case

with the defendant?

I'm saying she never made the statement

but if Mr. Gifford's claim is that she made the statement

if they're trying to argue

that this show she had some

knowledge or motive at the time

she accused the defendant

it's not material to that issue

because it depends the year after.

Your view is it only shows that she had the knowledge year after?

Yes.

Potentially attributable to what happened in this case.

So a good look under 403

would exclude the evidence anyway.

Again, it comes to the trial judge

performing his gatekeeping function

and deciding is the probative value

this is going to be more than this trial

within a trial. And this would have resulted

in a trial within a trial.

What if the trial court on Voidere

had said

you know, I believe the grandfather

would he have

would the trial court have made a mistake

in allowing that in?

Not if he believed him.

My question is

did it matter

what the trial court's finding was?

Apparently the trial court did not believe the grandfather.

It does matter

and if the trial court

that's why I say although it's an interesting question

about whether a threat to make an accusation

is the same

as accusation itself

it's a second order question

because the preliminary question is

did she even speak these words?

And the trial court said

this is the proponent of this

is the one who's trying to work his way through this

not hold to get out of 688

he has to demonstrate that

and he did not.

But you know how does

that jive with rule 1

I think it's 104

I think which says that

you know if evidence is conditionally

relevant the court shall

admit the evidence

if there's sufficient evidence

that the jury could find

somebody says something happened

isn't that sufficient evidence that the jury could find?

I think it's squarely within that

because I think that's what the

trial judge is being charged to do here

perform that gate keeping function

and make a preliminary determination

but what I'm really saying is

if somebody says

if a witness gets on the witness stand and says

Mr. Smith said X

I mean as a matter of law

can the judge say

I don't believe that person and therefore

there's not sufficient evidence for the jury to believe

isn't that the fact

that the witness said it that in itself

is enough? Normally the believability

and the credibility of the witness are left for the tryer

of fact but this court has said

in applying that exception to 608b

which says you're not going to

get into extrinsic evidence we've carved out

an exception in one narrow category

of cases and that in

applying that exception it's the gate keeping function

of the trial judge to make that preliminary

determination so that we don't run the

risk of a trial within a trial

and confusing the jury

this would have resulted in

in a trial within a trial the mother

because

because we contest that

Mr. Giffords claim the state

would have contested it so the recipient

of the victim's statement

would have come in and testified that was never made

she had a friend who was in the house

who had stepped out I guess because she was ill

she may have had some relevant evidence

to go in I don't know what other evidence

there'd be about Mr. you know Giffords credibility

the family dynamic

the situation at the time it could have

opened up an entire can of worms

so does the nature of the trial within the trial

or how extensive that would be

should that matter to us I mean it's not

like you're trying to prove sexual assault

it's just was this statement

made or not that's a

narrower set of issues the preliminary

the first order question here is

did she ever even speak these words

and that

burden is assigned to

the defendant to demonstrate that

and it failed according to the trial judge

who had an opportunity to hear

her denial and Mr. Giffords

assertion and made that decision

his assertion is no more

persuasive than her denial I'm not going to

inject this into the trial

now Mr. Giffords said it's an equipoise

right so he did an equipoise

it's not a preponderance

why should it be

why should it be preponderance

as opposed to a good faith

showing that there is such

evidence for the jury to consider

it shouldn't be a preponderance

it should be demonstrably false

which requires a precondition

which relates to conduct not to threats

now I think that it's a

precondition to say that her

prior accusation was demonstrably false

that there was a prior accusation

and that's what the court said in Gordon

and that's what the court has said in White

and that's not what happened here

so they didn't even reach

a preponderance I guess is my place

Mr. Gifford could have testified

as to her character for truthfulness

for reasons I don't know

they didn't take advantage of that opportunity

my time's expired the case that submitted

thank you case submitted
