This is case 2015-0561, R.A.M. Osman et al. v. Wen Lin et al.

The record should reflect the fact that I have given the monitor permission not to list each

separate case. We all know what they are, and that justices Hicks and Lin are disqualified

from this case.

Mr. Murphy.

Good morning, Madam Chief Justice. May I please the Court? My name is Francis Murphy, and

along with Chris Souffret, my co-counsel, we've had to privilege for nearly 10 years of representing

20 individuals of African ancestry. Three of them were born in Manchester. The other 17

were born in Africa. They came over at various times in their life, that is, various ages.

The eldest was Mohammed Mohammed. He arrived at age 10 and a half. One of the youngest

is the lead plaintiff, Arbe Osman, who arrived at three months old. She was only three months

in this refugee camp in Kenya. The issue is whether or not all of these children were

poisoned under one roof, six apartments, Lake Ave, bottom aisle from my office in Manchester,

very substantial elevated blood-led levels.

The bottom is the trial court's conclusion that your expert could not testify because,

in her judgment, your expert did not use reliable methods under the Daubert test, which is

now codified.

As I understand it, the key issue was that there was no so-called normative data relating

to this culture. Your expert agreed that there was no normative data. Am I right that, ultimately,

the decision we're going to have to make is notwithstanding that gap, is your expert's

opinion helpful to the jury under our rule and our case law regarding the admissibility

of expert testimony?

I agree. The reliability is the touchstone. The statute talks about reliable principles

and methods, and the statute goes on to set forth considerations under which, basically,

it satisfies the reliability criteria. And one of the considerations is whether or

not it's generally accepted into science. I believe we proved in spades that this methodology

is generally accepted.

But, of course, your opponent says that it's generally, it may be generally accepted

for educational purposes because, apparently, this testing is, in fact, used by your

expert and others in deciding whether children need special educational programs. And they

say, well, that it may be reliable, it may be okay for that purpose but not for the purpose

of this litigation. I mean, that's their argument.

That's the argument. And let me answer that in a little bit of an elaborate way. It's

essentially conflates. That point conflates the two of the three questions that Dr. Isquith

set out as his guideline for his methodology. He had three questions he said he was going

to address, and he did address in all his 20 reports. One, were these children exposed

to lead at high levels in a vulnerable age? Two, the test assessments that I'm giving,

will they reveal deficits, cognitive deficits? And three, can I then take those cognitive

deficits and take the inference based on medical literature and so forth and say more

probably than I am?

What was your evidence on their exposure? Is there any dispute about that?

That's a separate issue, right?

No, no it isn't. It was conceded. I started on direct, basically examining Dr. Isquith

about her three questions. It was conceded early on that there's no issue about question

one. There was substantial exposure to a known neurotoxin lead. So the focus, and the

court made this very explicit, the focus became question two. On page 122 of the

transcript, hearing one, the court narrowed the whole scope of the discussion and phrased

the party's dispute as follows. The issue is, can those neurological problems be diagnosed

and measured by the tests used by Dr. Isquith? That's question two. But she went on and

conflated issues regarding question two, namely, were these tests reliably yielding

data that showed cognitive deficits? With the third point, that is, do these deficits

can they be used to come to an opinion that more probably than not lead was a

substantial contributing cause to those deficits? The second question about the

reliability of the test goes to the fact that they are generally used in the

field. They're generally used not to identify the cause of the deficit, but

whether or not there was a deficit. What was your evidence going to be with

regard to the cause? Was that going to be through Carp? Dr. Carp, and I'm

confused about whether he's in or out. So we attempted to put, we did, we put

his affidavit in. Who's affidavit? Sorry, Dr. Robert Carp. Dr. Robert Carp is a

medical doctor, his expertise is in pediatric toxicology. His affidavit

said, it is a certainty based on the levels of lead that these kids were

exposed to. They suffered harm, a certainty. Okay, but I thought the court

made the decision not to allow Dr. Carp. Yes. And so where do we stand with

that? Because that isn't part of this in a lockatory appeal, the decision

to preclude you from introducing Carps testimony. The transferred question

does not specifically embrace that, but it was before the court. The affidavit

of Dr. Carp was before the court. We argued it was relevant because it adds

to the indicia of reliability. If it is a certainty that these kids were

harmed, doesn't that make the results of Dr. Isquist's tests more

reliable? Okay, so just, I'm trying to get oriented here. If you prevail

here, do you still have to fight about Dr. Carp? Because at this

moment, he's out. No, he was out solely because the issue in the

motion lemonade was the methodology of Dr. Isquist. He's not out

generally. Oh, I didn't appreciate that at all. I'm sorry. I didn't make

that clear. Okay, okay. We wanted his opinions in play when we're

discussing the reliability of the methodology. Wait a minute, though. I

read one of the trial court's orders that said Carp was a late

disclosed expert and he was out. Is that not the case? Late

disclosed on the methodology, not on the big picture. We had lots

of go rounds as to expert deadlines and is it pertaining to

methodology or the trial? Sorry, I led you down up. So again, we

argue that Carp's opinion was relevant because it pointed to it

added to the indicia of reliability of the results of

Dr. Isquist's testing. That is, it was a certainty that these

kids were harmed. If we were to uphold the trial court, is

there any way that you can see that these plaintiffs

could satisfy the Doberts standard? Probably not. Of course,

we're gonna revisit that issue as best we can because there's a

duty to do what we can. But generally speaking, the way these

are done is you show that there are cognitive deficits, you

get a combination of the neuropsychologists with the

medical doctor saying yes, lead was a substantial cause. But

I think the Chief Justice question really goes to the

issue of what the defendants expert said. He said in order

to establish the normative data, it would be terribly

expensive and complicated and take a lot. So I took from the

Chief Justice's question, as a practical matter, would you be

able to satisfy the criticisms that the

defendants have raised? As a practical matter, we could not

come up with this group and have an analysis to do a

normative study. In fact, the defense expert, Laurenti, in

the handbook of cross cultural psychology, which was in play

and the thing, said you don't do that. Dr. Laurenti's field of

expertise is Hispanics. He says there's a whole wealth of

different Hispanics in America, Cuban Hispanics, Mexican

Hispanics, Los Angeles, Texas and so forth. You cannot put

together as a practical matter. You should not do so.

Normative data to try to come up with a Hispanic

profile, a normative group. So the bottom line could be that

because of the characteristics of this group, they arguably

would be deprived of the ability to have their day in court.

Absolutely. That's our concern. Absolutely. And the

implications are more broad to other litigants, including in

New Hampshire. We've got other Somalian lead paint. But if

we don't uphold the trial court, then are we opening the flood

gates to little pockets of different cultures being able

to just ride and run around the Daubert standard? It isn't

running around. It satisfies the Daubert standard because it's

generally accepted as the defense experts acknowledged.

Generally accepted. It's used in the schools and

clinically across the nation, including in cross-cultural

But it's this application that they're quarreling with. They're

not saying that those tests aren't reliable. That's the whole

brain injury thing. So the judge conflates so-called

question and two. It says these deficits are not used in

schools to make a causation analysis on brain injuries. Well,

first of all, Dr. Isquith didn't do that. The testing, the

test results show deficits. The next step is, are those

deficits consistent in the medical literature with those you

find in the profile of lead-poisoned kids?

Mr. Murphy, let me just switch focus for a second. It seems to

me that our decision could well turn on the standard of

review here. And there's discrepancy here. The

defendants say that it should be a deferential standard of

review, unsustainable exercise of discretion. And, you know,

given a six-day hearing and all the stuff that you

filed with us, the trial court certainly had an opportunity to

do things that we're not going to be able to do on the record.

In your position is that we should follow the hood and this

should be a de novo review, essentially. Correct. And why is

that right? It seems to me that the bigger this is, the more

persuasive it is that the trial court has a better

perspective on it than we do.

Most, the vast majority of what's in those things is

literature. Literature that was just obliquely alluded to in the

course of the testimony. It was provided by defense counsel,

it loaded the record, but it wasn't the subject of

testimony.

But there were six days of testimony, right?

There were six days of testimony and four witnesses, all

experts, nobody, the defense experts never examined the

children, never acknowledged looking at their medical files

or anything. This was a forensic academic attack on a

generally accepted methodology without having any specific

acquaintance with the individuals.

Well, and although this went on for six days, the nub of it

was your expert did not have normative data on these children.

And he accepted that. He accepted that criticism.

He says there's no dispute that there's no normative

data on these children.

Right. So the question is, given what we have before us, is

this, did the court weigh the evidence as opposed to make a

judgment on admissibility? Because if we, if we reverse the

court's finding, you're going to have an uphill battle at

trial, your expert's going to be bombarded on cross

examination. So we've got to decide whether that's the way

to go because obviously your expert's going to have to

defend himself at trial. And that's going to be a very, there's

going to be a vigorous attack on him.

There was, and we, he did retort that there were 10 general

criticisms leveled at him by defense experts, at least as

disclosed in their expert disclosures. And we went

through methodically. What do you say to all these 10, and

that's in the record, it's in day one testimony. And I

believe there was good grounds for his retort back. And

basically he's saying, this is done every single day. We do it

carefully. It's a methodology that's accepted in school

districts around the country. And there's no other choice.

There's no other tools that are available to neuropsychologists

to, to deal with the demographic fact that in many urban

school districts, more than 50% of the children on non

Caucasian use the tools available. And the standard has

been Baxter and others, if it's good enough for the clinician,

it's good enough for the trial, it's good enough for the jury

to see the dog bird standards. I'm over. Sorry. Sorry. Sorry.

Thank you, Mr Murphy. I noticed you before you spoke. Yes, I

reserve. Yeah. Well, you didn't tell me about it. Okay. How

many minutes did you reserve to? Okay. Thank you. Thank you.

May it please the court, Gary Burke, on behalf of some of

the acquaintances, I didn't tell you. First of all, the statement

that was made that there was no way to properly assess these

children that is flat out false. There is a way to properly

assess these children. You create a control group. It's

done every day. You find 20 Somali ban two children not

difficult at all given that that Hampshire in 2004 had 300

families come into New Hampshire, live in Manchester

Concord and not find a psychologist who speaks, is it

pronounced to my my my my my the language, right? Isn't that an

issue? Well, that's an issue for the plaintiffs. Well, I know,

but it's not a question of having an interpreter. It's a

question of a qualified psychologist who speaks my

mind. Or, and we had interpreters, you know, it

doesn't have to just be a psychologist. It could be a

healthcare provider. And there were healthcare providers that

speak my my because they were in the medical records that he

claims my

They qualify to administer these tests. They don't administer

they simply interpret. I know it's an issue, but they

interpret. Well, isn't that your position? Interpretation

doesn't do it. Well, he this expert did not interpret

any way. And at all, he made the false assumption that

they spoke sufficient English, even though they were

English language learners. He called them by bilinguals.

He thought that that was sufficient. And as

But didn't your own experts say that I got this from the

brief someplace, didn't your own experts who wrote the

guide guidelines? Whoops, that everybody follows. He said

the only way to really establish, in his opinion,

reliable results is that you've got to have normative

data. And that process of establishing that is

expensive, complex and would take a very long time. He

said three things. And you're talking about Dr Reynolds. He

created a hierarchical structure of this. And that's

what I was getting to at the beginning. He said one way to

do it would be to get a normative group and test

them, ie 10 or 20 Somalia children test them with

these tests and then plot their scores. Now, so long as

they're healthy, I didn't have exposure to lead, they

probably would be identical in all ways to the plane of

group. And there is plenty available. Springfield,

Boston, Ohio, Kentucky had large families of Somali ban

two children come into their various locations. You do

20, you test them, you get your scores. Now you go to

your group that's lead affected. Let me just do

you have to test them with people who speak that

line. No, absolutely not. Because you test them,

you create control group. It's done all the time.

Dr Faust, who was in the Baxter matter in this

matter created a control. I don't understand the

testing. I thought that that much of the testing that

tester verbalizes a question or an instruction to the

child and then the child reacts. How can you do that if

the person doing the testing doesn't speak the

language? What you're misunderstanding is you don't

you're not testing them against the US norms. You

creating a whole new set of norms. So when you

create your control group of 20 kids, you're

creating a whole new set of norms. This is the major

problem with Dr Iskwas methodology. That is the

bell curve of which we're all familiar. Dead bang in

the middle, the red line is the median. If and the

literature out there suggested that Sub-Saharan

Africans can perform two, three and four times

below the standard deviation. So Adam, you want to

flip that first. So if he just assumed he

didn't know where they would score this group of

kids, and we're talking about deficits here. We're

not talking about brain injury. We're talking about

deficits. So if you take the Somali Bantu and we

assume that their mean score is one standard

deviation below the mean and you use what he

allegedly used, which is the 10th percentile. He

has found as impaired. People Somali Bantu

that would score in the 40th percentile had

they had their own norms and you just create

their own norms by doing testing on the same

test. All you're doing is administering the same

test and getting a number. It's when you start to

interpret the test score that it has meaning. If

you go to two standard deviations below the

mean, you're now starting to get in the group

that he said was impaired that had deficits.

Children that would have scored in the 70th

percentile under their own set of norms.

Okay. So let's assume that we appreciate all

of your arguments. I step back and ask

myself, what's the reason for the Daubert

standard? Ultimately, I'm exaggerating, but

ultimately the reason is to keep out of

courtrooms junk science. So we have been told

that there's no dispute that this testing is

used throughout the state and elsewhere in the

school system and it satisfies federal

regulations. So I hear what you're saying and

you've made a very thorough detail, passionate

argument here. But when I step back and say the

whole point of Daubert was to keep out of our

courtrooms what has been called junk science, I

say to myself, is it really junk science? What

the expert did here? Now it's subject to lots

of criticism and you would pound him to

death in trial. But should his opinion be

withheld from the jury? Yes. And I don't

like the term junk science. The question is

whether the... You may not like it, but

that's... Well, it's an oversimplification.

It's really an oversimplification, I'll

do respect your honor, of Daubert. Daubert

was meant to say, look, is the process the

product of scientific study? And in this

case, I believe we proved it was not. I

would also point out to... Wouldn't the

feds be standing on their heads if

students... Multiple students were put on

IEPs if testing wasn't reliable enough to

indicate that these children had problems

and needed assistance? What the problems

they have, though, is they are not

performing as well as their person sitting

next to them, so to speak, in school. It

doesn't identify a deficit and it

certainly isn't used to establish brain

behavior relationship, which is what

neuropsych testing's done. I would also

point out, your honor, that in three

cases, state v. Kressy, in Regina D, and

state versus Cavalier, 140 in

New Hampshire, 108 is the last one, 138,

697 is Gina D, and 137 in

New Hampshire, 402 is state versus

Kressy. In all three cases, the court

excluded an expert from testifying.

The first two was because the expert

was going to say that the defendant

was a sexual predator. Or I'm

sorry, the victim had been abused,

sexually abused. The court

recognized that the methodology

used in those circumstances had

therapeutic value, that it was used

for therapy regularly. However, the

court also recognized that there

were tremendous false positive

rates, and that the process had

not been generally accepted by the

scientific community in writing or

otherwise, and that the expert was

basically immune from cross-examination

because you couldn't penetrate the

argument that I was cautious, which

is Dr. Iskworth's argument. In one

case, they used standardized

cash. Could you clarify something

for me? Is Dr. Carp still in, in

other words, if... Yes, I can

clarify that. Because I was totally

confused. That's fine. I think

their argument is Dr. Carp not only

supports their reliability

argument, but he's going to be

their expert on the causation.

So could you could you just

clarify that? I don't know if

it will affect our decision or not,

but I was confused. I can

clarify here. We had agreed early

on that the issue regarding

methodology would be the primary

issue to be resolved first. They

disclosed Dr. Iskworth and his

reports. I disclosed my three

experts. Then they, untimely

fashion, disclosed Dr. Carp. I

said, uh-uh. I said he and

Dr. Liske, you were going to use

them, were supposed to be

disclosed beforehand so that my

experts can analyze it. Judge

Nicolosi said, yeah, Dr. Carp

wasn't timely disclosed and he

really doesn't play a role here

because he's not talking about

the methodology. I would also

say that two things, one, if

Dr. Carp's testimony is

there absolutely heard, which

is inconsistent, by the way,

with CDC, the CDC says-

But before you get on that,

is he in or is he out

ultimately?

Well, it all depends. I don't

know. I'm not going to say

he's in ultimately because

there may be another

challenge to his opinion.

I know Dr. Carp-

But all right. I asked it

wrong. For now he's in.

For now he's in. It may be

there may be other

difficulties. For now he's

in. Perhaps, Mr. Burt, you

should stop yelling at-

I know, I apologize. I

apologize. Everybody gets

excited. I know. But you've

kind of lost my way. Sorry.

Now you've lost my way. Oh,

in those three cases, the

court unequivocally ruled

that the evidence was not

sufficiently reliable, even

though used in a therapeutic

setting, it still was not

sufficiently reliable to

support the opinions and

therefore was out of the

case. And in the last case,

in state Cavalier, the

issue there was that the

expert was going to testify

that the defendant didn't

fit the profile of a sexual

predator. He used three

standardized tests. And the

court said there didn't

matter. There still was too

high a false positive. And

that's what this is. We

also gave an in fairness

to Judge Nicolosi. She had

all of those studies. She

promised us, and I think

she did, read all of

those studies. One study

was by a gentleman named

Paul, which said, you know,

we're going to go assess

Somali children in Ethiopian

refugee camps to determine

whether we have an assessment

mechanism that will measure

whether they have mental

health problems. But we

don't know if there's going

to work. So they did

validation studies, which

is what the standards

require. Remember, if you

don't have norms, the

standards say you must

label your test

interpretation conclusions

as tentative hypotheses,

i.e. a guess, not a

conclusion. So these

scientists went out and did

the validation studies. And

what do they write in the

Hall case, or the Hall

study? Oh, my Lord, these

are not acceptable for

doing this type of thing.

And this proves why it's

necessary to do

validation studies. And

that's why I'm saying,

yes, doctor, it's

with had a way to

validate if you wanted

to.

Your case is dealing

with studies in other

circumstances or lead paint

studies. Some deal with

lead. Take the Kosovo

study. In the Kosovo

study, they used a

reference group. They

went to Europe, Yugoslavia,

tested children who were

lead affected. Then they

went down the street and

tested children who

weren't affected.

Here's my question. Is

there going to be

evidence that children

exposed to a significant

amount of lead will be

damaged?

No. I'd not be able

to know how much, because

I kind of got that

impression from the plane

of spree.

It's an area of dispute,

Your Honor. The CDC says

that elevated lead levels

are a neurobehavioral risk

factor. They're not a

diagnosis. They are a

risk factor. The fact

that you have elevated

lead levels does not

necessarily mean you

were harmed. I will

tell you, the Baxter

case, which you are

familiar with, you

allowed that expert

to go away and bring

Dr. Isk within. The

jury in that case found

that there was no harm.

It's supported by the CDC's

most recent report.

Well, but doesn't that

answer the question?

It went to the jury, right?

No, because he tested

in the Baxter case

using tests for which

Shelby Baxter was clearly

normed. She was within

the normative sample.

I will tell you, if you

go back and read

Baxter, what you said

there was that the

Boston process approach

was appropriate because

the tests were

standardized. The

individual tests were

standardized.

Dr. Iskwit admits that

in this case, these tests

are not developed,

standardized, or validated

for this particular group.

Did he explain why he

didn't go out and find

the 20 kids that you're

talking about?

No.

Is that what's too

expensive?

Is that what takes too

much time?

No, he made no effort

to be honest with you.

To be honest with you,

in my humble opinion,

this methodology was

concocted by the plaintiffs

and Dr. Iskwit

at the Tilton diner

on the back of an

apkin because that's

what he said

in his deposition.

I came up with this

at the Tilton diner.

And as Judge Nicolosi found,

he...

Then I'm not sure

what your expert meant

when he testified

that to do this

properly would be

very expensive.

He said three things.

He was referring

to an epidemiological study

would be very expensive.

He said a less expensive

way would be to create

a control group.

You charge about $1,000

per assessment.

You have...

You typically pay

the group

some nominal amount

of money to participate

in the assessment

and you create...

You create your curve.

So if you create

your curve like this

and then you start

to test these kids

and you say, wow,

these kids are performing

just like the

unaffected group,

then you know

you got a problem.

But otherwise,

you're just guessing.

It is not the product

of a scientific study.

It wasn't validated

as required

by the standards

which is essentially

the controlling book

for psychologists

and neuropsychologists.

The standards indicate

that if you don't have

validity,

which means accuracy,

which is the hallmark

of Dalbert,

if you don't have validity,

then you have nothing.

You have a guess

and that's what the standards say.

What about...

I mean, have you been able

to find other cases

and other jurisdictions

that have dealt with this

very issue

with a particularized culture

that has a lot

of other factors

as you've described it.

Exposure to war,

violence, famine,

the whole works.

Yeah, all of those things

that Dr. Esquith

didn't even consider.

Yeah.

No, we haven't,

quite frankly.

The closest thing

is the down case.

So would this be a case

of first impression

that we're dealing with?

Probably.

But these books are here

for a reason.

There are multiple,

multiple, multiple criticisms.

In 2016,

and I brought extras

for the court if you wanted,

in 2016 there was a study

done about Zambians.

Zambians speak English fluently.

It's their mother language.

In that study,

they tested them...

Is that study before the trial court?

No, it wasn't

because it's 2016.

In that study, they found

64...

I know, but we can't consider that.

Oh, yes, you can.

In Baxter, you said you could.

In Baxter, you said

you'd look beyond the record

if it was pertinent

and looked towards...

Oh, so we get to do

our own research

on this case of first impression.

In Baxter, you said

we have to defer

to the trial court.

So are we going to do

a de novo review or not?

If we're going to do de novo,

then the floodgates are open

and we can research.

I'd prefer you follow,

obviously, Judge Nicolosi.

But I'm just telling you,

I'm just telling you,

the science has not stopped

merely because this case was tried

before Judge Nicolosi.

It continues to be cleared.

It's just one more piece.

Now, you don't even have to know about it.

It's clear that the scientific community,

the relevant scientific community,

has criticized significantly

the use of American norms

for cultures, different cultures.

And Dr. Isquith is within that group.

His chapter and his book,

he said you cannot assume

that you can use U.S. norms

for African cultures.

That's his chapter here.

He's an advocate of that as well.

And that is, so there is

significant dispute.

I don't think there is general agreement

amongst the scientific community

about the use of U.S. norms

for significantly distinct cultures

which there is no doubt

that this group of plaintiffs is.

Thank you.

Mr. Murthy?

These plaintiffs are not

Sub-Saharan, they're African-Americans.

When the trial court assumes

the mantle of a gatekeeper,

the trial court does not weigh the evidence.

I respectfully submit

there was a whole lot of weighing of evidence

and it all got tipped against Dr. Isquith.

For example, Judge Nicolosi

faults Dr. Isquith for not having done

enough cultural background investigation.

Page 43, appending to my bridge,

brief, she says he should have consulted,

among other things,

the local Somali-Bantu Community Association

of New Hampshire.

She neglects the fact that he consulted with

used as his term a cultural informative

Nasser-Urush in the Somali Development Society.

Nasser-Urush is the subject of an article

that's in the defendant's appendix

at page 1876.

It's a good and accurate portrait

of Nasser-Urush

who did a lot of good

in a saintly way for this community.

He played the role of interpreter

and cultural informant

and there's no reference to him

in Judge Nicolosi's case.

Can you just clarify?

Am I right that two out of the plaintiffs

were born in the US

and the others were born outside of the US

and raised many of them for many years

outside of the US and refugee camps?

Is that true?

Three were born in the US.

Judge Nicolosi makes reference to one

who was 10 years old

when he immigrated to the United States.

That's the elders, Mohamed Mohamed.

But Dr. Iskwit says he cannot say,

based on the data,

that lead was a substantial factor

for that particular plaintiff.

He's out of the case.

The others, for example, Abbey Osman

came here at three months old.

And at three months old

and then she gets lead poisoned

at a level of 59 micrograms per deciliter,

dangerously high.

She's coded before Dr. Iskwit sees her.

She's already been subject to assessments.

Taking out the fellow who was 10 years old,

who you say is no longer a plaintiff,

what's the oldest other individual

at the time they came to the United States?

The next one is his sister who also,

Dr. Iskwit said,

I think the sister was about eight when she came.

Dr. Iskwit, of the three that Dr. Iskwit said,

I can't say lead was a substantial factor.

These two were two of the three.

So the two eldest,

in part because they got exposed at a later age.

Children are most vulnerable

when their cognitive neurological things are happening.

Abbey Osman was two when she got these lead levels.

Very vulnerable, as all the literature says.

The other kids are between three months and eight years old.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Go ahead.
