Good afternoon.

This is case 2015-0349, state of New Hampshire versus Christopher Long.

The record should reflect the fact that when the court set this date for argument some many months ago, Justice Hicks was not aware that tomorrow his daughter-in-law would be graduating from business school at UCLA.

And he felt he needed to attend that family event and therefore is traveling to California as we speak, but he will participate in this appeal. Mr. Rothstein?

Thank you, Your Honor. May it please the court? My name is David Rothstein. I represent Christopher Long. Parenting rights are fundamental constitutional rights. Long as a parent had those rights.

The issue is whether a parent knowingly violates the no-contact provision of a criminal sentence by filing a petition in the family court about those rights.

Because that provision did not bar long from filing such a petition in the family court, the two to four-year sentence that the court imposed must be vacated.

Do you rely principally on analogy to the statute in the domestic violence area that allows an individual to contact the court and have the court send paperwork, all of that?

Do you rely on that statute principally to make your argument that he didn't violate the no-contact?

Principally, Your Honor, I rely on the fact that he had parenting rights.

Well, he did, but of course, part of his sentence involved no-contact, direct or indirect with the wife and the child, perhaps?

With the mother or her immediate family.

So there's the tension.

Well, and there is tension, and those rules, the kidder and the family court rule 1.23b that appears to have derived from kidder, deals with that tension.

I mean, the bottom line is in today's world.

That's why I asked the question that I did, because what occurs to me as perhaps one of the issues we need to determine in this case is,

does the existence of that statute create an ambiguity as to the responsibilities of someone who's under a criminal no-contact order?

In other words, would a reasonable person under that criminal order look to this statute and say, well, then I guess I'm okay?

Well, and you may have to look at the language of the statute.

It's a domestic violence order, a stocking order, or other similar matter.

So would a reasonable person believe that another similar matter is a no-contact?

And we've never ruled, we haven't, addressed whether this statute applies in other contexts other than domestic violence.

That's true, but in terms of another important thing that I'm relying on here is you're talking about a reasonable person.

In this case, Christopher Long was not only acting pro se, but he was an inmate at the New Hampshire State Prison.

So you're talking about an inmate at the New Hampshire State Prison having to reconcile this situation on one hand, having the parenting rights,

and trying to figure out how to, it's like I have these rights.

It's like a tangible object I have in my hand.

But what do they mean?

I know I can't write a letter to the mother of the child and say, hi, I've got the parenting rights.

Please bring the child up here so I can see the mother.

What do I do?

What if it plays out, though, as you would have it?

It's okay to file the parenting petition.

The trial court holds a hearing at which he's not found to be violating the protective order.

It creates a parenting plan that on its face would appear to give him some time with the child,

and yet he's still subject to the no-contact order, so he still doesn't get to see the child.

Well, and that could be your honor.

I do see a possible circumstance.

There's a couple of things that could happen here.

One thing that could happen here is the family court could say, you know, your rights are terminated.

In fact, what happened here from the statement of facts is that there was a cross petition file to terminate those rights.

So in that case, everything is pretty much moved.

Another thing that could happen is what the court says.

Now, as I understand, this is not my area.

As I understand, family courts have broad powers to fashion parenting plans.

They do.

And there may be a way for a family court to fashion some sort of minimal type of plan

where perhaps he could learn about his child or get an occasional picture of his child through an intermediary

where he wouldn't be able to have any contact with the child.

On the other hand, a family court judge or a master could say, you know what?

It was an awful crime that you committed, but you have another child.

This is hypothetical.

You have another child.

You have rights with that child.

I think there's some potential here, and I would like to grant you some rights with this child.

At that point, Mr. Long would have to go to the Superior Court.

At that point, it would be ripe.

See, the other thing here is that it's a unique situation, at least to me,

because I always view the Superior Court as basically being able to do anything that another court can do.

But in this case, it's unique because the Superior Court doesn't have, as I understand it,

the jurisdiction to determine Christopher Long's parenting rights,

and also does not have the power to forbid him from filing a petition in the family court.

And the state agrees that the court at the time of the plea and sentencing

did not divest him of his parenting rights.

Everyone below said, sure, you've got parenting rights.

They were not divested.

So if they're not divested and the Superior Court can't determine what they are,

and the Superior Court can't say to him, no, you cannot file a pleading in the family court.

Following the family court rule that people follow when they're under a protective order,

then he's in, I mean, it's a real enigma.

It's a real enigma, especially for a person who's an inmate in the prison.

He's not entitled to appointed counsel in the criminal case for this.

He's not entitled to other counsel.

He'll be entitled to counsel in the termination,

but he's not entitled to counsel for this purpose, the purpose of filing the petition.

He can't hire a lawyer.

He can't go to the clerk's office.

He can't call the clerk's office.

What he actually did here, in my view, was reasonable under the circumstances

and complied by the letter.

Can I ask you, Mr. Russell, would it make any difference?

Let's assume that you're right that legally he would have the right to do what you say he did.

Would it make any difference to that if, I mean, could the trial court find

and therefore Trump, so to speak, those rights if he did this,

not for the legitimate purpose of sort of having his parenting rights determined,

but his purpose was to harass the mother?

I think the court is getting at one of the comments that the trial court made here

is that I find that your purpose was to harass.

I've looked at the record here.

I've also looked at the record of the plea and sentencing.

I don't find, and the court has all of this,

I don't find in the plea and sentencing that Christopher Long said anything improper that day.

There were 18 months that had passed from the time of the plea and sentencing

to the time he filed this motion.

There's nothing on the record indicating that he did anything in those 18 months

that would constitute evidence of intent to harass.

So he followed, what he did is he filed a motion in a court of competent jurisdiction

trying to follow those court's rules.

Maybe it could have been styled differently.

Maybe he could have done a couple things differently.

But by and large, there's no direct evidence of intent to harass him.

So your argument is that he would have to have concluded

that RSA 173B, et cetera, that deals with domestic violence,

didn't relate to his case, and we haven't decided that issue yet.

Well, and there's a couple things there.

I mean, first of all, I doubt that, in practical terms,

I doubt that we're talking about a person who's sitting down

reading 173B5 and doing that analysis.

I think what a person in his position is trying to do

is he's trying to say, look, I've got these parenting rights.

I've got these rights.

There must be some way I can exercise them.

The family court has jurisdiction of them.

The family court talks about what to do when you're under a restraining order.

So that's what I'm going to do.

So your argument, I suppose, is even if we ultimately rule,

as a matter of law, that he couldn't do what he did,

he shouldn't have been penalized for that

because this is a little more nuanced than what one might believe at first blush.

First of all, I think, Your Honor,

I believe that other similar matter would reasonably cover this,

and I think that anyone reasonably looking at the situation

would see the relationship to Kitter

and would put these various types of domestic violence stocking,

no contact orders on a similar footing.

Because he didn't tell the court, I have a restraining order.

He said, I have a restraining order,

and he said, a full restraining order.

I think he didn't talk about the criminal sentence,

but the form asks for restraining orders.

It doesn't ask for criminal sentences.

He told the court who he was.

He told the court he was an inmate at the state prison,

so certainly the court could find out who he was.

The court could look up the sentence.

But the court, I believe, when it initially introduced the subject

of the language of 1.23b, used the word ambiguous,

or is there some ambiguity here?

And there is some ambiguity here.

It's a difficult situation.

It's a difficult situation potentially in part

because you don't know if other similar matter covers this.

And it's a difficult situation because you have these rights,

and the superior court does not hold the key to these rights,

but the family court does.

What if we were to agree with you in some form or fashion?

Does he get any practical benefit from that?

In other words, where did these two to four years stand at the moment?

They were imposed consecutive to,

I believe he's doing something on the order of a dozen

stand committed years and maybe 13,

and they were imposed consecutive to that.

So they, while imposed, they are not yet in effect,

so he's not serving those two years?

He's not serving those two to four years.

As I understand it, he's got some sort of many sentences

that he would parole through until he gets to 13 years.

He would not get to that two to four.

So it was imposed consecutive.

Mr. Ross, let me ask you.

I wrote down something, I think you said,

which is the superior court can't order

that he couldn't file a motion to establish a parenting plan.

Is that what you said?

It is what I said.

It didn't or it can't?

Well, it can't, in this case, could it have?

Now, I think it potentially,

let's say this plea in sentencing went a little bit differently

and the negotiated plea was,

we're going to give you this deal.

We think this is a really good deal,

but in order to get this deal,

we want to make sure that you just never,

ever have any contact with these people again

and we are going to require you as a condition

of this plea in sentencing to waive your parenting rights,

your constitutional parenting rights,

and to waive the right to a statutory termination proceeding

under Rule 170C, RSA 170C.

I do think, I mean, a lot of things can be waived

in plea in sentencing.

I think that might have been possible.

That didn't happen here.

The state's not arguing that that happened.

But I thought that's what you said.

Oh, no, I know.

They couldn't do it.

No, I didn't mean to imply that that

couldn't happen or just didn't happen.

It could happen here.

On this record, there's no way that it happened here.

In fact, there was a very interesting exchange

at one of the hearings that I quoted in part

in my brief at pages 10 and 11,

where the prosecutor is actually asked by the judge,

did you guys ever talk specifically about parenting rights?

And the prosecutor said, well, actually,

I don't remember that we really specifically talked about them.

So given that they've never been talked about,

and given that he has them,

and given that you have a court of competent jurisdiction,

what he did, especially filing the court rule,

did not warrant imposing the sentence

or imposing two to four years.

Or I suppose what you're saying,

that he didn't act knowingly.

If he, in fact, violated, that's not enough.

He has to do it knowingly.

If it's ambiguous, then it's harder to act knowingly.

And I do think that, in a sense here,

the reasonableness of his conduct

and how he comported himself,

it goes against, I think, a finding of harassment

in terms of being open with the court,

in terms of learning enough about the court rule

to know that he can't directly serve her

in terms of being open about his status.

I do not think it was a knowing violation.

I don't think, and there has to be,

this is equivalent to contempt, this court has said,

under state versus Smith,

there has to be an intentional failure to comply

or an intention to subvert the order here.

And I do not find that.

I guess, you would really be saying that,

because knowingly doesn't usually mean

that you know the law.

It just means you know what you're doing.

But here, maybe what you're saying

is that the law is really sort of unclear

and to impose a knowledge requirement.

Well, the law is, the law is,

the law can be, I think, reasonably,

this court might decide differently,

but it's sort of,

court would have to go through a statutory construction exercise

to do that.

This person in this position, Mr. Long,

is not going through that type of exercise.

And he's trying to determine what he can do.

And the question is in doing,

I mean, if other similar matter really means

not a criminal offense, if that's somehow excluded,

is it fair to kind of not only impart that to him,

but to say that he has violated the,

what do you call it, the misplaced trust

or what's sort of implied in these types of orders,

that he's acted in that way,

where he deserves to have two to four years

of a sentence suspended upon him.

So, for those reasons,

we would ask the court to find that the trial court erred

and find in that he violated the sentence

and in imposing the two to four year sentence.

Thank you.

Good afternoon, Chief Justice.

Justice is Elizabeth Woodcock for the State of New Hampshire.

Mr. Rothstein has said several times

that this is a difficult situation.

It was indeed a difficult situation.

The victim in this case woke up

with a man pointing a gun at her.

Having taken out a restraining order against him,

not 10 days after he has served,

he is standing at the bottom of her bed

with a gun pointed at her face.

That's a difficult situation.

It had a significant impact on her.

It's very clear from her statement to the court

and the court's reaction to it.

And bear in mind that Justice Garfunkel was there to hear her,

but Justice Nicolosi listened to the tape

and heard again this victim's deep trauma

at having been treated this way by this man.

When he entered into this plea agreement,

he made the bargain.

He agreed not to have any contact with the victim

or her immediate family.

But this does, I mean, you know,

it does strike me that this is...

you're reading into that,

that that means he doesn't have the right

to assert at all his parental rights.

And I mean, it just seems to me

that this is pretty aggressive on the part of the state

and, frankly, the trial court,

a way to interpret the no contact.

I mean, why couldn't, for example,

the prosecutor acknowledges, Mr. Rothstein said,

that there really was no discussion

of what was happening with regard to his parental rights.

And, you know, should the...

was it his responsibility to have that discussion

at the plea hearing or was it the state,

if they wanted to not have him be able to file anything

in court relating to his parental rights,

why isn't it fair to say it's their burden?

You want to, you know, basically terminate

his parental rights as part of this plea agreement?

Fine, propose to him that that's a term of the plea agreement

and you'll either accept it or not,

but then you've got it, you know,

then it's sort of clear.

He was repeatedly warned that he should have no contact,

direct or indirect, through any means,

through a third party with the victim

or her immediate family.

He knew the child had been born.

He agreed to this as a response,

as in order to get the sentence that he got.

Suppose that there was some claim that,

I don't know, that some kind of property dispute

between him and the victim of the crime

and that, you know, that was never something

that was discussed as part of the plea agreement,

that he claimed that he owned some real estate

or something like that and she didn't, you know,

and that she wanted to quiet title against her.

I mean, would we interpret that,

the language of this agreement to mean

that he couldn't have filed a civil suit

in court relating to that,

even though there was no discussion of that issue

in the plea agreement?

Well, I think that you have to back up

and look at what he actually asked the family court to do.

He asked the family court not only to contact her

but to set up a mediation, a parenting plan.

He wanted them to schedule our appearance.

His obligation, if he wanted to do that, Justice Lin,

was to go back to the court that had imposed the sentence

and say, I want to revisit the terms of my sentence.

Well, okay, but let's assume even,

let's even assume that we would say, you know,

with the benefit of hindsight, we would say you're right.

You know, that would have been the better thing for him to do.

Are we really, is it really fair to say that, you know,

and because you chose this, the wrong sort of alternative here,

you went to another court,

you went to the court that has jurisdiction over this matter,

the result of that is not simply that you lose,

but you got two to four additional years.

I think that you have to go back again to the situation

that was presented to the sentencing court.

This is a situation in which that victim was deeply traumatized.

She was eight months pregnant with that child.

He threw her into the back of the van.

He forced her down the stairs.

I mean, all of this, I don't mean to,

I don't mean in any way to minimize that,

but that really is irrelevant to the legal issue, isn't it?

Because if this, suppose that this was a really minor violation

of that he ended up pleading guilty to,

she wasn't traumatized hardly at all.

I mean, would the rule of law be different then

that if you're not really traumatized,

if it's not particularly significant, then it's okay?

But because it was particularly significant,

Justice Garfunkel repeated again and again and again.

You are to have no contact with this person.

But of course, there was no express waiver of 173B

to the extent it's applicable.

And as I'm looking at the language of 173B,

it does suggest to me that it is,

it perhaps relates to a case such as this.

Well, I think it doesn't, Justice Convoy,

because there isn't-

We've never ruled on it, right?

That's correct.

So we're arguing about it.

That's why we're here.

We're not clear on whether this would excuse someone

under a criminal no contact order from contacting the court.

I think that the answer to that question is that when you,

if a court imposes, a superior court imposes a restriction on someone,

you don't go to a different jurisdiction or a different sovereign.

You don't go and say,

I don't like what I agreed to in this plea agreement.

So let me try over here.

But what do we make of the remark?

I don't have it precisely at hand to quote,

but something was said by the trial judge to the effect of,

well, you still have your parenting rights, correct?

Well, yeah.

I think that that was actually an issue when the motion to impose was raised.

So that would have been Justice Nicolosi.

There was discussion about whether he had forfeited all of his parental rights.

And I'm not an expert on adoption law or something of that sort,

but I think that there are rights that he retained, also probably obligations.

If he had won the lottery, for example,

then he might have an obligation to support the child.

There would be things like that.

But if he is not satisfied with the imposition of the sentence by the superior court,

that's where he has to go back.

What suggests that he wasn't, you characterize it as he wasn't satisfied?

How can we draw that conclusion when in effect he's following 173B,

which does allow in DV situations an individual subject to a restraining order

to contact the court?

So how can we draw from his apparent utilizing a procedure

which is, by our legislature, allowed in a different context,

similar, different, where we have not made a ruling that this does not apply

in the context of a criminal, no contact order?

I think that the answer to that is that when somebody pleads guilty,

the person may waive a great many rights.

And one of the rights that this man waived was contact with the victim.

With a court.

With a court.

His contact was within the court.

Now I get that as a result of it, the court then sent paperwork to the victim.

I get that.

But you statute that says even notwithstanding a no contact provision

in a protective order, okay, it shall not be construed to prevent a defendant

or a defendant's counsel from sending plaintiffs copies of legal proceedings

filed in court or related to the DV or related civil or criminal matters.

Right.

But this is not a restraining order.

The process for getting a restraining order is entirely different.

This is an agreement that he made essentially with the superior court.

I understand they're not the same.

I do understand they're not the same.

But is it unreasonable for an individual to look at this statute,

whether he did, in fact, or not, to look at this statute and say,

well, maybe it's okay to contact a court?

Because if I'm doing something wrong, the court surely will tell me that.

In which case it would have been more, shall we say, forthcoming of him

to say that he wasn't under the order of a protective order,

but that he was given.

But he was.

He was, wasn't he?

No.

My reading of the breeze was that he also was under a restraining order.

That's not at all clear.

She sought the restraining order in April.

He was sentenced the following March.

By the time he filed this, there's nothing on the record that says

that she went back and got another restraining order.

And within a year, after a year, the restraining order would have expired.

So I think that the record is not at all clear that he was subject to a restraining order.

What was preventing him?

Is it so clear that it would be unreasonable for him to say,

I have a restraining order against me?

I mean, do we have evidence that he was told,

whoops, the restraining order is not in effect anymore?

We do not.

We don't.

So it strikes me that a reasonable person would say,

I got a restraining order against me.

And he told the court that.

I have a no-contact order which was imposed by the superior court

as a result of my kidnapping the victim.

That's not what he told the family court.

I understand.

And if the family court had realized that it wasn't a restraining order,

if you're a family court judge and you're looking at this,

and you say, okay, this is a restraining order,

well, that must have been issued by, you know, my turf here.

And you don't realize that over here in the superior court,

Justice Garfunkel has told this man about six times

and given him six different pieces of paper that say,

do not have any contact with this person direct or indirect.

Let me ask you this.

You act and you go ahead and serve the person

without realizing that Judge Garfunkel has said to this man,

she has suffered enough.

I want no contact.

Suppose that he had done what you say would have been,

I guess, the preferred thing.

He had gone to superior court and said,

I want to file this.

I want the terms of my sentence changed

because I want to file this petition in the family court.

Isn't it very likely that when the prosecutor learned of that,

the prosecutor would have contacted the victim?

And then would he be charged with that, too?

Well, you caused, you filed this in superior court,

you caused the prosecutor to contact the victim.

You must have known the prosecutor was going to do this

before responding.

I think that that's a different matter entirely,

Your Honor, because under the provisions

of the Victim Witness Act,

the prosecutor has certain obligations.

The court did not say to him,

you can't ever come back and ask for sentence review.

You can't ask for any kind of reconsideration of this sentence.

Justice Garfunkel didn't preclude him from doing that.

Justice Garfunkel precluded him from causing third parties

to contact this woman.

And in this particular instance,

the prosecutor wasn't contacting her.

The sheriff was showing up at her door,

handing her with a summons.

But Justice Garfunkel didn't put,

Judge Garfunkel didn't put in there that he couldn't file

for a parenting plan either.

You can't go to family court and file for a parenting plan.

He could have done that.

He could have done that if anyone had raised it,

but this was the bargain that this defendant entered into.

No contact with the mother or the daughter.

What was he doing trying to file a parenting plan

where he was asking for mediation and hearings

and oh, please get in touch with her.

Does it turn on his request for mediation or for hearings?

Should it turn on that?

I think it turns...

Well, I think it is an indication of what he anticipated

would happen.

I think that he saw himself going back into court.

And that's what Justice Nicolosi said.

You filed this in order to drag her back into court.

That's what the trial court said.

What was that brief conversation between Judge Garfunkel

and the parties at the time of the plea agreement

when he said, have you discussed the impact on...

That isn't clear to me.

They had a brief discussion.

Attorney Rothstein has got it in his brief.

And the answer was no,

but what was the implication of that discussion?

I think that that was afterwards.

I think that that was when...

What happened was that when the initial motion to impose was filed,

the court had two different hearings,

and that was Justice Nicolosi,

and the question was posed, did you advise him

when you were talking about this, Mr. Prosecutor,

did you say to the defense attorney,

of course, this will have an impact on his parental rights.

Oh, I see.

So that conversation happened after the fact,

not at the plea and sentencing?

It did not.

It did not.

And as I said, this was an agreed upon sentence,

an agreed upon sentence in which the defendant

knowingly waived a lot of rights,

including the right to have contact

with the mother of his child and the child.

Do I understand the excerpt correctly

that's in Mr. Rothstein's brief?

It's a representation by the, I guess,

the prosecutor as to his discussions with defense counsel.

Correct.

So we're once removed from whatever the defendant

knew or didn't know or was told.

Right.

I mean, I think it's clear from the record

that there was no discussion about terminating

this man's parental rights.

It was repeated advice not to contact

the victim and her immediate family.

Does it matter the nature of the relief he was requesting?

Someone mentioned earlier in our discussion this afternoon,

well, what if he won megabucks?

Would he violate this

if he sent a letter to the family court saying,

I have become rich overnight.

I'm going to be in jail forever.

I want to support my child.

Unlikely that would happen.

But would he then be in violation

and would incarceration be warranted

if the subject matter was different?

You understand my question.

So if the subject matter would arguably benefit the child,

would that change the analysis here?

Would he still be in violation

and therefore imprisonment warranted

for having that kind of contact?

Please court send this notice to the victim

that I want to now send her lots of money.

Well, again, I mean, I think that that's not the case here.

I get that.

I'm trying to understand

does the subject matter make a difference?

You say just the fact of contacting the court

knowing the court is then going to contact the victim

is enough to do it.

So if we change the facts just a little bit

and say he contacts the court

knowing that the victim is going to be contacted

but he's doing it for a good reason.

Well, I think that the answer to that

is that the court in its discretion

when it's asked to impose a suspended sentence

can take into consideration all of the facts before it.

And that might be a fact that a superior court would say,

well, I do not find that this is particularly egregious.

This is actually delivering good news

and I find that this particular violation,

although a technical violation shouldn't warrant

an imposition of sentence.

But in this case, he's not doing that.

And I think that he is bound by the agreement that he made.

I see my red light has been on for some time.

If the court has no further questions,

I'd ask that the case be submitted.

Thank you. Case submitted. Court is in recess.
