This is case 2015-0338, State of New Hampshire v. Terry Adams, Jr.

The record should reflect the fact that Justice Hicks is disqualified from this case. Counsel?

Good morning, Your Honors. Attorney Thomas Gleason for the appellant, Terry Adams.

First, I'd like to preface my comments by saying I find myself in an unusual situation, unusual for me, perhaps not so unusual for the court.

In preparing for today's case, I realize that the United States Supreme Court has taken certiorari, granted certiorari on a case out of the Ninth Circuit,

which is exactly the issue that we're dealing with. The information on that case is, I've got the docket number of the United States Supreme Court,

which is 15-458, and the name of the case is Dietz, D-I-E-T-Z versus Bouldin, B-O-U-L-D-I-N.

Oral arguments took place on April 26th of 2016.

So we would expect a decision. Is the case to which you refer squarely on point?

Squarely on point, from what I could see, relating to the issue concerning the jury verdict.

So we would expect that a decision would issue before the end of June?

I'm not sure how quickly the United States Supreme Court comes out with decisions, Judge.

I did alert counsel to it. We had some discussion about it.

My thought would be is to ask the court if the court would at least defer its decision until the United States Supreme Court rules,

because I don't want to be my client left in the position where if your honor's decided in a particular manner,

which is unfavorable to my client or unfavorable to my client, and then the United States Supreme Court rules favorably,

he's kind of, under these circumstances, I don't think it's very fair to him.

I would agree with you. That would probably not be fair.

I think that they try and usually succeed in releasing all of the decisions from all of the cases argued in the term by the end of the term.

And so that shouldn't be too far from now. And I would see no problem deferring our decision to see what happens.

Thank you, Judge. And that was exactly, frankly, the point that my mother made.

But they could tie 4-4.

Judge?

They could tie 4-4, in which case they couldn't.

Yes, unfortunately.

Okay.

The issue, I'm focusing on the jury verdict issue in my oral presentation.

From my looking at my research, it appears to be an issue of first oppression here in New Hampshire.

I know that there are cases, other cases, where in a civil context there were issues about reconvening a jury after it's been discharged.

And I know in criminal cases there were situations where juries were reconvened to address the issue of juror misconduct.

Can I ask a question just about the standard of review?

Do you agree with the state that the standard of review is unsustainable exercise of discretion?

Yes.

I think that the criminal cases or the civil cases actually that deal with the issue, really the extent to which the state has addressed it has been really an abuse of discretion standard.

That the court is, the trial courts are granted discretion as to how to deal with this issue.

How I think it's an issue of first impression is, is that the first impression is, is that the standards by which the court must, the standards the court must use to exercise that discretion I think is what's really at, really at issue.

So you would say that the court went beyond the boundaries of its discretion when it reconvened the jury and corrected the verdict?

Yes.

And, and, and does it matter whether the discharge is a, of the jury is a technical discharge or do you look at discharge based on the facts?

In other words, that the state says, well, yes, the court technically discharged the jury, but it never left the courthouse.

It wasn't exposed to any outside influences, putting aside the issue of the role of the alternate, which I'm not clear on.

But the state says within minutes, and I think you even say in your brief, within 15 minutes back in the courtroom for the clarification.

Does the Dietz decision deal with an argument concerning a technical discharge as opposed to whether they really were discharged?

Well, what do you, as I understand what the Dietz decision deals with, in, in the, um, the Ninth Circuit decision can be found at 794 F3rd, uh, 1093.

Um, it basically summarizes the different views, the differences between the circuits and the states when they're addressing this issue.

And basically it's come down to three different ways of looking at this issue.

Um, I believe it's in the Fourth and the Eighth Circuit and some, some states like Indiana, Ohio, and I believe West Virginia,

look at it as, as soon as the judge has released the jury there in the courtroom and said, you know, the, the jury's been, the, the verdict's been taken,

it's been recorded, um, and, and the judge says, you are free to leave.

I, you know, I, I encourage you to stay out in the jury room as they always do.

I'm gonna come out and say, talk to you, but you don't have to stay there.

You're free to leave the courtroom.

Once they leave the courtroom, that, that, that's the verdict. It's, it's done.

Um, it, it's over and there is no reconvening the jury.

A middle ground approach has been with some of the, uh, probably the majority of the, the circuits and the states has been,

um, is that there's like this protective, um, the, the word that you use, a protective shield in some of the decisions

about once the jury has been discharged actually from the courtroom but remains within that protective shield of the courthouse,

um, and has not been subjected to any outside influences, then they, then they're still, they haven't been officially discharged yet.

And then there's a third approach, which is, is that, which is probably the, uh, the, the most, uh, for lack of a better term liberal,

which is the, the ninth circuit in some states, I believe, including, uh, Massachusetts, is that if you're still with,

you're still within the protective shield if, um, even if you're outside of, even if you've been subjected to outside influences,

but you haven't been improperly influenced. So those are the three things at, at issue here.

Um.

Are you taking the middle position?

No. We're taking the position, Judge. I, I think that, that once that, that, and of course I'm an advocate for my client.

They're saying the discharge was not technical, it had a, it has substantive, it, it, it constituted a substantive discharge.

Yes.

And did the, did the trial judge actually, um, utter the phrase, thank you, you are discharged?

I don't know that that was the term, discharged, uh, that, that they use that term.

I know that, uh, they were told that they were free to go, I believe I quoted that in my, in my brief,

they were free to, free to leave, free to leave the courthouse, or they could go back to the jury room and meet with, uh, uh, the judge afterwards to discuss.

Well, I think that, that, that word is a term of art, and I spent a long time as a trial judge and always used that phrase.

Um, so I wonder whether there's any difference between saying you are discharged and you're free to leave,

because that, it might come down to that.

Well, I, I, I would respectfully disagree, Judge.

I think sometimes things are what they are.

And, and, and, and in the context of things, when, when, when a verdict is taken and you go through all,

Your Honor's a trial judge, been a trial judge, so you know, you go through all the, the, the procedures that are relative to that.

The jury was not polled in this case.

Nobody asked for the jury to be polled.

And you go through that, and then the jury is told, you may leave, and you may leave, you're, you don't have to stay in the courthouse anymore.

Whether you use that word or not, they are discharged.

And, and I, you know, I'm an advocate for my client, so I'm taking the, the, the position that would be most beneficial to him.

Um, but in terms of.

If we, if we went with the middle ground as you described it.

Uh, what is your position with regard to the fact that this, that the alternate in this case, somewhere along the line, entered the jury room and, and expressed a view?

What is your position on the role of the alternate here?

Uh, my, my, my view judge is, it's just if I could preface that by one comment is, is that whichever, whichever, um, um, position the court ultimately takes, I, I say that the defendant wins in this case.

But on that particular one, it's, um, the alternate is not part of the deliberation process.

I, I, I think that, um, you know, in this case what we know is, is that when his honor went back into the courtroom to meet with the jury, um, the alternate is there.

So how, when the alternate got there, how, how long the alternate was there, what kind of conversation took place before that time, what kind of involvement the alternate juror had?

We don't know.

And, and no one was queried on that.

Exactly.

No one was queried, so we don't know.

But isn't it, isn't it really clear, I mean, that, that, that the.

It seems to me that somebody, either the, either the foreperson or one of the other jurors must have said something to the.

To the foreperson about, you know, there's.

Something got it, something must have gotten screwed up in the announcement because, because that, that was, that was the first thing the foreperson said.

When Judge, uh, Shulman went, went into the jury room.

I mean, he didn't, he didn't say anything about, you know, how to do, you know, how did this go, uh, you know, anything.

He didn't raise, he didn't say anything to raise that kind of a statement by the foreperson.

Um, I, I think you can assume that judge, but I, I think that if we, if we're dealing with this from a legal perspective is, is that, you know, um, it would not be something you could infer.

Because there are no facts about what happened before the period, point in time that the judge comes into that room.

So there's nothing to infer from that you could, would lead you to conclude that somebody else had said something.

What we, all we know is.

Well, we know what Judge, well, we know what Judge Shulman said.

We, we know what he said.

Right.

We, we know what the foreman said.

And we know, going back to Your Honor's, uh, question about the alternate, um, is the alternate participated.

The alternate says something.

The alternate says, well, this is what I heard.

Um.

But the irony is that it actually favored your client.

Because the alternate heard, not guilty.

I, I, I suppose so, Judge, but the.

So, you know, I, I wonder whether, even if there was a potential for the alternate to affect the proceeding, the alternate's view was that the verdict was not guilty.

So, does it matter, I guess.

Well, I don't know that the, the, the, the, I don't know that the alternate's view, Judge, is, is that the, that, um, the defendant should have been found not guilty.

I think it was that.

She or he, I don't know, said, I heard not guilty.

Not guilty.

Um, what I would say about that, Judge, is, is going and, and dealing with the, the issue of the, of the court's decision, the, the, the order that the judge made.

I think one of the, um, with all due respect to, to his honor, one of the big mistakes that he made was, is in a circumstance like this, going back and listening to the tape and trying to recreate history as to what was said in the courtroom.

Um, I think that really treads on dangerous, very dangerous ground.

Um, in terms of, of how we do things in the sanctity of a jury's verdict.

Um, the, the way to approach it is, is not going back and trying to figure out what was said.

The way to deal with it is, is, well, can the jury, can, can the jury amend its verdict?

Can we, can we do that?

Can we recall the jury?

Can they amend the verdict?

But, but doesn't that assume that there is an amendment of the verdict?

I mean, and, and, and that was exactly, was exactly what Judge Shulman was trying to figure out, was, was, was there, you know, some kind of an amendment of the, of the verdict?

Well, I don't know, I'm sorry, I don't know what you mean, Judge.

In other words, you, you, you're assuming that there was, that, that what was announced was not guilty, and that when, and that when Judge Shulman went back into the jury room, it had now changed to guilty.

And, and, and that, what I'm saying is, Judge, Judge Shulman wasn't prepared to accept that that's actually what happened.

I mean, and overwhelmingly, the evidence suggests, I mean, the idea that 12 jurors walked out of the jury room and all of a sudden decided, hey, let's change our mind in, you know, a matter of, of a few minutes seems, seems pretty preposterous.

Well, whether, whether they changed it at that point in time, Judge, or whether they changed it, but there's 15 minutes here.

So, whether they changed it before, before the judge came in, or whether they changed it after the judge left the room, I, I, I, I can't say, Judge.

But, but the, the point I'm making with respect to this, this verdict is, is, is when you have these circumstances where, uh, the, the foreman announces a verdict, the judge accepts it, the clerk writes it down, no lawyer objects, the jury is asked, as, as a group, is this your verdict?

Is this your verdict?

Yes, it is.

It, it's, it's improper to somehow go back.

Well, how, how, how, how would human error be corrected?

Let's say the deputy clerk, um, had just had ear surgery.

Okay?

He, he or she is back after ear surgery.

And it's not quite hearing as he or she might normally hear.

Mm-hmm.

Hears it as not guilty.

The foreperson meant it as guilty.

The deputy writes it down as not guilty, reads it as not guilty, is the foreperson supposed to say, whoa, wait a minute, that's not what we said.

It strikes me that, in this case, the foreperson approached the court as soon as possible to explain, no, that wasn't our verdict.

I guess my question to you is, obviously, there are myriad circumstances where nor, just human error is going to result in perhaps the deputy writing down what he or she thought was heard.

But it was wrong.

Yeah, I, I, I, I, I, I, Judge, if you're asking me as my, in my position as, as not an advocate, is, does it make sense in terms of the law that there would be some leeway given to, to, to, to, because we're dealing with a human institution and people make errors?

Mm-hmm.

Mm-hmm.

It seems to be the best.

Because otherwise, if you're going with the other approach, you're asking for litigation about whether or not, if people have had contact with outside forces, whether or not they were improperly influenced.

You're, you're begging for all kinds of litigation on that.

Okay, so pushed against the wall, you'd say the middle approach probably makes them.

Right.

But my, my, my, my client still wins because that alternate, um, on a middle approach is, that's an outside influence.

The, the, that's the protective field.

No matter whether it would be an influence that favored your client or not.

Wouldn't matter.

The existence of an influence, you say, changes the calculus.

Absolutely.

And it's just.

But wouldn't one, one solution to this problem be a, maybe a rule change to require the use of verdict forms?

If you had had a verdict form here, there would have been no problem.

Maybe, judge.

Maybe.

And I could just find, I'll find, I'll finish with one point.

On, on the, just on the judge's ruling, um, I think there was a factual, uh, insufficiency because he, he made a, a ruling that the, the jury had not re, re deliberated.

And the jury, um, was not improperly influenced.

And I, and going to one of the points of one of your honors made earlier, there had been, in order to make that he would have asked, had to have asked the jury.

And he didn't.

So there's no factual basis for it.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Mr. Block.

Good morning, and may it please the court.

My name is Sean Lock, and I represent the state of New Hampshire.

Uh, the state asked that this court affirm the defendant's convictions.

And before I get started, I'll address two quick points.

I agree with Judge Lynn that a rule change for a written verdict form would help alleviate a lot of these problems going forward.

What is your position on the case pending in the U.S. Supreme Court?

Do you agree with your opponent that facts are pretty much on all fours, and this, that decision may well control?

That's what, that was gonna be my second point.

Um, and I'm not as convinced as my opponent is that this, the facts of that case are completely square in all fours.

That case is a civil case of federal courts sitting in diversity jurisdiction.

I mean, the jury at this point, members of the jury at that point had left the courtroom, or the courthouse entirely.

It also pertains to, uh,

I'm sorry, it was a civil case you're saying?

It's a civil case.

It also pertains to an issue of, basically, federal statutes governing civil case law and the federal rules of civil procedure,

not necessarily, you know, the due process concerns that would be presented in this particular case.

But was it an issue that, um, a verdict was rendered?

Somehow, allegedly, erroneously, jury leaves, they come back, and they say, whoops, wrong verdict.

So what I, what I had come to understand in this case, I'm just reading kind of analysis of this case,

is that the trial court had given an improper, or given bad instructions to the jury.

The jury returned a civil verdict that was invalid and had been discharged and left,

and the trial court realized its error, then recalled the jury and the parties to correct their instructions.

So this was not, this was not a case of, um, someone in the court, a question about whether the clerk or the judge

heard the correct, heard the verdict that the foreperson meant to convey?

Correct.

This was a correction of jury instructions?

Right, and then the jury went and re-deliberated, and then came back with a new verdict.

But do you, do you agree with counsel that it probably makes sense to wait, I'm not sure we'd get to it that quickly anyway, but, to wait for that case to be decided, to see if it sheds any light?

I have no problem with that, and I agree, and I, I advise counsel, I said, I advise that, you know, the Supreme Court will likely issue a decision before the end of June.

This court can take, usually takes a bit longer than that to issue its decisions, um, so it's likely that this decision would come out before.

Would you like a chance for supplemental briefing after the opinion's rendered?

If this court felt that supplemental briefing was necessary, and that this case was of particular relevance to this case, then the state would welcome the opportunity to address it.

Do you think in this case the judge should have queried the jurors?

In other words, um, although I personally, in a number of years as a trial judge, never confronted this precise situation, I did encounter others that, that I felt required me to have each juror come into chambers, on the record, separate from the other jurors, and answer my questions.

Do you think that would have been a better approach?

It could have go either way. I think the court's approach in this case was adequate.

I mean, I know there was concern around the fact that there was an alternate present, but in all the case law addressing these particular issues, the jury is interacting with court security officers.

It's very likely that there are alternates present in those cases as well when they return to the jury room.

And given the short amount of time that passed here.

Well, putting aside the alternate issue, the judge could have queried each juror saying,

what was your verdict as you came into the courtroom the first time?

Were you expecting the foreperson to render a guilty verdict?

And just do that with every single juror so that the court could be satisfied that there was a unanimous verdict of guilty the first time around.

Correct. He certainly could have done that. And they did, after the verdict was re-entered, each member of the jury was polled.

And then they were polled. Correct. And they all...

But that didn't deal with, was that your verdict when you were in the courtroom before being officially discharged?

I would agree that that doesn't answer that specific question.

Right.

But I think it's within the trial court's discretion to conclude that the jury did not change its mind in the three minutes between being discharged.

Well, maybe, you know, anything can happen. There may have been a huge fight with one juror holdout.

It may have been a huge fight. And in the course of a few minutes, that juror said, I can't do this anymore.

All right. I'm with you. We have no way of knowing that.

Well, if there was a one juror that held out, it would likely be a hung jury instead of a not guilty verdict,

which would be a very different result in this case. Here we had the fore...

Unless the foreperson was acting in some sort of deceitful manner to announce that the verdict was not guilty,

if there was a holdout, we would not be having this conversation.

And at the same time, I think, I mean, to your honor's point, this is human error.

I mean, the way I've approached this entire case is this is essentially a Scribner's error.

And if there's no ability for the court to correct these types of mistakes, then you have defendants who are,

in this particular case, you have a defendant who would basically evade justice because someone,

because the court monitor misheard what was announced in court.

So the state would advocate for the middle ground?

Yes. The state would advocate for the middle ground.

Obviously, if the court wants to go further, it can, you know, go more broadly.

But I think the middle ground is the best result here.

You know, as long as the jury remains within the protective sphere of the court,

the majority of jurisdictions have found that that's sufficient for them to be recalled

and have the parties reconvened to correct any kind of sort of error of this.

So let's assume we take the middle ground.

Your opponent says there's still this problem that the alternate joined the jury.

Now, I get that the alternate heard not guilty, but he's arguing to us there was this contact,

and the contact alone was enough to do it.

And I understand his point here, but the issue is, as I briefly kind of addressed,

I mean, the alternate was there, but they also were interacting with the court security staff in a far less rigid atmosphere

than they had been during the course of trial.

It's entirely, I mean, to have to go to that point where any single individual that's still within the protective sphere of the court,

that they've interacted, I mean, they interacted with the judge,

who is to say that the judge didn't influence their decision somehow.

So doesn't that speak to why there shouldn't be a more robust factual inquiry about who spoke to whom

and what happened, that there should have been, or could there still be?

There is a potential, there could still be a robust fact, there could still be a factual inquiry with this.

You know, the state would disagree, but obviously this court could remand for further factual finding in this matter.

The state feels it's unnecessary.

Would the court be able to recall all those jurors and talk to them?

Good luck, but it certainly is, I mean, it's a possibility.

The issue here, though, is that, again, and I think Judge Shulman's order afterwards also goes to this effect

where Judge Shulman has, you know, because this was brought to his attention, he didn't, you know, do this sua sponte,

but because this error and this controversy was brought to his attention,

he went back and re-listened to the announcement of the original verdict and concluded that...

And he noted in his order that there was a dispute over even listening to the tape,

counsel was not in agreement.

Right. Right.

So there was muffled, it was in some way, there was ambiguity about it, apparently,

because reasonable people disagreed about it.

Reasonable people disagreed about what they heard in the courtroom at the time.

Right.

No one just seems to have disagreed yet about what was heard when they listened to the audio recording after the fact.

Oh, I misunderstood that.

Yeah, I misunderstood.

I read it the same way you did.

So would you clarify that?

You mean...

So my understanding of his order and...

There was agreement on what the tape showed?

Well, not, he, his factual finding based on listening to the audio recording was that he heard guilty,

with respect to the first verdict.

Well, I'm talking about counsel.

Counsel...

I don't recall if...

I'm trying to...

I don't recall if they...

I thought there was a dispute between...

It says, the order says that the prosecutor heard it one way and defense counsel heard it the other way.

Okay.

Then they disputed this, but his factual conclusion was that he heard guilty, which just confirms...

I mean, it confirms on the one hand that the verdict was initially guilty and confirms what the, you know, the jury...

Well, you know, I'm sorry, but is that...

I guess I want to make sure I want to...

Are you saying that Judge Shulman found that the verdict, that the jury did say guilty?

Yes.

Because I guess, I thought when I read his order, he said that the word guilty was clearly heard,

but there was something before that that he was saying might have been a cough or a hiccup or something like that,

but I didn't sort of completely understand that he was saying that, you know...

Right.

I think that's...

I know that that wasn't...

It says he certainly made some sort of noise prior to saying guilty.

That's the phrase that the court uses.

Because if he had made a finding that the tape reflected a guilty finding, he wouldn't have had to bring the jury back.

Well, but he didn't have the opportunity to listen to the tape because the jury came back within minutes of the...

Oh, right. He listened to the tape afterwards.

Right.

So, in other words, what you're saying is that what he didn't find was that whatever that was before the word guilty was a not.

Right.

Okay.

And so it kind of leads to the conclusion that this, again, was just merely correcting what may have been a misapprehension by the court monitor

and maybe some folks in the courtroom, depending on where you were in proximity to the foreperson.

It seems like even, you know, the lack of kind of reaction from the other members of the jury, they may have heard guilty fairly clearly and not, you know, and heard this other noise as a cough or a hiccup or whatever it was.

And therefore not, did not react to this in the way that, you know, you would expect if the verdict being announced was not what they would.

Can I turn just for a second, Mr. Locke, please, to the second issue that I want to make sure that I'm understanding.

Because my, am I understanding correctly that what you're saying is that it was not error, that the judge's ruling that the, that the defendant couldn't cross-examine the witness,

couldn't elicit from the witness, not only that he had committed a burglary, but that it had been a burglary of the defendant's residence,

was based sort of on a, on, on the defendant's position that he was not attempting to use that for sort of, for showing sort of a general bias of the, of the witness against the defendant?

So the defendant raised two arguments at trial, the first, for this evidence, the first was this motive to lie reasoning,

and the second was a bias argument. And I believe, in my understanding, my recollection of the record is that,

he dropped the bias argument because the trial court and the prosecutor explained that, you know,

if we go down this bias road, you're going to open the door to the whole history of domestic disputes between these, this couple.

And.

This was his girlfriend.

Right.

Who burglarized his house after the incidents in this case.

Right.

And so the court said, I will allow you to establish that the girlfriend has a burglary conviction,

but you can't say it was a conviction for burglarizing the defendant's house.

Correct.

Normally one would think that that would be admissible to show bias.

Correct.

And.

But you say that if we look at the transcript, we're going to conclude that defense counsel waived that because the court said,

if you want to talk about bias, then there are lots of other issues that the witness girlfriend can be queried on,

and you're not going to be happy about it.

Exactly.

That's, that's the state's position ended.

There is an extensive history of domestic disputes and restraining orders.

So you say that issue is waived and is a non-issue.

Right.

And so the only issue really left before this court is the con, the motivation to lie, um,

which the trial court concluded was the, the connections between this particular, the incident, the dependents on trial for,

and the burglary were just too attenuated to conclude that, you know, her motivation to burglarize.

That's really, that's kind of slicing things very finely though.

I must say, I didn't under, quite understand that, the difference between bias and motivation to lie.

So the court said, no bias, but motivation to lie can be explored?

No, no.

The court said he couldn't explore the motivation.

He couldn't explore.

That's why he couldn't have, you know, have it revealed that.

Because the motivation to lie was too attenuated.

I thought the burglary happened a couple of weeks after the incident here.

Exactly.

There was a deal made with the girlfriend.

There was a deal made with another co-defendant.

Why shouldn't the jury hear the whole enchilada?

The jury should, I mean, in part because then it, it prompts the jury to, I mean, it prompts the jury to...

She did have a motive to lie, didn't she?

She made a deal with the state.

She doesn't have a motive to lie about, in this particular, about the allegation she's made against the defendant though.

That, the fact that she, you know, may have committed a burglary several weeks later to get...

But she got a deal on the burglary.

Which they were allowed to explore.

They were allowed to explore the...

But the jury didn't know the burglary was of the defendant's house.

No.

But at the same time, then creates the kind of the impermissive...

That, you know, the defendant should be acquitted because she got hers.

But it wasn't...

I mean, if...

Let's assume that...

Do you concede that if the defendant hadn't been trying to sort of, you know, not allow the rest of the story, so to speak, to come in...

In other words, if the defendant said, look, I want to cross-examine this...

I want to cross-examine this witness and show that she burglarized my client's house.

And, you know, I understand that may open the door to some other things, but I'm willing to run that risk.

It would seem to me, if that were the situation and the trial court would not allow it, I would think that would be error.

I mean, the fact that, as Judge Conway points out, the fact that you've committed a burglary may show, you know, generally that you're not such a good person.

If you add to that, it was of the person's...

Of the person that's on trial, it was that person's house.

It would seem to me that would be, you know, an incrementally stronger showing of bias.

It wasn't...

You didn't want to burglarize anybody's house.

You wanted to burglarize this guy's house because you hate him.

And I wouldn't disagree with that, and I think that's why there's the important distinction to draw between the bias argument and this motivation to lie.

And the issue...

Let's say you lose on the burglary issue.

Does that mean that perhaps we don't need to address the major issue in this case?

The defendant gets a new trial?

Not necessarily, because the defendant still has to show that the decision was prejudicial to his case,

and it's not clear necessarily how this would have affected the outcome if they had known that she had burglarized his home.

Well, she was the main witness against the whole thing about the car and being thrown out, and...

I mean, she was the state's critical witness in this case.

So it seems to me that if we find...

I don't know what we're going to do, but if we find that the court should have allowed that piece of evidence to come in, didn't,

and we reverse, we don't have to deal with the issues about the jury verdict, do we?

You certainly would not have to deal with the issues about the jury verdict, and just with the motive...

And I apologize, I know my time is up.

You're answering, Justice Conway.

Okay.

That's fine.

The motivation to lie issue is, the question is whether or not she was motivated to lie about these assaults.

These assaults were reported immediately after they occurred.

The burglary is completely unrelated to what she told police after these assaults.

Well, it certainly would show the volatility of their relationship, right?

But again, I think that goes to the bias point, not necessarily to her motivation to lie, which would be the 404 issue.

And you're saying bias wasn't preserved?

Correct.

There was a discussion which you quote in your brief, and defense counsel chose not to pursue it because the cost was too high.

Correct.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

The court will take a brief recess.
