This is case 2015-0477, Michael Newell versus Markle Corporation at all.

Good afternoon, may it please the court.

My name is Kevin Trueland and I represent the Appalance Essex Insurance Company,

Markle Corporation and Markle Service Incorporated.

The issue in this case is whether IV banks, DBA, INL cleaning services,

qualifies as a volunteer worker under liability policy issued by Essex.

Where his workers provided cleaning services to the named insured Brains, Inc.

During motorcycle week in June 2010, where banks offered his services in exchange for

tips received from patrons using the bathrooms.

And where he received $75 to $100 a day in tips during motorcycle week.

And where the Essex policy defines volunteer worker as any person who isn't an employee or

a lease worker, donates his or her work and isn't paid a fee, salary, or other compensation for that work.

Also, there's a further qualification in the policy and

so a separate issue is whether banks qualifies as a volunteer worker.

Where the policy provides that the volunteer worker, that volunteer workers are insured only for

activities or work they conduct or perform at Brains's direction and

within the scope of their duties for Brains.

And where banks brought his own equipment to provide cleaning services during motorcycle week.

And he did not receive any actual instruction or supervision from Brains or

Robert Ames, who was the principal of Ames.

What would he need beyond go clean the bathrooms?

Isn't that at the direction of Brains?

He brought his own equipment, brooms and mops.

Well, that may be true, but Brains says, you can do this.

You're volunteering.

I know you don't agree with this, but you're volunteering to do this and I think that's great.

I'm not paying you.

Make sure you clean the bathrooms and so people will like them enough that they might give you some tips.

Why isn't that at the direction of Brains?

Well, the word at the direction of, I would submit, requires some affirmative action on

the part of Brains and some actual supervision and actual instruction on the part of Brains.

And the testimony from Mr. Ames is that these were bathroom cleaning people.

Mr. Banks had been coming for a number of years when he initially came to the premises.

The bathrooms were pointed out, Mr. Ames pointed out where the bathrooms were, but did not provide

any supervision or instruction, did not oversee the work in any way.

So there was no affirmative supervision or instruction provided by.

So you would use as an example, if I hire someone to come and cut down six trees in

my front yard, that's what I tell them to do.

I cut the six trees down, but I don't tell them how, when, with what equipment, they're independent contractors.

Essentially, yes, Your Honor.

And I think it's a similar situation here where Mr. Banks is an independent contractor.

He's got his own business.

He's got other workers who came with him.

He's got his own equipment.

He's agreed to perform a particular task, but he isn't given any instruction.

Let me ask you this.

You say he's agreed to perform a particular task, but the way I understand it is that Mr.

Braems wouldn't be able to force Mr. Banks to do the work.

I mean, if Mr. Banks decided he wanted to go to Acapulco for the week instead of hang

out at motorcycle week, there's no enforceable obligation to stay there.

Isn't that right?

I would agree with that.

And I think that supports the idea that Mr. Banks is not acting at the direction of Braems

or Mr. Ames.

But I would look at that as perhaps supporting the notion that he's there as a volunteer if

he doesn't have to be, and he could leave any time.

Well, that's true that he's there on his own free will.

Isn't this really sort of a quintessential sort of unilateral contract?

In other words, I agree with Justice Bassett that Braems can't require him to be there.

But I would seem to me that if he shows up and does what he's asked to do,

Braems probably can't do something to take the tips away from him.

In other words, Braems probably can't say, listen, I'm collecting the tips today,

assuming they had this agreement.

So he accepts by performing.

And once he performs, it seems to me Braems has got to uphold his end of the bargain

of letting him collect the tips.

I would agree with that, too, Your Honor.

And the Lafollette case is actually cited in the plaintiff's memorandum at page 14.

That's Hastings versus Lafollette.

There's a statement in that case.

That's a case involving a swimming pool that had been installed by a tenant without the knowledge

of the landlord.

And the landlord was the holder of the insurance policy.

And that policy contained language at the direction of Weatherly, who was the name insured.

And the court stated on page three that the plain meaning of this language indicates

that some affirmative conduct must be performed on the part of Weatherly, the name insured.

And we don't have affirmative conduct here on the part of Mr. Ames or Braems with respect

to directing the work that's performed by banks.

But beyond that, there's three separate requirements here.

So to what extent is it relevant that it appears there's no dispute that Mr. Banks

made a business out of circulating to these various venues and living off tips?

So you tell us he's being compensated, and it doesn't matter that the compensation isn't

coming from Braems.

Correct, Your Honor.

There's no indication where the compensation has to come from in the policy.

But the first requirement is a requirement that Mr. Banks donate his services.

And the fact that he's in a business here, to me the word donate is defined as giving

a gift.

And it connotes intention on the part of Mr. Banks to provide a gift of his services.

Here he's in business, and he's been doing this for 15 years.

And he has other people that come with him to the site.

He travels around the country, goes to other events around the country, and it's a profit-driven

business.

And so for that reason alone, the fact that he does not donate his services here, he's

doing this for a business, and this is how he earns a living.

So the first policy requirement that he donate his services is not met, and each one of these

policy requirements have to be met in order for Mr. Banks to qualify as a volunteer worker.

Isn't the real issue here, and I appreciate your argument, and you may very well be right,

but Judge O'Neill heard this too, and he presumably heard a contrary argument.

And he found that both were quite reasonable.

Not surprising, given the caliber of the lawyers here, it would be quite reasonable.

And isn't the real issue whether there is an ambiguity, and then if there is, game over?

Well, Your Honor, I would agree that that's the rule of construction, that if policy language

is ambiguous, that it's construed against the insurance company.

But I would submit that the policy language here is unambiguous.

Well, maybe not, because you say there's no donation of the services, but it seems

to me that it's arguable that he was donating his services to Braimes, because Braimes

wasn't going to pay him, and they got clean bathrooms in return.

Well, I don't think that he was donating his services to Braimes.

I think this was a relationship.

It was a business relationship where both parties benefited by the arrangement.

This was an event that took place during Motorcycle Week, where there's hundreds of

patrons using this facility.

Mr. Banks has given the opportunity to come in and use this facility where hundreds

of patrons are going to be using the bathroom.

So there's a quid pro quo where...

So you argue that Braimes is essentially donating his facility to allow banks to earn a living?

No, I'm not arguing that he's donating his facilities, Your Honor.

I think this is a business relationship where both parties benefited, and where

it was, this was no intention whatsoever on the part of banks to donate his services.

This is how you made a living.

But Braimes was donating basically what the consideration that would seem to me from Braimes

was, is that he was allowing banks to come on and be put in a position where he could

earn tips.

Braimes presumably didn't have any obligation to do that.

He could have said, get out of here, right?

Exactly.

And the benefit to Braimes was that he did not have to hire somebody and pay somebody

to do that.

There was a business relationship between the two parties where both parties benefited.

Also there's the question of compensation, and tips, I think the common understanding

of tips is that tips amount to compensation, that those are wages.

If a waitress earns tips, that's something that's income that's going to be required

to be reported as wages.

Is there this policy, shouldn't the compensation be coming from Braimes and not from random

strangers?

Your Honor, if it is compensation?

The policy doesn't say that.

Is that another ambiguity?

I don't think it's an ambiguity, Your Honor.

The policy, the wording of the policy is that isn't paid fee, salary, or other

compensation for that work.

So I think that that language is broad enough to encompass a situation where it's

either from any source, and a situation where-

So why isn't that an ambiguity?

I don't think it's an ambiguity because it is broad language that includes

whether it's paid by Braimes or by some other party.

If it weren't cash, would it still be excluded?

Some other benefit other than cash?

If it was not cash?

Right.

Well, compensation, I think the question here is, do tips amount to compensation?

And tips are defined in the statutes that I've cited in the memorandum as

wages.

And it talks about fee, salary, or other compensation.

And I think that tips are something that's analogous or defined in the state

statute as wages.

So would it depend on whether that particular day, the people who use

the facilities were big tippers or didn't tip at all if there were no tips

that day?

Well, I think then we're getting back to the question of whether he acted

with what his intent was in entering into this arrangement.

He acted with a profit motive, and there was no intent to make a gift or

to donate his services to Braimes.

And again, each one of these separate requirements has to be met in order

for the policy language to be satisfied and in order for him to

qualify as a volunteer worker.

There's been an issue raised with respect to judicial estoppel, which I

would touch on.

The question of the status of Mr. Banks came up during the course of

the underlying litigation involving Braimes.

And at that point, the parties to the Braimes action, Plaintiff,

in this case, actually took the position that Banks was an

independent contractor.

There was a motion for partial summary judgment filed by the

plaintiff in the underlying case where Plaintiff took the

position that based upon case law that Braimes would be

responsible for the actions of an independent contractor and

therefore vicariously liable.

Braimes, through defense counsel Fred Desmaris came in and

took the position that he was a volunteer so that principles of

vicarious liability did not apply.

And we're dealing with an insurance policy.

That's my point, Your Honor.

That did not, the underlying action involved the question of

tort law did not involve the question of whether Mr. Banks was

a volunteer within the four corners of the insurance

contract.

And I would submit that the issues are different and that

principles of judicial estoppel.

How is somebody a volunteer for tort law purposes but not a

volunteer under the contract?

Well, because, Your Honor, the insurance contract has specific

requirements and it has contractual requirements that we've

talked about that would not necessarily and did not come into

the issue of whether he would qualify as a volunteer for

the purposes of tort law.

Were any of the defendants here, participants in that

earlier suit?

Excuse me?

Were any of the defendants, in this case, participants in the

earlier suit?

No, Your Honor, the defendants in this case were not

involved in that case.

But your opponent says that you were in privity, that under

the insurance policy with Braimes you control the defense.

So if Braimes wanted to say, wanted to take some other

defense and the insurance company wanted to say, no,

he's a volunteer, the insurance company gets to control

that.

Well, I would submit, Your Honor, that the defense

council is an independent contractor who has an

obligation to represent.

If we can't use tort concepts to define who's an employee

and who isn't, why should we be permitted to use independent

contractor jurisprudence to interpret this insurance

policy?

I think both would be off base.

Well, because, Your Honor, I think that the insurance

policy, the way that it is worded, it brings into play

concepts of independent contractor where it talks about

whether there was direction on the part of the

named insured.

And so I think that, to the extent that it calls into,

or is analogous to independent contractor principles,

I think that it comes in there.

But my point is, for purposes of judicial

estoppel, is Essex was not a party to that case.

Again, I think council was an independent contractor

acting on behalf of this client and making an argument

attempting to defeat summary judgment.

The issues were different, and I would submit respectfully

that principles of judicial estoppel do not apply.

And then one last point.

Your time is up.

Thank you, Your Honor.

If it pleased the court, my name is Matt Leahy,

and I represent Mr. Newell.

And I'd like to begin with the point that Justice

Bassett raised.

And that is this issue of an independent contractor.

And first of all, I want to say that this moment today

was the first time that Essex has made the claim

that Mr. Banks was an independent contractor.

You will not see it in the summary judgment motion

filed down below.

You will not see it in their brief that there was

any allegation of that made.

The way that it came up in the brain's litigation

was simply a response to a set of interrogatories

we filed asking who was Ivy Banks

or who was the person that was doing the cleaning,

and they said he was an independent contractor.

Because of the Volente case, we filed an even if motion.

Well, even if he's an independent contractor,

the property owner, the commercial enterprise

is still responsible for them.

And then from that point forward,

they doggedly took the position that Mr. Banks

was a volunteer, and it has carried through

in this litigation, this contract litigation,

right up until today.

But the point that Justice Bassett made is

he wasn't an independent contractor

because under the policy, which is at Appendix 43,

an independent contractor is someone

who has a contract with the insured.

Black Letter Law is a contract, is a promise

or a set of promises that create

enforceable obligations, the breach of which

the law recognizes.

But isn't this a unilateral contract?

In other words, as Justice Bassett said before,

maybe Banks had no obligation to go there.

But under their agreement, once he went there

and showed up to do the cleaning and did the cleaning,

Braimes couldn't say, sorry, I've changed my mind.

You're not going to get your tips.

But Braimes had no obligation.

It wasn't like Braimes could say,

we're not going to pay you because Braimes wasn't.

No, but Braimes could have said,

no, you can't get out of here now.

You've cleaned the bathrooms, now leave.

Of course, it's a week-long thing,

but I can tell you from the litigation,

there was no enforceable remedy that either party had

and they acknowledged that.

That's in the record that everything that they did

was voluntary.

They did not have any contract.

No one had enforceable obligations against the other.

When you say that's in the record that everything was

voluntary, you say it's in the record.

Everything was voluntary.

What are you going to direct our attention to?

Mr. Banks said that he came up here voluntarily.

He had no obligation to do that.

And Mr. Ames, it's one of the uncontested facts

that I cited in the brief,

indicated that they had no contractual relation.

It was essentially an arrangement,

but not a contract because there were

no enforceable obligations.

But isn't it clear, could Brame have said,

let's say on any particular day,

this guy comes and he cleans the bathrooms

and he's got his other assistants

or they're collecting tips from people that come in.

Isn't it really clear that Brames could not then have said,

give me those tips.

This is my property, I want those tips.

He couldn't have done that.

I don't think he could say give me the tips,

but I don't think that translates

to creating a contractual relationship between them.

Your position is that because there was no obligation

for Brames to give the tips

or some other monetary compensation,

that answers the question here.

There was no compensation.

These are the Brames and Banks.

That's correct.

That it's no compensation

and that's the argument that I make.

That the policy doesn't say that.

I mean, it just says no compensation.

It doesn't say no compensation by the insurers.

I've argued in the brief

that I think that that works against assets.

You say that creates the ambiguity.

Because in the appendix to the brief that I filed,

it is universal.

That the initial language donates its work,

isn't paid a fee, salary or compensation.

It's kind of the base language.

But then it's universal to add on the language,

whether it's paid by you or someone else.

And in the appendix to the brief,

there must be 25 cases there.

Other insurance policies include that language.

This one happens not to.

You say it's universal.

Does it amount to an underwriting standard, do you know?

I don't know that.

But I know that it was many, many cases,

many different insurance companies.

And in their policies, they all use that language.

Can you just tell us, are Markle Corp and Markle Service,

are they really out of this appeal?

Because you did not object to the motion

for summary judgment as it relates to them.

Yeah, we did not.

The insuring company was...

So this case is only live as to Essex.

Thank you.

And do I understand correctly that there's no dispute

that Essex knew about this litigation

and yet the default was entered?

No defense was offered, default was entered.

The only issues are the ones that have been raised.

The second main point I would make is

the court has rules of construction

for interpreting undefined terms and contracts.

And in this case, Essex has not applied those

and I think Mr. Newell has.

The issue of donates, the main argument

that Essex makes in its brief

is that donates means to work without compensation.

Isn't the problem there that when Judge O'Neill

in the definition of donate that he came up with,

it's actually the definition of volunteer.

Isn't it?

It's not the same word.

He came up where he said it's just a voluntary...

That's the definition from the dictionary of volunteer.

Isn't it?

It's not the definition of donate.

Actually, I think where he got that

was the North Carolina case that I had cited

that was spot on directly on point.

And it said that donates can't mean

to work without compensation

because to work without compensation

is already part of the definition,

so it must mean something else.

The law I cited, which was, again,

dealt with this very same contract language,

said, well, if it can't mean

work without compensation,

then a reasonable interpretation

is to do the work by free choice.

Doesn't that apply to everybody?

Doesn't that apply to everybody?

I mean, nobody's forced me to be here.

Nobody's forced you to be here.

We could leave.

We do it voluntarily.

It's simply, again,

we're talking about contract language here,

that we're interpreting the contract language

and what that can mean,

and the law says you give each word or phrase

their own separate meaning,

so if the word donates is used

and without compensation is used,

donate can't mean without compensation.

But is it limited?

It just got me as very strange.

I mean, with all due respect to that case,

it seems odd to use voluntary action

as opposed to coerced action.

It seems very odd,

but be that as it may.

It didn't quite make sense to me.

Not your argument, but the case.

An overly simplistic example,

but if my father orders me to mow the lawn

and tells me I'm not going to get paid

and tells me exactly how to do it,

he's directing me.

I'm not getting paid,

but I'm not donating it.

I'm not doing it voluntarily.

I had that experience.

So that's how Judge O'Neill got to the point

that in the North Carolina case,

it was a dictionary definition.

Again, same thing that this court does.

Here's the thing.

Practically, how do we say

that somebody that's in the business of doing this

that obviously has a motive to earn income

is donating?

It just seems to me that that would be

an absurd result to say

that somebody that's doing this for a business

is donating his services.

But we're not looking at it in the abstract.

We're looking at it in the context

of very specific contract language

where the language has very specific meaning.

And I'll come back to the point I began with.

Mr. Banks cannot be an independent contractor

as that term is defined.

Well, whatever he is,

he's a businessman who makes his living

on these tips.

We know that,

and that doesn't seem to be contested.

So he's working.

He's getting paid.

You're saying,

well, he's donating his services to Braimes.

And so it doesn't matter

whether he's making his living

being a donator of services to others.

Right?

I mean, that's where you got to end up.

But I come back to the rules of construction

and again,

one of the rules we're talking about

compensation and gratuity.

The court says that when we're defining those terms

and contracts,

the first thing we do is we look back at other cases

and see if we have defined those terms.

On two occasions,

the court has talked about those terms

in the same case

and contrasted them

and said very specifically,

as we have argued,

that compensation is for something that is owed

and a gratuity is a gift,

which was again exactly

what the situation was here.

So banks got a gift

which he then pays his workers with.

I'm sorry.

Banks got a gift

that he then pays his workers with.

From a third party.

From a third party.

Okay.

From a third party.

Does the record tell us,

I'm not sure it matters,

but does the record tell us

whether the workers are cleaning other bathrooms

for their own tips

or that banks is giving them part of his tips?

I don't know the answer.

It's probably not relevant in a way.

Just in the point

that should not be missed here

is a party that wrote the contract

and this is clear in the record.

A party that wrote the contract

interpreted that language

for a year and a half

as meaning that he was a volunteer,

that he was not an independent contractor.

And that is throughout the occasional...

What's the basis for saying that?

Weren't they taking that position

in the tort litigation?

They did and that brings us...

But that wasn't about the terms of the contract.

Maybe I didn't understand what you were referring to.

What was the year and a half

where they were taking the position?

Later on when the issue came up

it dealt with the terms of the contract.

You say their internal documents reflect

the adjuster is interpreting the policy

as volunteer, but that's not...

Is that binding on us?

Is that even relevant?

It's part of my persuasion

and it's in the record incited

that Mr. DuFont, who was in charge of this file,

I went back and looked at it.

I looked at the contract language and said,

you know what, he got tipped,

so he's not a volunteer.

Somehow that didn't make its way up to

the management who made the decision

not to defend the bank's suit.

He was management.

Mr. DuFont was the person.

You're saying even though the record shows

he decided that banks was a volunteer,

he made an affirmative decision

not to come forward and defend?

It looks that way.

When I went down to New Jersey and deposed them,

my pleading was right there in their file

that I had filed against Mr. Banks.

Am I correct?

Under the insurance policy question,

did Essex...

Did they have the right to control

the defense of brains?

Absolutely.

So they could have said...

When Braimes took the position

that he was in that litigation,

that he was not an independent contractor

but a volunteer,

the insurance company could have said,

we're not taking that position.

It was the insurance company that was taking the position.

No, I understand.

They presumably, even if Braimes

wanted to take that position,

they could have said, no, we're not doing that

because it might screw us up

if there's a suit against Banks.

And Demaris was being paid by...

I'm sorry.

Attorney Demaris was being paid by Essex.

By Essex.

Controlled the strategy...

Well, they chose the attorney.

Chose the attorney.

It's privity in the highest degree

because it's privity by contract.

It's spelled right out in the policy

that what the company wants to do,

Trump's what the insurance wants to do.

There's really no say in it.

No other questions?

Thank you very much.

Submitted.

Court is adjourned.
