This is case 2015-0524, state of New Hampshire versus Robert Breast.

The record should reflect the fact that Justice Convoy is disqualified from this case.

And additionally, the court would like to welcome the students from John Stark Regional High School,

who are here this morning accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Dan Marcus.

Welcome, we hope you'll find the session interesting.

Council.

Good morning, you may have pleased the court.

My name is Ian Dumane, and I represent the defendant Appellant Robert Breast.

I'd like to reserve two minutes for a rebuttal.

Our appeal presents three questions.

We've called them the burden question, the scope question, and the weight question.

I'm not going to address the burden question this morning unless the court has specific questions,

because we should win the weight question under the standard even the state has proposed.

Before I take questions this morning, I'd like to address one of the supplemental authorities that we submitted.

Since briefing closed.

That's the case, Commonwealth versus Hardin and Clark out of Kentucky.

In Commonwealth versus Hardin and Clark, the Kentucky Post, a Kentucky Post Conviction Court,

vacated the convictions of two defendants and granted a new trial under a post-conviction DNA testing statute.

Is that been appealed?

I'm sorry.

I'm not aware that it's been appealed.

Sorry to interrupt.

None at all.

Under a Kentucky Post Conviction DNA testing statute that is substantively identical and

in many cases tracks verbatim the New Hampshire statute.

There are two important parallels between that case and this one.

First, in both cases, the conviction of the defendants relied largely,

it was the most important piece of evidence was the testimony of a jailhouse snitch.

That's true there, it's true here.

Another important parallel is that in both cases, the post-conviction DNA testing

did not conclusively exonerate the defendants.

In that case, far from it.

Post-conviction DNA testing in that case showed two things.

One, it showed that a single hair that was found on the victim's sweatpants did not belong to one of the defendants.

And the other post-conviction DNA testing showed that a bloody rag that was found in the home of one of the defendants was covered with his own blood.

Now, I'm not going to get into the facts of that case, but to suffice it to say that that did not conclusively exonerate the defendants.

Nevertheless, the Kentucky court found that those DNA test results were favorable because they undermined

arguments that had been made to the jury by the state and they undermined the credibility of the state's case.

This is one of the problems though that you have here is that in some sense,

the DNA testing produced evidence that was inculpatory that had not existed at the time of trial.

In other words, we didn't know at the jury didn't know at the time of trial that there was DNA under the victim's fingernails from which the defendant could not be excluded.

That in a sense is, I mean, if the state had had that evidence, they certainly would have introduced that at trial.

I mean, I think you'd have to concede that.

They would have said this is inculpatory evidence of all the people in the world that could have done this.

We happen to have a person here whose DNA cannot be excluded.

I think it's true that the state would have tried to introduce it.

And I think that's true that that's different from the Hardin court case.

I would say that it is not true of all cases in which motions for a new trial have been granted.

I would point the court to the Anderson case, which we cite in our brief,

in which the defendant could not be excluded as a donor of DNA on the handle of the knife that was argued to be the murder weapon.

That's number one.

Number two, and more important, number two or three, is that the inculpatory value of those DNA test results is a matter of controversy in the case.

The state's expert, Dr. Word, testified that those DNA test results came from either Mr.

Brice or one of his close patrilineal relatives, a term that morphed over the course of the hearing.

That testimony is contradicted by every documentary piece of evidence in the case,

concerning the probative value of why STR DNA test results.

So the swag damn guidelines, those are the authoritative interpretive guidelines issued by the FBI's working group,

say that why STR inclusions can include the subject,

their patrilineal relatives, and an unknown number of unidentified individuals.

John Butler, we have a presentation from him in the case.

He's recognized in the record, he's recognized by the Dr. Word, the state's expert,

as one of the leading authorities on DNA testing.

And in the record, a statement from him says, the conservative way of presenting the YSTR DNA test results,

the type of YSTR DNA test results that we have in this case is to say that the defendant cannot be excluded,

his patrilineal relatives cannot be excluded, and an unknown number of other individuals cannot be excluded.

I read somewhere in the briefs, I don't remember exactly where there was a number of about 34,

3496, or 3,500, what?

So that is one of the numbers, I'd be happy to explain it, your honor.

In the early, in 2008 testing, the 15 locus DNA test result that was consistent with Mr.

Breeze was not seen in a database of 3,500 people.

However, that profile was seen in a database, it's called the US YSTR database of 2,500 people.

And it was seen in the subsection of that database for African American people.

And the import of that is this as it relates to the testimony in this case.

The testimony in this case from the state's expert is that those DNA test results

had to have come from Robert Breeze or one of his close patrilineal relatives.

That was her testimony.

Yet, evidence introduced by the state in her testimony shows that

that DNA profile is present in a database of African American donors.

Mr. Breeze is not African American, he's Caucasian.

And for a variety of other reasons there's no reason to think that that profile,

that African American profile comes from Mr. Breeze or anyone.

So if it's so unreliable that it wouldn't support a conviction,

why is it reliable to support a motion for a new trial?

Because a conviction, well, the DNA test results here support a motion for a new trial for two reasons.

The state's theory at the case, in the case, in every piece of evidence-

The state's theory might change, go ahead.

The state's theory can change on a retrial, Your Honor.

But the state is not entitled to shift its theory to fit the evidence at post-conviction.

We're perfectly willing to concede that at a new trial the state could come forward and say,

we have these DNA test results, we say they're inclusionary, and we say they mean this.

And at that trial we would say they don't mean that.

But that is a question for a new trial.

So for that reason, let me interrupt for just a moment.

If the state is constrained by the evidence from the first trial,

I take it that the defense must all but concede that the defense is also so constrained

and therefore the trial court was correct when he said,

that's the lens we have to look through here, and I take it that's your scope question.

That is the scope question, and I would say that we agree with most of that with a nuance.

And the nuance is, we do not argue that we are unconstrained by the trial record.

What we say is, is that the record ought to be the trial record, the new DNA test results,

and other new evidence that was not available at the time of trial.

Well then why couldn't the state take the same position?

We're not, we're not suggesting that the state is prohibited, far from it,

from saying that the court should assess when it's considering whether a new trial should be

granted the new DNA test results. We have not said that.

What we have said is that, that assessment has to occur within the context of the theory

that was offered at trial.

Is the informant still alive?

The informant died in 1973, and the way that Mr. Brist found out about his, the deal that the

New Hampshire Attorney General's office had made with the informant that wasn't disclosed at the

time of trial was by reading about it in the newspaper. The informant is not alive.

However, what we, what we intended, the person we intended to call was another individual who

was jailed with the informant, Mr. Corita, and Mr. Brist at the time that Mr. Brist was

awaiting extradition from Massachusetts to New Hampshire.

What he would have testified is as follows, that in early 1973, Mr. Brist was tried in

March 1973, he was approached in prison in, in Massachusetts where he was incarcerated

by New Hampshire state authorities who asked him whether he would testify against Mr.

Brist, and they told him that Mr. Corita had told them that he, Mr. Kelleher, was present

when Mr. Brist confessed to this crime. So Corita says, Brist confessed and Kelleher was there.

The authorities, the New Hampshire authorities go to Kelleher and they say,

will you testify against Brist? And Kelleher says, that never happened.

Can I just ask you, do the New Hampshire authorities agree that that happened, that

one of them went and talked to this other guy? The New Hampshire authorities, in this case,

have never said anything about what happened, one way or the other.

So in other words, just, you don't have any police report or anything like that,

which says that a New Hampshire officer, which agrees with your witness that he,

in fact, went to talk to your person at all.

No, we have nothing. We have the testimony of a man who put in an affidavit in 1975 that said,

in substance, this happened, and then over 30 years, and at the time he had no reason to lie

about it, and when he was approached 30 years later, certainly had no reason to lie about it,

said, I will say the same thing again, I will testify for you, and I have been waiting

for over 30 years for somebody to ask me. And can I just ask you, there was some

suggestion in the record, and I may have this correct, wrong, so that's why I'm asking you,

is there some evidence that the defense before the trial was aware of this person and talked to

this person? There is no evidence that I'm aware that the defense was aware of this before trial,

none whatsoever. In the state's brief, the state has suggested that Kellerhur is unreliable,

and if we thought he was reliable, we would have called him at trial. But the answer to that is no,

the reason we didn't call him at trial, because we were not told about him.

Can I shift gears for a second? Isn't the most damning evidence in this case,

the fact that your client showed up to volunteer for an interview with the police station in

Manchester? Your Honor, I don't want to go outside the record. I do not think that's

damning, because there are many reasons that people voluntarily would speak with the police.

I can't say more about it, unless you want me to go outside the record, but I don't think it's

damning. Did I go outside the record with my question? I don't believe you did. Okay, thank you.

Then don't answer it. I won't answer, other than to say, I do not think it's damning that

he voluntarily came to the police station. On the question of the scope, I would add,

again, that other courts applying statutes just like this one that are essentially verbatim,

either the Illinois statute on which the New Hampshire statute is modeled or the Kentucky

statute, have admitted just the type of new non-DNA evidence that we're relying on. So again,

in the Hardin case, the court admitted and relied on new evidence about official misconduct that

had been committed in another case by the lead investigator in the case against Hardin and Cork.

So if we were to agree with you on that point, we would not be the only court that

would allow such evidence. To the contrary, Your Honor, the Illinois Appellate Court allowed it.

This state statute is modeled on the Illinois statute. Now, the Superior Court, when it was

considering this question, looked to Illinois. Unfortunately, it looked to a case called

People v. Dodds, in which the question of new non-DNA evidence wasn't considered.

The only question in the Dodds case was whether the defendant was entitled to a hearing. In a

later case called Starks, which relied on Dodds, the court admitted and relied on new

non-DNA evidence. In that case, it was new evidence about the serological case, the serology evidence.

Constable, I know you're red light on, but I want to go back to something because I want to make

sure that I'm not missing something here. You seem to be saying in answer to my earlier question

that something that at least suggested to me that you dispute that even the efficacy or the

correctness, maybe it's a better word, of the state's evidence that says,

Breast cannot be excluded from the DNA. Because if that was what you were saying,

you didn't sort of brief that. At least I didn't interpret your brief to be saying that.

We say that, Your Honor. We say that there's controversy in that the evidence concerning the

exclusionary power of the DNA test result comes from the state's witness, Dr. Word. And what we

say is, is that her testimony about the inclusionary power of the test results is contradicted by

all of the authoritative documentary evidence in the case. And was there a here, did you have a

witness below, for example, that said, one of your experts that said, the state says that

he can't be excluded? I disagree with that. We just don't know whether he can be excluded

or not. We don't say that, we don't disagree that he can't be excluded. What we say is, is that

the power of that statement, merely that he can't be excluded, which is the only conservative

statement that can really be made, is- Doesn't mean very much. Doesn't mean very much, if anything.

Which is what Justice McGuire said in 2000 when she granted the original motion for

post-conviction DNA testing. She said a negative match, which is analytically the same, analytically

the same as the results we have here, would mean, and the state was making the same arguments

last time that it's making now, would mean one of two things. It would mean either Mr.

Breast didn't do it, or it would mean that Mr. Breast did do it, and he did it around the

time that someone else was in a violent struggle with the victim. And even that second set of facts

based on the trial record would be so, in the court's words, radically different from the state's

case to the jury that Mr. Breast is entitled to DNA testing under the standard that governs

motions for a new trial. That is what Justice McGuire held in 2000 when we started down this

now 16-year path of DNA testing in this case. Thank you.

Thank you, counsel.

Good morning, your honors. Elizabeth Woodcock for the State of New Hampshire. With me at

counsel table is John Kennedy, who also was on the brief. I would like to just make one

quick statement, and then I'll take the court's questions. In none of the five DNA tests

from 2002 to 2012 was the defendant excluded as a source of the DNA profile. Therefore, the

fundamental premise of the defendant's argument that the 2012 profile somehow exonerates him

is simply wrong. Even though there is a major profile in that final test that is not his,

he is not excluded as the source of the minor male profile, a result that is consistent

with each of the previous four tests. I want to talk a little bit.

Can I ask you before you go on, can you explain why the DNA pattern is generally found in a

group of African American citizens? Or is it? I can't explain that in particular

because I think that you don't know exactly where the DNA would have come from through

generations. But I would point out that there has been DNA testing on the Hemmings family,

which has turned out to demonstrate that probably Thomas Jefferson or one of his close relatives

was the father of a number of Sally Hemmings' children. So you could wind up with a profile

because of the way this country has operated over the years with a profile that was in a

minority group. Dr. Word talked about that. She talked about how you couldn't determine,

you could go back. All you can do is look at the results, but you can't determine exactly

how this was transferred. Can I ask you a question that I'll concede is unfair to you

and it's not part of the record. My understanding of this has come from something that was either

in the newspapers or somewhere that I read publicly. My understanding is that Mr. Priest is

eligible for parole. He's 78 years old and I thought that I read somewhere that he was not

granted parole because he refused to admit that he had committed the offense. Do you know

if that's true and if that's true, it strikes me that this, you know, at 78 years old, having

served 40 years in prison, assuming he doesn't have a bad disciplinary record or something,

I can't help wondering why is he still in prison if the only reason is that he won't admit the

offense. I think that there is a very good reason for that, Justice Flynn, and it's not part

of the record. So he should stop reading the newspapers. Fair enough. Fair enough. I would

answer the question, but it would be unfair. Council. I want to go on and I want to talk a

little bit about the, first of all, this whole notion that David Carrita was unreliable.

And I want to talk about this simply because I think that Mr. Domain has driven this home so

much that I'm urging the court to read his testimony. The reason I'm urging the court to

read his testimony is if you look at Mr. Kelliher's affidavit, he says that he was in the cell next

to Mr. Priest and that Carrita was sort of down. It was a cage and it had seven, six or seven or

eight different cells and that Mr. Carrita was down at the other end and that the only way

that Priest could have confessed to Carrita was to shout it out and other people in the cell

would have heard it. I urge you to read the cross examination of David Carrita. In that cross

examination, the defense brought out the following, that Carrita was in the cell

next to Robert Priest, that they could pass notes back and forth, that they

couldn't see each other but they talked to each other. Carrita listed off a number of other people

who were also in the cage at the same time. None of them was John Kelliher. The reason that I point

this out is that this was brought out on cross examination. The defense, therefore, was bringing

this information out and the problem that I see with what the defense...

And therefore they knew about Kelliher at the time of the trial.

Pardon me?

And therefore they knew about Kelliher at the time of the trial.

Well, according to Kelliher's affidavit, he told Robert Priest that Carrita was unreliable

and you would have thought that if Kelliher was correct that they would have called

Mr. Kelliher to challenge Carrita's testimony.

So the suggestion, I'm not ascribing any improper motives,

but the suggestion that was made that the defense at the time of trial knew nothing

about Kelliher's even existence might not be accurate?

Well, it wouldn't be accurate if you believed Kelliher's affidavit.

The problem is that what they're trying to do is they're trying to use Kelliher's

affidavit to challenge the testimony that they introduced at trial.

So all of this information about where Priest was in the cell block and all that other

information came in on cross-examination.

What do you say about that?

I mean, did this officer...

What's the state's position as to whether this officer

actually went down and talked to Kelliher?

Well, first of all, my position is that we don't know that it happened because

Mr. Kelliher has never identified the name of any officer.

So there would be no way that we could even check.

He says that a state police officer or police officer came,

there has never been any name that was associated with that.

The first time he raised this story was in 1975.

I'm not certain why that affidavit was provided.

But I mean, presumably, when he raised this in 1975,

there would be a limited universe of people that could have gone down.

I mean, I presumably...

So when you say you didn't have any way of knowing,

I mean, presumably the state could have said, look,

here are the 10 officers or whatever that might have been involved in,

had something to do with this case.

It presumably it wasn't an officer that was patrolling the highways in Coas County.

So we know that there's some...

We have some limited number.

I mean, did the state make any effort to say anybody...

Anybody talk to this guy in the way that's alleged?

I don't know the answer to that, Justice Flynn, because the case is old.

But I will tell you the following.

That affidavit was in some manner before the courts some time ago.

I don't know if the affidavit was made part of Robert Brice's pro se challenge

to the Corita's testimony in his direct appeal.

If it was, this court had it before it.

This court decided that Corita's testimony was properly admitted.

He... Corita was extensively cross-examined.

He was challenged in ways that you could never challenge anybody

under the existing rules of evidence.

He was not only asked about his criminal convictions.

He was asked about the details of his crimes.

He had to go back through and explain exactly how he had committed every single offense.

And he went through it and he was extensively cross-examined.

But the point that I'm trying to make is that the evidence

that the defense brought out at trial, that they brought out,

that these two men were in adjoining cells

and that they were talking back and forth.

This was not part of the state's case.

This was the defendant's case.

They now turn around and try to challenge this.

Now, the proper challenge, if you were going to challenge it,

would not be under the DNA statute.

It would be a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel.

You would say, counsel was ineffective for having brought out this evidence.

But you would not do it by saying,

oh, by the way, I should be allowed to challenge this other thing

under the narrow scope of the DNA statute.

The other thing I would urge you to do and urge you

is that there is an affidavit that was submitted from their expert

who talks about the neutron activation analysis.

And he criticizes the state's witness,

and he does so with great detail.

So did the two experts that were called by the defense at trial.

Justice Smuckler makes reference to this,

but if you read those two experts' testimony,

which the expert that gave the affidavit for purposes of the hearing,

the expert doesn't talk about how that testimony was challenged

by the two experts that were called by the defense.

One of them was a PhD from MIT who worked for the Harvard

Department of Legal Medicine or Legal Department.

And he was also working for the Harvard Department of Pathology.

He went through every single statement,

virtually every single statement that the state's expert made,

and challenged everything.

The second person who testified was a PhD from Toronto.

He had previously qualified as an expert in state v. Coolidge.

He testified, which was the case that was cited

in the amicus brief.

He went through every single piece of evidence.

He went through, said that the particles of paint

were too small to be analyzed,

that the analysis was done incorrectly

when he compared the two kinds of paint particles.

He said, these two red particles do not match.

It was every single thing that the state's expert had said was challenged.

Does the state still have the car?

I rather doubt it, Your Honor.

So why isn't Mr. Brees entitled to a shot at a hung jury or a mistrial?

Because no court has ever said that a hung jury is,

or no court, no federal court in this court has never adopted

the position that if you can persuade one juror to hang,

that that's a favorable result.

It just is not the law.

It's this court in dealing with standards for a new trial has never adopted that.

I understand it's not the law, but why?

Why shouldn't it be?

Yeah.

Because I think, I,

juries can hang for a lot of different reasons.

You can have a juror who simply refuses to participate

in the deliberations.

You can have a juror who is just not persuaded

to be part of the analysis.

The standard that was used in the house case,

which the defense cites,

is a standard of that no reasonable,

that no reasonable juror would be persuaded to vote not guilty.

And that's essentially what this court has adopted.

I wanted to make one other point, however.

One of the things that when the amicus brief cites State v. Coolidge,

it talks about how this court in 1969, and it makes a,

it has it in bold, four years before this case was tried,

four years before this court talked about the weaknesses of

neutron activation analysis.

So the challenge that he's trying to raise

by saying that this evidence should have been admitted at the DNA trial

is simply not new evidence.

This court offered an opinion on it four years before the brief trial ever took place.

This is a case where I think the final point I'd like to make is in response to

one of the questions I think Justice Hicks asked about Mr.

Breast showing up at the Manchester Police Department.

It is a very odd thing for him to have done.

Susan Randall did disappear from Manchester,

but she was found, her body was found out on interstate,

by the bridge on interstate 93 in Concord.

She was lying half naked on a slab of ice.

Why Mr. Breast would then go to the Manchester Police Department

and say, oh, you usually want to ask me questions about these things.

Why don't you ask me some now?

If the court has no further questions, I would ask that the case be submitted.

Thank you, Mr. Jumain.

Do you need your reserve time?

Go right ahead.

Thank you.

Just to respond to a few things first,

there's no testimony in the record that Mr. Breast said,

you usually want to talk to me about these things.

Let's talk.

That's just fabricated.

One, we do not say that these DNA test results exonerate Mr. Breast.

We say that they are favorable as we discussed.

And there are a variety of cases included in the Hardin case that we cite,

the Jones case, where courts have granted new trials in these circumstances,

and the cases are retried.

It just happened in Philadelphia, and Anthony Wright was acquitted

in a circumstance not unlike this.

On the parole question, what I believe you're referring to, your honor,

is that there was a quote from an employee of the New Hampshire State Adult Parole Board

who said, last time Mr. Breast had a parole hearing,

had he said in substance, had he admitted and cooperated in the sex offender program,

he would be out by now.

That is an admission from the New Hampshire State Parole Board.

Tellerhur's testimony, we heard a lot about it.

I wonder why they don't put Mr. Tellerhur on the stand

and cross him about all of this stuff.

The question is whether it's admissible, not whether it's reliable.

They can ask Mr. Tellerhur all of these questions.

On the neutron activation analysis, there is a different standard then.

It was a Frye standard, now we have a Dobbert standard.

That's why we have a Dobbert standard,

it's because it was concluded that the jury is unable to sort through

what in this case was literally a nuclear scientist

from the federal government who got on the stand and said,

in my opinion, based on this nuclear analysis I've undertaken,

Susan Randall's coat was in the car.

That was wrong.

It is not supported by any science.

That's the import of our second supplemental authority.

One thing the state does not say and has never said

is that the science is defensible, that the science was right.

They just say that this was heard before, but what we were saying

and what we say in the scope argument,

what the hardened court heard was that this type of testimony

where a scientist gets on the stand and says something like,

in my opinion, these two things match,

which is scientifically invalid testimony, should not be admitted.

I see my red light is on.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you, counsel.

Case submitted, the court will take a brief recess.
