This is case 2015-0471, appeal of James G. Boyle as trustee of the 150 Greenleaf Avenue

Realty Trust.

Good morning, counsel.

Good morning, Your Honor.

Justices.

My name is John Kozinovich.

I represent the appellant James G. Boyle as trustee of the 150 Greenleaf Ave Trust.

I have requested respectfully two minutes before questioning, unless there is a very burning

question on an obvious mistake or issue I've created, and I have requested three minutes

of rebuttal time.

This is an important case.

First of all, this is not a case about legal maneuvering to get an unsafe driveway approved.

Everyone, DOT hearings examiner, Mr. Boyle, his engineers, agree the driveway is safe.

What this case is about is a fundamental issue of New Hampshire jurisprudence.

DOT has lots of discretion when enacting regulations.

It has a lot of discretion when finding facts.

That's not this case in either instance.

This case is once you have adopted a policy, do you have to follow it?

Section 7a of the driveway policy says a permit shell issue if there's adequate safety.

That has never been challenged.

DOT wants to gloss over this entire issue and bury this case in the concept of discretion.

Its flaw appears on page 12 of DOT's brief.

In addition, while the adequate protection language viewed in isolation may appear mandatory, viewed

in the context of the driveway policy as a whole, it is not.

But what do you say about the other section?

If we read it the way you read it, wouldn't we read Section D out of the regulation?

No, because we say it's an impossible situation for a driveway to be both safe and an unreasonable hazard.

We also argue they use the wrong standard when the district engineer testified it was because his family used the road and he wanted the best solution.

So it's not an unreasonable hazard.

But why can't the, I'm sorry.

Which clause do you read out?

How do you reconcile them?

They're both there.

Well, I will tell you, the key to that is in the LaMire-Corville Associates case, which says if you have two conflicting findings, they are on their face, arbitrary and capricious and irrational.

That ordinarily would happen here and in Corville Mew, the matter was remanded back down.

But requiring safe curb cuts can't be irrational or arbitrary or capricious?

No one said they're not safe.

The two findings in conflict are capricious.

They can't conflict.

So shall we throw both of them out?

One hasn't been appealed.

DOT never appealed the finding of safety.

In Corville Mew, both parties cross appealed and left it as an open issue of which finding could control, so it would be appropriate to remand it down.

It strikes me that perhaps there's a grammatical problem in that the first provision talks in terms of Shelby issue and then the competing provision talks in terms of Shelby denied.

But didn't Mr. Deporter at the hearing reconcile the two factually?

Isn't that true?

We have evidence in the record that Deporter, who is the DOT guy, said that the adequate protection provision relates to physical characteristics of the driveway itself.

But the unreasonable hazard provision is something much broader and must be regarded in connection with the fact that there's already an existing driveway.

It strikes me that his testimony alone provides the reconciliation necessary.

It actually doesn't reconcile it because you still have two different facts where section 7A has been satisfied and 7E has been satisfied.

The fact that they may deal with different subject matter doesn't cause a reconciliation.

They have to be legally reconciled as a matter of legal interpretation, not a bending of the facts.

But why isn't it a reasonable interpretation to say that what A is dealing with is in the confines of simply this particular driveway cut, can it be made safe?

Okay, and maybe if you were just looking with blinders on it, that one issue, maybe the answer to that would be yes.

But on the broader question of is it unreasonable if there's a completely safer alternative access?

It seems to me that why isn't it entirely appropriate for DOT to say, wait a minute, however safe this can be made,

here's another alternative access that is much more reasonable and that's the one we're going to approve.

Because that's not what the regulation says.

The regulation says if it's safe, it shall issue.

Isn't what's going on here really the DOT adding context?

Now whether it's entitled to add context under these regulations, I'm not sure.

But isn't the DOT adding context in the sense that this is a very tight intersection with multiple controls and a stretch of roadway

and multiple curb cuts and that somehow the sum of all the parts equals a hazard?

Your Honor, first of all I want to say there's not multiple curb cuts here.

On the length of the bypass, there's probably 1200 feet without a curb cut.

This is a very large parcel.

And if you ask about the safety, think about they said if there was no driveway on Greenleaf,

they'd have no problem with the proposed driveway.

So a driveway that would then get more use is not an unreasonable hazard, but when it gets less use, it becomes unreasonable.

But that's not what the policy allows.

The policy has a conflict and I cite the cases in the brief where you cannot have legal opposites or factual opposites existing at the same time.

The other thing is Section 7A on adequate safety, 7A sub D has a catch-all that says any other condition for safety that the district engineer may impose.

The district engineer could have made it a condition to close the Greenleaf driveway, but did not.

That's because this had nothing to do with unreasonable hazard.

The original denial letter did not say unreasonable hazard.

That's Exhibit 22 in...

Well, what do you say about it wasn't, I mean it seemed to me that the hearings officer gave a pretty thorough discussion of all the implications of this.

For example, one of the things I think she said was that if you go out onto the Route 1 bypass, there would be a fair amount of traffic that would have to cross over to the left lane

and pretty quickly in order to be able to make a U-turn or make a left turn there and that would be something that would appear fairly hazardous.

So why isn't that something that's entitled to some deference?

Because we're not looking at deference and fact-finding, we're looking at the legal question of interpreting a statute.

Also, this whole notion of unreasonable hazard, they applied the wrong standard, they did not follow the web case, which sets forth a standard for unreasonable hazard of unusual danger.

And there was no showing of anything unusual that this was just a normal intersection.

She never addressed the legal question.

And to say that it's clear this is an unreasonable hazard, the DOT engineer who actually worked on this application, Kevin Russell,

the DOT cites him on page 4 of the brief to testify he's the one who testified about the hazardous nature of this.

When asked about it, Mr. Russell testified directly that he could not say this was an unreasonable hazard.

There was disagreement within DOT whether it's unreasonable.

Can I ask two factual questions?

One is Greenleaf Avenue, it's not a state highway, is it?

No, it's a city road that has two car dealerships at its entrance, then it has a housing project, a few other businesses.

It's a small road that people use it either as a cut through or to go to either dealership.

And did this plan ever get before the planning board?

It is submitted to the planning board, there are no comments.

We have asked the planning board to suspend comment on it because of the sewer line case, which this court is probably familiar with.

So the planning board never weighed in on issues involving the use or access on Greenleaf Avenue or on the state highway?

No, they would still have to and if the permit were ordered granted,

we would ask to sever out the driveway portion of our site plan from consideration of the overall development.

You would sever it out pending the outcome of this case?

No, sever it out pending the outcome of the sewer line case with the city of Portsmouth.

Because that has implications for the remainder of the development, but

Mr. Boyle needs a driveway in any case.

Also, the hearing examiner in this case throughout confused application of

the purpose section of the driveway policy saying maximum safety,

no new conflict points, the tab.

Well, of course, that's, isn't that semantics?

You are either pregnant or not, you're not maximally pregnant.

So to say, well, maximum safety is something different from safety.

Safety is safety.

So do you say you can have minimal safety as opposed to maximum safety?

That whole discussion struck me as irrelevant.

That's why there's the unappealed finding that this is safe.

The only problem becomes trying to reconcile a notion of unreasonable hazard.

Our engineers testified none exists.

DOT engineer testified none exists without trying to step on toes.

For some reason, DOT decided to deny this.

And I'm in my trial lawyer mode for a second.

When I'm cross-examining Mr. Deporter, he says adequate provision for safety.

A few seconds later, it's as if the light bulb goes off,

that he all of a sudden approved the driveway.

And I asked him, well, is it an unreasonable hazard?

And he looked very uncomfortable.

He said, yeah, it's unreasonable hazard.

Something's going on with the factual constructions here.

We think it improved safety.

But if this court construes the provision shall issue as permissive

instead of mandatory, you've changed New Hampshire law.

No cases have been cited of New Hampshire law or other jurisdictions

which hold shall is not mandatory.

Well, we'll see, won't we?

If you do that, your time is up.

Thank you.

Good morning, may it please the court.

My name is John Conforti, representing the New Hampshire Department of Transportation.

The department's denial in this case

was based on substantial evidentiary findings

and a reasonable interpretation of the driveway policy.

And to be clear, there were two findings here that are at issue.

The department did find that the driveway as designed

was adequately protecting the traveling public.

But it also found that in light of the safe existing access

that granting that driveway would be unreasonable.

But the regulation doesn't say that.

It doesn't say that if they have another access,

it's OK to deny an otherwise safe driveway.

It does not say that specifically.

But in other sections of the driveway policy,

there is extensive discussion regarding the number of curb cuts

and what is reasonable for frontage.

And the overall.

Well, is there any evidence that this is an unreasonable number

in the stretch that Council was alluded to?

That it's not an unreasonable number for that frontage.

And that's why we're not here under section 8 of the policy.

But I think it's important to look at section 8 of the policy

because it is clear that when the department looks at these driveways,

they don't just look at it and say, is it adequately safe?

That's the end of the analysis.

It's is it adequately safe?

And then it looks at other conditions that are there,

the frontage, the number of driveways already permitted.

And I think it's reasonable in this instance for the fact

that the department looked at around the corner,

we have a safe existing access on a low-speed, low-volume road

where it is going to intersect with a state highway

at a signalized intersection, which

is an incredibly safe way to manage the conflicts

onto the state highway.

You have a, is there a history?

I mean, can you tell us that in other cases

where the department has been confronted

with this kind of an issue, that it has said,

we're going to require you to use an alternative access?

I don't know of any specifically that

have gone up to our level at a hearing or beyond.

I know that one of the things that they look

at in general is the purpose of the overall driveway

statutory scheme, which this court has ruled on back in 2005

in the so-called three-driveway rule case, which

is the department is tasked with doing a balancing test

between the safety of the traveling public

and the rights of the landowners

to access the state highway.

I think that is the central purpose

which undergirds all of this language

in the driveway policy.

And given the fact that they found contradictory findings,

which gave them contradictory mandates,

what the department did was look at this overall purpose

here, which is that balancing test.

And the fact that there is an existing access

and that it's a safe access and that it's successfully

managing the traffic at this point

is a substantial factor in this balancing test.

The landowner now has access to the highway.

But it certainly doesn't say that in the regulations.

The regulations, to me, guard a very valuable right

to property owners.

That is curb cuts for commercial businesses

that give direct access to the state highway.

These are not trivial issues.

These are not trivial issues, Your Honor.

And I absolutely agree with that.

And I cannot sit here and tell you

that it says in the regulation that if you

have an existing access, you are not

going to get another access.

Because I think what is in effect is that the department

has to bring its engineering judgment

to bear on each and every one of these driveways.

You have to what extent do you argue

that the sub-paragraphs under the shall be issued part,

shall be issued if the public can be adequately protected.

Under that are specifics, or specifics,

that talk about the location of the driveway on the parcel,

the drainage structures, establishment of line

and grades, et cetera.

Should we look at those in understanding

the scope of the first provision in comparison

with the second seemingly contradictory provision?

I don't know.

Yes, I think absolutely.

I think when you look, when you start

to unpack the regulation of the policy here,

if you look at the exact language there, 7A

deals with the physical characteristics of the driveway.

Where is it on the land?

Does it have adequate drainage structures?

Does it have adequate sight lines?

So my next question then is, to what extent

should we waive DePorter's testimony?

He's the engineer for DOT.

He is.

And he's the one that explained how he applied the two

provisions.

He did, although I need to be frank with the court

that I don't think that that was entirely clear

in his testimony.

You have to read into his testimony to find that.

But what is undisputed in the record with respect to,

I think Mr. DePorter's testimony and then Mr. Russell's

testimony is that they found, physically, if you

draw up this driveway, it looks fine.

It's a question of, and if it was the only access onto

the site, they basically indicated

it would have been permitted.

The only issue is, based on these surrounding factors

and the fact that you have an access that's controlled,

that the landowner doesn't really

have a right to optimum access, that in that particular instance

it's unreasonable.

What concerns me here is that.

Isn't that internally inconsistent?

In other words, if this Greenleaf Avenue access

didn't exist, even though this is hazardous to the traveling

public this new driveway, it would be permitted.

No, I don't think so.

I don't think so, Your Honor, because we're not

the appellant wants to focus on whether this is safe or not safe.

It's not a binary decision.

A driveway creates hazards by its nature.

Even on the loneliest country road,

it creates hazards because it creates

conflict points, potential conflict points.

The question is not whether it's safe or unsafe necessarily.

It's whether the hazards that come along with that driveway

are reasonable in light of the other circumstances.

Well, someone should have written these regulations

a little more clearly.

Isn't one interpretation, and I think your opponent sort

of suggests this, isn't one way to reconcile these regulations

to say that A, the considerations that are articulated

in A, if those are satisfied, you must grant the permit.

If the considerations in E are satisfied,

you can't grant the permit.

And then there's some wiggle room in between that.

In other words, the department might, presumably

under that interpretation, the department

might say in a particular case, well, OK,

we don't have to grant this permit

because all of the factors in A aren't satisfied.

On the other hand, we don't find that it's unreasonable,

so we're not prohibited from granting it.

And therefore, we have some discretion.

But if we interpret it that way,

doesn't the fact that your engineer has found A

mean that you can't find D?

You can't find E, I'm sorry.

It would be a tempting argument, except that when

you read the policy as a whole, 7A does not control.

So you could have a finding of safety under 7A.

And regardless of what we view as 7A,

if you go to Section 8, if you have too many driveways,

even though it's a safe driveway, it's going to be denied.

So the shall issue in 7A, when you look at the policy

as a whole, doesn't actually mandate that.

So I think, unfortunately, the language is not clear.

And I think what the department had to do

was look, try to read these seemingly ambiguous terms

in 7A and 7E.

And what they did was they went to the heart

of the statutory scheme, which is what is the purpose here?

The purpose is this balancing test

between the rights of the landowners and the safety

of the traveling public.

Well, what concerns me is if we adopt the department's

interpretation of this conflict, E

seems to me to turn the department

into the planning board.

And these issues are much more amorphous.

And the balancing, that's what planning boards do.

And DOT is an engineering operation.

I agree, Your Honor, but this court

has found that the department has wide discretion

in reviewing these driveways.

And I think that there is a certain amount of discretion

and engineering judgment that needs

to be ceded to the department on these types of issues.

Maybe there needs to be a rule change.

Well, I think that under this,

I think that the interpretation that the department has had

here, despite the language, is a reasonable one.

It meets the purpose of the statute.

It meets what the legislature intended

when it adopted 236.13.

And when the policy was originally

adopted as administrative rules.

And I think that, ultimately, the department's decision

was fact-based.

And I note that at this point,

the appellant doesn't seem to be challenging that here.

And it is a reasonable interpretation

of the statute based on purpose.

And I think that the department should be given discretion

in interpreting its own regulation in that manner.

So what if Mr. Boyle came in and said, well, you know,

I really, I think I don't want access off Greenleaf

Avenue, so I'm going to close that.

I want to have my access on the highway that

has the most traffic.

Would you get that permit?

He may.

It's a different case.

And now this is an odd situation

because you have the access off of Greenleaf Avenue

is to a city-owned road.

So it's a different permitting issue.

But let's just take the hypothetical

that the city takes it away.

I think what the department said is,

that is now a different case

because what they are doing is a balancing test.

And now you have a landowner who is landlocked.

And what we're doing, again,

is looking at the competing interests

between the traveling public and the landowner.

Here, if we have a landowner

who does not have access to the state highway,

the reasonableness of the risks,

that analysis becomes different.

And that is essentially what the department said here.

But as counsel pointed out, isn't it a little odd

that if they're landlocked

and all the traffic goes out on route one, it's okay.

But if they're not landlocked

and less of the traffic comes out, it's not okay.

I don't think it's unreasonable

when you look at the purpose of the statute.

Again, there's a question of the reasonableness of the risks.

It's not a question of whether it's risky or not.

It's a question of the reasonableness of the risks.

And we want to afford landowners

a right to access the state highways.

It's the whole purpose of it being there.

If we need to, at that point,

certain risks become acceptable

that are not acceptable

when there is a safe existing access at the intersection.

And that's the totality of this case here.

This is a question of the risks being unreasonable

in this particular instance.

There's one other note I just want to make

with regard to Mr. Kucinovich's presentation.

He indicated that Kevin Russell

of the Department of Transportation said that

he couldn't say that this was an unreasonable hazard.

I would just direct the court to look specifically

at the transcript in that area

because what he said in a fact though is

he couldn't say that because he's not the district engineer

who is the person who actually has to make the determination.

So he couldn't make a determination of unreasonable hazard

because of his position,

not because of the facts on the case.

And he certainly didn't take the position

that this driveway was unreasonable.

Let me ask you this, your response to the point

that the state hasn't appealed the fact

that 7A was satisfied.

So that's a given and what we're fighting about is

E and whether E should take precedence

or whether E was reasonable or unreasonable.

Correct. It would be incredibly disingenuous of us

to appeal that.

That was our finding.

Our finding was that there was adequate safety

under the provisions of 7A.

So there's no question that that was in the record

and that was the finding of the department.

The question is how do you justify that

along with the findings which are factually supported

with respect to 7E?

I would just say I hope that regardless

of how we decide this case,

the department might look at these regulations.

I think the department is looking at the regulations

regardless of the outcome of the case.

And they need the advice of an English teacher

because using one clause as a shell

and the other clause as a shall not be issued

is very problematic.

And they can't use justice convoy.

Thank you very much.

Mr. Kucinovich, do you need your reserve time?

First of all, to address the regulations

don't have a balancing test.

They have specific standards and words.

The balancing test in the three driveway case came in

when DOT adopted the regulations.

The regulations were being challenged

with the balance of the rights of the owners.

So the question is it within DOT's discretion

to have regulations that says 400 feet versus 350?

What's at issue here is once in their discretion

they have adopted the regulations

do they have to follow them?

Very important distinction because it means

people like Mr. Boyle have no notice

of what standards are going to be applied

which is the very purpose of regulations.

Finally, we would not take as narrow a view

that justice convoy's questions about 7A

because I noticed that the justice

asked about the first three sections

but not the catch all section D

which would make it co-extensive

with any other concern that there is.

And I do think Justice Lin was on the right track

in terms of mutually exclusive findings

have to reconcile them and this is where I say

you can't have mutually exclusive.

If it's obviously safe, it's there.

If it's not safe, if it's an unreasonable hazard

it gets denied and the wiggle room is in the middle.

If it's almost adequately safe but a few feet short

but it doesn't rise to an unreasonable hazard.

There's probably a category of driveways

that fit in there that does not do any offense

to the regulations as written

just recognizing two opposites can't simultaneously exist

just like when my red light comes on

and my yellow light's still on letting me talk

I kind of have to look up.

What do I do? I can't.

Red means stop.

Well, it's not on but I will stop here.

I know, you didn't keep on talking if you like.

No, I'm fine now.

Thank you very much.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Council may come forward in the matter

of Clearview software versus.
