This is case 2015-0071, appeal of Pamela Caliores.

Proceed.

Good morning.

May it please the court?

My name is Attorney John Ward from the law firm of Pat Fitzgerald and Ward,

and I represent the appellant Pamela Caliores in this matter.

This is the case regarding an individual that was hit by a car while on a paid break.

And what type of analysis should be used?

It's the appellant position.

This is the analysis in this case controlled by the finding of the board that the claimant

during at the moment that she was unfortunately hit that her purpose was only to smoke and

not to do something on behalf of the employer.

I recognize that her position was she was getting milk crates out of the car to move

her cubicle, but we do have a finding.

Are we bound by that finding?

And to what extent is that going to be determinative?

No, Your Honor, and here's why.

It's our position that you have to look at it on a broader basis.

Paid breaks are an opportunity for employees to rest, to recharge,

and to be better when they get back to work and more productive.

So it's our position that there was a benefit regardless of whether she was smoking,

whether it was a coffee break, whether she was doing a crossword puzzle.

It was not a prohibited activity.

It was something that she was allowed to do.

There was testimony throughout the hearing that employees did that.

They went to their car.

They smoked in that area.

They smoked in other areas.

So it's our position that regardless that it is a compensable claim,

when you look at it in the broad context, they got focused on the smoking.

I don't think that is dispositive in this case.

And I don't think the fact that they found that she wasn't retrieving milk rates

is dispositive in this case.

What's dispositive is that it was a work-related activity that was not prohibited.

So we think that's the relevant factor.

And why was it work-related?

Say that again.

Why was it work-related other than it happened during the break?

Or is that it?

It's our position that it was a break, that it was a paid break,

that paid breaks are given to employees to allow them to recharge, rest,

and that she became a more effective employee once she gets back.

So if it's a paid break and a discussion from your perspective,

we don't need to know anything more?

I think you have to look at it as a prohibited activity, Your Honor.

Is it something, if she was doing something that was prohibited,

if she was using drugs, doing something like that,

then I think that would get it outside the scope of her employment.

So if she went to the CVS and tripped in the CVS and got hurt, covered?

I think you have to look at whether it was a prohibited activity.

Does it matter that the employer provided a smoking area on premises?

No, because I would say once again that there was testimony throughout the hearing

that people did not just smoke in that area, they smoked in other areas.

If the employer had set out guidelines, strict guidelines,

and said this is the area where you need to smoke,

if you don't do that, that you would be reprimanded, warnings terminated,

then yes, that would absolutely be an important factor.

But because there was no enforcement, there were no real rules regarding this,

and testimony was clear throughout the claimants on...

a supervisor testified that she smoked in that area or around that area.

Do you say that the board erred in its application of our holding in Margeson?

That's correct.

Because Margeson, as I understand, stands for the proposition

that you need first to decide whether this is a neutral risk,

because at that point, then you look at whether the employee is,

as a result of employment, exposed to a higher risk

than a member of the general public would be.

So do you... let me ask you this.

You're not challenging Margeson.

You're challenging the board's application of Margeson.

That's correct.

I make two points.

Number one, I think the correct analysis would have been the employment risk analysis,

and then go to Steinberg, because once again, this wasn't a prohibited activity.

Number two, even if you use a neutral risk analysis,

it's our position that the way that property was set up,

there were not enough parking spaces.

She had to travel, she had to go to different places,

that there was no prohibition about being in that area.

Employees were commonly in that area.

So it's an issue of, did she have to go there more frequently

than a normal person in the general public?

So wouldn't that mean that any time an employer doesn't provide a parking area

that it would... and there was a fall that it would be covered?

Well, a fall is generally a neutral risk.

Neutral risks are unexplained causes.

If we don't know the reason why somebody fell,

that's generally a neutral risk.

Here we have a known cause. She was hit by a vehicle.

But that's your analysis.

I mean, she had a 15-minute break, but she decided,

the CVS is only a five-minute drive away.

I'll just run there really quickly,

because I need to pick up some aspirin or whatever.

And she gets in a car accident.

Is that employer liable for that?

I would assume that that would be a prohibited activity,

that the employer would not allow them to leave the actual work area.

Why is that any different than this?

I assume the only thing the employer wants

is to make sure that the person is back in 15 minutes.

In this case it wasn't prohibited. Employees generally did that.

I think if it's a paid break that it's compensable

as long as it's not a prohibited activity,

under the case law that New Hampshire currently has.

Thank you.

Thank you.

May I please record my name is David Johnston.

I represent the Department of Health and Human Services in this case.

As the appeal board noted in his decision,

it appears that the claimant is actually advocating

for a positional risk test, such as a injury is deemed

to have arisen from the employment if the obligations

of employment place the employee in the particular place

at the particular time that she is injured.

And this test was rejected expressly in Margeson.

Margeson makes clear that the mere physical proximity

of the workspace to the accident is an insufficient basis

to conclude that the accident meets the criteria

of the statute section 11.

In this case the connection to the work environment

was even more attenuated than the case in Margeson.

Would the outcome of this be any different

if the employer's designated smoking area was outside?

I take it it was outside.

It was outside, Your Honor.

And she was hit by a car that intruded into the authorized

smoking area.

Would that make a difference in the analysis here?

I don't think so in that particular circumstance, Your Honor,

because the neutral risk test was applied, and rightly so.

And Larson in his treatise provides examples

of when the neutral risk test should be applied.

And he includes things like a random accident

such as tin being blown off a roof and striking a person,

or a murderer running muck runs into the place

of employment and kills a person.

Those are things that have nothing to do

with the employment per se.

And I would submit that a car running off the road

and going into the workspace would be the equivalent

of such an incident.

Before you run out of time, I want to ask you about

the sequestration issue.

Yes.

And was there a ruling by the board

that the person was essential to be present as Svensson?

I can't see that in the record.

And, Your Honor, there wasn't a specific ruling by the board.

However, the board implicitly, by allowing the person to stay,

indicated that the person was essential.

So is the absence, I take your position,

as the absence of a ruling is not fatal?

No, it's not.

And, Your Honor, I would note that the board,

by allowing the person to stay,

did not unfairly prejudice the claimant.

There's no evidence submitted by the claimant

that the supervisor's testimony was either untruthful

or that it would have been different

had the board sequestered that person.

So I believe that even if the board should have

expressly said something to the effect that

her testimony was essential, it was harmless error.

Is there any case law that you can rely on in that regard

or in terms of causation that has to be proven?

With respect to this particular rule,

Your Honor, no, I did not find any particular case law.

But I believe that the board's decision in doing so

was not proven to be harmful.

But do I understand correctly that Ms. Fenson was present

and then she heard the testimony and then she testified?

Is that what happened?

That's correct.

I'd also note, Your Honor, that in the board's decision,

there were many references or several references

to evidence that was submitted to show

that the claimant was in the parking area

for reasons other than obtaining those crates from her car.

They cited the medical records,

which had no evidence of the stated purpose

for going out to the parking lot.

They also cited the fact that the two carols

that she was moving between were just a few...

They just found her not credible.

Just a few feet away.

That's correct, Your Honor.

We can't get behind that, can we?

I mean, that's a credibility finding.

And you certainly don't want us to look beyond that.

That's correct, Your Honor.

That's correct.

So they had ample evidence aside from this whole issue

of whether or not Ms. Fenson's testimony was truthful or not.

And was she the one that testified about the location

of the offices and the crates and all of that?

Was that the company's testimony in that regard?

Or the department's testimony?

It was, but it was also the claimant's own testimony

that it was just a few feet away.

They were sitting in the hearing room,

and she said it was like from one side of the wall to the other.

Thank you.

Thank you.
