This is case 2015-0335, William Weaver et al. v. Randall Stewart et al., James Sousa v. Randall Stewart, William Weaver et al. v. the town of Pelham et al., and James Sousa v. the town of Pelham et al.

Mr. Morissette. May it please the court?

This case is about summary judgment, whether or not there are genuine issues of material fact, and whether the two sets of defendants were entitled to judgment as a matter of law.

And I suggest to the court that there are serious issues of material fact.

There's a multitude of facts that were in dispute.

There are issues about weighing the credibility of various witnesses that were made by different trial court judges.

Also, the law on this case is pretty clear, that in New Hampshire, driving while intoxicated and keeping motorists who were impaired off the highway is a deplorable act.

And there's public policy case law, cause of actions recognized by this court in Hickingbotham, that there should be civil actions taken to prevent this from occurring.

In this case, both the police department and their agent, Woody's Auto, a towing agency under a contract, had possession of a car.

They took custody of it following a drinking and driving arrest.

Mr. Morissette, may I interrupt you just to sort myself out here?

The trial court decided this case on the issue of proximate cause, correct?

With respect, yes.

And it, I think, if memory serves, it did not find that any immunity came into play.

Is that also correct?

That's correct with regard to the Pelham defendants.

Okay, not Woody's.

That's correct.

Does that, where does that leave the immunity issues?

Are they at play here today or not?

They are.

They are at play to the extent they've been preserved.

And the only issue preserved for this court is 507B5.

The official immunity under Everett was not raised in the appeal notification.

So the trial court never made a ruling one way or the other about immunity as to the Pelham defendants.

Because...

That's not true, Your Honor.

It is not true, because I've read this a couple of weeks ago.

I have it that the trial court, Judge McHugh, on the Pelham defendants, said that the LGC coverage provided the town does constitute insurance.

That's a separate issue.

And so the trial court said, but that doesn't matter because I find no proximate causation.

So the decision of Judge McHugh was not based on immunity, right?

Well, Your Honor, what you just said is the net effect is true.

If you read that decision, with all due respect to Judge McHugh, there's a number of findings in that decision that he says ultimately are not controlling.

And he went through the analyses.

Well, the reason I asked the question, because I want to know procedurally what your position is, let's say we agree with you.

Proximate causation is a jury issue.

It's not for the trial court.

And let's say we disagree with Judge McHugh about the insurance coverage.

Do we have to remand to the trial court to develop the issue of immunity?

That's my question.

And I think it's a fair question.

I think the answer is yes, with respect to a remand, because Judge McHugh, while he goes through some analysis, he doesn't conclude either way on the issue.

And if you notice in this case, there's a series of motions to clarify and motions to reconsider, because there were several decisions made.

But those decisions were not the ones he ultimately relied upon, despite the presentation in the order.

As we reviewed it, it was very confusing.

We sought relief from the court.

He didn't make any rulings of law on the immunity issue.

From his perspective, that's true.

Ultimately, on the motions to reconsider and clarify, that is what he has said.

And whatever he did, it's kind of dicta anyway, because it turned on proximate cause, what Judge McHugh did.

That's true with regard to the column defendants.

Yeah.

When I ask you, Mr. Morissette, let's assume that this arrest happened in the daytime, when the courts were open.

And let's assume that the police officer brought the defendant, brought Mr. Stewart, into the police state, before a court, and Mr. Stewart was visibly intoxicated.

Is it your position that the court could not have said that an appropriate way for what was before him at that time to be resolved was for the judge to say to the police officer, listen, drive this guy home.

I'm not going to set any cash bail.

I want you to drive this guy home.

Could the judge have done that, or would that have been some kind of an error?

No, I don't think it's error of any kind there.

I think that's abundantly reasonable.

What we have in this case, though, is none of those facts occurred.

What we have is this fellow taken home by a police officer day or night, and this case was at night, and he was brought to someone else's residence, as an aside.

He was brought to Miriam Stoltz's home, someone that wasn't listed on his license, someone the officer, Joya, never met, never spoke to, didn't find out whether it was a responsible person, didn't find out if the person existed, didn't know whether a vehicle was there.

But how does that have anything to do, I mean, how does that have anything to do with what happened?

I mean, are you saying that somehow if he went, you know, if he had been brought home as opposed to this location, something different would have happened?

I think that it's a possibility.

Really, what I'm saying, Your Honor, is when you have someone who's intoxicated that you don't feel can drive, you cannot just take him and deposit him to an unknown location.

172B3.

So the judge, so let me get back to my example, then.

If in my example, the police officer brought the person before the judge and said, listen, he wants to be taken to this, to the house of this friend of his who he has some relationship with, and the judge sees that the person is intoxicated, he can't say, okay, okay, officer, take this person to that location.

That would be, somehow the judge would be acting improperly if he did that.

No, again, Your Honor, that's not true with all due respect.

Right, 170B3 answers all these questions.

That's our protective custody statute.

And that statute indicates you can take someone to their home if they're intoxicated, but you also have the concomitant obligation to make sure they do not receive that motor vehicle, or any motor vehicle, or warn them accordingly.

In this case, he had an obligation.

Where does it say that in the statute?

I'm sorry?

Where does it say in that statute that you have to make sure he doesn't get his car back?

Okay, that's fair.

It doesn't say it in 170B3, but it does say it in RSA 262-40.

But that's statute, if memory serves, that deals with impounding vehicles for criminal investigations.

Your Honor, I agree with most of what you said, but one of the issues of fact and one of the issues for the trial court is what impoundment really means.

My brothers here argue that under 262, 33, and 32, the car was taken for safekeeping to get it out of harm's way.

Those statutes are called impoundment statutes by title.

And the legislature gives us some significant indication as to what they mean by their title.

Every tow by a police officer is authorized by 262, 32, 31, and 33.

Those are all impoundment statutes.

How you get the car back varies by whether or not you're legally entitled to it.

Right.

And in this case, the fellow went down sometime between 9 and 11 the next morning, paid the fees, and that's what the statute says he has to do, and he got his car back.

And what it says, Your Honor, is if he's legally entitled to do so.

Also, you must read the statute.

Well, you're not suggesting, are you, that Woody's is supposed to decide whether he's legally entitled to do so?

I think Woody's has a role as an agent of the police department.

The police department can delegate their possession and seizure of the vehicle, but they're not free from liability.

So if they're going to give it to an untrained person to decide whether or not this person is equipped to take the car from a sobriety perspective,

then that is the decision made by the town of Pelham and made by the agent.

This agent signed an agreement.

They agreed for years in the running to take cars for those persons arrested and incapacitated.

So is it your position that Woody's would not be liable independently, but that the Pelham defendants are ultimately responsible for Woody's conduct?

Is that your position?

It's not.

I didn't think so.

It is not.

Our position is that the restatement of Torch 390 and Sections 390 and 308 and the New Hampshire case law on jurisprudence on this issue of negligent entrustment and negligence required Woody's not—

So does every towing company have to hire someone with expertise in recognizing when someone is in some kind of condition that he or she shouldn't be given control over a car?

No.

In this case, Mr. Wood was well aware this guy was towed by an arrest.

He was towed verbally on the phone.

There's a tow receipt.

There's a tow dispatch request saying this is due to an arrest.

Early morning.

Early morning, right?

At 1 in the morning.

The fellow comes back at 9, say the earliest, 9 o'clock when they open up.

Correct.

Does Woody's have to make a judgment whether he's still intoxicated or that he may have continued drinking or taking drugs?

Who knows?

You say regardless.

They have the responsibility for judging whether he was in proper shape to take a car.

The answer is twofold.

One, yes.

And the second one is pick up the phone, call the department, or have the police department there to make the assessment if they cannot do so.

The law in this state is strong.

You cannot put a motorist impaired back on the roadways.

And there is no equivocation on that.

Heckenbotham recognized that for teenagers and social host liability.

The Weldy case recognizes it.

There's a common law duty on top of and complementing the statutory obligations in this case.

In the statute at issue that we've argued very strongly 262, 40 is important, the ability to tow is 262, 32, and 33.

The ability to get it back in this case, excuse me, is when there's a crime at issue.

But doesn't that, it wasn't Judge Anderson, I'm pretty sure it was Anderson that ruled on this,

wasn't he clearly correct that the criminal, that section that you rely on is designed for a situation where the car may be evidence of a crime?

Justice Glenn, I strongly disagree with that analysis by Justice Anderson, Judge Anderson.

The statute does not say that in any way.

There are words added to his analysis to the statute.

That statute indicates if there's a reasonable belief that a crime has occurred, then the...

So that would, but if we accept that, that would mean that even if the, in this situation,

even if it was undisputed that Stewart was sober, cold stone sober, when he went to pick up the car,

the towing company couldn't release it to him.

They could with the permission of the department.

Well, they have to call the department first.

That's correct.

So that's, so your position is that in any, any time a vehicle is towed under, under the statute,

the, the, the, the towing company can't release it to the, to the owner unless they get permission from the police department.

I just have to clarify one thing.

When you say anytime it's towed, the authority to tow is 262, 32, and 33.

The authority to retain and, and seize and keep is 262, 40.

So under 40, when a crime has occurred, they are obligated to have communication with the police department

to find out whether the car is going to be retained, as Judge Anderson would say, for evidentiary purposes,

or whether or not the car can be released because we have a DWI, which is a serious criminal event.

Justice Anderson took a very narrow view with all due respect of, of, of criminal acts.

So, so, so, so let, so let, let me, let's give you this situation.

The person gets a rat, the person gets arrested for DWI.

They're seriously drunk.

They have to go to the hospital.

And in the hospital, there's some complications develop.

And they're in the hospital for two weeks.

Two weeks later, the person gets out is now cold, stone cold sober, goes to the towing company and says, I want my car back.

You're saying the towing company can't release it to them without calling the police department.

Or have already done so.

I mean, if they learn this person was sick and they come in and they understand the scenario,

then they certainly can give the car, as long as they act reasonably, Your Honor.

Find out if it's authorized to release.

Find out if this was DWI.

Remember, in this case, it's not just DWI.

What Judge, what, what police officer Goya was told, that he was on muscle relaxers that night.

Don't forget the morning hours.

From six in the morning on, they're told that, hey, hey, this wasn't drunk driving.

I was on Xanax, an entirely different drug.

Now, we know by one o'clock in the afternoon, he has four drugs in his system that are long-lasting.

What's the evidence that the towing guy knows that, you know, knows all these, all these, that it was drugs instead of alcohol, and it was Xanax, and how much, all that?

What's the evidence that he knew?

To be fair, there's nothing in the record about what he knew.

But does he appreciate that he's intoxicated?

Knew or should he have known?

And if he called the police department, he may have learned these things.

Or more importantly, if Officer Goya had taken the initiative when he had these conversations.

Well, let's go, let's follow up on what you said.

If he had called the police department at nine or between nine and 10.30 in the morning, he would have learned what?

They, the, the, the officer would have told him last night at midnight or one o'clock in the morning, whatever, when I arrested this guy, he was intoxicated?

Yeah, and so what does that tell him?

I mean...

How about in the morning when, when the fellow called back and said, hey, I was taking Xanax.

That's different than the muscle relaxers and alcohol.

That's, that was later, at 11 o'clock or 11.30.

The evidence was, I think, undisputed that the officer picked, that the, that the guy picked up the car between nine and 10.30.

It, it, it is disputed when he picked the car up.

I don't think anyone's going to agree it was nine and 10.30.

When is it undisputed that Xanax arose?

It, the first call in the morning, he told the dispatcher and the police officer, there was explanations throughout the morning that I took Xanax.

It was an anti-anxiety medication.

He told dispatch and he told officer Joy.

And it's, that's all in the morning hours.

It's the Xanax that has the elongated dissipation rate, which, if my medicine serves me well, when, if combined with alcohol, is a very dangerous situation, isn't it?

It, that's correct, it's exactly what our expert talked about, and by the way, the trial court did not give any credence to our experts, both a police officer liability expert and a, Dr. Barbieri, who actually was the expert who analyzed the blood in the criminal case that prosecuted Mr. Stewart.

We hired him after the criminal prosecution, and he has opined that the half-life of Xanax is 11 hours.

It puts us back to the night before.

Dr. Barbieri also listened to the tapes, and he has said that the actions in the morning, the next day, day two, and the night before, all show CNS, central nervous system depressants.

And he said that the night before was either or both alcohol or drugs.

We know this fellow was highly impaired on four different drugs.

And Dr. Barbieri said the synergistic effect of all the drugs would have suppressed his central nervous system more.

Well, didn't Judge Anderson ultimately conclude that there was no genuine issue of fact as to whether Woody's employee knew or should have known?

That's ultimately what grounds the decision, isn't it?

On that point, that's true for Woody's, and what he basically indicated was that he adopted the reasoning of Mr. Wood, the defendant in this case, and he dismissed everything that Mr. Stewart said in his deposition.

We were told by Judge McHugh, go out and depose this fellow, and if you get A, B, C, and D, then you may have a chance on proximate cause.

Attorney McDowell got every point raised by Judge McHugh, and Mr. Stewart, according to the judge who never saw him, reading a transcript, said his testimony is not reliable.

But didn't Mr. Stewart essentially say, I have no recollection of any of this?

He said that at one point.

Many other times, he gave very specific examples as to what he remembered in the morning and the night before.

The other side in isolation, you can either discount or discredit, but that goes to the weight of the evidence.

Putting his testimony aside without seeing the fellow was improper, and the trial court should not have done that.

This goes to the genuine issues of material fact.

Thank you.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Good morning, Your Honors.

May it please the court.

My name is Brian Cullen.

I don't think we actually covered this in the preliminaries, but we'll do seven and a half minutes each.

I'm here on behalf of the town of Pelham, Officer Joya, just as a matter of housekeeping.

Attorney Johnson's here for Woody's.

May I ask for a clarification on your position?

On the 507b issue, Your Honor?

Right.

If we conclude, this is just for the sake of argument, if we conclude that the proximate cause issue

was not an issue that could be decided on summary judgment, I know you disagree.

But let's say we conclude that.

And we also conclude that Judge McHugh made a mistake when he said that the LGC coverage constituted insurance.

Okay?

Correct.

Do we send it back to the Superior Court to deal with the immunity issue, or do you say

we should deal with the immunity issue in the first instance?

Well, not surprisingly, I'm going to say that you should deal with it in the first instance.

But that's also-

But I need to understand from you why.

But I'm going to tell you why.

First of all, Judge, this issue came up on numerous occasions.

We moved to dismiss right out of the gate on 507b.

The plaintiffs responded by arguing that 507b shouldn't apply because this arose out of operation

of the vehicle, and also, even though it was an operation by our people, and also argued

that the PLT, the LGC at the time, was insurance.

The judge denied that for all the reasons in the plaintiff's objection.

Then we raised it again on motion for summary judgment.

And Judge McHugh did address the insurance thing, but he also addressed the operation.

He said, I'm not prepared to say that the 507b doesn't apply.

So I think he did address it.

In any case, all of the facts are in front of this court on the 507b issue.

The operation question is not, frankly, particularly a complicated one.

507b has been repeatedly affirmed by this court as applying to bar suits against municipalities.

Well, if you say it was so clear, I'm asking myself the question, why didn't Judge McHugh

deal with the immunity issue, and say, and therefore, I don't need to deal with the proximate

cause issue?

He flipped it.

And I'm struggling with why that happened.

You, you, I could speculate a little bit, but realistically, I think he just, he determined,

frankly, that he wanted to see how this case played out with some discovery.

So he just, I mean, he didn't look at the motion to dismiss all that much.

He just said for all the reasons in the brief.

You know, we specifically said-

So that's why, my question is, why, why don't we have the responsibility, assuming the underlying

my conditions, why don't we send it back to the Superior Court to make some legal findings?

Well, I don't think that there are any legal findings that have to be made.

Judge McHugh did, well, in the motion for summary judgment, Judge McHugh did punt it on

the motion to dismiss.

On the motion for summary judgment, however, he came back and he specifically addressed each

of those issues that were raised.

He talked about the 5.0, the insurance liability, and frankly, I think, got it wrong under the

appeal of local government center.

But then he did go on to address the operation aspect of that.

And I can look at it in the record, but he definitively talked about this ownership

and operation, and he talked about it from the ownership standpoint in particular, and

he got it wrong.

And then he moved on to the causation.

Now, his opinion is not well articulated.

It bounces from place to place.

It resulted in a couple of different motions to reconsider or for clarification.

But at the end of all of those, he did make it clear he had addressed the 507B.

He simply disagreed that it bars a case such as this.

And that, I think, if you really look back, and I don't envy you the task, but if you

look back and parse through his opinion, I think you'll find that he did do it.

We have a lot of experience with that.

I'm sure you do.

So I think the 507B is squarely before the court.

And again, I don't think it's a decision that needs to go back to, in this case, it'll

probably be Judge Anderson at this point to decide.

Certainly, that's an option of the court, but I don't think it's required in this case,

because I don't think the question is a close one.

Can I just ask you on the proximate cause issue?

Sure.

What is the evidence from the expert for the plaintiff that would permit a fact finder

to find that?

I mean, I understand he's talked about the half-life, so to speak, of Xanax and all

that, but he hasn't – is there evidence in the record as to when the following morning

the plaintiff – I'm sorry, Stewart took the Xanax?

Do we have any evidence in the record as to when he took the Xanax?

None whatsoever.

And that's a critical point, Your Honor, because the night before, what we know is he –

So what am I looking at on page 57 of some brief that says,

the plaintiff's toxicologist who will testify that Mr. Stewart showed signs of central nervous

system impairment throughout the day mean?

That means Xanax to me.

That's not based on any fact.

There's no – Justice Lin's question was, is there any evidence as to when he took it?

It's an opinion.

But it has to be an opinion based on facts that are inevitable.

Isn't that for the jury to evaluate?

No, Your Honor, you can't –

Aren't you able to cross-examine just as you normally do in such a circumstance?

No, you'd move to strike the expert opinion.

It's not based on any facts.

Well, yeah, but when would you do – you'd do that in a trial, wouldn't you?

You'd do before trial, but you don't need to get there in this case because, as Justice

Lin points out, there were no facts and evidence whatsoever as to when he allegedly took these

additional –

The plaintiff's argument on that point is that the expert's testimony was he had to have

shown signs of impairment given his toxicology experience.

The court itself called them facts.

The court itself said none of these facts convinced the court to reconsider as the conclusion.

Well, that may be an artful language on the dealing with the reconsideration.

Maybe.

But maybe none of these arguments.

But the thing is this.

The night of his arrest, there was no indication that there was any Xanax container or anything

else in Mr. Stewart's car.

The following day after the accident, there is a prescription.

There's an indication that sometime that day, the day of the accident, he took additional

medication.

The only evidence as to when he did that is that we know he was seriously impaired at the

time of the accident.

And we know from Woody that he was – he did not appear to be impaired at the time he picked

up the car.

Can I just ask you, is there anything in the expert's report that would allow the – from

which the expert said, I can tell that what happened here was he must have taken the Xanax

sometime before he picked up the car because of whatever – my scientific expertise is,

I can tell you, as opposed to he took the Xanax sometime after he picked up the car.

Is there anything – did he articulate any basis for saying, I know it had to be the former

because?

Categorically, no.

Absolutely and categorically, no.

He never has any ability to pinpoint any time by which the person took the Xanax.

Yeah, you found – felt it sufficient to offer an opinion.

That's – yeah, that's shocking.

An expert who was willing to apply an opinion without – without an underlying fact.

That's how you – as I understand it.

That's how you – that's how you avoid summary judgment, Mr. Cullen.

Only if the court goes along with the idea that an unsubstantiated opinion is somehow

– still creates an issue of fact when there's no underlying fact.

As I understand it, Mr. Wood testifies that he didn't see any signs of impairment.

That's correct.

So, you're saying that testimony together with this unreliable expert testimony, it

just doesn't amount to an issue that should go to a jury?

Right.

Yes.

And frankly, there needs to be some affirmative evidence, even if you set Mr. Wood's testimonies

aside.

There has to be affirmative.

The plaintiff has the burden of proof.

They have to prove affirmatively the intoxication.

Well, let me just ask you this, in terms of Mr. Wood, isn't the jury – wouldn't a jury

be free to disbelieve him on the basis that, well, he's got a lot of skin in this game,

so even whatever he saw, he might not own up to.

Absolutely.

And I apologize.

My stoplight's on, but if I can just finish that, Mr. Chief Justice.

They can absolutely disbelieve him, but that doesn't create proof on the other side.

The plaintiff has to come in with proof of intoxication at that time.

Simply the absence of it by taking Mr. Wood's testimony off the table doesn't create the

opposite.

And that's what the plaintiffs don't have.

In other words, the disbelief of a denial is not affirmative evidence.

Correct.

Thank you.

I wish I had said it that way myself.

Thank you.

Write it down.

Thank you.

Thank you, counsel.

May it please the court.

My name is Mike Johnson.

I represent Woody's Auto Repair.

Judge Anderson's decision was sound on the issue of 262.40 not being applicable.

On the issue of this Mr. Wood being a bailee at the time.

Can I interrupt you there?

Sure you can.

I really don't remember.

Did we learn about bailment in contracts class, or did we learn about bailment in torts class?

I learned about it in both, if I remember.

A long time ago.

Maybe attorney Kelly might help me on that, but he's closer in time to law school.

And my point is, do we really in New Hampshire at this day, do we really constrict ourselves

in negligence cases to rather ancient doctrines of bailments for hire, or bailments, gratuitous

bailments, et cetera?

Well, I would say yes, because you have the, in order to have a negligent entrustment in

this case, there has to be some control over the vehicle, not like Judge Anderson found,

the physical control, but the actual control to know you can't prevent someone from taking

the vehicle.

And that's what Mr. Wood had in this case.

The statute 262-33 really creates a bailment.

If you look at 262, if you look at the statutory scheme of these statutes, 262-32, 33 and 40,

232 says the reasons a police officer can tow a vehicle.

And under this scenario, in the statute, there's seven Roman numerals.

This one was a sixth Roman numeral that the person was arrested or otherwise incapacitated,

and the vehicle was a nuisance on the roadway.

That's the reason this was towed according to Officer Gioa.

Uncontroverted testimony by Officer Gioa, the arresting officer.

The vehicle, the next statute, 33, is the bailment, is the end of that bailment,

where it says, if you towed a vehicle pursuant to that first statute, 32,

which contemplates an arrest, unlike what they say, it contemplates an arrest in 32,

then a tow operator, when confronted with an owner of that vehicle that pays the money

for the tow and the storage charge, must, is obligated to give that vehicle back.

Despite all of that, do you disagree that Woody was an agent of the police?

I disagree that he was an agent of the police, yes.

The claim has always been that he was independent negligence,

and I think plaintiff's counsel admitted that here.

It was an independent negligent claim against Woody's.

From Woody's standpoint, the police officer would have had to tell somebody at Woody's,

don't release this vehicle, it's evidence.

In the absence of such an instruction, then your position is, the fallback is,

the other statute applies.

33 applies, yes.

Okay, so what's critical is that in this case, the office,

Woody's doesn't have the two statutes in front of him in trying to decide which applies.

Of course.

So you're saying, because the officer did not instruct Woody's to treat this as evidence

and not let anybody in it or to take it or whatever, then the other statute applies.

Correct.

I agree with your point that Brendan Wood, who's been doing this since the 70s,

wasn't versed on chapter and verse of the statute.

However, he knew what he was obligated to do when someone presented their money.

And he also knew, and he testified, as did GEOA, that if this vehicle was impounded,

it was a whole different set of circumstances.

It goes to the tow yard of the police department.

Well, but let me just ask you this.

Suppose it's sort of the same question I asked your opponent.

Suppose that this arrest took place at 9 o'clock in the morning.

The officer immediately brought the person to the judge and, you know,

the defendant said something about, look, I can, you know, I want to go home.

It's obvious to everyone that Mr. Stewart is highly intoxicated.

So the police officer takes them home.

The car gets towed to your clients.

And within an hour, the guy shows up at your, you know, he gets a ride from the friend to the tow place.

And then within an hour, he shows up and he's still highly intoxicated.

Is it okay for your guy to release him, release the vehicle?

I would say yes, but I would say that the court doesn't have to decide that issue.

As untasteful as that is, that the tow operator is obligated to release the vehicle,

the great way to change that is to change the statutory scheme and also to change the temporary license.

Don't forget, he received a temporary license here.

He was still a licensed operator.

There are states that neighbor this, that neighbor New Hampshire that take away that license.

So is it, following up on Judge, Justice Lin's question,

is it your position that if Woody's employee had said he came to pick his car up,

he was totally intoxicated, out of his mind.

I could see it.

He was stumbling around.

But I felt that I had to give him the keys anyway.

I would say that.

Are you saying that no liability?

I would say that Mr. Wood wouldn't have done that.

But I would say if he did, there would be no liability under the current statutory scheme, yes.

But I think the court doesn't have to decide it that way,

because what was discussed on the state's or the town's portion,

there's no evidence that Mr. Stewart exhibited any signs of intoxication.

Dr. Barbieri, the plaintiff's expert, if you read his report,

it's at volume 2, 987 to 988.

It's actually 16 pages, but those last two pages are his opinions.

And if you break it down, he says,

at the time of the arrest on Friday night, he was intoxicated.

At the time of the accident, he was intoxicated.

He avoids saying anything regarding these visible signs of intoxication

that Mr. Stewart may have exhibited when he met Brendan Wood.

Now, I made a big point in my brief about Mr. Stewart's lack of credibility.

But even if you believe everything he says,

believe everything he says,

he still has no memory of the event of picking up that vehicle.

And like my brother said, the absence,

and even if you want to choose to disbelieve Mr. Wood,

who said he made, gave his appropriate documentation,

was able to speak and converse with understanding,

wasn't stumbling, wasn't slurring his speech,

didn't have red and glassy eyes.

And it's important to note he wasn't...

If I understand what the expert said,

he said what you just said, but he then said that the,

he talked about his understanding of the, you know,

the lag time of Xanax and all this and that,

which obviously that's something the jury would be entitled to consider.

But the one thing that he, that he never said,

it seemed to me,

which seems to me to be pretty problematic for the plaintiff,

is that he has any basis upon which to say when Mr. Wood took the,

Mr. Stewart took the Xanax.

Yeah, I agree.

There, there is, there is,

Mr. Stewart did say for,

that I would take the medicine in the morning,

but there was no indication that he took it that morning.

The...

Why isn't that enough?

If he just says, hey, I don't remember,

but it was my habit to do that,

why does that get too...

He didn't say it was my habit,

because he also said,

I might have left the medicine in the vehicle,

which would have been at my client's facility,

which would have meant he took the medicine

after he picked up the vehicle.

And that's the real critical issue here,

is when he took that next step in the medicine.

Well, was there, for example,

let's follow up on that though.

Was there anything,

did the experts say anything about,

you know, it's,

it's effect on him would have been,

would have been to,

to make him intoxicated between 9 and 10.30,

when he showed up at the...

Sure.

There's nothing in the expert report on that.

And it's also important to note,

that this wasn't an alcohol intoxication.

In fact, after the accident,

the police officers,

who were also in the motorcycle ride,

but also the responding police officers,

needed to call in a drug recognition expert,

to a highly skilled, trained officer,

to come in and examine Mr. Stewart,

for signs of impairment on prescription medication.

They're asking that,

to be done by a tow truck operator.

And I think that's fundamentally unfair,

and not what the laws of New Hampshire provide.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Did you reserve any time?

I did.

You can take 10 seconds.

With regard to Mr. Stewart,

he said he took the medication.

With regard to Mr. Stewart,

he said he took the medication in the morning,

it's at page 657.

And the expert did say,

the peak performance on the drug Xanax,

one to two hours after he took it.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Court will take a brief recess.
