This is case 2015-0068, appeal of Kathleen Burrill-Cardin.

Mr. Vanakor.

Good morning. May it please the court. I'm John Vanakor, and I represent the appellant Kathy Burrill-Cardin.

And I'd like to reserve two minutes for a rebuttal if I think I need it. That's all right.

And I'll also entertain questions or field questions, I should say, at any time when you feel like asking them.

Isn't Dr. Dructinus' opinion the answer here and carries the day?

Well, you know, I think that may be true. And I say that only with regard to the fact that I believe Dr. Dructinus supported my contention that this case should have never been heard by the Department of Labor.

Because he testified that Kathy Burrill-Cardin had an anxiety disorder in 1993 that was found by the board, and that's absolutely true.

That there was a misdiagnosis in his mind of PTSD because PTSD has a requisite requirement of a certain level of trauma.

And he also admitted that PTSD is just another anxiety disorder.

But he also said, I think, if memory serves, that while she may have had an anxiety disorder, she was in the process of developing a full-blown mental illness that has nothing to do now anyway with what occurred she claimed at work.

Well, he said that actually that the symptoms that she had displayed in front of Dr. Geoffrey Barnett in that he noted in his 1994 report, not the earlier one, where he indicated that she was getting much worse and that she was not only getting much worse but she was displaying these symptoms.

He says, well, they could be symptoms of early signs of the development of a psychosis.

But he did say that he could not rule out, this was his testimony, he could not rule out that work was a contributing factor to Kathy Burrill-Cardin developing the mental illness in 1993.

He also said that it may have been a substantial contributing factor in 1993, but that it was no longer a substantial contributing factor in 2014.

Now, if there's a possibility, this is going back, looking through time at what happened back then and there's no record of what happened at the hearing.

If we're going back in time and looking at this, and he says, well, I have to say there may have been a substantial contributing factor.

Well, would he know better if he had been there at the time, if there was a record of what had happened?

You agree that the employer is not looking to recoup benefits, the employer wants to turn them off at this point.

No, I agree.

Okay, so we're comparing what was the case when the original diagnosis was made and what is the case today because the statute does allow

an examination of change.

So we're really not bound by Residucata principles as you say in your brief because the statute contemplates changed situations, right?

Right.

No, I agree with that.

And you're not bound by Residucata, but there has to be a change of condition or there has to be one or two things.

It has to have been a mistake made by the board originally or there has to be this change of condition.

And the change of condition, though, would have to be a change of condition that where the condition that my client had in 1993 improved to a point where she became able to work.

I don't see how that follows.

I mean, in other words, why is it in any way inconsistent with the statutory scheme for Dr. Dr. Tynes to say, which I think really this is sort of the bottom line of what he did say is, look, this may have been contributing,

the work-related injury may have been a contributing factor in 1993 and enough to allow for compensation.

And maybe that would go on for some period of time, but isn't it entirely reasonable for him to be able to say, wait a minute.

Now, you know, in 2013 or whatever it was, whatever happened in 1993 could not be continuing to have effects, it's got to be something other than this.

I mean, it seems to me to be perfectly reasonable.

No, I understand your point and spoken in those terms, I'd have to agree with you.

But that's not what happened in this case.

Dr. Dr. Tynes testified that the anxiety disorder my client developed in 1993, which was found to be related to work, never got better, but continued to get worse over the next 20 years.

Didn't he then say that with PTSD it would have been expected that over a certain period of time she would have been able to return to work?

Didn't he say that?

So he said that's what convinced him that the PTSD diagnosis was wrong, that instead it was generalized anxiety disorder.

Well, actually he never said that he thought, I mean, clearly he said that the PTSD diagnosis is wrong, but that is a red herring because the only reason why that was wrong because he believed there wasn't the requisite trauma that's necessary for finding a PTSD.

I thought he said that part of the reason he thought the diagnosis was incorrect is because of the severe deterioration of her condition.

And that she was dealing with other stressors along the way.

So he said taking that bundle of facts into consideration, the PTSD diagnosis was wrong in his professional opinion.

I don't think that that's correct.

I mean he may have said that at some point in time, but his major contention was that PTSD was the wrong diagnosis simply because he didn't believe there was the requisite trauma.

And if he was right about that then there was a mistake made by the board if we were to believe him.

The board never found that my client had PTSD.

They found that she had a stress injury related to work.

Now I suggest that perhaps the chairman, the board, had realized the controversy at the time in the diagnosis of PTSD and it's still a controversy to this day.

I think it's a little more cleared up, but there's a big controversy and Dr. Driftinus admits that it is because Geoffrey Barnett is a qualified psychiatrist just like Dr. Driftinus is.

And he's the one who thought that the amount of stress that my client was subjected to at work warranted.

But he didn't testify in 2013.

He didn't testify in 1993 either. He produced reports.

But they weren't updated reports. These are the original reports.

I thought now we were talking about the original diagnosis. That's why I'm discussing that.

Well, but we're comparing the original diagnosis with the facts on the ground in 2013.

And the only expert we have is Dr. Driftinus. This is not a case of competing experts.

Well, it's not because I contend, and I did it that time too, that there should have been no hearing under Hisco or Carnahan because Driftinus said that my client had the same condition, never recovered from that same condition.

Only that this new onset of the psychotic thing, which she says there was no stress to cause the onset of the psychotic symptoms, that that became more of an overriding thing in this person's life.

But if she never got better from...

You're not claiming, are you, that the psychosis was caused by the decades old stress at work, are you?

Well, you know, I think that that's an open question still, even though we don't have any opinion to that.

But some of the symptoms that my client was exhibiting as early as 1994, prior to the CAB hearing, were symptoms of early onset of psychosis.

And Dr. Driftinus...

Caused by this work situation?

Yes, that the whole thing was that's, well, her condition was, and that was what was found by the compensation appeals board.

But where do I go from here?

But that's categorically rejected by the board here.

I mean, it says the panel unanimously finds that the original findings of work-related disability were in error, her condition was never caused by her workplace.

I understand your argument, presumably you made it below as well, and they didn't buy it.

And they've got Driftinus' testimony.

How can we get behind that?

Dr. Driftinus did say that what happened in the workplace may have been a substantial...

At that time, may have been a substantial contributing factor to what my client was experiencing.

But he says that it was the underlying stuff that nobody knows anything about other than Driftinus saying,

well, there had to have been something.

There had to have been something.

That underlying stuff eventually overrode the stress that was at work.

But my client had the stress injury at work that never got better.

It has to have gotten better so that when something else worse happens to her,

they can't say, well, now something else worse happens.

So even though she never got better and could go back to work from the original diagnosis,

that we're going to cut her off because there is a more disabling condition.

Isn't the import of Dr. Driftinus' testimony that whatever may have been the effects of the original...

What do you call it? PTSD or stress related disorder at work? Whatever.

Whatever may have been the effects of that, that would have dissipated over some period of time less than today.

And the fact that it didn't shows that what is really causing her injury today is something other than the work connection.

What he said was that the fact that it never got better is evidence that there was an underlying predisposition

to the condition that my client eventually developed.

So why isn't this just completely analogous to the person who has the torn tendon or something in his shoulder

that goes on disability benefits and later on gets worse and worse and worse

and the opinion that develops from that is, well, you were predisposed

because you had an underlying arthritic condition that had nothing to do with the work injury.

That person doesn't get better either, but benefits are no longer due.

Well, and then that's the Hisco case in that the person got better with respect to the original injury.

That didn't happen in this case. In Hisco the person, that initial injury resolved

but the person had disability from something else. That's not what happened here.

This is not a Hisco case. My client, according to Dr. Driftinus, has the same condition she had in 1983

and it never got better. In fact, it got worse and he's saying it's the underlying stuff.

I argue that if in fact the predisposition was unknown at the time, which apparently it was,

this genetic chemical, whatever predisposition, then my client is entitled to a Steinberg analysis

back then as to whether or not there was a substantial contributing factor in work

to cause her to become disabled. That never happened. Well, it kind of did happen back then

because there is language in the 1994 decision that is very close to the Steinberg analysis

and why Michael King did that, I don't know, but I think it certainly takes the thing out of Steinberg.

I think she's entitled to that then. And again, I say that there was no misdiagnosis.

The board found what it found based upon the evidence that my client has the same anxiety disorder

that she had back then, whether you call it PTSD or anxiety disorder.

It never resolved. Dr. Driftinus says that never resolved to the point where she could go back to work.

Well, if it never resolved, then you don't get to have another hearing.

If it never got better enough, you don't get to have another hearing.

And if there was no mistake, you don't get to have another hearing.

So neither Hisco nor Connerhand apply to the circumstances of Kathy Burl-Carton.

Mr. Vanakor, if the person with whom you were sitting is your client,

she appears to be in increasing distress.

So I wonder whether you would like the court officer to escort her to the lobby and get her some water.

I second.

She says no, Your Honor.

She's okay to say.

Thank you, though.

Would she like some water?

Would you like somebody to...

Can she bring it in here?

It's for Bowden, I know.

Well, there are sometimes we can make exceptions.

If we can have water and if she would like some water, we can give her some water.

Oh, you have water there?

Okay.

Well then, she can drink her water?

She can.

Okay.

Thanks.

Thank you.

And thank you.

Your time is up.

Good morning, Your Honors.

May it please the court.

My name is David Johnston and I represent the state in this case.

As Justice Hicks said at the very beginning of Attorney Vanakor's testimony,

Dr. DeKynes' testimony does carry the day.

Contrary to what Attorney Vanakor said,

Dr. DeKynes never testified that the claimant's work-related condition only got worse.

When he agreed that her condition got worse,

he was talking about her overall mental health.

But the record will reflect that Dr. DeKynes said on numerous occasions

that her work-related stress caused claimants...

or never said that her work-related stress caused claimants downward spiral

to her current condition that is disabling today.

He said the opposite.

As he explained, the psychosis that developed and overall deterioration

of her thought process over time were not present in 1993 and 94

and cannot be explained by her work situation.

Dr. DeKynes, in a quote from some of his testimony,

testified that the stressors from work could not be the cause

of a 21-year history of mental illness.

He said she might be temporarily anxious and depressed,

but she wouldn't be depressed and anxious for 21 years because of that.

He also testified that he can't say work-related issues are no longer related

in any way to claimant's mental stress.

However, he was clear that the work-related stress, quote,

can't be a substantial contributing factor to a 21-year illness

with psychosis involved.

Now, the claimant argues that the 1994 board was in the best position

to weigh the evidence,

but in fact the 1994 board only had a thin snapshot

of Ms. Burl Carden's mental health history.

Claimant's providers in 93 and 94

incorrectly diagnosed her with PTSD

and minimized the indicators of pre-existing condition.

While the 94 board may not have specifically concluded

that the claimant had PTSD, as Attorney Van Corp properly notes,

her providers clearly did

and thus failed to give a sufficient consideration

to the degree her pre-existing condition

was contributing to her symptoms of stress and anxiety,

the 1994 board's conclusion that she had no pre-existing condition

was simply mistaken.

She had a clinically verifiable pre-existing biological predisposition

as well as environmental factors

that were starting to manifest themselves at that time.

Can you clarify something for me?

Yes.

Take it that whatever happens in this case

is unrelated to any application she may make

for social security disability benefits.

I would say, Your Honor.

Pardon?

I haven't examined that issue, but I would agree.

But presumably she could apply and be examined

at least according to Dr. Dructinus.

He thinks her condition is severe.

Yes.

And presumably she would be entitled to social security benefits.

I would think so, Your Honor.

And it wouldn't be that decision would not be driven

by what we decide here.

I concur.

I agree.

All right.

Yes.

Well, in other words, if we were to agree with Mr. Vanakor's position,

would she be able, in addition to get social security disability benefits?

Do you know?

I do not know that.

Okay.

Quite honestly.

I'd also make reference, Your Honor,

as the board did to the opinion of Dr. Sack

who provided a written opinion in September of 2005.

He said that Ms. Burl-Cardin does have a disabling psychiatric illness.

That most likely is a personality disorder.

And Dr. Dructinus agreed with that.

Dr. Sack in his report explained, and I quote,

a personality disorder is an enduring pattern

of inner experience and behavior that deviates markedly

from the expectations of the individual's culture.

It's pervasive and inflexible.

Has an onset in adolescence or early adulthood

is stable over time and leads to distress or impairment.

Work-related stress, in other words,

is not a cause of a personality disorder.

It pre-exists.

And the personality disorder is due to a combination

of biological and early environmental factors.

These are all things that came out before the board

in which the board relied in coming to its conclusion.

Ms. Burl-Cardin got significantly worse

in the years that followed her employment,

even though the presumed cause, work-related stress,

was gone and long gone.

This was one of the bases supported by Dr. Dructinus

upon which the board came to its conclusion

that work stress was not a cause

of claimant's ongoing disability.

With regard to the claimant's latches argument,

I'll just address briefly.

I'd simply note that the board correctly stated

that RSA 281A48 is ongoing jurisdiction to the board

without a time limit to review such matters.

Can I just add, correct me if I'm wrong,

but my understanding is when the board made its decision

in 1993, or I suppose it would be true

if we had a new case today,

when the board decides that somebody is entitled

to compensation, all they're deciding is that that,

I mean, they don't typically say in an order

the person is entitled to compensation

and this condition will last for X number of years.

They simply say the person's entitled to compensation

and that's the end of it.

Then it's up to the carrier.

If the carrier thinks that at some point

they should no longer have to pay benefits

because it's not related any longer,

then it's your obligation to come in

and seek relief as you've done here.

That's correct.

What was the occasion for Dr. Sacks

offering his opinion in 2005?

He was requested by the carrier to review her records

and render an opinion relative to her ongoing disability.

And do I understand correctly that at some point

the records became unavailable?

There were some records that were unavailable, Your Honor,

but a whole host of other records were available,

including continuing treatment.

Dr. Dakinas, when he testified,

never even suggested that the absence of some records

somehow raised questions in his own mind

about the correctness of his conclusion.

But at some point the claimant refused

to provide access to medical records, is that right?

That's true as well, Your Honor.

Were those records ever obtained,

those particular records?

Ultimately they were produced for an in-camera review

by initially the Department of Labor, I believe,

and then they were released to a council for the state

so that he could review them.

But the Department of Labor, in the meantime,

had retained Dr. Dakinas to review the records.

So Dr. Dakinas was not retained by either party,

he was retained by the state.

By the Department of Labor.

By the Department of Labor, I'm sorry.

Correct.

Right, the Department of Labor, Your Honor.

Unless there's any other questions,

I'd refer the court to our written brief

and respectfully request that the

boards this and be affirmed.

Thank you.

Do you need your reserve time, Mr. Vanakor?

Of course.

A couple of things.

One is that Dr. Dakinas was originally retained

by the Department of Labor for the first hearing.

For the CAB hearing, he was retained by the employer.

A little bit of a distinction there.

And attorney hours had a huge amount of access to him.

I spoke to him for five minutes before the hearing.

But I think what I'd really like to get is

Dr. Dakinas never testified that Kathy Burl Cardin

was disabled from anything but an anxiety disorder,

that personality disorder thing.

Yeah, he says he actually had that too,

but he never said that that disabled her.

And I think that's a mistake that's in the appellee's brief.

It's been the same thing from day one,

never got better to the point where she could,

never got better at all, got worse.

And I would have to agree that that may be an indication

that Kathy Burl Cardin had some underlying predisposition,

meeting genetic predisposition,

and we could all have something like that.

But if stress causes you to have an injury

and you never get better, then you continue to get paid.

Even if the other stuff becomes even more prominent

somewhere along the line,

you never got better from the original injury.

So I think that that's hugely important.

And also the fact that the board only had a snapshot.

There was some sort of comment that

or other doctors have only had snapshots.

These are treating physicians

that see my client over the years.

They know what's going on with her.

And with regard to Dr....

This may be neither here nor there,

but is she currently being treated?

She, to some extent, yes.

And she does, yes.

She does still see Dr. Patil.

And she doesn't really want to go back to Dr. Kelly

only because he wasn't getting paid.

And she feels terrible about that.

The...

Dr. Drugtinas testified.

When asked some what-ifs on cross-examination,

he says, well, I can't really answer those questions

because I can only testify as to what's in the medical record.

And this is with regard to the first onset of psychosis.

I said, well, you know, if you were there,

wouldn't you have had an opportunity to see

what she was acting kind of psychotically

at her hearings?

The first-level hearing in particular

and somewhat at the second-level hearing

says I can only go on what's in the medical records.

The medical records weren't even complete.

And he decides that simply because he didn't see anything

that indicated psychosis until well along the line

that there was no psychosis.

That, I think, goes very strongly to the argument

that latches should apply in a case like this.

Your time is up.

Thank you.

If you're permitted, the court will take a brief recess.
