This is case 2015-0226 Elizabeth Jewel versus National Grid USA Service Company, Inc. at all.

Council?

Please, the court. My name is George Spinaeus. I represent the plaintiff appellant, Elizabeth Jewel, and I have reserved one minute for rebuttal.

The trial court was wrong when it held that I needed an expert witness against National Grid to testify about industry standards because without an expert, the court held, the jury would be left to speculate about industry standards.

That holding is clearly wrong because every defendant that I cross-examined at deposition, all the instructors from National Grid, when they were asked, are there standards that apply? Are there customs and practices?

Are there certifications? Do you have to pass a test? Do you have to mentally or physically to teach one of these courses?

Every one of them said no. They're not aware of any industry standards. So there aren't any industry standards for me to even go out and hire an expert to come in to testify about.

And then I can see the opposite of that now. I go out and pay an expert to come in and give his personal opinion of how these things are supposed to be taught and run.

And then the defense counsel moves to dismiss that for lack of any foundation.

Well, Mr. Expert from Mr. Spineis, what's the standards? What are the industry practices? Well, there aren't any. So you're basing this on your personal opinion.

Mr. Expert, isn't that right? That's true. Your Honor, we move to exclude this expert. He's not really an expert. He has no standards by which to judge because there aren't any.

So when the trial court tells me we need an expert on industry standards, otherwise the jury would be left speculating about negligence, it's clearly wrong.

This is an ordinary negligence case. What happened to ordinary negligence if there is not a standard or practice that is fixed and accepted to be a standard, then it's the ordinary negligence standard.

What a reasonable person would do under the similar circumstances.

So your theory is that the jury is basically, you want the jury to decide what the standards for training people to be linemen should be?

No. I want the jury to decide based on the reasonable, ordinary standard of care of a reasonable person under the similar circumstances, was this training course conducted in a negligent manner?

And so isn't that the same thing? What you just said is really the same thing as I just said. They get to decide what a reasonable training course should be.

That's correct. They get to decide was the way this course was conducted reasonable. For example, there's testimony that a training video that was very important according to the testimony of the instructors.

Very important to teach climbing and safety. And it wasn't shown. A juror can say, gee, that sounds like negligence. There is testimony from some of the instructors that said there is a training book.

We call it the Bible. We quoted it in our brief. That's supposed to be given and shown to students. You've got other instructors that say-

And you're saying it was not given to your client?

That's correct. Other instructors said they don't recall ever, even hearing of one or ever even seeing one.

But my client would certainly testify. There was no training video showed. She did testify to that. She would testify.

There were no instruction training manuals handed out to us. So those kinds of things a jury of ordinary intelligence can decide was this course conducted in a safe manner or negligent manner?

There is testimony that we quoted in our briefs that the instructors knew from the beginning that my client was horrible at climbing, unsafe. She didn't know how to do it.

But just let's follow up on that one as an example. So the jury will have to decide how far it is appropriate.

Isn't this sort of like saying, well, wait a minute. The student came into a high school calculus class and the teacher thought after-

I don't know how long this training program went on before she was injured. Maybe that would be something that would be important.

But presumably we'd have to know how much of an opportunity or a fact finder would have to know how much of an opportunity should they have given someone.

I wouldn't know whether it was appropriate, for example, for a teacher to say to someone in a calculus class, listen, you're not going to make it.

Whether it's appropriate to do that after one quiz or before you do that and ask the person to leave the class, you have to give them a lot more opportunity.

I wouldn't know that and I wouldn't know here. I suspect that the average juror wouldn't know.

The red light's on but I think the average juror would know because unlike a calculus class, this is a dangerous activity and these people are there to become linemen.

And when there's a determination made early on that this woman would never have made it as a lineman because she was a poor climber and unsafe,

you don't let that person continue to engage in a dangerous activity.

Unlike continuing to practice math with a tutor at home where you're not going to get hurt.

So I don't think it's that difficult of a decision and that's just one piece of the negligence that we're talking about.

We will consider your other arguments submitted on your briefs.

Yes.

Thank you.

I get one minute for rebuttals.

You do.

Good morning.

May it please the court?

I'm Bob Whelan from the Manchester firm McDonough, Shaughnessy Whelan and Maher and I represent Buckingham Manufacturing.

The issue in this case, like the issue with National Grid is whether an expert is needed for the point to proceed with the case.

Our position is clearly an expert is needed as to the mechanical device.

And exactly why?

Because the jury has otherwise left to speculate on this device that was used by National Grid since at least according to National Grid's answers 2004.

Is the device still in existence?

I don't know for sure.

There's no record that it was taken out of service by National Grid.

In fact, the lead instructor, David May, when I asked him was the device left in place, he says I know it was.

So there's no spoiliation inference to be drawn here?

Well, not intentional spoiliation.

I don't think National Grid and according to their answers, they never removed it from service because they never thought anything was wrong with it.

And the device itself is tested, you know, without yank every time before you climb it.

And in this case, Ms. Jule testified that yes, she did it before she climbed.

She yanked it.

She went up the pole and her testimony is from this device with serious age on it, it let her go when she fell.

There's differences in her testimony as to how far, whether it's 5 feet, 10 feet or 20 feet, but that it failed.

Then worked and caught her, then pulled her back up, let her go again, failed, and then engaged.

Our mechanical expert, and I think it's a matter of common sense, says it will never pull you up, ever.

Because if it would pull you up, it would never let you down.

It would be like a Three Stooges episode with all the climbers dangling at the top.

They'd be left to speculate as to how a device could fail in that manner and heal itself.

Which our expert also says, mechanical devices do not do that.

Well, can I just ask you, I mean, do we, when you say heal itself, how do we know that, is there evidence that it after that time it was used again in a circumstance where it had to actually operate?

I mean, do we know that?

Well, we know that in the sense that all, everybody in the case from National Grid and Ms. Jule testified they were instructed and actually did test it before they climbed it.

They pulled on it.

Right, but how about afterwards?

There's no testimony about anybody falling or having a problem with the device afterwards.

But it is used in a course for beginners in climbing utility poles.

Thank you.

If it's speculation about that, then it's speculation about the failure.

Thank you.

Good morning.

May it please the court.

I'm Bruce Felmly and together with Rachel Hampy, we represent National Grid USA Service Company in this case.

Let me address the question that you raised about, several of you raised about the spoilation or what was used.

And there are innumerable references in the record.

I think you'll find them without any difficulty.

But with respect to what happened that day, nobody believed the device failed.

She was not claiming the device failed.

She claimed that she slid down the pole and had some falling incident.

There's huge disagreement among Ms. Jule's various accounts of what happened.

But the device was repeatedly tested and was working.

It was not taken out of service.

Nobody made an argument that this was a defective device until the statute of limitations was approaching some years later.

And now a product's liability claim gets made.

That device was used in the course thereafter.

It stayed on the pole.

The testimony, it's a fixed device on the pole.

It was used and tested, and they had a protocol for this every time.

Now, since nobody...

So I'm sorry.

So I guess maybe I did misunderstand that in my earlier question, Ms. Felmly.

You're saying that this device is a, at least as it's used in the training operation, is a fixed device on the pole so that that same device was on the pole.

When they had later training...

And the next morning when they come in, I mean, this is invariable.

They test it.

They make sure this works.

And if it fails, they take it out of service.

They take it off the pole.

At some point, no doubt in the years, it may have been taken off the pole.

But there was no indication this was a failed device.

It was continued in the course of use.

And frankly, the suggestion has never been made that there was any spoilation.

Let me talk for a minute, though, about the piece that directly relates to us.

Because I think the mechanical device is the clear situation.

But there's no indication from the plaintiff as to if the video was not shown.

And that's in huge dispute.

Some people very specifically remember it.

Some don't.

What was it that she did not learn in the demonstrations in the class that the video would have provided?

What technical information didn't she receive?

An expert would be required to present and explain that.

And how that would have made a difference.

The reality here is that the council has brought up and made a case based on a straw man.

He said, since there's no national standard, some Bible out there,

and people are using their own judgment and experience, we don't need an expert.

The expert is going to talk about the mechanics, the nature of training,

the dangers of the pole, all of the things that comes from experience.

These trainers for a national grid service company had decades of experience.

Why couldn't the plaintiff use them as an expert?

Well, he could have purposely chose and did not list them.

I mean, you know, first of all, they wouldn't have been helpful to him

because they had all testified very clearly.

And they did not test him.

Sometimes you get lucky in cross-examination.

Well, you know, and my light's on.

But the answer is he purposely did not list them as an expert.

And the reason was he knew that they were going to provide information that wasn't helpful.

The question is not, this is irrelevant, the jury ought to decide.

Even today does not indicate what is it that she supposedly was going to learn

that was different in the video than all of the instruction she had.

This is the clear case whether they intentionally chose to try to wing it without an expert

or they couldn't get an expert, I don't know.

But this is the clear case where they needed an expert.

Can I just say one last thing on this issue?

Just one.

And this is it.

The ultimate irony here is this is so simple, supposedly every juror would understand

how this would have failed and we don't need an expert.

He describes this as a problem with a tension device.

This is a centrifugally driven device.

Even counsel does not understand, even today,

how that mechanism in the Buckingham device works.

This is the clear case where an expert was needed.

Thank you.

Mr. Spineas.

First of all, I think it is not correct to say that this particular attractable device

was in use since 2004.

They do not know that because they kept no records of it.

Their answers to interrogatories were this kind of device was being used by National Grid.

But we asked, did you identify the device?

Did you take it down?

Which they should have according to the OSHA rules that we cited.

That device comes under shock load.

It is supposed to be identified and it never was.

What does your client say she would have learned had she been better trained?

Well, it's easy to figure that out.

All you have to do is show the jury the video that's been produced in discovery

and the jury can see.

And my client would say that the training was really not that good.

The video didn't work.

We went out there.

Everybody started climbing.

All these kids or young adults, they're climbing at the same time.

There's 13 poles.

It's not like one student goes up and we watch them.

Everybody's going up and down at the same time.

She would tell you it was chaos.

And the video, you just show the video.

And why can't the instructors talk about the equipment?

They're the defendants in the case.

I couldn't cross examine them at trial about, well, these are boots.

This is a hard hat.

This is a pole.

How is the jury not going to understand those simple things?

We're talking about simple equipment.

Thank you.

Thank you.

The case is submitted and the court is adjourned.
