We apologize. We took a little bit longer than we usually do.

This is case 2015-0391, Bernard Casey, MD, et al. v. Seacoast radiology PA.

May it please the Court, Jonathan Shirley, for the appellants. I'd like to reserve three

minutes for a closing rebuttal. We're here today on the appeal of an order for summary

judgment issued by the Stratford County Superior Court. It involves the issue of whether my

clients, the appellants, who I will actually today call the doctors if that's all right.

Just a point of clarification, just so I'm sure. You're not disputing the fact that

summary judgment was the proper remedy. You're just saying the wrong result was reached.

I think that's correct, Your Honor. Because there are no material facts in dispute.

I think there was an error of law. That's correct, Your Honor.

Okay. Thank you.

Thank you. And I shouldn't have mentioned, by the way, I'll take questions at any

time. I don't need to be only talking. In any event, I wanted to mention I'm going to refer

to the doctors as my clients. Seacoast or the practice is the defendant appellee.

Well, you know, I wonder if I could just ask, then, if you say there, if we agreed

with your position, why should this be limited to named insurers? I mean, I assume

under these policies, there may be some other insurers. In other words, for example,

are nurses or others that are under the doctor's employ? Are they also, you know,

sort of additional insurers in some way under the policy?

I'm not aware of that fact, but the named insured is, in fact, a defined term

and is found in the standard terms and policies. And the named insured

specifically references whomever is identified at item one of the policy.

Right. But I guess what I'm asking is why. I mean, if your claim is that even

though they didn't pay the premium, they were named insurers. Why, you know,

why wouldn't you extend from that and say, well, they didn't pay the

premium and they weren't named insurers, but they were insured. And

therefore, they should get some recovery also.

And I would submit to you that in response that, and I don't know if

this is the case, but if there was a nurse for which this insurance was

available and that nurse's name appears at item one on a policy

declaration for a particular policy year, that person, too, is entitled

to these premiums, to these earnings.

But I thought, underlying your argument was at the time, these doctors

were shareholders and their work, in essence, paid for the policies.

I mean, that's what I took from your brief, that there's just sort of

this equitable argument is that their work paid for the policies, now

there are new doctors in the practice and they're going to be

unjustly enriched.

That is certainly a theme that isn't in the briefing and it has

come up. I would say in the first instance, but that is, the reason

that theme has even come up is because one of the counterarguments

raised to the arguments that we're asserting is this notion that,

well, the practice paid, it's only fair that the practice gets the

money back.

And it's ultimately, these are moral or these equitable arguments

really need to step back because ultimately what the right we're

trying to assert in bringing this action is a contract right.

We have a policy, series of policies.

I know, but can we disregard the fact that the practice paid and

then took deductions as, didn't I read that someplace in the briefs

for the cost of doing business, that kind of thing?

I'm not aware of that.

All right, maybe I'm imagining it.

That fact, yeah.

All right.

In any event, I mean, the principle or the notion that a

person is identified in a policy as the policy holder, in this

case, the name insured and the premiums are paid by some

of the party is not unique at all.

And that's the basis for why I cite the Trevor case, the white

metal casting case out of Illinois.

But you didn't seek, you meaning your clients, didn't seek to

intervene in the class certification, right?

And didn't file kind of proofs of claim or anything like that.

So when the issue in the, in Title II was being litigated,

your clients were not part of that litigation, right?

There was a class notice that was issued to anybody, and

I'm not sure how that was determined.

And you object to the definition of the class

participants now, you do, but you didn't then.

Well, I'm not sure it's fair to say it's an objection.

I actually would submit that Title II and the Merrimack County

Superior Court did a commendable job in trying to sort through a

difficult process and difficult situation.

And it came to a solution that preserved as many rights as

possible for everybody involved.

It required it to take some steps that didn't actually

conform with how the policies were written, but it allowed

and indeed contemplated the very type of action that my

clients brought against Seacoast.

Well, when your clients receive notice, because they did receive

notice, right, of the class certification?

Yes.

I'm just wondering whether they had some kind of legal

obligation to say, well, wait a minute, we're going to be

written out of this.

Well, the class notice is written in a way where that's

not very clear that they even have that, either that

obligation or right.

It says at the very first page.

It says you only need to pay attention to this notice if you

meet this description.

And then if you carry on to the second page.

Well, but it was clear that any recovery was going to be to

the class participants, which would convey that your

clients weren't going to be getting anything.

But on the second page, it goes on to say, if you

don't meet this class definition, take it up with

the person who does.

So in this instance, for example, the party who met

the class definition was Seacost, because the records of

the JUA indicated it paid.

And then in the second page, it instructs all the others,

whether you're named and short or some other status under

the policy, to basically take it up with the policy

holder when the monies come available.

And that's the process that was contemplated.

And in fact, Judge Horanus nods to this fact.

Nods to the fact that it was understood that this

was a process that the Title II had contemplated.

So we're in it, I guess, and ultimately what I would say

about the situation and the reason we've appealed the

order of the Stratford County Superior Court is that all

along the assertion here is that, as named and short,

there is a contract right.

That contract right was acknowledged in 2010 by

this court in the first Title I decision.

And essentially we're here today to ask for kind of a

corollary decision as to what it means and exactly

who holds that contract right.

The analysis we've said-

And now of course the trial court said,

Title I is not controlling because the question of

entitlement vis-a-vis the physicians and the practices

was not resolved in Title I.

Yeah, and I should make clear, I am not asserting

that Title I is a controlling authority.

The trial court recognizes that Title I,

it's informative, it's relevant to a discussion

about the issues my clients have raised.

And I agree with that analysis as well.

The trial court also said that Title II was not binding

on our clients, on my clients.

And the point only here is this, and it goes to what

the trial court and the error we believe has occurred,

which is as follows.

Our clients share a contract right with Seacoast.

And as such, they are entitled under principles

of restitution.

So how would you envision it playing out then?

Let's say you're right, and we agree with you,

that your clients share with the practice.

What happens next?

We go back to court, and we have a hearing or trial

on the question of what, on an adjudication as to

what our fair share is, our clients fair share

of these policy premiums or earnings, I should say,

that will return to Seacoast radiology will be.

They're being held in escrow at the moment?

Actually not.

They believe they've been distributed out to the

underlying shareholders of JUA, of Seacoast.

Is the practice holding it in escrow,

handing the outcome here?

No, not that I understand.

No. Okay.

The shareholders of that company have taken

that money, it's to my understanding.

But in any event, the error is in the trial

court's opinion, it goes in search of a promise

between the Seacoast and the Dock.

Can I ask for a factual clarification?

I was just wondering about this.

When your clients terminated their relationship,

they were bought out, right, by the practice.

They were paid off when they were no longer shareholders.

And that's, I don't have an answer to that factual

in this sense.

My understanding is I believe, yes,

in the sense that they signed back their shares

in the shareholdership.

It was not a focus of discovery,

at least not up until now, or if this goes further.

So is it relevant?

In other words, I was just wondering

whether at the time of termination,

and they no longer became shareholders,

and presumably they would get paid by the practice,

did valuation of what was owed to them,

was that valuation influenced by the potential

for the physicians to get paid from the JUA settlement?

You understand what I'm asking?

I do understand what you're asking.

And the answer is no.

There is no evidence of any of that analysis.

There's no evidence that in any time,

any of the doctors when they left this practice

took compensation and recognition

of what the JUA may ultimately have.

Should they have?

If, whether they did or not,

the position here is that no part of this claim,

or claims that have been brought against Seacost

have anything actually to do with their shareholdorship

or absence of it now.

This is a contract.

This is a contract that existed between the doctors

and Seacost on the one hand,

and the JUA on the other.

You would say that might be an issue on remand.

I'm sorry?

I would say that might be an issue on remand.

Being the issue being whether or not,

as between?

Determining a fair share if they're entitled to a share.

I think that if there's, the contract right exists,

if the contract right exists as we believe it does,

someone needs to decide how much money

needs to be divvied up.

But isn't Judge Horan right that whatever the contract

was between the insurance company and your clients,

your clients gave up that contract right in the sense

of they entered into this arrangement with the corporation,

that that right was, as part of the corporation paying

the premiums, as part of their determination

of what their compensation would be.

I mean, presumably all of those things

went into the agreement between the shareholders

of the practice and the practice.

And I would disagree.

There's nothing to that effect.

There's no written word whatsoever on any of those points.

What we have instead is a contract

where the JUA is obliged, if it declares earnings,

to distribute those earnings to the named and short.

It just so happens the name and short on any given year

is more than one person.

It's more than just Seacost.

It's Seacost plus the shareholders of that particular year.

So are you saying that there's nothing

in the shareholder agreements between your clients

and the practice that have any bearing at all on this?

That's my position.

There's been no evidence that those shareholder agreements

resolving their withdrawal from the practice

had any bearing on these contracts.

But because they are co-obligies,

that being the doctors, are co-obligies

on the obligation of the JUA to pay earnings

to the named and short.

They have a claim against Seacost,

who's holding all of the money.

And that is cited in the restatement section 47

for restitution on Justin Richmond.

That principle is well-recognized.

You don't need the contract.

And this is the error that we believe

has taken place in the Stratford County

Superior Court order.

Judge Horan goes looking for a promise between.

Are you still answering Justice Lee?

I apologize.

I realize that my time is up.

I have one more question.

Do I understand you correctly that the contract that you

are seeking to enforce is a contract between the JUA

and Seacost?

No, the contract is between JUA, Seacost, and the doctors.

Because that contract is between JUA and everybody

that's named and short on each of those policies

for each year that they're there.

Those are the contracting parties.

And the obligation is jointly owed by the JUA

to each of those named and short.

Is your position that they're a party to the contract

because they're insured?

Or were they separately identified as parties to the contract?

They are identified at item one on the policy declaration

pages, which are submitted in the appendix.

And by virtue of being named and short,

by being identified at item one, they are parties.

They have the same contract right to the earnings as Seacost.

And the right, furthermore, is to be

able to claim against Seacost if it's

holding all the money when that money shouldn't

share it among them all.

Thank you.

Thank you.

May it please the court?

My name is Derek Lick with the Soloway and Hollis office.

I'm representing the appellee in the case,

Seacost Radiology PA.

I'm happy to take questions at any time.

Can I just follow up on the last comment by your opponent?

If we go with his argument and we send it back and say

there's an issue as to to what extent the physicians get

any of the proceeds, presumably, the end result

could be the same, that they would get zero

because they didn't pay the premiums.

So I guess what I'm asking is, do you

agree that if we did remand it, there's still

the possibility that they would come up with zero

based on the language and the facts at play?

In other words, even though they were named insurers,

if they didn't pay the premiums, the lower court

might conclude they're not entitled to anything.

The issue before you today is whether or not,

based on the contract terms in the policy,

they're entitled to anything at all.

If you remand it back, I think the instruction to the court

or what will be taken by the Stratford County Superior

Court is there is some obligation

that they be owed something as far as a refund

under the documents.

If there had been a risk assessment, Mr. Lick,

would your client have taken the position

that each of the named insurers

had to pony up individually?

No, Your Honor.

The reason I'm not sure of the group

was that the practice group itself paid all of the premiums.

It's not in the record, and I'm not

sure anyone is aware of whether any excess premiums were

requested by the JuA in the 24-year time period.

But what I can say is that for that entire 24-year period

that's at issue from the JuA refund,

the practice group paid all of the premiums.

Now, there's one side note in that one physician paid

his own, but he received reimbursement from that.

The practice of the group was that the business paid

the premiums.

No individual physician paid those premiums.

So based on that practice, if indeed the JuA gets it.

And Judge Horan said that the practice

treated these payments as a business expense.

So that's where I'm getting it from.

Now that I'm seeing my note here.

And that is correct.

This expense was just like any other expense of the practice.

Keeping the lights on, paying for the real estate taxes,

this expense for insurance was a business expense

of the practice group and was treated

as such by the practice group for this entire 24-year period.

Which goes back to the issue of the only way

the plaintiff physicians should be entitled to any part

of the refund is that there is some arrangement

in the practice group as part of the business

that they would be entitled to reimbursement

in the normal course of business.

And that was not the case.

In fact, it was the opposite.

The practice was once you turned in your shares

and you left the practice, you were no longer entitled

to any proceeds, distributions, dividends,

from any assets of the business.

Is that on the record?

That is on record.

I think it's agreed to.

Everybody agrees that that is an undisputed fact.

Well, maybe it didn't happen in the valuing of the payout.

But should it have been a factor in everybody's mind

that the physicians were giving up any potential receipt

from the JUA settlement?

No, it should not have been a factor.

Just like you cannot anticipate in the future what 10 years

from now the current shareholders may see as a receipt

or something that's recoverable

to the practice group 10 years from now.

Now, we haven't gone back and done an analysis of each

of the eight plaintiffs in this case.

And precisely when they were there, when they left

and what the status of the JUA issues were.

But what we can say is there was one individual who was

in fact about ready to leave the practice at the time

the JUA refund became an issue.

And the practice group and the physician reached a site

agreement, a special agreement saying

that in this particular instance, you are here,

the process is underway, we don't know what's going

to happen, but because you're leaving

and this is a anticipated recovery,

we're going to put a special agreement in place

for you given the circumstances here today.

So the others had left before the JUA litigation was underway?

That's my understanding, Your Honor, yes.

I see.

Now, we haven't done a full fledged analysis of who left

and when and what the timeline was.

But that's our understanding based on the record.

Can you say when they depart from the practice group

there's no residual for goodwill,

accounts receivable, work in process?

We haven't done discovery in depth

about all the details of that.

But what I can say is as part of the turning over the shares

under the agreement, it's my understanding a payment was

due as a set payment, and that was it.

Essentially, once they turn in their shares,

they are done with the business

and they're not entitled to any future dividends,

any future recoveries from the business,

just as in any other business.

Once you leave the business and you walk away,

absent some side agreement as a shareholder,

you're not entitled five years later, 10 years later,

20 years later to come back and say,

oh, you've now received a accounts receivable,

some funds that I should have been entitled to

when I was there, please pay up.

The response is, well, you're not a shareholder of the business.

It didn't come in when you were here

and you're not entitled to it.

It's very basic corporate law and shareholder law

that you're not entitled to receive those funds

once you walk away from the business.

And likewise, it's a quid pro quo.

They're not responsible for any of the liabilities

either in that five years, 10 years or 20 years.

Well, can I just follow up on one of the things you said?

I understand you said that if there was some,

if instead of a surplus in the JUA,

there had been a deficit and monies were owed,

I understand you said that the practice would pick that up.

But I guess my question is granted

that the practice would pick it up,

but suppose the practice was not financially

in a position to pick it up.

Could the JUA have gone after the doctors individually

under the agreement?

Could they have said, listen doc, we went to the practice

first and they're going bankrupt tomorrow,

but we understand that you have some assets

and we're coming after you.

I think the answer to your question is yes,

that the JUA could in fact have levied an assessment

against the individual physicians.

And had that occurred, it would

be in a different posture today.

And our position would be they would be entitled to a refund

based on whatever they paid as a part of proportion of that.

But that's not what we have here.

In every circumstances, the practice paid.

And it's our client's position that when the practice pays,

if you pay into it, that's when you're entitled to a refund

of the excess surplus premiums.

You don't get a refund unless you paid in initially

to the program.

The record's undisputed that we're the ones that did it.

The plaintiff physicians made no such payment.

But what about their argument that they're shareholders

and it is their work and remuneration

for their work that essentially paid the premium.

And now this recruitment by the current practice

with new doctors is getting a windfall.

Two responses.

One is some of the physicians who are still in the practice

were there as part of this settlement,

so they contributed to it as well.

But as a basic proposition, merely because you as a shareholder

may have contributed to the business five years ago,

10 years ago, 20 years ago, and therefore the practice later

receives some benefit from that work,

once you step away as a shareholder,

you're not entitled to it.

Otherwise, you would open up a mess of trying to account

five years, 10 years, 20 years later

for receipts that come in or assets that

come into the business, and you could never close your books.

You'd always be back reopening, trying to apportion out

what percentage of the new money may

have been associated with a benefit that was created

by someone that previously worked there.

But of course, those are practical considerations,

but there could be an agreement to do that.

There just wasn't here.

That's exactly right.

And Your Honor, if there was an agreement to do that here,

if there was an agreement that the individuals were

to pay for themselves, or if there was an agreement

by the practice group that in the event

the practice group paid and there was ever a refund,

we'll give it back to the shareholders,

we would be in a different posture,

and we probably wouldn't be here,

but there was no such agreement.

And indeed, we can't imply one to be in place when there wasn't.

It was exactly the opposite.

The agreement was, as whatever business expenses came in

in any given year, you're responsible for those

if you're a shareholder, whatever assets come in,

you may be entitled to a dividend or a distribution

in that given year, but we're not

going to go back years back and try to apportion out

later on.

And indeed, as a practical matter,

there's an additional issue here.

We have eight plaintiff physicians here,

but that's not all of the former shareholders

of this practice.

If it's remanded back, we have a variety of problems,

one of which is how do you apportion

among the eight that are here,

but then the other question is

what do you do with everybody that's not here?

If this court ultimately determines

that you don't have to pay in to get a refund,

we now have to figure out what do we do

with everybody else that was ever a shareholder

in this 24-year time period.

We got to find them or find their estates,

try and figure out how to allocate.

Do we name them in the case?

Do we bring them in?

How do we do that?

And presumably this problem wouldn't be confined

to this medical group, it would be statewide.

Absolutely not.

I think this court needs to be aware

of the ramifications of the decision.

If ultimately you rule in favor

of the plaintiff physicians in this case,

you're dealing today with one practice group

in the state and eight physicians.

If you ultimately rule in favor

of the plaintiff physicians,

you're now going to open the door to litigations

for every practice group and every physician

that received any JUA refund in the state.

It is going to open the doors wide open.

And I would submit to you-

What's the order of magnitude?

How many practices are sharing in this?

Your Honor, I don't have an answer for you.

I don't know how many practice groups were involved.

All I know is it was a significant amount of money.

Is this court is aware from Title I?

When you're dealing in the magnitude

of $100 million, there's a lot of people involved.

And what I would submit is when this court

addressed this issue to begin with in Title I,

the entire context was the folks

that are entitled to the funds are those that paid in.

And indeed, when the state came before you in Title I

and said, well, we as the state have a right

to some of these funds to put it in the general fund,

part of your analysis was, well,

the state never put anything in the fund to begin with.

So how can the state be entitled to reimbursement

from that fund when it's excess surplus?

The plaintiff positions are a very similar position

as the state was in Title I.

They didn't contribute in any way to the fund

and indeed they're not entitled to a refund from that.

And when the case got remanded back

or ultimately the class action in Title II went forward,

they had to review the policy,

the very policy the plaintiff positions

are relying on here.

And in reviewing that policy,

Judge McNamara, the Merrimack County Superior Court

agreed that it's those who were paying into the fund

were those that were to receive from it.

And indeed, there was an interim step.

The court may recall that after Title I came down

in 2010, the legislature passed a statute in 2011

directing the funds to be placed

with the Merrimack County Superior Court.

And in that statute, the legislature specifically said

that the excess surplus fund resulted from premiums paid

and they belong to the policy holders who paid.

The legislature in setting aside the funds,

they were ultimately sent over

to the Merrimack County Superior Court in Title II,

specifically said it's those who paid who gets the funds.

But the doctor's here in a little different position

than the state because they indirectly paid it.

They would have gotten more take home pay

in those years had they not paid a premium

that wound up funding the surplus.

I agree their position is slightly different in that regard

but I don't think it changes the result.

Just as if any partner in my law firm

who retired as of December 31st of last year

is not entitled to a receipt in my firm

that comes in today or tomorrow.

They walked away from the practice

and absent a separate agreement

that they're not entitled to those funds.

Again, we would be in a different position today

if there was a separate agreement.

And the practice group said, you know what?

We're putting in the payment

but if anything ever comes back

we're gonna distribute it to you, it's all yours.

That is not what we have here.

And indeed the trial court in reaching its decision

issued a decision that's consistent with insurance law.

General insurance law when you look at it says

that the premium if it's excess

it goes back to the insured unless somebody else paid.

And in that instance it goes to the party who paid.

That's general insurance law.

And indeed we cite in our brief

and cited at the trial court level

an Alabama Supreme Court case

on all fours of this case.

A fight between a physician and a practice group.

Practice group paid.

Physicians said he was entitled to that premium.

And the Alabama Supreme Court said nope.

We look at the general insurance law.

It's absolutely clear.

Those who paid are those who were entitled

to receive a refund of that payment.

And it's only fair.

Who paid in to make the funds excess.

The practice group,

it's only fair that the practice group

received those funds.

And again I would wanna point out

that if you reach a different result today

we are gonna be here

or you're gonna be here with a lot of cases very soon

with all the other doctors

who retired from practice groups,

left practice groups saying

we too want a piece of the pie

even though our practice groups paid

even though we walked away from any receipts

any accounts receivable

we want a part of the JUA refund

because somehow under the documents

we're entitled to it.

Are there cases other than Rodriguez Ramos

from Alabama that support your.

There is, there's a second case from Alabama

that's also cited in our brief

and they're both couch on insurance

and other secondary sources,

applicant on insurance all have this general proposition

including American jurisprudence.

This is nothing new and not.

And are there cases that reject the proposition

that go the other way

that are four square with us?

Actually no, Your Honor.

I have not found any cases

that are in opposite to the Rodriguez case.

What we have found is the one case cited

by the plaintiff physicians

and in that case it's completely distinguishable

involves a life insurance policy

where there's a named beneficiary.

And the question is does the practice group

or the name beneficiary get the proceeds from the policy

and the answer the court gave was

it's the name beneficiary on the policy.

Completely different scenario than we have here.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Shirley do you need your reserve time?

I need to use it absolutely.

I need to, I begin by saying

this rule of insurance law is not on all four squares.

That rule applies to a very distinct situation

where in the Rodriguez-Ramos case as an example

a policy is purchased.

Halfway through the year the policy is canceled

because the physician leaves.

There's no term in the policy

as best you can read in the case.

There's no term in that policy

that dictates who gets that money back.

So that's kind of extra contractual.

It's a situation where equity comes in

and the courts of fashion rule

and it says if you paid the premium

they're gonna send it back to you.

Trieber the case that I have been relying on

and I believe is all four squares with this case

stands for the proposition that when you have a policy

that dictates who gets the benefit

and this was a benefit.

These earnings were a benefit, a dividend.

Then that controls irrespective of who pays.

So do you agree or disagree with Judge Horan

that these funds represent unearned premiums?

He made that finding.

He does.

He makes that finding and I disagree.

There's many terms used, unearned premiums,

excess surplus, earnings is what the contracts call it.

The policies call it earnings.

So and I don't think the label actually matters.

It doesn't really matter.

What matters is if there's a contract provision

that calls for the payment to be made

and we claim it is there.

Now and the issue, the reason he gets into that analysis

is because before again to that section

he makes the decision that there's no contract

relationship or promise exchange

between Seacost and the doctors

and by absence of that there must be

no contractual obligation at all owed to the doctors.

And so the rule of insurance law that is being championed

is gets applied and I submit it's just

an inapplicable rule of the general insurance law

because it only applies in the absence of contract.

Another important point there's been discussion here

about there's been no agreement between Seacost

and the doctors about how these excess earnings

would be shared.

I submit that that's the absolute contrary exists.

You have a policy.

But doesn't that raise the question here

that arguably at least you've sued the wrong party?

Because if you say that the doctors have a contract

with the JUA and they should have gotten the money.

Go sue the JUA.

And if I may, section 47 of the restatement of law

on unjust enrichment says if a party pays in respect

of a contract right to one of the co-obligies

where there's other co-obligies who didn't get the payment

the co-obligies have a claim against the other co-obligies

that's holding the money.

That's the situation.

This isn't the JUA's problem.

This is a problem between parties that entered a contract

that was deliberate by the way.

This was a deliberate framing of how this,

the declaration page was created.

The shareholders got together and they said

we're gonna put our names individually at item one

along with the practice.

The inference to be drawn is that that's the agreement.

The agreement is even though premiums are being paid

from account held in the name of practice

dividends if they get paid get distributed

directly to the shareholders.

That's the deal.

That's the agreement.

There is no need for another agreement.

They didn't need to step back and sign some corollary

or other document someplace else.

It is right there year after year after year.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.
