This is case 2015-0070, appeal of William Nolan.

May it please the Court? My name is Sean Sullivan. I am proud to represent Bill Nolan on this case.

I'm asking this Court to reverse the decision below from the CAV.

Mr. Nolan was being totally disabled following his surgery in January of 2013 by their doctor.

Now, I'll take questions probably halfway through here. My issues here are not weight of the evidence.

My issues here go to the foundation and materiality and the legality of the evidence that was

put on against us. The controlling statute in this case is Section 48.

I need to have shown down below that during four years from this January of 2013 time period

that I got one penny in what was called disability, workers' comp disability.

Now, I've had the opportunity now to review the brief from the other side and I can tell you that there's a lot that we agree on.

Number one, this whole notion of the Code 75, which is what you put on your, what he put on his payroll,

it is agreed that Code 75 represents a workers' comp disability.

That's page one of his brief and pointing to the record where they're where it says that.

But it also can represent other payments as well. Do I have that correct?

Yes, yes. Door number one is disability alone. I'll take that door.

Door number two is disability and a supplement. And if you look at his brief closely,

there's the comp that pays the disability and then there's the payroll outside of the jurisdiction of comp that pays the supplement.

I'll take door number two.

But they say they took taxes out of everything that there was no, that there's no, and you say that you say that that's not true.

I say that the statute, the trigger for the statute is a payment of an 075. It's the payment.

It is a matter of undisputed facts. How does the statute, in other words, if they called it, what difference does it make?

I mean, they could call it chocolate cake, I suppose, but if it wasn't, if it wasn't, in fact, a workers' compensation payment

because they didn't, it was taxable income, you know, what difference does it make, what they call it?

Here's what I have to say. The statute says that you can't, any reviews under section 48 for how long you're going to be disabled

or whether you are disabled, do not affect payments already made, payments already paid, okay?

Everybody, let me just make sure I'm understanding. Are you saying that they actually didn't treat it as taxable income

when they paid it and then sometime after the fact, when you raised the question, that's when they took the taxes out?

Here's what the record reflects, and this is set out, page six in my brief.

He's got disability starting June 10. He throws the code through as 75.

He's going to tell you that code 75 means workers' comp disability and a supplement. I'm fine with that.

They paid him under code 75.

And did they take taxes out when they paid him?

They took taxes out of that check, which was a combination of...

Well, are you saying, do you have evidence? Was there something presented before the board that the amount that they took taxes out of

was somehow different than a regular paycheck that would reflect that they only took taxes out of half of it or something like that?

They tell me that when code 75 on my paycheck is comp disability and a supplement.

I don't care how much is which. That's in the ordinary course of things.

You're disabled, you put code 75, you get a check.

Let me ask you this. Putting aside code 75 for the moment, I tend to agree with Justice Linn about the chocolate cake theory, but...

If you pay for the chocolate cake with comp, it's a comp chocolate cake.

Let me just ask you, what about the panel finding that the decision in September of 2010 controls and that there was a finding of no disability in 2010 end of story?

That's what that decision was. June 2010, excuse me, the 10th of June, he went out partial based on a disability.

They paid him these 075s. As a matter of record, they...

That was to attend the workouts, the doctor's appointments and treatments, but then along the way the doctor said, I can't justify this as clinically required.

Right. I lost the argument. When they started saying after they're paying the code 75 for two weeks for a disability from Dr. Levy, you can only work five hours a day, those three hours he throws through code 75, they give it to him.

So when he goes to the appeals board, he says, hey, they denied me.

The man is starting on June 24th. He's already collected and that's my point. They started denying me for June 24th. Pay that to me. He lost.

All right. And the board improperly grabbed that. And I'll tell you why they're wrong. Because the statute says...

Which board?

...you cannot affect what's already been paid. Their own records tell me they paid him this for the two weeks prior and then they stopped.

Well, when you say the board got it wrong, which board decision are you talking about the decision in September of 2010?

I can live with the old decision because that's for a period after they stopped giving me the 075. I got the 075 in hand.

By operation of section 4 of 48, they can't touch it. That board in 2010, a pale member, cannot touch that by operation of law.

I already have it in hand.

Thank you.

So it couldn't have affected it.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

I'm going to please the Court. My name is David Johnston. I represent PSNH in this case.

As the Court seems to recognize, there were no payments made to Mr. Nolan that were in a war of indemnity benefits within the meaning of A48.

Can I just ask you a question that I'm not quite sure I understand it, but it seems like this issue is not joined and maybe that just sort of reflects my misunderstanding.

But when the statute talks about four years from the denial or the last payment, why isn't the denial, this denial?

It's your honor, the original intake of the...

But he doesn't say that in the statute.

He doesn't say that, but if you consider how the four-year statute could be defeated repeatedly if it were anything but the original acceptance or denial, it could be defeated repeatedly by a claimant continuously filing a claim before the four years are up.

It would be denied, and that would start the statute over again.

I don't think that's what the letter says.

But I guess the thing I'm having some difficulty with...

If I understand correctly, there's no...

You don't dispute that the medical expenses that were incurred by the claimant here for this 2013 surgery are covered.

And that's because it's covered under a different statute, Your Honor.

Right, but I mean the thing I guess I have some difficulty understanding is this.

If a person is injured and they get indemnity benefits for some period of time and then eventually the injury clears up or it ameliorates to the point that they can go back to work.

So they go back to work, they stop getting indemnity benefits.

And then sometime after four years, they have to have surgery which the employer concedes is related to the original injury.

And so the employer pays for that.

And as a result of that surgery, for example, suppose a person is now out of work for three weeks because of that surgery which the employer concedes what is related to the original injury.

Why does it make sense that they don't get indemnity benefits for those two or three weeks that they're out of...

I mean, what's...

You know, even if it is more than four years, if it's related, so what?

The point of the statute, Your Honor, is to bring finality to indemnity benefits that may have grown stale and to prevent the carriers from being on the hook indefinitely.

The purpose true of the medical benefits is that they require the carrier to go back to the Department of Labor to have them seized if they're not causally related.

Here, however, there were no indemnity payments made.

As the Court pointed out, back in September of 2010, the Department of Labor specifically determined that the claimant had failed to prove that any of the claimed period of disability in June 2010 was causally related to the work related injury of 1999.

Now, we have a split board here. We have a majority opinion and a minority opinion.

The minority opinion said, the employer's own payroll records show it paid workers' comp benefits in June of 2010.

Do you disagree with that?

Absolutely, Your Honor.

That is referring to the Code 075, which was an internal PSNH code that had no bearing on what was actually, whether or not they were statutorily required indemnity benefits.

The question came up earlier as to whether or not full taxes were taken out of the paychecks of Mr. Nolan.

They were. Mr. Nolan conceded during the hearing that his paychecks were no-

So when they do that, do they tell the employee, look, you filed a form 075 mistakenly because we regard these as not workers' comp benefits.

So FYI, you used the wrong form. Is the employee told that?

Yeah, the employee was told that because he was-

At the time.

When it was discovered that he was on this time card using this 075 code, he was told you can't be using that code.

And because he was making a workers' comp type assertion here, that's why the employer filed a memo of denial.

It was their only avenue to contest.

And all of that was done contemporaneously, not after the fact.

Correct, Your Honor.

It was done as soon as it was discovered.

And it's important to note that the hearing officer in September 2010 said those earlier dates from early June to June 23 when it was discovered, those weren't compensable.

All right. Thank you.
