Good morning.

Thank you.

Council may come forward in the first case.

Oh, the record, I'm sorry, sir, and I'm sorry, Claire.

The record needs to reflect that Justice Delanis is participating in this case,

as well as the other cases today.

She's simply unable to be here personally today.

This is case 2015-0748, petition of Wayne Sawyer.

Thank you, if it pleased the court.

My name is Aaron Ginsberg.

I'm with the Disabilities Rights Center representing Appellant Mr. Sawyer,

seated immediately behind me.

I've arranged to withhold one minute for a bottle, if appropriate,

and I'm happy to take questions at any time.

This case is about a person's right to choose where they live and

to receive developmental services from the agencies serving that location.

Can I just ask them if you say you don't mind if I ask questions at any time?

Please.

I guess the thing I'm having some difficulty with is sort of understanding

the practical consequences of what you're saying.

In other words, can you tell me what?

I didn't see anywhere in your brief and maybe you can elaborate if I'm

just missing something, but you haven't said to me, or to us, I should say,

that look because of not providing the services from Laconia,

the facility that provides services to people who live in Laconia,

as opposed to having the services provided in Concord.

My client has been prejudiced in some way.

In other words, I could completely understand if that was the issue.

In other words, if you were saying, well,

he's supposed to receive services A, B, and C, and because they're coming from

Concord instead of being provided locally in Laconia,

his medication arrives late or he doesn't get his meals on time, or

there's some other counseling services he doesn't receive on time.

I could completely understand that he has every right to complain about that.

But I didn't see any of that, so I guess I'm not clear what

is his arm.

There are several key services that area agencies provide while somebody is receiving.

There are other developmental services from the Laconia DRF.

It includes case management, it includes evaluations, and it includes discharge planning.

It's important for a peasant to be able to establish a relationship with the people that are going to be providing his services.

Are you saying that he's not getting those services now?

He can receive those services from Community Bridges in Concord.

But Concord isn't going to be providing the services in Laconia.

They don't know the service system in Laconia like the Laconia group does.

He needs to establish his relationship because the evaluations that are requested help build on the discharge planning that's done.

And help, overall, with the quality of services he's going to be receiving.

So he needs to establish his relationship now for

this ongoing planning that goes into his time of development.

But he's in Laconia now, correct?

Yes, he currently lives in Laconia.

Is he receiving services?

He is receiving developmental services from the Laconia designated receiving facility.

It's a specialized residential service program.

It's a small group home, it serves six people, and you have to have a developmental disability to be there.

Area agencies don't stop serving a person because there are also receiving services at the DRF in Laconia.

And he's getting services not only from the New Hampshire Bureau of Developmental Services,

but also from the Laconia area provider.

That's what we're asking for and what was denied.

I'm trying to understand what is actually happening.

It because the DRF, the designated receiving facility,

is a secure facility, it's managed by the New Hampshire

Department Bureau of Developmental Services.

I understood from the briefs, that is a separate regulatory body from the area agency.

Am I wrong on that?

The area agencies, there's ten area agencies, one for each region in New Hampshire, and

the Bureau of Developmental Services contracts with them to provide all the community-based residential services.

Laconia DRF is the only one of its kind in New Hampshire.

It is a small residential facility, it's certified.

It contracts with either Concord or your client is requesting Laconia for the service.

I'm still not clear about that.

And I apologize.

There's no contract with the area agencies.

You have to be admitted into the program, you can be admitted voluntarily or involuntarily.

A pilot was admitted voluntarily.

They're receiving a services there, but area agency services do not stop, they do not get suspended.

If there's a residential component of an area agency service, that would be suspended while somebody's there because they're receiving residential services.

But they continue to receive other area agency services.

And so right at this moment, your client is receiving area services from Concord.

Correct.

They go to the Laconia facility and continue to provide the services they have been providing.

And this would be a normal setup for a lot of people.

He's not really receiving them from Concord, but it's complicated.

Concord has refused to provide the services.

Has refused?

Yeah, and right now there's an independent contract to provide case management for him.

But to answer with the Bureau of Developmental Services.

Pursuant to 171A, what's the interplay between 171A and 171B?

171A is the statutory structure for providing state funded community developmental services.

All of these services are voluntary, they promote independence, they promote autonomy, and they're preserving of rights.

171B is a special statute for people that have been adjudicated not competent to stand trial because of a developmental disability.

Which your client has not.

Correct.

But as your opponent argues, his situation is such that if he was not in the DRF in Laconia,

he would be in the secure psychiatric unit of the prison.

Appellant is on a civil commitment, that is not necessarily true.

Appellant is on a civil commitment under the mental health system, 135C.

He's been conditionally discharged from that commitment, from the SPU to the Laconia DRF.

A condition of his conditional discharge is that he receives developmental services from either the Laconia designated receiving facility or another appropriate residential program.

Who made the decision that he'd be in Laconia?

The conditional discharge is an administrative process, it's not a judicial process, and it is an agreement between the department and appellant.

So appellant made a choice, he made a decision to go to Laconia.

It is a voluntary process, it is voluntary in that you have to voluntarily consent to the conditional discharge and each condition of it.

Right, but isn't Justice Convoy correct if he had not agreed to that, then he would be in the secure psychiatric unit.

Unless he was able to arrange another appropriate residential services through the developmental services.

Appellant has always wanted appropriate developmental services.

He's struggled for many years to obtain them and actively sought out these services.

Can I just ask, if I can go back to my original question, because I'm not quite sure, are you seem to be assuming

that if he were getting, if the service provider, so to speak, was in Laconia, as opposed to in Concord,

that the other services you're talking about, you talked about with me before, would in fact be provided.

For example, I think you mentioned discharge services, discharge planning.

I take it, one of the reasons that, correct me if I'm wrong,

you say that Concord isn't providing any of that kind of service, for example.

And I take it, it's because they don't think that he's going to be discharged at least any time soon.

And so how do we know that Laconia would treat it any differently?

I mean, why should we assume that Laconia would say, we'll provide the discharge planning services

and not simply take the same position as Concord, he's not likely to be discharged any time soon,

so we're not going to do that right now.

First, I would say it's a regulatory obligation.

And second, I do not believe that that is why Concord is not providing the services this time.

They just have-

As I was reading the briefs, an overall question concerned me, and that is this.

Is all of this just premature?

In other words, your client has said, when I get out of here, I'd like to live in Laconia.

But is that expression of a desire sufficient for us to make a decision at this point

where the services should come from?

And it seemed to me that maybe in the big picture, we needed to wait until it looked like

he really was going to be discharged into the community.

And so maybe you can help me with my concern that all of this is premature.

Certainly.

The regulatory provision that governs transferring developmental services from one region to another

is really straightforward and simple.

If you plan to move, you don't even have to have actually affected that move.

In this case, a parent has been living in Laconia for over a year.

But it's just if you plan to move.

And that language is used because these are complex services that need to be transferred,

and it takes planning, and there shouldn't be a gap in those services.

Can I just give you this example then?

Because part of what you're saying seems to me to be sort of an internal administrative thing.

In other words, suppose that the state, the Department of Health and Human Services,

for whatever reason, some internal reason, they decided that services that are being provided to people in Laconia,

for some personnel reason or whatever, some administrative reason,

we're going to provide, we're going to actually have the office that's located in Grafton County.

We're going to have that office provide the services in Laconia.

Would your client, and let's assume that there's no change in the services.

The people don't show up late, the meals don't show up late, the counselors doesn't show up late.

Everything is the same except that it's the Grafton County office that's providing the services in Laconia.

Would your client have a basis to say, I've somehow been deprived of my rights?

Under the statutory and regulatory framework, Appellant has the right to receive his developmental services

from the agency providing services in his geographic region.

I had a related question and that is, it isn't clear from the briefs,

but it is asserted that there was a breakdown in the relationship between your client

and the conquered area people who are providing services.

I'm wondering whether maybe therapeutically it makes sense for the people in Concord

who have been following him, who understand what his situation is

to actually remain as the treatment provider for therapeutic reasons,

and query legally can he say, I don't like dealing with them,

I really want to deal with the Laconia people,

and my hope is that at whatever point I'm released, I'll live in Laconia.

You understand what I'm saying?

I'm wondering if there's a therapeutic component to all of this.

Should he be allowed to make the final decision?

I hear you saying the statute's the statute and that's the end of it.

I mean, he does have a right to make the decision where he lives

and that does impact where he receives services.

People make healthcare choices all the time that are significant

and could affect where they want to live.

People could move to Boston to receive better healthcare services.

Mr. Sawyer could intentionally move to Laconia to receive different area agency services.

It is his right to do that and I think it's important to understand

that there's no operations in 135C, his civil commitment statute.

Do those rights get triggered only when he is released without condition to the community?

Those rights are present at any level of commitment in New Hampshire.

Is there a disagreement between the parties on that?

Probably.

So you're saying the rights has had now?

It hasn't been briefed extensively.

The United States Supreme Court has been very clear that the rights of somebody that's incarcerated,

a prisoner's rights, really set the floor for the rights that are retained by somebody on civil commitment.

People that are incarcerated can change their residents.

Our First Circuit has said they can change their residents.

They've cited cases that say even if you were compelled to go to a place,

you can still change your residents to that place.

I have two questions before you're about to run out of time.

So what is the state of the record about the quality and availability of care

provided by Concord as opposed to Laconia?

Is there anything in the record about that?

Any deficiencies?

No, the record is silent about the quality

and it is not a different set of services that Appellant is asking for.

He's asking just that the region he lives in provides those services.

May I just ask one more question?

It appears that the parties are each arguing off a different regulation.

There's a regulation that was in effect at the time of his application

and then there was a regulation that has since taken effect.

And the AAU decision seems to refer to both

and the parties seem to brief sort of past each other on that issue.

What's your position on that?

The difference in the regulation is the use of the word reside or live.

It appears that it was changed for an unrelated reason

and Appellant's position is that whether you use live or resides,

you end up with the same conclusion

but ultimately lives would probably set a lower standard or threshold.

And do you take the position that you're taking is that you went under either?

Correct.

But do you have a position as to which actually controls?

I mean there was one that was in place at the time.

By the time we got to the AAU we briefed it.

There was a new regulation in place.

It makes sense to me that you would do your analysis under the new regulation

so you don't, you know, beg a new appeal under the new regulation.

Yeah, go ahead.

Can I just ask one more question?

Just as an example, is your client registered to vote?

And for example, if he wanted to register to vote in Laconia,

and I don't know if he is, but I would assume if Laconia said to him,

you can't vote here even though he's here,

I could understand completely where you'd have a legitimate argument.

But I'm still having trouble understanding, you know,

what exactly is the prejudice he's suffered.

Or, you know, if they wouldn't let him get a library card in Laconia

because they said you don't really live in Laconia,

I could certainly understand why he'd have a basis to complain,

but I'm still having difficulty understanding what the prejudice is.

He does everything in Laconia.

If he could vote in Laconia if he wanted to,

he gets his mental health services from the Community Mental Health Center in Laconia.

Social security is sent to him.

All of that has his Laconia address.

And you're saying his rights to get services there are based upon the statute and the regulations.

Thank you.

You still have your minute.

Mr. Gordon.

Thank you.

May it please the court?

I'm Joshua Gordon.

I represent the Appellee Lakes Region Community Services

and Hayes Attorney Scott McGuffin who represented the Lakes Region below.

I want to address some questions you asked and then go on to my main point.

As far as prejudice, Mr. Sawyer has no prejudice.

He is receiving all the services he needs in his current situation.

Do you have a point of clarification?

Is he getting the services from Laconia Area Agency or from the DRF?

Well, from the DRF probably.

The services are provided and the Area Agency,

in so far as Mr. Sawyer is concerned, provides case management.

And if he were going to be released to the community, that's not imminent,

but when it might occur, then there's planning for that.

But that's not in the offing as far as anyone knows.

And so the services he receives from the Area Agency are pretty ministerial.

And currently they're being done by the Brain Injury Institute, I think.

Is Concord out of the picture now?

Concord apparently is refusing.

There is a complaint process within HHS that if someone in Mr. Sawyer's position

is not receiving sufficient services, there is a procedure within HHS

and an appeal procedure and so forth, he has not taken advantage of that.

What's the legal basis for your client's position that he's not entitled to have services in Laconia?

Well, two things, Your Honor.

One is this is all premature, as one of the justices suggested,

that if there is a ladder of restrictions at DRF

and the choice where he will live will become meaningful

when discharge becomes imminent or even contemplated.

Did you argue that it was premature below?

Yes. Yes, in fact, that's in Mr. McGuffin's letter to the appellant

that for the reason for...

There's no issue now when you're ready to be discharged, then we'll talk about it.

When it's imminent or when it's contemplatable.

Again, factual clarification.

This is the designated receiving facility in Laconia, a one of a kind.

So one of a kind...

So that it theoretically takes people from all over the state.

All over the state.

So your argument is because it is a one of a kind.

Run by the state, not by the agency.

Run by the state, not by the area agency.

Correct.

You can't have everybody who has been placed in the DRF say,

gee, I like it here in Laconia.

I'll stay in Laconia and therefore the Laconia area agency has to provide the services.

Your argument hinges entirely from, seems to me,

from the factual situation that the DRF is a one of a kind serving the entire state.

Not only is it one of a kind, but it's the only place that Mr. Sawyer is allowed to live.

Judge King's order in April 2014 said the SPU is too restrictive.

You don't belong there.

You're done with your incarceration.

And the only other place that has sufficient security for the man is DRF.

So go to DRF.

But Mr. Gordon, I guess the thing that I'm not quite sure I understand you to be...

If I'm understanding you, then I'm not sure I would agree with this.

I mean, are you saying that he shouldn't be...

He wouldn't be entitled to receive services from Laconia because this is this one...

It's just one place that services the whole state.

Even if the services that Laconia would provide were different...

In other words, if he would actually get more intensive services in Laconia

from the Laconia agency...

That's almost inconceivable, Your Honor, because there's an individual plan that says what services you get.

And they're administered the same, no matter where you get them.

Okay, so in other words, you're not saying that it would be all right for Concord,

for the state, because this is a one of a kind facility,

that it would be all right for services provided to him from Concord

to be somehow a lesser quality or amount of service.

He gets the same services regardless.

So can you answer my question? Why shouldn't your client provide them?

Well, my client doesn't provide them because there's no choice to move there.

Mr. Sawyer has been transferred by the probate court to this facility

and there's no basis for Lake's region to be the administrative agency until...

There's imminent need of services in Laconia.

You said Concord is out of the picture.

Well, I don't really know that, but I think so.

Because your position is Concord is responsible.

Now we're told, but they're not doing it.

Well, I don't know that they're not doing it.

I think that's what... It's not really in the record.

But this is in line with a century of law.

We have in New Hampshire, you place the special burdens on the originating community,

not on the hosting community, and that occurs in schools,

in special education, in juvenile delinquency, in sex offender registration,

in prisoner voting, and the Byronel case, which is the juvenile delinquency case.

There, the young man was in the custody of DCYS as a juvenile delinquent,

placed at YDC in Manchester.

This guy, Wayne Sawyer, is in the custody of HHS as an involuntary committal,

and he's placed at the DRF in Laconia.

And his originating community is who bears the cost.

Let me just try to clarify something.

Mr. Ginsburg said that his client is there because he chose to be there.

And you're saying that's not so...

Absolutely untrue.

There are, at most, two places, really just one he can live.

And the DRF is not a choice because the spew is not a viable option.

And the probate, like I said, the probate court held the spew was overly restrictive,

and the community clearly is too permissive.

And so DRF is the only remaining choice.

And if you read Judge King's order, it says in it,

transfer, and it says in it, it repeatedly uses the word transfer

and does not regard spew as a viable place to go.

DRF is the only viable alternative.

So are you saying that even if the appellant had not agreed to go to his present placement,

Judge King's order would have sent him there over his objection?

If he had not agreed, probably he'd be in spew.

Well, that's your opponent's point, isn't it?

There is at least a voluntariness component to this on the part of the appellant

in that he made the choice to go there as opposed to saying it's spew.

And you seem to be agreeing that he has at least that limited ability to make a choice.

It's not much of a choice, really.

As restrictive as DRF is, spew is much more.

And so I think it would be unlikely anyone would choose spew.

Your opponent emphasizes to us that his client is in the system as a result of mental illness.

And yet we were provided in the briefs the whole history of his sexual offenses.

So to what extent do we consider or ignore his violent sexual assault history?

I think those facts are important to understand the lack of choice that he has.

And I don't think they're relevant in a legal sense, but they're relevant to figure out why he got where he is.

That's the reason Judge King said spew and DRF are your only choices, which do you choose?

And obviously you choose DRF.

And I think perhaps they're also relevant because it makes clear that he's not going to be discharged to downtown Laconia anytime soon.

So the prematurity issue.

But I think those issues are there, and that's the problems Mr. Sawyer has.

And they're relevant because we know he's not moving and we know he has really only one choice of a place to live.

Mr. Gordon, let me ask you about this dueling regulation issue because your brief implicitly takes the position that the residency is the key issue.

And that's the language of the old regulation when he applied.

I don't think it matters.

I'm going to agree with my opponent here.

So if we use the new regulation about that it uses a term lives rather than resides, doesn't matter in your view and you win.

But is that the operative analysis under those regulations?

I think this is not a regulation based case, Your Honor.

I think this is a statute based case.

Mr. Sawyer was committed under the Committal Statute and DRF is a state facility and he's appropriately there.

And that's pretty much the end of it.

So you say these regulations don't, we shouldn't even have to look at them.

So why are you arguing residency?

The whole, I mean the thrust of your brief has to do with residency.

The thrust of my brief, I hope, Your Honor, is that the lack of choice that Mr. Sawyer has of where he's going to live and he doesn't really, he hasn't made a choice.

He has complied with Judge King's order.

Well, but you know, just to follow up on an earlier question that Mr. Gordon, I mean I, for example, it would seem to me, I mean I understand that prisoners under our law prisoners who are incarcerated, while they're incarcerated are not entitled to vote.

I think that's right.

So, but let's assume that wasn't the law.

I could see where, in the case of a true prisoner, let's say somebody's committed for a criminal offense and they're sent to Berlin.

They're sent to the prison up in Berlin.

I could see where Berlin could say, wait a minute, you know, we're not allowing you to register to vote here even if you could because you're not here.

You've been sent here by the court.

That seems to me to be different with your, with the appellant here.

I mean, he did make at least that much of a choice to go to Laconia.

So, I mean, if the issue here was something like voting, I could see where that would be different than the situation that you were referring to before about, you know, our history is that prisoners don't get to vote where they're sent.

And that's the statute.

So, the legislature can choose then all those prisoners to vote in Berlin.

But I think maybe the school cases and the YDC case are similar in that there is a special burden that it would be borne by a hosting community.

And this court has made it clear that it's, those burdens are to be borne by the community from where the prisoner or in this case the inmate or whatever we call, originates.

And not the hosting community.

Is there a statute that says that?

No.

There are.

Is that a problem for you?

I don't think so.

I think there's analogous cases.

And these are, and this is the same.

There's the school case.

That's Lisbon and Landiff.

And there's the special education case.

There's the juvenile delinquency cases.

And those are all the very similar.

I think the juvenile delinquency case is, is, is right on point by Rinal or Brian.

There's no more questions.

Thank you again, Mark.

Would you like your minute?

Yes, please.

Thank you.

I really just want to make one point.

Whether a parent is committed or whether, or however you characterize the Laconia DRF, it's really independent of how you should answer the question today of does he retain the right to make where he lives, his residence.

The presiding officer in the decision below sweepingly said, and he can't change where he lives until he is fully out from under the commitment authority of the court.

So if everyone who is at the DRF in Laconia said, I want to live, I want to continue to living in Laconia, even after I'm discharged fully.

Laconia would have to provide services to every one of these people in this so-called one-of-a-kind state facility.

If they plan, if they plan to move to a different area, for them if it's a different sending region, yes, they would start the process of switching over the services.

Most people want to go back where they're from.

Mr. Sawyer has no ties to the country.

And that's a statutory right, you're claiming, correct?

Yes.

Thank you.

Okay, submitted.
