My name is Paul Geherty and I represent Eddie Johnson.

It's okay.

I jumped the gun, I guess.

It's not the first time you've jumped the gun, Mr. Geherty.

This is case 2015, 0293, State of New Hampshire versus Eddie Johnson.

Sorry about that, but I do represent Eddie Johnson.

My brief raised a number of issues, but I think the main issue is with respect to the warrant that was issued and

the lack of the description of the place to be searched in the warrant.

The warrant merely said the vehicle and didn't describe the vehicle in any way.

I know the state and their brief, I think, tried to make it more descriptive than it actually was.

And at one point, I think it's on page 12 of the state's brief,

they erroneously misquoted the language in the warrant,

the state on page 12 of the brief

quoted the language as being the vehicle and

persons of Eddie Johnson and Rocky Hutchins, which was not the language actually used in the warrant.

The warrant, at the beginning, spoke about maybe in the vehicle and

on the persons of Eddie Johnson and Rocky Hutchins.

So the state attempted to make it much more descriptive than the language in the warrant actually was.

There was no description whatsoever in the warrant as to the place to be searched.

You've got me a little confused, didn't it say Eddie Johnson's car?

It did not.

It said maybe in the vehicle without any description at all,

and on the persons of Eddie Johnson and Rocky Hutchins.

But his name is on the warrant, right?

His name is on the warrant, but there's no indication at all that the vehicle to be searched is that of Eddie Johnson or Rocky Hutchins.

But the affidavit sets forth sort of the facts leading up to what happened, right?

The affidavit is very explicit, very descriptive.

However, there are no words of reference incorporating the affidavit.

I know the warrant uses the boilerplate language approved by Affidavit, supplemented by oral statements made by the affiant.

But a boilerplate statement simply isn't sufficient and there's no express words of incorporation.

So the affidavit should not be utilized.

And I think one of the cases referenced by the US Supreme Court and

the Williamson rejects the use of boilerplate language.

In fact, they just-

Was it the same officers involved in serving the warrant?

So query, does that make a difference?

In other words, the officers that were involved in seeking the warrant had these facts.

Were they the same ones in executing the warrant?

They were, Judge, but I don't believe that that in some circumstances can fill in the gaps.

There's a couple of cases.

Isn't that what went on here?

Well, I mean, I think the officer's knowledge can be utilized to fill in the gaps of a flawed description.

But there has to be at least some description of the place to be searched.

One of the cases I cited, Crab Tree talks about that.

In fact, the officer there, they realized they were at the wrong apartment, went right back to the magistrate,

got a search warrant, didn't realize that she had used a template from a previous search which had the wrong address.

Went right back to the search scene, and according to their found that that was not sufficient.

That the officer's knowledge there didn't fill in the gaps.

In another case of the Supreme Court reference in Grove, Williamson also talked about

officer's knowledge and whether or not it can fill in the gaps.

Where the sole source of information for the description of the place to be searched is the officer's knowledge.

That's not sufficient.

It does not fulfill the particularity requirements of the Fourth Amendment in our state, Part 1, Article 19.

And I think the basis behind that is the warrant serves a number of purposes as the case is described.

Both it tells the officers the limitations of what they search.

And also supports the person on notice whose place is being searched, what the scope of the search is, and what authorization the police have.

If it's simply based on the officer's knowledge, that doesn't fulfill either requirements.

So let's just judge the officer's knowledge, isn't it enough?

You make an argument about the officers opening the car door to place the keys inside to facilitate the tow.

Was there any evidence in this case that that was a routine practice of the officers here?

I have to say I'm a little concerned about that because if it is an acceptable practice to open a car door without a warrant to place keys in there so that the vehicle can be towed,

it gives the police a free shot at the vehicle.

And I understand the trial court did not found that there was no pretext here, but if that's a regular practice,

that raises concerns in my mind.

I think officer, our detective Giuliano said that he would do that.

And I think implicitly he was saying it was his normal practice to do that to safeguard the car because it was going to be put up on a tow truck.

But I think in the circumstances of that case, that normal practice wasn't allowable given that he took the keys from another officer.

There were a number of officers left behind at the search scene who could have simply given the keys to the tow truck operator.

And there was no authorization for any officer to go into that vehicle prior to the execution of a search warrant.

But in this case, the search warrant wasn't descriptive in terms of the place to be searched.

Thank you, council.

Thank you.

Good morning, Jason Casey on behalf of the state.

Was there a practice to essentially allow the police to open the car to put keys in it?

When, as your opponent argues, those the car could have been protected, the keys could have been protected in many other ways.

I'm worried about this.

I get that the trial court found there was no pretext here, but if that's a regular practice,

I do worry about whether this gives officers a quick peek in the car when they don't have a search warrant.

I can't speak to what the general practice is by police officers.

I can tell you that officer Galino testified that in his experience,

he has a practice of when he has keys to a car that is going to be towed,

he'll simply put them on the driver's seat to ensure that they're not misplaced.

Because that's the easiest way, in his view, for the tow truck driver to simply come up.

It's also a very easy way to get a quick look in.

The car without a warrant.

I think the fact that there were alternatives here, he could have given them to another officer perhaps,

doesn't preclude this being a reasonable community care taking act.

So let me ask you this, are you relying upon a good faith exception to the warrant requirement?

Or are you relying upon the community care taking exception?

The community care taking exception, which again permits a good faith attempt by an officer to safeguard.

Do you really use the word good faith when we describe it?

It is, it's actually in there.

I'd like to take a moment.

Whatever case I cited my brief has that language, so that is the wording used by the court.

So I suppose it is a good faith exception, and that's what officer Galino testified he was doing here.

It was simply his way of ensuring that the defendant's car could be safely towed onto the tow truck as soon as it runs.

I guess I'm thinking as you sort of think this through.

Let's assume that he had, if I understand it, somebody was going to have to get in that car at some point in connection with having it to take it out of park or whatever so you don't mean to have it towed.

So somebody is going to have to get in there.

And if we, so even if the officer didn't do that, presumably now the tow truck guy shows up, the officer gives the keys to the tow truck guy.

The tow truck guy opens the door, sees the marijuana, presumably is going to, I mean, so I guess.

Because all of that, well let me just stop you, the door was already open, the defendant when he exited his car left the door open, so the officer didn't have to open the door.

Isn't that more important than any of the other facts here?

Absolutely.

But the most important fact I think is this is completely harmless.

Well, wait a second, so the door was open, was it open, was there testimony that it was open sufficiently that anybody strolling by would see the marijuana in the side pocket of the driver's drawer?

The door was completely open because when the defendant pulled into the gas station, he was ordered out of the car and he left the door open and nobody closed the door.

And there's actually a video that was admitted into evidence during the suppression hearing which shows.

Do we have the video?

It was admitted into evidence, I believe, during the suppression hearing.

So the door was open, he simply reached in and put the keys on the driver's seat.

I would ask that council make sure that we have that video.

We can make sure it's submitted to the court.

And now let me go a little bit further.

So are you saying that the discovery of this marijuana was inevitable?

No, I did not make that argument in my brief.

I wish you had.

I'm sorry?

I wish you had.

Well, because the community caretaking exception can swallow the entire Fourth Amendment in one full gulp.

It's a slippery slope, but I don't see how it's in.

You're saying he wasn't found, he wasn't even charged with the marijuana.

He was charged with the heroin and the cocaine, which couldn't have been discovered without the search warrant.

So you're saying this is much ado about nothing.

It would only be important if he had been charged and convicted of the marijuana possession.

Well, that's true.

It's also important insofar as the marijuana was listed in the affidavit which supported the search warrant to search the car.

So it was part of the probable cause determination made by the court.

So to the extent that-

But you say even if you excise that?

Correct, yes.

Because the warrant was sufficient to allow the police to search the car.

There's a lot of information in there.

But all the other circumstances.

Yep, there's a lot of information in the affidavit, text messages from this individual about arranging a drug deal at a particular place, at a particular time.

So you say we don't have to give our imprimatur on this putting the keys in the car business, because all of it is irrelevant.

Correct, I think it was a legitimate exercise by the police officer, but you don't have to decide.

It's crazy about putting my stamp of approval on putting keys in a car to have it towed.

But so you say we don't have to go there.

And we don't have to stretch the community care, taking exception either, do we?

No, you don't.

Well, I don't think it's much of a stretch here anyway, because the car was open.

But you don't have to reach the issue.

Let me ask you this question.

Did you just say it was at a gas station and not on the side of the road?

Correct.

What was the hazard?

I'm sorry?

What was the hazard presented by the car sitting at the gas station?

Well, it was to protect his keys, first of all, not to lose the keys while the tow truck driver was in route.

But the officer's conduct was also necessary to ensure that the car could be safely driven onto the tow truck, not dragged, none of that stuff.

So the keys, to protect the keys, it's also to protect the car.

So this isn't the case where the dead of night van is left at the side of the road and it creates an obstruction.

Yeah, it's not an issue of whether or not the car can be towed or should be towed or anything like that.

But I should note, it did need to be towed here because it was actually parked at a pump.

It wasn't parked in a legitimate spot.

It was actually parked right at the pump.

But it was going to be towed to the police impound lot.

So this doesn't really sound like community caretaking as much as it does furthering an investigation.

I agree with you that there has to be a clear line.

It can't be investigative and community caretaking.

But just because somebody is investigating doesn't mean they can't also engage in community caretaking acts.

But you say, at the end of the line, it's all irrelevant because it was never charged with the marijuana.

Purely academic conversation here.

Thank you, thank you.

Case submitted.
