This is case 2015-03-8-4 in the matter of April Quigley and Martin Quigley.

Mr. Satterley.

Good morning, Your Honours. May it please the Court. My name is William Satterley, and in this matter I speak from Martin Quigley, the respondent.

Madam Chief Justice, may I reserve one minute of my time for rebuttal?

That's bold.

Thank you very much.

The record before the trial court in this matter included a five-page letter of termination in which Mr. Quigley's employer fired him.

It included the fact that he had an exemplary record of child support payments.

It included pages of documentation showing his job and employment search.

Can I just ask you a question, Mr. Satterley? Is it your understanding of our law that in order to impute income to someone, they have to not only be voluntarily unemployed, but they also have had to do that to avoid paying child support?

Or is one or the other enough?

The prior law says that the court should, and the word is used, should consider the intent and whether the intent is to avoid child support.

So much of the law, many of the cases that have come before here, there's not a huge universe, but one of the cases, for instance, suggests or shows that the husband had a $7,000 back order that he hadn't paid,

and he used $5,000 to pay for a motorcycle repair.

There's a piece of intent pretty conclusive that he was using his money and he wasn't going to pay his child support.

In comparison, there's another case in which the Lynn case, in which someone voluntarily chose to get more education, so that would not necessarily amount to an intent to avoid child support, but that would be a known consequence.

The language that is used is the intent, finding of an intent should be considered by the trial court in examining whether or not there's been a voluntary step towards unemployment.

Is this real mistake, granting the two new outees?

I understand that the lifestyle asset has been brought up.

I'd like to point out that those were leases.

I don't know when they were entered into, but he also notes that there was a contribution from his fiance with regards to the payment toward the leases, so I don't think that that's demonstrative of anything.

Given this fact, given this record, we think it was an abusive discretion for the trial court to find A, that he was voluntarily unemployed, and B, that he was doing it with the intent of avoiding child support obligations, which is what the trial court found.

With that information based solely on that record, the documents that were before her, plus nothing more than an offer of proof for her to go and make those findings, we think, is an abusive discretion.

So there was no testimony from the parties?

There was no testimony.

Just offers of proof from counsel.

And did anybody object to offers of proof?

Did anybody say, no, we don't want to proceed in this fashion?

I don't believe that the record reflects that.

So aren't you sort of stuck with that?

I mean, we have a case, I think the Yaman case, the same kind of thing was argued.

Well, we didn't really have an opportunity to present evidence, and I think we said you could have presented evidence if you wanted to.

But the court proposed proceeding by offers of proof, and nobody objected.

And I'm not suggesting that solely proceeding on the offers of proof is itself wrong.

What I'm saying is that combined with the extensive record of a job hunt, for instance, and then for her to conclude that that record, the pages of documentation of Mr. Quigley's job hunt and the way he did it,

showed a lack of diligent effort to find employment.

Those two things, she could have examined more.

She could have said, I don't think, I don't understand this record.

But in this context today, for instance, in the way one conducts a job search today, what Mr. Quigley did was demonstrably fine.

He's networking, he's hiring a local recruiter, he's writing letters, he's getting letters of referral.

The court said, well, you only applied for two jobs in January and two jobs in February.

Well, how many was he supposed to send out 10 letters of application?

The court doesn't make that clear.

It doesn't ask for any testimony.

It ignored the record, and we believe that the record was sufficient to demonstrate that he was not voluntarily unemployed.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Mr. DePew.

May it please the court.

My name is Dave DePew.

I represent April Quigley here.

We, I think you may be familiar with the facts and the pleadings, but Mr. Quigley worked, had a good job paying $200,000 for Wyman Gordon, $200,000 a year.

He went on vacation on August 4, 2014 to return at Portland, Oregon on August 18th.

He never showed up.

They called, they emailed him.

They got no response.

He, what's the evidence that he did that?

In other words, it strikes me that one of the consequences of this is that your client lost, if we were to uphold, I mean, if we were to reverse the trial court, your client lost $30,000 or so a year in child support.

But Mr. Quigley lost the other $170,000 that he would have earned in income.

So I guess it's, I'm having some difficulty understanding, to the extent your theory is he did this to avoid paying child support.

Pretty stupid decision on his part if you, if you really accept that that's why he did it.

He got $400,000 after tax cash in the bank runner and his own financial affidavit says, if I pay child support closer to $40,000 a year, if I pay that child support,

I can not work for three years.

Sure, but I guess my point is he was going to get that $400,000 whether he worked or not, wasn't he?

Correct.

Okay, so he still, I mean, if, so he still was looed by leaving his job, he was still losing, he was losing a lot more than she was losing.

Well, he was getting to live an extra year without working.

Some people don't like to work.

So he gets to live an extra year without working if he doesn't pay child support.

And how do we know he doesn't want to pay child support?

Because earlier in the proceedings we asked for his employment agreement and he gave us an employment agreement and that employment agreement said he got a salary of $185,000 a year.

At the time there was a court order preventing us from directly contacting his employer after six months or so.

We got that order reversed so we could contact his employer.

We got an authorization and contacted his employer and his employer sent us a different employment agreement.

And that employment agreement showed he had a 45% bonus that he would get.

And as a result, the first employment agreement he gave us was fraudulent.

It was a counterfeit.

It was made up.

Only after we went directly to his employer did we find out there was 45% more money that she could, April quickly, could get child support on.

And she did.

But that, how far do you go to avoid paying child support?

That was fraud.

But what does that, I guess, I mean, you've spent a lot of time in your brief talking about these other sort of collateral things that he did.

And you've made a very strong case that, you know, he was, it sounds like he was not a nice guy in many respects.

But with regard to this particular issue, I'm still having some trouble understanding the theory that he was doing this to avoid paying child support.

I mean, we've said in our cases that even if somebody, you know, decides to commit a crime and they go to jail, that, you know, unless they've done that to avoid paying child support,

that you can impute income to them.

Your Honor, he withheld the termination agreement of his, with evidence of his termination from us until the, despite repeated requests by me until the day before trial.

That's the first time I got the termination agreement.

And it said there is a probationary agreement attached to this letter.

I never got that.

I didn't get, that wasn't turned over to me at the time of the trial or the day before.

He said he was disabled from working.

That's why he couldn't work.

He was disabled.

His employer said, through an authorization, we got, just before he said there's another letter of October 31, 2014, that deals with his claim for disability.

But we can't produce it.

I, because hipper rules, I'd like to have an authorization directly to make a producer.

He didn't produce it.

At the, at the same hearing, he's saying I can't work because I'm disabled.

He won't produce the letter from his employer that deals with that very issue.

Sounds like he was a little close to the vest in a lot of things.

But Mr. Satterley suggests that he paid his child support obligations right on time and up to the date that he was fired.

How long was that period of time that he, that he allegedly paid his child support in an exemplary manner?

He filed his motion or petition to reduce, to eliminate child support on December 17th.

He stopped paying December 31.

But how much time before that had he been paying?

Was it a year?

A year and a half.

And Mr. Satterley?

He had only been recently divorced, Your Honor.

I don't have the date.

Are you two years or something like that?

Is Mr. Satterley correct that he did pay his obligations during the time that he was supposed to,

before his job was terminated?

Yes, he did.

But, Your Honor, for us to prove intent, we have to use collateral evidence.

And we have cited in our brief an inference that you may draw from his failure to comply with our discovery requests.

I mean, do we have to have a confession from Mr. Quigley on doing this because of this?

He goes now, he's just looking in the Portsmouth area locally.

Your time is up.

Your time is up.

We know all the facts.

Your time is up.

Thank you.

Okay.

So he's intentionally, voluntarily unemployed because he's limited his search, Your Honor, to...

Thank you.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Do you need your minute, Mr. Satterley?

I just would note that at the time that he was terminated, his employer knew that he had a lawyer and was considering a lawsuit for wrongful discharge.

So that may well have influenced the content of the letter that was produced about his termination.

It is those sort of lack of a legitimate basis to draw an inference that we object to.

We believe the court went too far, given the paper in front of it, to draw the conclusions that it did.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Thank you, Your Honor.

You may come forward.
