This is case 2015-0382, Hannaford Brothers Company, LLC, versus Town of Ringe.

The record should reflect the fact that Justice Convoy is disqualified from this case.

And while Justice Bassett is medically unable to be with us today,

we expect that he will participate in this appeal.

Council.

Thank you, Your Honor.

May it please the court.

My name is Mark Derby from Concord.

I represent the appellant Hannaford Brothers, LLC.

I asked to reserve two minutes of time for a buttle if I may.

And I'm willing to accept questions at any point if you have them.

The issue that this case places squarely before the court is the extent of the showing that

an applicant must make in order to obtain a waiver of a site plan review regulator.

Is it the extent of the showing or the extent of the findings of the regulatory board?

I would say both.

In this case, we've argued that the board has not adequately provided its reasoning in the minutes as required by statute.

And at the same time, the other issue is that Walmart did not satisfactorily present the case for

an unnecessary hardship as required by the subdivision regulations.

Well, how explicit should findings of volunteer local boards have to be?

They're giving their time, they're trying to do the best they can, they're mostly not experts.

What do you say they should have done here?

Well, I don't necessarily fault the planning board as much as I would

fault Walmart for not providing the type of evidence that the board would have needed to say,

yes, option one, option two, reason one, reason two.

We agree there's an unnecessary hardship, so we're granting the waiver.

In this case, all you had was Walmart saying, look, we would like the waiver.

We need the waiver.

Please give it to us.

Isn't there another, I'm sorry, please finish.

Sure.

We're already at 50.9% impervious coverage.

We want to go to 53.

Now, ultimately the coverage levels have fluctuated, and there's a little bit of confusion in the certified record about what was on

the ground, but yes.

Doesn't the use of the word or in the waiver test provide another route for Walmart to succeed in this case?

In other words, the specific circumstances relative to the site plan or conditions in the land

indicate that the waiver will properly carry out spirit and intent.

I don't think so, Your Honor.

If you look at the actual local site plan review regulations, they are conjunctive, not disjunctive.

And I think even if you were, and nobody raised that issue or argued it before, in other words, Walmart went forward reading section 16 saying,

we think undue hardship, we're going to follow undue hardship, and I've addressed that briefly.

Unnecessary, not undue.

I'm sorry, unnecessary.

Either way, and I'm sorry because those get shifted back and forth.

And I think, and I preemptively address the idea that the statute is now disjunctive,

but the local regulation is conjunctive.

But either way, even if you were to look at option number two, there is a requirement that you show that the property is unique.

And you have to have some explanation of, why can't we comply?

What is it that makes us not able to comply?

And I think if you look at property portfolio and the Auger case, those are the two cases where you have facts,

which say, look, when an applicant comes in and says, I need a waiver,

it's going to be an unnecessary hardship, here is what it would look like if I tried to comply.

And I can't because doing this would be an unnecessary hardship.

Property portfolio was a dumpster set in a setback, and they said, I can't put it here,

I can't put it there, it has to go here, and here are the reasons why.

Can I just ask you this question, if a plaintiff shows or

if an applicant shows that there will be no harm resulting from what it wants to do,

can the board say, well, wait a minute, if we then, if in light of the fact,

undisputed that there will be no harm by what they want to do, we don't allow them to do it,

that is an unnecessary hardship.

There's no reason not to allow them to do it.

Well, I think that the showing, the bit about there's no harm, if you grant the variance, it won't be a problem.

That is always part two.

There always has to be something that comes first, the showing.

This is here, this is an impervious surface coverage requirement, it's important environmental regulation.

If you're going to waive it, you have to say, I can't comply, and here's why.

My land is unique, I can't comply, it would damage my ability to do something.

And then after you've made that initial showing, then we look at mitigation,

remediation, other things that would make it not be a problem.

Because you have to get to that first point before you override the voters who

enacted the site plan review regulations as part of the zoning ordinance.

So, again, I think that in this case,

it's very important to note that the existing status of the property is what the court looked at.

It said, look, you're at 50.9%, you're over the limit anyway.

I'm just going to assume that it would be an undue hardship for

you to put a 42,000 square foot addition under your 76,000 square foot store

without further exceeding the 50% impervious surface ratio.

And I think in that case, the court was just using conjecture to say, well, it can't be done.

But what I think has to be in the record, there has to be something in the certified record to say, look,

if we did it, here is the problems we would have.

If we-

But Judge Kissinger seems to think there was enough in the record.

I mean, that's what he found.

Well, he said, all he said was-

And it's a matter of finding of unnecessary hardship.

And there is sufficient evidence to support a finding that literal enforcement would create an undue hardship.

And in my brief, I've been through those minutes.

I've pointed to every point in the minutes, every point in the application where they talk about the need for the waiver.

And it's just not there.

You won't find it.

And what I was getting at is if they said, look,

if they had gone and said, look, we can keep it within 50%, we can extract it down to 50%.

But we're going to have to go into the parking lot and take 100 parking spaces and

compensating for that with a $30 million double-decker parking garage is unnecessary hardship.

If they had put that in the record and the planning board had looked at that, maybe there would be something to work with.

But you have absolutely nothing.

The key thing you have to remember here is that they started at 50.9% on the ground.

In about a month and a half, and then they said, we want to go to 57%, all right?

In a month and a half, in order to strategically avoid a trip to the ZBA,

Walmart managed to go from 57 down to 53.

So any supposition or

finding or suggestion in the trial court's decision that going from 50.9 to 50 or

53 to 50.9 is impossible or an unnecessary hardship.

Walmart's own actions throughout this process show that with a little bit of creativity and

effort, they can knock 4% right off the top.

And if they could do that and they were able to do that, they had a duty

before they got the waiver to show the planning board that it was impossible to go back to 50.

Because there are a lot of technologies, there's pervious pavement, there's changes to the parking area,

there's roof gardens, there's double-decker parking garage.

There are many other things that could have been implemented.

I bet the town of Ringe wishes that you guys in Walmart were not a butters.

And the point is, this impervious surface limit is significant.

It's environmental protection regulation.

Hannaford itself has on its property man-made wetlands that are used to receive and

treat the runoff from the Walmart site.

Walmart site came in in 93, Hannaford came in in 95 or 96.

So these site plan review regulations are there for

an important environmental and public health purpose.

And you can't just say, well, we'd love to have the taxes from a new Walmart, so

we're going to rubber stamp exactly what they are.

What do you say about the, if I understand correctly the original waiver was for

a, when the building was first built, would have allowed a larger percentage

of the property to have an impervious surface than actually happened.

And so, I mean, how does that, could the board have properly said,

well, look, we were going to allow them to do more and

they actually didn't use up all of what we would have allowed them to do.

So now when they're still asking for something that would have been less,

even with the expansion, that sort of goes to unnecessary hardship.

There was no initial waiver.

What happened is once we got to the trial court, Walmart worked up and

picked through the certified record to discover that the 1993 site plan approval

had a future 39,000 square foot addition that had been approved.

That if it had been built, would have gotten to 54%.

It was never built in 20 years.

And when Walmart came back, they started with a fresh site plan of 42,

43,000 square foot addition in another place and lots of other changes.

So they wiped the slate clean with the older site plan approval when they made

the kind of significant changes and redevelopment proposals contained in the most recent site plan.

Is there any evidence in the record that the existing drainage swales

are insufficient to cover this increased impervious area?

No.

Thank you.

And again, that's steps too.

But you say the, to Justice Lin's point, you say that original plan is irrelevant to what's going on now.

Yes, I believe it is.

And that's because if they had a 39, and what you will see if you look at the record is Walmart never even said.

We have the 39,000 square into the planning board.

We have it.

It's going to go here.

This is where we're building it, let us do it.

No, Walmart made enough changes in this site plan proposal that they

waived whatever argument they would have had to go to 54%.

They had to start over.

They chose to start over with something different.

If they wanted to do the old thing, you pull a building permit and

say, I want to do this based on my 93 approval.

Even if you can get beyond the exception in the vesting statute 67439,

that exempts public health, public welfare type regulations.

And I would suggest that controlling the sheeting of runoff of impervious surfaces of commercial

developments full of oil and gasoline and so forth into wetlands at an appropriate pace is the type of public health.

But I just, the thing I'm sort of wondering is, couldn't the board have said in terms of an unnecessary hardship,

well look, we were going to, granted it was before the new zoning ordinance was in effect,

but we were going to allow them to build this other addition.

They presumably had some sort of interest in being able to do that,

some settled expectation that they would be able to do that.

Now yes, they've changed their plan, and yes, these are important sort of environmental kind of regulations,

but there's been no dispute that what they want to do here will not have any adverse effect on the property.

And so putting all of that together, we find that there was an unnecessary hardship here if we didn't allow them to do it.

I don't think you can jump to the unnecessary hardship without requiring the applicant to say,

here is why I can't comply today.

That was 1993, this is a 2005 ordinance regulation, we're here in 2013.

A lot has changed, if I went to 50%, here's what it would look like.

It's an undue hardship, I can't do it, please give me my waiver.

None of that happened, they just jumped to the second stage and said, well,

we think that there's enough drainage in there to slow down the rate and it won't be a problem.

But before you, I'm sorry, I noticed my red light is on.

You can finish your sentence.

But before you get to that second stage, you have to do something first.

The applicant has to give you that evidence, that certified record,

that alternate plans, those other ideas, especially when you're dealing with placing things on property,

before you can get to the remediation component.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Okay, please accord John Mark Turner here for the intervener Walmart.

Gary Kenyon, the town's council is with me at council table.

Let me tackle this procedural argument first that the minutes don't somehow reflect the board's decision.

I think a fair reading of the minutes show that the minutes do explain what the board was thinking and what the board decided.

It begins all the way back in May of 2013, where the issue of a waiver being needed is raised in conceptual review.

That's at the Walmart Appendix S6.

Then in July, Walmart actually applies for the waiver and sends in a letter, outline the reasons for the waiver.

And it explains to the board that it's already over the 50% impervious coverage limitation,

that it's only asking for another 3% for the substantial addition that it's going to make.

That it's endeavoring to limit the amount of impervious surface it's putting down.

And it also includes the drainage reports that we've talked about a little bit.

And I think those are worthwhile to look at, those are in Walmart's appendix.

And if you look at page 30 in particular, you can see that Walmart is showing to the town

that what we're proposing to do is invest and create an entirely new storm water and

wastewater management system that's going to make the amount of storm water leaving the site actually go down from the current levels.

And the quality of the storm water leaving the site is actually going to be better because Walmart's creating a pretreatment sort of system.

Well, all of that may be very well and good, but isn't Mr. Derby right that you have to show the unnecessary hardship before you get to do any of those things?

What was it?

The unnecessary hardship?

Well, the building didn't, the expansion couldn't happen without some impervious service being added.

And I think the board knew that because if you look at the map.

But was there evidence on that point?

And was there some evidence that would say, we can't build this building unless we have at least some increase?

Walmart said it, and the board was aware of what the map shows, which is there's only a little bit of

pervious coverage which is behind the building.

And you cannot build the building without either taking that up or going on to the parking.

Now, as to evidence, the proposal changed halfway through.

I think in some time in the fall or the winter of 2013, there was some concern that there was going to be encroaching on the wetlands.

And so Walmart changed its original proposal.

Originally they were going to add about 0.9 acres of impervious surface.

But they reconfigured the building, took the corner off, and dropped the amount of added impervious surface to 0.5 acres.

And the effect of that was to reduce the amount of parking that was available.

They had to put a detention pond out in the parking lot as part of their storm water management system.

The effect of that was taking away 15 parking spaces.

So what's the big deal with 15 parking spaces?

That's a 15 parking space reduction from what they currently have even though they're going to dramatically increase the square footage of the store.

And if you look at page 109 of the appendix, you can see the important thing for a retailer is actually the ratio of the parking spaces to square footage.

So you're saying that essentially by sort of negative inference that the planning board could have said, look here's what they've done.

That we can sort of infer from this that they've really made a sort of conscientious effort

to minimize the additional potential adverse environmental impacts.

And they wouldn't be able to do anything, and we can infer that they wouldn't have been able to do more.

I think so.

I think the board was aware that Walmart was proposing a dramatic expansion of its building,

which it was allowed to do under the zoning regulations.

There's no argument that this was somehow not allowed or needed a variance or anything like that.

It's more a matter of placement.

Yes, it's a matter of placement, but there's no place to put the expansion, except again there's a-

And you say that the planning board knew that.

It must have.

I mean, these are members to the Chief Justice's points.

These are volunteer members, board members who live in the community for 20 years.

I mean, the building's been there for 20 years, and the map shows it.

There's only two places to expand this building.

Behind it, where the pervious surface is, or in front of it, where the parking is.

Either way, if you expand it to in the front, that's going to take away parking spaces like the detention pond.

And we're talking about a dramatic reduction in parking spaces.

15 doesn't sound like a lot, but when you look at the ratios, again, look at page 109.

You can see the current ratios is six parking spaces per thousand square feet.

That's going to go down to four by the reduction of parking spaces.

That's a hardship.

And the board knew that it was an unnecessary hardship.

That's because Walmart presented the evidence to it of the substantial investments in the wastewater and

stormwater management system, which shows the level of water coming off the site is going to go down.

And the quality of water is going to go up.

I mean, the board had its eye on the ball here.

It knew that the purpose of the regulation was to ensure surface water quality to make sure there's not flooding going off the site.

And it knew that if Walmart added 0.5 acres or 0.9 acres of impervious surface and

allowed to create its expansion and create this new stormwater management system, the quality of the water was going to go up.

That's what it, that's a reasonable decision for the board to make to say, we're going to allow this additional impervious surface area percentage.

And in exchange, the town's going to get a much better stormwater and wastewater treatment system.

And that's essentially what the board did.

Now in terms of the findings, whether the board had to be more particular in what it was in its minutes,

I fundamentally disagree and it's again to the Chief Justice's points.

These are volunteer boards, they're spending, they're late at night, they're doing the best they can.

And to expect them to have a court reporter in the room with them or to act like lawyers or judges and

make findings on every single element I think is completely unrealistic.

And that's not what the legislature expects.

I would point the court to 676, 4, Roman 4,

which says the court system doesn't even have jurisdiction to flip planning boards.

When a procedural error is made, unless it's so substantial it's more like a due process violation.

Like Hannaford couldn't participate or didn't get notice.

And this situation is diametrically opposed from that, where there's no due process.

Hannaford was in five or six planning board meetings.

The very first issue that's taken up in all these planning board meetings is,

should we approve the minutes from the last meeting?

And Hannaford never once objected to any of the minutes, never once told the planning board,

hey, you need to explain better what your reasoning is for the waiver.

Instead, what they really did, they're just lying in wait and creating an appellate issue.

Because they know, I mean, this is really about preventing competition.

Walmart's trying to create a grocery store there, essentially, among other things.

It hasn't been able to do it for two years next to Hannaford.

Well, they're trying to create an appellate issue, so the courts will say,

no planning board, you didn't explain well enough, try again, and that's another two years.

And what the legislature has said is no, the planning board process is not a gotcha game.

If there's a procedural error, then we're not going to flip the planning board for that.

It should be about the substance.

I think the substance here is pretty clear, as I said, that the planning board was looking at

the fact that Walmart has been over the 50% limitation for a very long time.

Was only going to minimally increase its impervious surface area.

And was going to not only mitigate the effects of adding that impervious surface area, but improve the situation.

Now, the notion that the planning board should be looking at alternative designs,

I think there's a dozen designs or something listed in the brief of rooftop gardens.

The court has never required that, that planning boards and

planning board applicants have to sort of propose or look or

evaluate a myriad of alternative designs and show that they're impractical or impossible.

I mean, talk about an impossible burden for an applicant to come forward with alternative designs and

show each one is impractical.

You know, Hannaford could have proposed some of these things during the process.

Told the planning board, hey, what about rooftop gardens?

Then maybe the planning board could have engaged with Walmart, and

Walmart could have explained why that's not feasible or impractical, but that didn't happen here.

So the court has never required,

except in the area of variance context,

to show that alternative designs are somehow not feasible or impractical.

And even in that context, area of area context, that's no longer the law that's been superseded by statute, as we explained in our brief.

So, unless the court has any other questions.

Thank you.

Do you need your reserve time, Mr. Derby?

Yes, I'd like to.

Okay.

Thank you, Ron.

I'd like to speak to the point or the suggestion of opposing counsel that Hannaford somehow laid in wait or

tried to seed this proceeding with errors.

The waiver was granted on August 6th, 2013.

Hannaford was there with their engineer and they made comments and those comments are in the record.

There is a September 3rd, 2013 letter, basically the next meeting.

And that's at appendix 61 through 66.

It's a six page letter detailing very carefully the problems and

errors that we believe that the zoning planning board made when they granted the waiver.

It goes on for basically a page where we talk about that they did not meet the showing of unnecessary hardship.

So, September 3rd, early in the process, and I was there at all those meetings, except August 3rd.

We, in writing, explained exactly what we thought was wrong.

And there are legitimate environmental concerns that Hannaford had as to the wetlands on its property.

So the idea that Hannaford was not actively engaged and

telling the planning board about the mistakes it was making early on.

September 3rd, 2013, August 6th, 2013 in writing.

I would commend you to just take a look at our September 3rd record and my comments in the minutes on the September 3rd meeting and

subsequent meetings talking about how we did not believe that the planning board had required Walmart to or

that Walmart had adequately met its burden under section 16 to prove unnecessary hardship.

Thank you and for the reasons stated in our brief, I would request that you overturn the Cheshire County Superior Court.

Thank you.

Case submitted, the court is in recess.

All right.
