This is case 2015-0185, State of New Hampshire v. Jonathan Dodge, a.k.a. Brian Smith.

May it please the Court. Stephanie Hausmann, on behalf of Jonathan Dodge, I have reserved one minute of my time.

The evidence in this case was insufficient to prove that Mr. Dodge issued the check, that it was returned for a culpable reason,

and that he knew or believed the check would not be paid.

As the trial court found, this circumstantial evidence case was not strong.

The State urges inference upon inference in arguing that the evidence was sufficient,

and yet the State's argument would snare almost any person who passes the check that is later returned unpaid.

The State is permitted to rely upon circumstantial evidence,

but in order to prevail, that evidence must exclude all reasonable conclusions consistent with innocence.

Here it did not exclude the reasonable conclusions consistent with the State's direct evidence that Mr. Dodge was given a check

that had insufficient funds in the account or that he was the victim of someone else's scam.

To contradict the direct evidence, the State argues that the implausibility of Mr. Dodge's description

of the transaction was sufficient circumstantial evidence of his guilt.

It was pretty implausible.

This Court has never found that the State can show consciousness of guilt without ever proving a fact from which that can be inferred.

And here the State failed to prove any particular fact that showed Mr. Dodge's consciousness.

But doesn't the fact that, you know, on its face the idea that somebody came from Ohio to buy a, you know, $750, whatever it was,

a piece of sort of fungible equipment?

I mean, that could be, presumably, couldn't a jury say, you know, this is crazy.

Somebody would, the idea that somebody came from Ohio to buy this thing for $750 that presumably could be bought anywhere in Ohio

or made by somebody anywhere in Ohio just doesn't.

And just adding on to that the address given within 10 days the person is gone.

Well, I'd like to address that because the State argues that Mr. Dodge gave false contact information on the form that he filled out

at the bank, and that is not what the record shows.

Mr. Dodge filled out a form at the credit union, listed his accurate driver's license and social security numbers,

gave a telephone number and a post office box.

The service credit union employee testified that she attempted to call Mr. Dodge at that phone number.

That was the total of the evidence about that phone number.

There was no evidence that it was not his phone number, he never returned a call, just that she tried to call him at that number.

And then she testified that she sent two certified letters, one to the PO box that was written on Mr. Dodge's form

and another to a street address, and the record doesn't indicate where she came up with that street address.

The exhibits that the State admitted showed only that the certified letter sent to the street address was returned as undeliverable to the credit union.

The evidence didn't indicate through the exhibit that the post office box letter had been returned because that was no longer his post office box.

And there was no evidence that the credit union got the return receipt indicating that Mr. Dodge was signed for the letter at the post office box,

which would have shown that his statement to the police that he never received the letter was false.

So here the State's evidence was just that he was not reachable at the, through the attempts that the credit union made,

but the State failed to prove that any of the information on that form was false.

But the evidence, let me get the chronology, he gets, he says he gets a check on Saturday, dated Saturday.

Am I right on that?

I think he said that he had gotten it earlier in the week and it had been dated for Saturday.

The furniture wasn't picked up until the next day.

Yes.

So he caches the check.

Yes, on the date that it's dated.

On Saturday, but then the furniture doesn't get picked up until the next day.

That's a little odd that he would be paid before the furniture was picked up.

It is unusual, but it's not unusual that a person who had transacted in a arm's length transaction would require

that the payment clear before they come and pick up the merchandise.

Did the defendant have a theory at trial or was it just I leave the State to its proof?

Did he have a theory that somebody, I understand that the check was drawn on a company that was no longer in business,

but I suppose it could be argued that someone stole the checks of a business that is no longer operating.

I mean, I was having trouble figuring out what the defendant's pitch was at trial.

Well, the defendant's story to the police came through the State's evidence

and that direct evidence through the State's evidence was that he did not know the check would not be paid

and that he did not issue the check himself.

So did the jury have to conclude that he printed up the check fraudulently?

Yes.

Because that was a little fuzzy given the evidence and the instructions and everything.

Issuing a check is different from passing a check.

So he had to issue the check.

And it seemed that the State was suggesting that he actually created this check.

Yes.

The statute requires either issuing or passing, but he was indicted as having issued the check

and the State accepted that burden at trial, that they had to prove that he issued as in he created the check himself.

Contrary to the State's argument at trial, it was not impossible to admit circumstantial evidence

that excluded reasonable conclusions consistent with guilt or consistent with innocence.

As Justice Combo brought up, the State could have proven that the account did not exist,

either by bringing in certified business records from the drawy bank

or by proving that, say, Ohio law prohibited anyone to hold or use a bank account

in a business name when they were not registered with the Secretary of State.

The only evidence that was presented was that the check showed a company that was no longer in existence.

Yes.

And that it was drawn on a bank that was not the bank that processed the check.

Yes.

Yes.

It was drawn on the citizen's bank from Beverly, Ohio.

Yes.

Was there some evidence, did I understand correctly from the record that there was some evidence

that the defendant said to the police initially that he had never been to Manchester?

That is true.

Mr. Dodge was arrested on this charge over seven months after he cashed the check.

And so he was initially told by the arresting officer who was not a Manchester officer,

that he was arresting you on an issuing bad check case out of Manchester.

And he at that point said, I'd never been to Manchester.

But when he got to the police station and was shown the affidavit, he said, oh yes,

I remember that check.

I did cash that check.

In the brief it says that the defendant admitted that he cashed the check and that

the signatures on the check were his.

What signatures are we speaking?

I agree that the testimony or at least the transcript says signatures plural.

And there were only two signatures on the check, one on the front presumably from the

person from Ellison Construction and then Mr. Dodge is on the back.

But if the police officer had really been saying that he admitted, I mean that would

be admitting having committed the offense.

And the gist of the detective's testimony was that Mr. Dodge denied having committed

the offense.

It was clear from the testimony of both police officers that Mr. Dodge admitted

endorsing the check on the back and cashing it.

The state bears the burden of proving guilt.

Did anyone compare the signatures at trial?

No one compare, like an expert?

Sometimes lay people can do that.

There was no testimony comparing the two signatures.

Was the jury invited to do so?

No, the jury was not invited to do so.

The state also bears the burden if it's relying on circumstantial evidence

to dispel reasonable conclusions consistent with innocence.

The state does not bear this burden by evidence showing the transaction was

unusual or by arguing that it was suspicious or by putting the burden on

Mr. Dodge to prove his innocence.

Without proving more links in its inferential chain, the state's evidence

was insufficient and this Court must reverse.

I didn't address the second issue which has to do with the retroactivity

of the sentencing statute if the Court has any questions about that issue.

You draw a distinction.

You draw an attempt to distinguish this case from Samson on the grounds

that you're not making a claim that there could be no charge brought at all.

That is one difference, yes.

I guess one of the things when the legislature, what we said in Samson

is when the legislature changes a statute to account for the fact

that money is increased in value and that before they did that,

the old statute would apply.

And isn't this particularly the kind of situation?

In other words, if the legislature says the value of, you know, $500 has now

sufficiently diminished that we should no longer make this a class B felon,

let's say, but a misdemeanor, and they say that that law becomes effective

on ex-date, isn't it, you know, isn't that a particularly bad situation

for us to say, well, we can apply it before to a crime committed before that date?

Well, I agree that the Court, as the Court said in Carpentino,

should look to the effective data of the statute.

And one of the other differences between this case and Samson

is that it is a different statute that the Court is looking at.

And this statute in this case was effective immediately.

And the Carpentino Court said that's an important or a significant indicator

of legislative intent about whether the statute applies prospectively only

or retrospectively.

And to the extent that there's any ambiguity,

the Court can also look to legislative history.

Sorry.

Did the State make a deal about the fact that the defendant

absconded and during the period of his absence,

that's when the statute changed that if he had been at trial as originally

scheduled, there'd be no question?

No.

And that's not what the record reflects.

I'm sorry to correct you.

But the trial happened without delay.

His first sentencing schedule...

Oh, the sentencing.

It was the sentencing.

The first sentencing hearing was scheduled.

The statute became effective in between his conviction

and the first sentencing hearing.

Right.

I did understand that.

I misspoke.

And the sentencing hearing was continued for some reason.

And the second sentencing hearing, that is when he failed to appear.

And so the Mr. Dodge...

That wasn't used to argue this issue.

Yes.

Mr. Dodge made clear he wouldn't have been making that argument.

Had the statute gone into effect during the period of time that he was

not reachable in the jurisdiction.

Are there any other questions?

Thank you.

Thank you.

Council?

It's all right.

I had a broken ankle all winter.

I sympathize.

You should pull the microphones out.

Could you just clarify a factual issue?

Was it the State's position that he actually manufactured this check

as opposed to somehow winding up with a check of a company

that used to be in operation and is no longer in operation?

They actually, the State actually took the position

that this document itself was created by the defendant.

Well, I just want to be clear about not just signing it

as the person authorized by the company,

but actually creating this document as a check,

say, from a blank piece of paper.

He put it together with all the bells and whistles of a check.

What was there proof that he did that?

How did you prove that he manufactured the piece of paper?

But how did he do the tracking numbers and the routing numbers

and the account numbers sufficiently accurately that the Credit Union

inside Walmart accepted it as a genuine document?

Well, wait a minute.

I understood that Ellison construction was no longer in business.

Well, wait a minute.

I get it from the briefs that the Ohio Secretary of State's office

wherever was queried and they said, we have no Ellison construction

register.

Well, was there evidence that it used to be registered and is no longer

or at no time was that company ever registered?

I misunderstood what was said in the briefs then.

But wait a minute.

The current registration.

Apparently there was no evidence of a current registration.

But there are companies that go in and out of business all the time.

And maybe there was, I have no idea.

Maybe there was an Ellison construction that went out of business ten years ago

and there were these blank checks floating around.

By those circumstances, what if he was, he got this check from someone

who fraudulently produced this check.

He was a real expert.

He's got the machinery in the basement and he can make checks look beautiful.

And he says to our defendants, I'll give you this check for 25 bucks.

Do with it as you wish.

I'm sorry, did you say that the bank account, the account numbers,

the bank's clearing number and the account number actually did exist?

It did not currently exist.

This is, you know, I'm really struggling with this because when I read the briefs,

I tried to pay particular note that the evidence was there was no current registration

for Ellison construction.

But I didn't see any evidence that said and never was there

since the beginning of time in Ellison construction.

Well, I appreciate that, but it's pretty skimpy.

You say you cobble all this together and you have proof beyond a reasonable doubt

that this defendant not only signed perhaps a fraudulent check,

that is signed it on the front of the check authorizing it,

but he manufactured the document.

That's a huge leap, it seems to me, based on this evidence.

All of that may have supported passing, passing a bad check,

but issuing is a different situation.

I grant you, it's bizarro, it is.

I give it to you.

In order to prove issuing the check, do you have to prove that you manufactured the check?

Are you taking that burden on?

Is that one that the State undertook and had to satisfy the burden here

that the piece of paper was manufactured by the defendant?

Drafting it isn't signing it.

Drafting is printing it.

But don't people do that all?

I mean that's not an uncommon occurrence to post data check.

But you're assuming an established business sent the check.

Well, what if it was another fraudster

who made his living selling bad checks

or providing them for whatever reason?

I'm not so concerned about the lack of evidence that there was no existing company,

but isn't it just as reasonable to assume that maybe someone, another party,

created a bad check and either gave it to the defendant, sold it to the defendant,

whatever, and the defendant passed it.

He may have manufactured that whole story.

I mean, if he obtained this check from a bad guy, he's got to come up with a story.

So everything you say points to his guilt

and his knowledge that he's passing a bad check as opposed to issuing a bad check.

Right?

I mean, all of the evidence you've marshaled could very well support passing a bad check.

But query, does it establish beyond a reasonable doubt issuing it?

You can't see it, but your yellow light is on.

What was the evidence?

You said that when he was first interacted with the police,

there was some discussion on his part about knowledge of the bad check statute.

And was that something in front of the jury that was presented to the jury?

Can you just elaborate on it a little bit?

What exactly was that evidence?

That was the extent of it.

He quoted the bad check statute.

No, no evidence, and there was each of them ordered.

No sawdust.

No sawdust.

Thank you.

Ms. Hausman, do you need your time?

When the state says that the check was false or the account was invalid,

that is an inference because the record in the case is just that the check was returned unpaid.

No reason for why the check was returned unpaid was apparent on the record.

And when the state says that Mr. Dodge's story was not credible,

the state, the record also does not indicate that the state proved any particular or single aspect of Mr. Dodge's story to be false.

And finally, Mr. Dodge was arrested seven and a half for about seven and a half months after he passed the check.

He was not expecting to be arrested.

He was arrested on the road, so he didn't have the phone number there,

and he was arrested and charged and received an attorney shortly thereafter.

And so the state can draw no inference of guilt from his failure to provide evidence to the state after that point.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

The court is in recess.
