This is case 2015, 0537, Terry and Bartlett versus the Commerce Insurance Company at all.

Let me just say for the record that although Justice Hicks is disqualified from this case,

Chief Justice Delanus will be participating in deciding the case.

Thank you, Your Honor.

May it please the court.

My name is Kevin Trueland, and I represent the Commerce Insurance Company.

This is the second occasion that this case has been up on appeal, and

I would invite questions at any time.

Okay, so here's my first question.

Why shouldn't we completely just say your first,

the issue about whether the stacking,

you now say stacking is the first question of the case.

You now say stacking is not allowed at all under the commerce auto policy.

You didn't make that argument on the first appeal, and it strikes me that if you had made that argument on the first appeal,

the outcome of the first appeal might have been very different.

Because frankly, I tend to think on the merits, you may have a pretty good argument, but you didn't raise it on the first appeal.

You didn't raise it with the trial court on remand, and now you raise it now.

Why shouldn't we say, listen, wait, a day late and a dollar short?

Well, Your Honor, number one, at the time of the first appeal,

I believe the first appeal was argued on February 19th of 2015,

and that was at about the time that one of the two cases from the Superior Court had come out.

There was one that came out in February of 2015, and

the second case came out in April of 2015.

So at the time that the initial case was on appeal,

we did not have the benefit of the Nixon and Goban cases, which are two

Superior Court cases that have addressed the anti-stacking language.

Right, but you had the, this was your policy.

You had the language of the policy, and I mean,

Canada, without getting into any detail about what happened, I mean, I can remember before this case was decided,

specifically asking, not, I mean, specifically asking as we were going through the drafting process of the first decision.

What about, why, you know, what about this issue about whether or

not there's no stacking at all loud, and the response was from, you know, as we were going,

well, that was never, nope, they never raised that issue.

We're not going to decide something that's not raised.

And that was an issue that, again, these two cases came out at

the time that I filed a renewed motion for summary judgment in the Superior Court.

I was unaware of these, these are not reported or decisions that were available by research,

but these were opinions that were relied upon by Bartlett in Bartlett's memorandum of law.

And in fact, on remand Bartlett argued in her memorandum of law

that the anti-stacking language of the commerce auto policy was unambiguous based upon the Gobin and the Nixon cases.

And it was Bartlett who took the position after my initial motion for

summary judgment was filed that the commerce auto policy does not apply at all.

And the reason-

All right, so it's clear that the trial court decided this case based

not on either of your positions before the trial court on remand.

Well, Your Honor, the-

So, assuming, just assuming that to be true, then was there a motion for reconsideration?

There was, there was not a motion for reconsideration, Your Honor.

There was, there was an argument raised by Bartlett that the anti-stacking

provision of the commerce auto policy eliminated that policy from coverage.

And I, my-

Yeah, I am very confused about that because the order, Judge Garfunkel's order said,

that the petitioner argues that commerce has no UM coverage under the auto policy.

That's correct, and-

So that's what they told, the petitioner told the trial court.

Yes, the petitioner's memorandum is in the record.

And the petitioner essentially reversed her position from,

from day one in this case, the petitioner took the position that the petitioner was

entitled to stack all coverages under the policy.

Once the case came up and there was the, the Bartlett one was decided by this court,

there was the foremost policy was the commerce,

the ruling was the commerce would receive a credit for the, for the 250 and

coverage from the foremost policy as primary coverage.

What was in dispute was the, the coverage under the progressive policy,

which is secondary insurance, and, and whether commerce would be entitled to a credit there.

In order to address that issue, Bartlett came in and took the position that based on

Gobern and based on Nixon, the anti-stacking language eliminated

not only the commerce policy, but eliminated the progressive policy,

the secondary insurance from the progressive policy.

And that's your position now.

That, that, and-

And you now have their position.

Well, Your Honor, that, but that was also an alternative argument that I raised in my objection to commerce's memorandum.

I-

Now you're saying, you, you say now, if I understand correctly, that the, that the,

that the progressive policy still is in play to the extent that you say before the U.M.,

the, before the umbrella coverage comes into play.

Yes.

The, the plaintiff has to have the $500,000 of the plaintiff's damages have to be absorbed by the plaintiff.

So, but Bartlett came in and argued that, that the anti-stacking language controlled the, the also the progressive policy.

And that was, and when I came back with my objection, that was something I took issue with.

I said, if, if the plaintiff Bartlett's position is accepted that the anti-stacking language knocks out,

well, first of all, I, I took the position that the Bartlett was precluded from making that argument.

I didn't say it was incorrect.

I said, procedurally, Bartlett was precluded from making the argument.

But I argued in the alternative, if Bartlett is able to make that argument and

commerce, the commerce auto policy anti-stacking provision knocks out the commerce auto policy,

then I disagreed with the plaintiff's subsequent or additional argument that it would affect coverage under the progressive policy.

Because as the, as the Superior Court observed in its, in its.

One policy cannot control.

And I had made that argument as an alternative argument earlier that the progressive policy was either 250 or 125.

And the reason for the 250 was that the anti-stacking language can only control coverage under the commerce auto policy.

It doesn't control the progressive policy.

And I just ask whether my understanding is accurate from your standpoint.

You are treating all three policies together.

That is, foremost, progressive and commerce to achieve the result you want to get to.

The trial court pulled out foremost and said there,

foremost is the primary policy.

And then looked at progressive and commerce together as excess coverage.

Yes.

You disagree with the trial courts doing that.

Yes, Your Honor.

I'm, I'm clear on what happened.

I, I, I disagree and, and I, and I believe the, the reason for the trial court.

I think once the, the anti-stacking provision knocks out the, the commerce policy,

that that is the end of the analysis with, with respect to the commerce policy.

The, the Superior Court disagreed with, with Bartlett's argument that the, the commerce auto policy was completely out.

And then backdoored the, the policy back into the equation by coming up with

a formula in which the commerce policy would now.

Stood on the same footing as progressive.

As progressive.

And it brought the policy, the, the court's opinion brought the, the progressive policy, the commerce auto policy back into the picture.

My-

Why was that error?

Help me understand that.

Well that, that was error, Your Honor, because what the, the court makes, makes a statement that, that the anti-stacking

provision in the policy, in the commerce auto policy is not something that affects coverage,

that it affects damages.

And the, and the court got back into the idea that, that the, that this is not a coverage provision,

that it's a damages provision and that there are no damages of it that can be recoverable.

Right, if we, in other words, it sounds to me, and it sounds like neither side thinks that the trial court got that part right, if I understand correct.

And it would seem to me that if we, that what, if you accepted the trial court's theory about how it construed the policy,

it would essentially reverse, it's at odds with what we said in the first part of the review.

Exactly.

Because it would say, well, even though, even though these policies are forfeited because no damages could be recovered under them now there.

That's, that's exactly my point, Your Honor, that, that essentially when the, when the, the trial court went back and, and

made that analysis and, and brought the, the commerce auto policy back in,

it was essentially at odds with what the court had decided in Bartlett one.

And that, and, and, and again, the anti-stacking language,

once that policy is knocked out from, from the, the scenario,

it becomes, that's the end of the analysis with respect to the commerce auto policy.

So I, I disagree with, with that portion of the Superior Court.

Let me ask you this question, what the, the turning to the umbrella policy.

I mean, I, I guess, you know, you're, at least to me,

your opponent's argument seems to have a fair amount of, of merit to it.

I mean, you, you, you define, I'm sorry,

you don't define retained limit in the uninsured motorist section of the policy.

There's a definition in the liability section that talks about minimum retained limit.

And you, and by putting them both in quotes, you seem to say that they're terms of art.

It would seem to me that if I were a policy holder reading the policy with more than casually,

I would think, you know, retained, it's a reasonable construction.

I would think retained limit means the amount of my underlying insurance.

Again, well, number one, before I address that language,

I would point out that there is additional language in the excess UIM endorsement.

The other insurance clause of, of the excess UIM endorsement,

where the court does not even need to get into the, the difference between minimum retained limit and retained limit.

The policy states any insurance we provide under this endorsement with respect to a vehicle you do not own

will be excess to the total limits of any underlying insurance, and that's in quotes, so that's a defined term.

Or any other primary insurance that applies.

So relying on that language, and I disagree that the, that I think reading retained limits and

minimum retained limits, that reading the policy as a whole, that the intent here

is to, is to provide excess coverage in excess of all other policies.

I'm sorry, and that other, the language that you just read about other insurance, that's in the UIM, the uninsured motorist section of the umbrella policy.

And that stands on its own and, and primary, it's excess over any other primary insurance that applies.

And, and I've, I've cited a lot of cases from other jurisdictions that talk about an excess policy being a true excess policy.

And you look at the, that you, an important distinction that you have to make is a distinction between

a primary policy that has secondary language,

such as the foremost policy or the, the commerce policy.

That those are primary policies that are excess in some circumstances.

But these cases talk about the distinction in a true excess policy,

that these policies are meant to be excess over all other insurance all the time.

And, and that when it refers to other primary insurance with respect to the,

the excess UIM endorsement, other insurance clause,

those other policies are primary insurance.

They are primary policies with an excess provision in them that sometimes makes them excess,

such as we're, in this case, where Bartlett was in a non-owned vehicle.

But, but those policies are distinct.

So, so in essence, the, the, that language renders the,

the foremost policy and the progressive policy, secondary to the, to the true excess policy.

Let me ask you one other question. I know you're, if, let's just, so we,

the dispute, it strikes me between, with regard to the umbrella policy between you and your opponent is.

He says $250,000 and then the umbrella, then the umbrella policy kicks in.

You say $500,000 and then the umbrella policy kicks in.

Yes.

Question that I, I want to make sure.

Let, let's assume we agree with you for a minute, that it's $500,000.

Does the, does the umbrella policy then provide

a million dollars of additional coverage so that the total damages could be up to a million five?

With the $500,000, you know, not, not covered.

Or do you say that the million is the cap?

No, no, it would be the, the first, it would, the coverage would be the.

In other words, you, in other words, you provide a million dollars of coverage

above whatever the, whatever other coverage is provided.

Not, not only, you don't, not only up to a million dollars.

That's correct.

Okay.

So it would be foremost followed by progressive, followed by the one million dollars under the excess UM policy.

I would point out one of the other considerations, they, they, the cases, I could, I could cite or

refer to the names of some of the cases, the Lamar's case talks about true excess policies.

The Monroe case talks about true excess policies and

also the National Farmers Union.

But those cases talk about it being an almost universal rule that

true excess policies are excess over other policies, underlying policies.

I also read a case saying that the, the rule of mutual repugnancy does not apply when you're comparing

a true excess policy to, to underlying policies.

So, so the true excess policy is, thank you.

You can finish your sentence, but I just wanted to let you know.

Okay, thank you, Your Honor.

So in closing, I would, I would suggest that, that, that the, the issue of, of the anti-stacking language was

addressed at the superior court level in, in my objection.

And for all the reasons stated, I would ask that the court enter judgment declaring that,

that there's $500,000 before the excess UIM coverage applies.

Thank you.

At police court, my name is Gordon Renborg.

I appear here on behalf of Tarian Bartlett, the plaintiff below, and the appellee here, and I welcome your questions at any time.

The bottom line, can I just follow up on what your opponent just said?

His argument is 500,000 of damages needs to be exhausted before the excess applies.

Your position is the court was correct in saying it is 250.

Well, our position is that the court was correct when it found that the triggering point for

the umbrella policy is $250,000.

And we believe that's the only issue before this court, and

the only issue that this court need to decide.

Because the umbrella policy provides by its terms, and

when you're looking at the umbrella policy and interpreting a policy,

it's important to interpret the policy according to the language of the policy,

as this court recently said in the Cogswell Farm case.

You don't look to the purpose of the policy, you look to the language in the policy.

And the language in the umbrella policy says that commerce will pay

those damages which it's insured is legally entitled to recover from an uninsured motorist

which are in excess of the retained limit.

And the term retained limit is in quotation marks.

That tells the reader that it's a specifically defined term that can be found somewhere in the policy.

But if the reader looks at the policy, she, in this case, will not find-

What if the policy, an aberration, what are other policies in the industry?

How do they read?

Are they consistent with this file?

I'm just curious.

Where is this?

I don't believe so.

They would define the term retained limit or say, and I don't have another policy here to specifically,

I don't want to make a representation that I've looked at a whole lot of other policies in this regard.

However, if commerce wanted the term retained limit to be equivalent to the term minimum retained limit,

which is also in quotations, it could easily have said so.

Or it could have simply used one term instead of the two terms.

And it is presumed when people are drafting insurance policies that words have meanings and

words have, they intend the words to mean what they say, and words are not mere superfluous.

I tend to think you have a very good argument on that point, Mr. Rainborder.

But I guess what do you say about this other insurance provision of the umbrella uninsured motorist?

Well, I say the same thing the trial judge said.

The trial judge said that if you're trying to figure out what the term retained limit means,

you look to the policy, and you don't look to the other insurance clause where it talks

about underlying insurance, the term underlying insurance and retained limits simply don't

mean the same thing.

They're not the same words, and they shouldn't mean the same thing.

And it's a drafting error, perhaps, on the part of-

So in other words, are you saying that you can't read both the retained limit language

and the other insurance language consistently, in other words, that they are at odds with

each other and they can't be reconciled in some reasonable way?

Well, they are at odds with each other.

The term retained limit is the triggering point.

That's clear from the policy.

Notice that the retained limit cannot mean underlying limit.

Those are different terms.

And it's not reasonable, as the trial judge said, for the insured to look to the other

insurance clause to figure out what the retained limit is.

The retained limit is $250,000, which is also consistent with the expectations of the

parties.

The deductible section-

Well, it doesn't- I mean, when you say retained limit isn't defined, so when

you say it means $250,000, you're sort of asking us to infer, well, that's what it must

mean.

Well, I'm asking you to infer that's what it must mean, because if you look to the deductible

section of the policy, it requires the insured to maintain the coverage, the primary coverage

that's required in Schedule A, which is $250,000.

That's what the parties bargained for in this case.

My client bargained for an insurance policy that would provide her with coverage if she

sustained damages caused by an uninsured motorist in excess of $250,000.

She was required to maintain $250,000, according to Schedule A. She did that, and that's exactly

what commerce bargained for.

They promised to pay damages if the damages were in excess of $250,000.

So long as my client complied with Schedule A and maintained $250,000 of primary coverage.

What she did-

You argue in your brief that assuming we agree with you on the second remanded issue that we've

just been talking about under the umbrella.

Triggering point.

Yes.

The triggering point.

We don't have to answer the first issue that we sent back.

That's correct.

You said we don't have to address it because the umbrella takes care of it.

That's right.

Is that because you think the trial court in your heart of hearts made a mistake on the

first issue?

No.

I think the trial court ruled correctly on the first issue.

But I think since the umbrella drops down to $250,000, it's an irrelevant issue because

the damages do not exceed, we stipulate while the damages are significant, they do not

exceed $1,250,000.

We all agree that there's a gap of $250,000 caused by the forfeiture of the coverage

contained in the foremost policy.

That's gone.

The umbrella policy, we say, drops down to $250,000, so it doesn't matter what happens

to the commerce auto policy.

So if we rule your favor, you say we simply, you're agreeable to us not addressing the

first issue?

Oh, I don't think you should address the first issue because it's not properly

before this court.

It was never argued below by either side.

Our position...

Well, that's not what Mr. Truland says.

He says he did argue it, didn't, I mean, he just said that to us.

Well, our position was not that progressive has to, that there's a gap of $250,000 from

the foremost policy, and then the progressive has to pay, the progressive policy comes

into play at $250,000 above that.

Our position was that there's simply no stacking at all of those three primary policies.

Is that your position right now?

No.

There's no stacking?

No.

We did not appeal the Superior Court's decision regarding commerce's obligations under its

auto policy.

That's fine.

This court...

I mean, is there any...

Is there any...

But I mean, I guess it struck me that the Superior Court's construction of the

section A1 of the other insurance clause in the commerce auto policy, its construction

of what that means seemed to be, I mean, I have great respect for Justice Garfunkel,

but it seemed to be a little bit sort of out there, and I'm not quite sure that it

doesn't have the effect of, that if we accepted that, it wouldn't have the effect

of overruling what we said in Bartlett-Mont.

Well, I don't think so.

That other insurance clause has been reviewed by a number of courts and other jurisdictions.

It's been reviewed by two Superior Court judges in this state, and Gobin and Nixon

Case, but it has never been reviewed in the context of a case where previously available

coverage has been forfeited for some reason or other.

A1 in the commerce auto policies other insurance clause doesn't say you can't

stack or combine or add the coverages that are or might be available under policies.

It simply says you cannot recover damages in excess of the amount of coverage,

the amount of damages in the policy with the highest limits.

In this case, no damages can be recovered from either the foremost policy or the progressive policy.

The only damages that can be recovered are those under the commerce auto policies.

Yeah, but I guess what I'm wondering if it's construed in the way that the trial judge construed it.

I mean, it sort of seems like it sort of says, well, if our policy limits recovery to $250,000,

it limits recovery to $250,000.

It's kind of superfluous, isn't it, in that circumstance?

Because if damages, I mean, of course it's true that if damages can't be recovered under any other policy,

the limit of this policy is $250,000, but that's true, you know, whether you said that or not.

Well, I suppose, and that's a good argument we probably should have had at the Superior Court level.

It was never raised, it was never argued, it was never briefed, and it should not now,

nor was the Motion for Reconsideration filed to clarify that issue.

And it's not something I would submit that this court should undertake in the first instance

without proper briefing and what have you.

In fact, the whole idea that the other insurance provision in the commerce auto policy is clear

and unambiguous and prohibit stacking is not a settled issue.

Two New Hampshire Superior Courts have said so.

There's other courts, the H Circuit Federal Court of Appeals and the Missouri Supreme Court both say

that it's ambiguous in the limited situation, as is the case here, where the insured is occupying

a non-owned vehicle.

And you say for those reasons we shouldn't address that issue because our case, this

case will be resolved if we find in your favor under the umbrella policy.

If you find in my favor or my client's favor on the umbrella policy and find that

it triggers at $250,000, the other issue becomes irrelevant.

There's a gap of $250,000 and damages above that are paid by the commerce under the commerce policy

and that's the end of the case.

I guess my case is submitted.

All right, thank you.

We're adjourned.
