This is case 2015-0270, Wayne Peralt versus town of Gostown et al.

Council.

Thank you. May it please the Court. I'm Roy Tillsley from the Bernstein-Schur law firm on behalf of the petitioner and the appellant, Wayne Peralt.

I would like to reserve two minutes for a rebuttal, and I've notified the clerk prior to this.

I'm also happy to waive the non-questioning period and take questions from the Court at any time.

This is an administrative appeal of a 2011 decision of the town of Gostown's zoning code enforcement officer,

allowing an expansion of a driveway owned by the intervenors, the Gordon's.

The Gordon's live across the street from my client in 2010 when an initial permit was granted.

Their property consisted of two lots, a northern lot, which did not have any improvements on it.

A southern lot which contained a single family home.

In 2010 they received a permit for a driveway on the northern lot, and that is pursuant to a decision date of October 19, 2010, at page 82 of the appendix.

Which basically-

And so, and that was a non-conforming driveway because it was on a lot that was not merged with the southern lot.

Exactly. So that decision was you have it right to a driveway as a matter of right, and it granted a driveway permit that's at the appendix at pages 78 and 79.

That driveway permit allowed a maximum driveway width of 22 feet, including 5 feet, 5 foot flares.

In other words, you've got 22 feet where the driveway intersects the road, and it flares down 5 feet in each side to a 12 foot driveway.

That's the 2010 driveway. The town says you can have it as a matter of right because you're a separate lot of record.

The town says, and this is at pages 22 and 23 of their brief, that what happens next is the Gordon's constructed driveway, and they begin using the northern driveway to benefit the house on the southern lot.

And at that point for zoning purposes, the lots have been merged.

And now you have a situation-

Now we're disputing what the Code Enforcement Officer Rose made findings with regard to all of that. That's what's in dispute.

Correct. In 2011, Code Enforcement Officer Rose allows the driveway to be expanded from the 22 flaring down to 12 to 28 feet wide, and he makes a determination based on this merger doctrine that there's a non-conforming use.

The merged two lots only have enough frontage for one driveway.

There's two driveways. There's a southern driveway and a northern driveway, so when the lots merge, there's a non-conformity created.

The Code Enforcement Officer says in 2011 that the property owner can pick one of the two driveways, make it the conforming driveway, and then the second driveway becomes the non-conforming driveway,

and therefore he allows the Gordon's in 2011 to expand from the 22 flaring to 12 to 28.

Our position in the trial court, which we really didn't get to raise because of the preclusion issues, is that when you have a non-conforming use that consists of too many of something, an expansion of either of those things is an unlawful expansion of a pre-existing one.

Well, before we get to the merits, don't we have the fundamental issue of the application of the Fisher Doctrine?

Sure.

And your position is that Fisher shouldn't be extended under these circumstances?

Correct.

And why not?

Fisher deals with applications to a zoning board of adjustment for some type of a permit. So if I apply for a variance for an in-law apartment and I get denied,

I can't come back with the very same application in six months and try it again because the board composition has changed or because I'm hoping to get lucky or what have you.

I can't keep coming back with the same request. If I request my in-law and I don't get it, there needs to be some type of material change before I can come back.

Similarly, I had a special exception. I'm asking for a permit. I can't keep coming back every few months hoping I'll catch the board on a bad night.

This is different. This is a statutory appeal under RSA 674331A. My client has a right to appeal the decision of the Code Enforcement Officer if my client has standing.

The parole have never asked for any permits here. Decisions have been issued by the town and my client has an absolute right to appeal them.

Tell us why that's not a distinction without a difference.

I don't think it's that way at all because if the town is making new decisions and in this case you've got the 2011 decision where the Code Enforcement Officer says,

here's the seven new issues that I've just decided, seven of them. One of them being this non-conformity issue.

But I think the trial court felt that one of them clearly had been decided and an appeal on that issue had not been taken.

The 2010 permit was issued, 22 feet flaring to 12. I think at this stage of the proceedings based on what the trial court has said and the court's rulings,

I'm not appealing that the 2010 permit doesn't stand. It stands. That's what I think the trial court said.

I think what the trial court misconstrued was saying that because the Northern lot was granted a permit because it was conforming at one point,

therefore it could have a driveway that conforms to the maximum allowed by town ordinances as a matter of right.

And what the court didn't address was the change from 2010 to 2011.

So the bottom line here is would your clients be comfortable with the first ruling as to the width of the driveway?

Or are they complaining about the existence of the driveway at all?

I think as we stand here today, comfortable might be the wrong word. I don't think they like the 12 foot driveway,

but as we stand here today, we're not seeking to reverse the 2010 order.

I think as the case has moved along.

So you want, you acknowledge that the 22 foot finding by the first code enforcement officer, you don't contest that.

I would rephrase it a bit. The 22 foot finding, which is the flaring down to 12, which is the permit at page 78 of the appendix.

Right.

I'm not contesting that.

But you want, so you want the 28 to come back to being 22.

22 down to 12. Correct.

Can I just ask that the original 2010 permit, did it specifically say what you're saying?

That is that it's got to be, it can be no more than 22 feet at the curb cut.

And then it is decreased to 12. Did it say those words?

I'll tell you specifically what it said.

And it says at page 78, max driveway width equals 22 feet include INCL period five foot flares.

And in the context of what this type of a driveway, 22 feet including.

So there wouldn't be any dispute over what that means.

Correct.

And in fact, in fact, what interestingly enough, the typewritten document that they have typically says 22 feet with five foot flares, which would be a little vaguer.

In this case, they crossed out with and put the INCL period.

So the 22 feet includes the five foot flare.

Can I just, the flare is at the curb?

Correct.

That's where you would flare and then you flare down to, you know, you flare five feet in each direction.

But I mean, isn't at least one interpretation of that language that if you're going to have a flare, it can't be any more than 22 feet, but you don't have to narrow it above the flare.

In other words, the rest of the driveway could be 22 feet wide also.

I think if it said, again, the typewritten language, which is typically there, which says 22 feet with five foot flares.

I would agree with your first interpretation.

You get 22 feet and then you can add the five foot flares.

Here it says includes.

No, no, no.

But in other words, what I'm saying is, can't you have the flares that extend to 22 feet and then have it, in other words, and then have it be 22 feet all the way up the driveway?

No, I think the five foot flares are for the purposes of the roadway, and the flares down.

In other words, they're not flares.

But is this an issue in dispute?

We'll check with the other side when their turn comes, but I didn't get that as being a real issue.

I'm not sure we got there because of the preclusion ruling.

I'm not sure that the trial court ever really got to determining whether I'm arguing 28 feet versus 22 feet or 28 feet versus 22 flaring to 12.

Then why is the trial court wrong about the preclusion issues?

The trial court's wrong because A, Fisher doesn't apply to our mandatory right to appeal under 674331B.

Well, we've never said that, right?

What's that?

We haven't ever said that.

You've never said that.

I mean, you've never said that, but if you look at Fisher, you look at what it's designed to prevent.

It's designed to prevent subsequent repetitive applications.

It's designed to prevent people like me going to the ZBA and hoping I get lucky the night of the snowstorm and the guidance against my project doesn't show up.

Those are the kinds of things that Fisher is designed to prevent.

Well, help us understand the context of the preclusion argument here.

You're telling us now that you can live with the first ruling.

The trial court said you were precluded from appealing the second ruling based on the substance of the first ruling from the Code Enforcement Office.

Right.

And the difference is, and even if Fisher applied it.

You're not asking to appeal the first ruling.

The first one.

Right.

So the issue is, are you precluded from appealing Rose's findings as a result of what was said by the prior Code Enforcement Officer?

I'm confused about how the finality issue gets framed.

I shouldn't be precluded.

And Rose's finding.

You shouldn't be precluded from what?

Appealing Rose's finding.

The second one.

Second finding.

And even if Fisher applies, I can bring a subsequent application if there's a material change.

Same thing with collateral stop.

The material change here is the 2001 permit is, Northern Law is a separate law of record.

You can have a driveway as a matter of right.

In 2011, there's one law.

There's two driveways.

Driveways are now nonconforming.

Any expansion of a nonconforming use by the Code Enforcement Officer without a variance is unlawful.

But I guess the thing I don't understand is, isn't the 2010, if that was a nonconforming use in 2010?

It wasn't.

Right?

You're saying it wasn't a nonconforming.

The second position, and it's in their brief, 2223, is the 2010 permit was granted because the Northern Law is a separate law of record.

It's entitled to a driveway as a matter of right.

Right, but it's still nonconforming.

They're entitled because it was a pre-existing use.

It's there entitled to a separate driveway, but it's still nonconforming.

There's no nonconformity at that point in the town's view because it's a separate law.

The nonconformity is when the law's emerged.

Now, instead of having two laws and two driveways, we have one law and two driveways.

That creates the nonconformity.

And that's the issue I didn't get to raise with the trial court.

So the substantial change is the change from whether the Northern driveway exists as a matter of right to whether it can be expanded even further now that it is part of a nonconforming use.

That's the change.

So even under Fisher, we should have been entitled to argue that in the trial court.

Joe said I'm not changing anything that the prior code enforcement officer said, but he acknowledged you could take an appeal from that.

He specifically listed the seven things that we could appeal, which is what we're trying to appeal.

And our issue is that the court did not reach and the ZBA did not reach because it found preclusion.

Thank you.

Thank you.

May it please the court.

My name is William Drescher.

I'm from Milford and I represent the town of Govstown.

And I'm a little bit confused because I just heard a different case for the first time that we've heard.

And we've been in superior court twice on this matter.

Almost made it up here once.

And back down for a remand before the zoning board.

There's several misconceptions, I think, in the argument made by my brother council in the facts.

And if the court would permit me just for a moment, let me suggest to you that this is what we understand the facts of this matter are.

In 2010, the Gordon's bought this property.

The town had carried it on their tax maps as one big piece of land.

Because of that, it was one lot that had 180 feet of frontage.

In Govstown, the zoning ordinance said if you have less than 250 feet of frontage on a single lot, you can only have one driveway.

There was a driveway on the south and there was this very little driveway on the north.

When Gordon's came to own the property, the first thing they did, albeit without a permit, was they started to fix that driveway.

They wanted to expand it a little bit.

They wanted to forget about the southern one and start using the northern one.

Derek Horn, who, by the way, is here today, issued an order, stop.

You don't have a permit for that and you need a permit.

And what's more, you can't have two driveways.

And he, of course, he issued that because of the complaint by the plaintiff.

And he said, this is one lot.

These lots, if there ever were two lots, have been merged.

You've treated them as one or we have, so somebody in the past must emerge them.

And therefore, in order to get the second driveway improved, you have to get a special kind of permission.

Not a variance, as they thought, as even the lawyer for it, then lawyer for the plaintiff thought,

but a conditional use permit because Goffstown allows the expansion of driveways,

nonconforming or otherwise, with a conditional use permit from the planning board.

And they also allow a second driveway where you can prove that you're not going to be a hazard and various other things.

So the Gordon's armed with the information that they had from their purchase met with Mr. Horn

after he issued the first opinion, which is part of the record in this case.

And that's at page 364 of the plaintiff's appendix.

He investigates this and comes up with the conclusion these are two lots.

They've never been merged.

The law now even statutorily protects the right of a property owner to maintain the integrity of two parcels of property when they're not being used as one.

Unlike the Robillard case in Hudson, this house was entirely on the southern lot.

And the driveway that was being fixed was entirely on the northern lot.

Every lot is entitled to a driveway and any lot can expand a driveway,

but there are rules about what you can do to expand them and they were mentioned here.

The rules, which are both in the record and in our appendix, talk about 22 feet and the flare and 28 beyond.

Do you agree with your opponent's description of what Mr. Horn's ruling was essentially 22 feet, including the flares?

I do not agree with what he said and I'll explain that, Your Honor.

The ruling was that at the curb where the curb meets the traveled portion of the right of way,

you have to have no more than 22 feet and that has to include, I think you're allowed to have a flare,

but the driveway width can't be more than 22 feet.

Irrespective of whether the flare is within the 22 or outside of it, that was what the rule was

and that rule only applied from the paved area to the end of the town right of way.

It was a development regulation put out by the DPW pursuant to the statutory authority that both the DPW

and planning boards have to govern driveways and what they did was they took the position that they'll issue a permit.

The regulation will apply only between those two points.

Beyond that, you're limited to 28 feet because of a zoning ordinance.

Now, the interesting part, and we've mentioned this in our brief, is that that zoning ordinance said you couldn't make it wider than 28 feet on the private part of the property,

but it was changed before the trial to apply only to a different district than this particular district.

So by the time we actually had the trial in this matter, there was no regulation as to what you expanded it to on your own property.

So you would say they could have paved the whole thing.

That's right. They could have. Now, they didn't. They did the 28 feet they originally intended to.

On their property, they did the 28 feet.

But where it connected to the towns right of way, it was still 28 feet?

I believe they started that and they were told to stop.

And they eventually brought it within compliance, if I'm not mistaken, within the 22 foot stretch for that portion that was in the town.

Now, this never came up. This was not an issue at the trial court, either time that we were there.

What actually went down in this matter was that the principal argument and that they hired an attorney for to challenge Mr. Horn's interpretation was his interpretation that this lot under our zoning was not nonconforming,

or rather the driveway was not. He could expand it.

That was the decision he made. Right wrong or indifferent, that's what went to the zoning board in the first case, ZBA 1.

And that was never appealed.

Pardon me?

That was never appealed.

That's correct.

But they actually, he was represented by council.

Okay.

Now we're, now we move forward to Mr. Rose's decision.

And he makes certain rulings and says, and by the way, these are appealable.

Sure.

But if you read, excuse me.

I'm just trying to sort out what the issue is because now we've been told that legally the petitioners are not challenging the first ruling by Mr. Horn.

So I'm sitting here asking myself, so where does the finality doctrine fit?

Exactly. I'm having the same problem here, because I came here prepared to argue the finality doctrine for this reason.

If you look at the letters, there's actually two letters that Mr. Rose wrote in the second appeal.

And in both of them, he said, he had a litany of complaints from Mr. Baral.

And those complaints, if you look at them, they were all spelled out in the old paperwork.

And most of them have gone away.

The permit expired. You had no right to continue to do this.

Because keep in mind, when this was originally constructed, it was under a permit that was issued in Mr. Horn's at that time.

But it delayed, and it got delayed, and this is all part of the record, because there was an improvement on the road.

And the DPW asked the Gordon's to lay off on their driveway until they got the road paid so that it would be easier to connect.

Do you agree or disagree with the proposition that Mr. Rose's findings are appealable?

Sure.

They're live issues.

Absolutely. But he didn't make a finding on the zoning non-conforming issue.

He specifically referred back to Mr. Horn and said that that is not appealable, in spite of that.

And now we're being told they're not appealing that.

Well, there's nothing more to be doing here.

And I'd like to go home.

But the truth is they were appealing it until I hadn't heard otherwise until a few minutes ago.

As far as I'm concerned, that is really the crux and only issue that is open in this matter.

So without the finality, let's just assume their finality doctrine is not in play.

Is there anything else that is in play at this point?

No.

The driveway's constructed.

It's built according to the specs that the town has in place at the present time.

There's no violation in this section between the...

No, but I know.

But he was told by Rose he could appeal...

They could appeal Rose's findings because his made it wider, right?

Wider than the 22 feet.

He makes it 28 feet.

Correct.

Except that the 28 feet was back of the...

And that issue was addressed also.

It's not true that it wasn't raised in front of Judge Brown.

He addressed it.

And he pointed out that the regulation in place, the only regulation that locked anybody into 22 feet,

was the DPW regulation that only by statute applies to this little piece of land

between the paved right of way and the end of the public right of way.

Beyond that, it was anybody's game.

I mean, it was 28 feet by an ordinance that was in place at one point.

So your view would be, if I'm understanding you correctly, that there's no live issue left?

No live issue left if they've conceded that we're entitled to have...

Well, but isn't one of the...

I mean, isn't one way to look at this is that the original decision did not say

that you could have a driveway of 28 feet, right?

There's no reference to 28 feet in that original decision, right?

I think that's probably correct.

So I guess, I mean, from your opponent's point of view,

when this issue then comes up before Mr. Rose,

he's the one that says the driveway on your own property,

away from where it meets the road, it can be up to 28 feet.

So isn't that a sort of a separate decision that he's now made a determination

that it can be 28 feet on your own property?

Yes, but that's not being raised because he's violating the zoning ordinance.

It's being raised because he's violating what they believe is the 22-foot restriction

that governs to the back of the law.

Well, they're allowed to raise that, aren't they?

They may not succeed, but aren't they allowed to raise it?

I'm sorry?

In other words, why would that be blocked by the doctrine of administrative finality?

The 28-foot to 22-foot, it wouldn't be,

but it's not an issue of whether he complied with zoning or not.

That was the issue in our motion in Limone, which the court ultimately granted.

And the only reason it went back to the ZBA was because at that hearing on ZBA 2,

the zoning board didn't get into it.

They simply didn't.

Because they felt they were precluded by the doctrine of administrative finality?

That is what they ultimately told us,

but they didn't get into it because nobody brought it up

because at that particular hearing, Mr. Perrault wasn't there.

And the extent that Mr. Rose mentioned it,

he said the issue of whether they can expand this driveway at all

is the issue that was decided by Mr. Horn,

and that is not before you.

That's in the minutes.

And that is what we focused on in our motion in Limone

because they brought it up.

They brought it up in the motion for re-hearing.

They brought it up in their pleadings.

They brought it up in their answer to our...

But do you agree that if the first ruling by Mr. Horn stands

as not being challenged legally,

that the Perraults still have the ability

to challenge any rulings made by Mr. Rose?

Correct.

If he said you can expand this thing to 40 feet

and had no legal justification for it.

But the trial court seems to have cut them off entirely.

I don't read the trial courts.

You don't.

First of all, by the time we got the trial,

most of those seven issues were gone because they had...

But the trial court did make rulings affirming

the width of the driveway, right?

Correct.

So there's still a live issue as to whether the trial court

did or did not air in affirming the town's ruling

on the 28 feet.

Isn't that still a live issue?

And it was decided.

Not on finality, but...

Not on finality.

No.

But on a basis of the regulation that the government...

Right.

Okay.

So but that issue is still alive.

No.

It's alive in the sense that it was decided by Judge Brown

and their challenge.

Right.

That's my whole point.

I'm trying to figure out what it is we're going to be

ruling on.

And as I'm hearing all of this, as I get it,

our decision is going to be whether Judge Brown

aired or not in affirming the town's ruling

by affirming Mr. Rose.

Right?

Isn't that what we're going to be doing?

Aside from finality.

Aside from finality.

Aside from finality.

Now I confess to being slightly confused here.

You're not the only one in this room.

And I'm in good company, I think.

The issue of the width of the driveway was never raised.

Not...

I mean, whether he could expand the driveway at all

was always raised by them as a zoning question.

In other words, it's non-conforming.

You can't do it.

That was decided.

That's what's done.

Now he's allowed to expand it.

The issue under Rose is can he expand it to 22 feet,

28 feet, or 40 feet?

And what Rose said was you've got to stick with

22 feet, at least until you get to your property line.

But of course, then there's this whole business of...

When I got to the end of reading the briefs,

I thought there was still a live issue

as to the width of the driveway.

The town was arguing that the parking area design ordinance

was subsequently amended to be applicable only to properties

with three or more family dwellings

and all other non-residential uses.

So your argument is,

substantively, on the merits that Judge Brown was correct,

because we were dealing with an ordinance

that presumably allowed unlimited expansion.

Well, actually, he was dealing with the ordinance

that allowed 25 feet by 28 feet.

They may lose on that, but the point is,

that issue is before us.

Yes.

And that is not precluded by the finality, Dr.

Right, but it has been decided by Judge Brown.

Got it.

Okay.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Mr. Chillsley?

Thank you.

I have briefed that issue in the last section of my brief

in terms of if the driveway can be expanded in 2011,

what is the maximum width?

We've alleged that the appropriate width would be 18 feet

under the ordinance based on section,

I forget, it's in my brief.

I want to spend my two minutes on what Judge Brown

didn't allow us to reach because of preclusion.

Our argument is that there can be no expansion

of the Northern driveway in 2011,

because the construction of that driveway

and the use of that driveway for the Southern property

created a merger and created a non-conforming use.

And a non-conforming use cannot be expanded.

So you never get to open the zoning ordinance

and think about 28 feet or 18 feet or 40 feet.

That's the argument we were not allowed to raise

in the trial court because we were told we were precluded,

even though there's a change from 2010 to 2011.

The 2010 driveway is a matter of right for a standalone lot.

The 2011 expansion is allowed

even though you've got two driveways

and therefore you've got non-conforming driveways.

As a matter of law, you can have no expansion

of a non-conforming use with other variants.

It doesn't matter what the zoning ordinance says,

that was the argument that I was not allowed to raise.

I was told they got a permit in 2010

as a matter of right and nothing's changed.

You're precluded.

So you're saying that, and I don't mean to denigrate your argument,

you're saying that the fortuity of the merger

creating the non-conforming use creates a new ballgame.

Absolutely.

It's number five in Mr. Rose's letter.

Number three in his letter acknowledges

that he's allowing an expansion to 28 feet.

That creates the new ballgame.

It's no longer a driveway as a matter of right.

It's now a preexisting.

It's now part of a non-conforming use

and it cannot be expanded.

You say I'm precluded from making this argument

that arose after the 2010 proceeding.

I simply can't be.

This is a new argument.

It's a material change.

Even if the Dover case applied,

I'd still be able to bring that application

and make that argument because it's new.

It's different.

There's a substantial change.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Council may come forward in the matter

of green versus school administration.

Thank you.
