This is case 2015-0233, Thomas Todd versus virtual mutual insurance company, et al.

The record should reflect the fact that Justice Hicks is disqualified from this case.

And Mr. Burt, have you informed the monitor how you intend to divide your time?

We have, Your Honor. We just split the time equally.

Thank you.

Good morning, may it please the court.

Lee Smith of Devine Milliment representing Thomas Todd in this matter.

With the court's permission, I'd like to reserve two minutes of my time for rebuttal.

As the court is aware, this is a coverage case that concerns whether Mr.

Todd is entitled to a defense for certain claims that were made against him in a stocking petition

filed by an individual named Sally Leonard.

That stocking petition alleged that Mr. Todd had hacked into Ms. Leonard's computer and

it damaged her jeep after she had requested that the Appalachian Mountain Club prohibit Mr.

Todd from participating in activities for the Appalachian Mountain Club paddling committee.

Because Ms. Leonard had claimed that Mr. Todd had harassed hers and others at the AMC.

Can I just ask, Counselor, the one thing that's not clear to me is at the time that

that there was this dispute between Ms. Leonard and Mr. Todd about Mr. Todd participating.

Was he then a member of the paddling committee?

Yes, he was, Your Honor.

There's an affidavit to that effect in the record.

The petition does not specifically address whether it was a member, but

certainly be read in that manner, which is what we're looking at on the duty to defend standard,

is whether it can reasonably be read that way.

But the affidavit is in the record and that's unrefuted as far as the undisputed evidence in the case that he was a member at that time.

Your Honor, I'd further say that the only point that that gets to is whether or not he qualifies as an insured under the policy.

And under the policy language, an insured includes an executive and an executive is defined as any past, present, or future member of the committee.

Presumably the past, to the extent that it refers to past member,

that would only cover the situation where the accusation of the occurrence or whatever was wrong related to the person's past involvement.

In other words, it would be hard to read that.

It would seem to me to say that if an executive had been a past member 10 years ago and the claim that was for

which coverage was sought had nothing to do with the fact that related to something that happened today.

That you could say, well, 10 years ago he was a member of the paddling committee, let's say, and therefore he's covered.

Your Honor, I think that answer to that question depends on which particular provision of the handover policy.

That's the only policy that we're talking about with regard to this applies.

Under the directors and officers policy, it simply says an insured is an executive with no

requirement that the wrongful act or the allegations relate to their capacity as an executive.

So I think it would make no difference under that policy.

Under the second policy, the EPL coverage, there is a requirement of a, at least through part of it,

there's a requirement that they be acting in their capacity.

So there may be a difference between when it's a past, present, or future as to whether the conduct falls within the scope.

But again, under the DNO coverage, I don't think it makes a difference.

The definition of insured is an executive without relation to whether they're acting within the scope of their employment or

as an executive, at least for a portion of the policy.

Can I just ask you about the Vermont Mutual Policy choice of law issue?

It seems to me that it should be governed by Massachusetts law.

And tell me why that's not right.

Your Honor, to be honest with you, I don't think it makes a difference whether it's under Massachusetts law or New Hampshire law.

I think the laws are substantially the same on the duty to defend standard was just what we're on here.

So from your perspective, if we look at Massachusetts law, that's fine with you.

That is fine on the duty to defend standard itself, that's correct.

I think the standards are substantially the same.

The only difference, I don't think your opponents agree with that, is the burden of proof requirement.

Under New Hampshire statute RSA 491-22, the burden of proof was with the insurer.

We don't really base our argument on the burden of proof.

We think that there is, when the petition is read, it can reasonably be construed to provide for coverage,

whether the burden of proof is on us or on the other side.

So we don't really rely on the burden of proof.

So you're not challenging the court's ruling that under either state's law, the outcome, according to the trial court,

the outcome would not differ based on the difference in the state laws.

We're not taking the position on the Vermont mutual.

But you do obviously disagree with the court.

Yeah, we're not taking the position that we would, the result would be different under Massachusetts law.

There is some issue on the substantive portion of the law, slightly on the ambiguity issues and

what invasion of right of privacy means, which actually is the first issue I would like to address with the court.

Because I think the privacy language within both the handover and the Vermont mutual policies

is a key issue in the case and is potentially dispositive of the coverage issue and

demonstrates that there should be a duty to defend in favor of Mr. Todd.

As I believe the court is aware, the handover directors and officers policy, the DNO coverage,

provides coverage for a personal injury which is defined to include, quote,

a wrongful entry, eviction, or other invasion of right of privacy.

The Vermont mutual umbrella policy has coverage for personal injury caused by an offense.

Offense is defined as to include invasion of private occupancy, wrongful eviction, and wrongful entry.

It is Mr. Todd's position that the allegations of hacking in the computer hacking,

in the petition, can reasonably be read to create a potential claim,

which would provide coverage under the duty to defend standard, under one or both of these provisions.

The other invasion of right of privacy, invasion of right of private occupancy.

And you would probably say that notwithstanding that the law on this subject seems to suggest

that we're talking about real estate entries, the world has changed and we're now in the internet age

and therefore hacking could qualify as an invasion of someone's right to privacy.

That's correct, Your Honor. This court is on two occasions, Construo. I'm sorry, Your Honor.

What's the factual record regarding the nature of the hacking?

The factual record is what's alleged in the petition because that's what the duty to defend is decided on.

And what's alleged in the petition is that she woke up and found her computer hacked.

There's no description of what that hacking involved or anything beyond that, which, you know,

anything we developed after that point in time would probably be irrelevant to the duty

to defend standard because it's determined at the time that the petition is filed

and based on the petition. So I'm getting back to Chief Justice Delanis' question.

We think there are a few errors with regard to the court's determination on this privacy issue.

First, the court concluded that the term was unambiguous. There are two decisions specifically

by this court, both cited in our papers, the Goshen case and the Epping case,

in which this court has specifically found that the term invasion of right

of private occupancy is an ambiguous term.

But do we need to know what the hacking constituted? Do we need to know that?

I mean, hacking is certainly a very broad term.

It is, Your Honor. And again, I'm kind of heading in that direction, I guess.

I mean, I just want to establish there is an ambiguity.

I kept asking myself that question as I was reading the briefs.

I mean, is that not a factual question that we would have to have an answer to

in order to address this invasion of the right to privacy?

It's not a factual issue because if the term hacking can be deemed in any way

to fall within the policy terms, then there is a duty to defend.

Now, it might turn out if the case had gone forward and Mr. Todd had been found

that there were damages flowing from that, whether or not there's a duty

to indemnify could have been a factual issue.

But at the duty to defend standard, the only issue is could the petition

reasonably be construed to assert facts which could lead to coverage

that are reasonably susceptible to coverage?

And our position is yes, hacking as undefined in here could lead to that.

And the reasoning why, again, these terms have been construed

as ambiguous by this court in the past.

Hacking for the invasion of the right to privacy, what has been construed

to be ambiguous, the invasion of the right to privacy?

That term itself, although it's the right to private occupancy itself

that has been, and I would just note for the court.

Isn't that an important difference?

I do think there's an important difference.

And why shouldn't that matter to us?

Under the handover policy, it's just an invasion of the right of privacy.

It doesn't include occupancy.

Under the Vermont Mutual Policy, it is an invasion of the right

of private occupancy and is left at that.

I would say that there's a stronger case for coverage under the handover policy

because the lack of occupancy, which creates no link to real property in this case.

And what's your best argument based on our case law in that regard?

Well, the best argument is based on the Goshen and the Epping cases,

which have found it ambiguous and that it doesn't require a physical

invasion of any kind of real property and finding that those terms are ambiguous.

So, again, our position is there's probably a strong argument for handover.

But even with the occupancy language,

that doesn't make it necessarily relate to real property.

Again, based on these ambiguity findings and

based on other case law that we cite from other jurisdictions.

I guess the thing I have the most trouble with with any of this is how is any of this,

how is any of the things that your client was accused of doing in the stocking

related to his relationship with the paddling committee?

In other words, I understand that the dispute,

so to speak, between Ms. Leonard and your client may have come into fruition as a result of

the fact that they both were connected with the paddling committee.

But how is this, I mean, if your client was accused of having

murdered Ms. Leonard and there was a civil suit for wrongful death,

would Hanover and Vermont Mutual be on the hook?

Your Honor, that's a separate portion.

I just want to make clear that that would relate to whether there's coverage under

an occurrence or whether they're acting the capacity is assured,

neither of which is relevant to this privacy concern argument.

Those do provide coverage for intentional torts, like an invasion of privacy,

like defamation, like libel, those types of things are in there.

My answer to that would be that's not the case before us, but

you would be looking at whether the petition could reasonably be read to

certain claims that might fall within the coverage,

which might fall within the scope of his duties.

Certainly murder wouldn't fall within the duties.

Hacking potentially could.

Hacking could be as simple as an act of Mr. Todd's email.

He's the webmaster for this AMC site.

His email was hacked and emails were inadvertently sent to a bunch of other

people including Ms. Leonard and she has construed that as hacking.

Do you say there would be coverage under a hypothetical situation where

a client was accused of calling the woman at odd hours of night so

that she would be awakened to have to answer the phone?

It could if that arose out of their relationship on the Appalachian Mountain

Club committee and that would be because if we look at it in employment

law context, if an employee is harassing somebody outside of work but

the employer and it's related to their employment relationship.

Well, I understand that, but is that comparable to hacking?

I mean, because you're saying the reason that the invasion of right to

privacy isn't limited to sort of a physical intrusion,

then you say that ought to cover hacking and I take it,

it ought to cover such things as just making a telephone call.

It could potentially, but I think when we get into the invasion of privacy

around there has to be some suggestion that there's an invasion of the privacy

information.

I think it's private to me to be asleep at two o'clock in the morning and

not be able to answer my phone.

If it does interfere with the use of the property, your enjoyment of your

property, then it could potentially fall within the scope.

I think that would be a closer call.

I guess the other issue, I'm sorry, I see that my red light is on.

I can save it for a while.

You will have to consider the remaining issues as submitted on your briefs.

Thank you.

And we will give them our full attention.

I'm sure you will.

Thank you.

May it please the court?

Gary Baird on behalf of Vermont Mutual.

I want to address some questions that were raised.

We have to keep in mind the distinction between the Vermont policy and the Hanover policy.

I'll let Hanover argue their position, but the Vermont policy is quite clear on the offense issue,

which is it has to be an invasion of private occupancy, wrongful eviction or wrongful entry.

Not an invasion of privacy, which is a much more broader concept,

nor is it the invasion of the right of private occupancy,

which was a broader concept in the Goshen case.

So we have a very limited offense language, which is the invasion of private occupancy.

And you say that even our prior cases, all of them involved,

some kind of harm arising out of real estate?

Yeah, absolutely.

Even quite frankly, this morning I found the ALR invitation on all the cases that address the broader concept in Goshen.

And I can give you the site.

All of those cases focused upon whether it was an invasion of a real estate related, so to speak,

invasion or something different.

So and that's annotated at the court may want this, but it's annotated at 97 ALR 5th 473.

But no, the focus here is whether hacking and causing damage to the woman's jeep constitute an invasion of private occupancy and they don't.

There was no evidence that they did.

I want to step back for one moment.

It makes a big difference whether you apply Massachusetts law and the Hampshire law because the burden of proof.

They kind of poo pooed that and said, well, the burden of proof is different.

Well, that's a major difference.

If you go forward in the case and offer no evidence to support your conclusion or don't clarify the evidence sufficiently, you haven't carried your burden of proof.

You lose.

Well, but from your standpoint, it doesn't matter, does it?

Because the court found in your favor.

Well, absolutely.

I agree that it doesn't matter except.

So we have to cross that bridge at all?

Well, you would if you found that under the Hampshire law, the coverage was afforded.

You didn't have to look as to whether it was afforded under Massachusetts law.

And if I had been a judge, when I get anointed, I would have applied Massachusetts law.

But she was correct in that if she made the same conclusion under both Massachusetts law and

the Hampshire law that there's no coverage, then she doesn't have to reach the full scope of Massachusetts law.

I would also point out, though, that Massachusetts law is probably more clear than the Hampshire that the right of private occupancy or

invasion of private occupancy focuses upon a relationship between the person and land or property.

And as you suggested, some sort of interference with your enjoyment of property.

In the Hampshire, the Goshen case was really whether there was a tangible versus direct interference with the enjoyment.

In other words, in Goshen, there was regulations in place that caused the value of the land to be worth less than it otherwise would be.

So there the court said, well, it doesn't have to be actually a physical invasion of occupancy.

It can be an intangible interference with it.

Frankly, that's the minority decisions throughout the states, but it's our law and it has been adopted by other courts.

But that doesn't apply here.

That's why this suggestion that that clause is ambiguous and therefore leads to the conclusion of coverage is only one step to the process.

The court has repeatedly said it doesn't matter whether it's ambiguous in and of itself,

it's whether it's ambiguous as applied to the facts of this matter.

If it's ambiguous as applied to the facts of this matter, then there's coverage.

But if it's just ambiguous and not applied to the facts of this matter, in other words, you don't get the result.

Even if something is ambiguous, you have to be able to make a reasonable reading of it that would say coverage is applied.

Correct.

Correct.

And there's been at least a handful of cases where this court has said, yeah, it may be ambiguous, but not as applied to this factual scenario.

So our position is quite frankly that the clause clearly links occupation of property.

That's why it says private occupancy to some sort of enjoyment of the right to enjoy your premises, whether it's owned, rented or otherwise.

And there was no interference with that whatsoever asserted in the stocking petition.

And the other part of that, of course, is we don't believe that this would, under any circumstance, be considered accidental.

Because what she said, and what they agreed was that she brought this charge

that he had engaged in this conduct, rather, in retaliation for her speaking out against his involvement in the AMC.

So if there's no other questions, I'll see you in time.

Hey, please, the court.

My name is Perry Shores, and I represent Hanover.

I would like to adopt Mr. Burt's arguments regarding the ambiguity of the phrase,

with respect to the ambiguity going to whether it requires a physical intrusion or some other kind of intrusion into real estate.

But your policy is different, right?

It doesn't talk about occupancy.

It doesn't say occupancy.

However, that's where we get into the concept that the trial court applied here of a used-in generous.

And if you take the Mr. Todd's interpretation of the other invasion of right of privacy,

what that means is any invasion of right of privacy, regardless of what it relates to.

And to do that would be to violate two maxims.

One is a used-in generous, since it follows wrongful entry or eviction that it's, when you use the word other,

and I would make note of the fact that the City of Glendale case, which they cite in their brief,

specifically distinguished their case from other cases that used the doctrine of a used-in generous

in the fact that their policy didn't use the word other.

They distinguish cases where it said other and therefore found the doctrine not applicable in that case,

but didn't say that it was inapplicable generally.

The second problem is that it would render another provision meaningless in that you've got the publication

of material that violates a person's right of privacy.

If you have another, if you have this clause saying any invasion of the right of privacy,

you would never get to the publication of material that violates a right of privacy,

which is a narrower right of privacy than what Mr. Todd is.

Well, but you know, if you look at what I forget, the name of our case, but goes back to the 60s,

about the four aspects that are stated in the restatement towards what the four aspects,

the four types of violation of the right to privacy can be.

Couldn't you have, it's not clear to me that if we interpreted other violations of the right

to privacy, as your opponent would say, that that would necessarily encompass all of the publication.

In other words, what if you, there might be, for example, a situation in which you would say

that a person, for example, the conduct that intruded into someone's personal life in some sense

of hearing a private conversation or something like that, there were circumstances under

which that would not really violate the intrusion aspect of the privacy right,

but that then the person went on, so it wouldn't be covered under four,

but then the person went on to hold a press conference and say, by the way,

I learned this information and the, or would try to take that information

and sell it in some kind of an advertisement.

And that the court might say, well, the initial intrusion didn't violate the right

of privacy, but the publication did.

So I'm not sure that one necessarily would swallow the other.

Well, but regardless of what kind of a right of privacy you have,

if you're under the publication requirement, there does have to be publication of material, if.

Right, no, but what I'm saying is, it would seem to me that there could be circumstances

under which the publication, the public, the conduct would trigger the publication violation

of the right to privacy, even though it would not, even under your opponent's construction

of the last paragraph, it would not cover the other violation of the right of privacy.

Well, we could disagree about how broad or narrow that provision is.

I don't think it's in question that it's not all encompassing any right of privacy element.

But even assuming, let's just assume for a minute that you're right,

that the violation of the right to privacy is limited to an intrusion

into one's space in some respect.

Given the development of technology, couldn't hacking fall into that category?

In other words, the intrusion here might reasonably be characterized

as intruding into one's physical space, you know, unanticipated by the law back

in the 1960s, different situation.

And so maybe the change in technology causes us to look at what it really means

to intrude into someone's physical space.

Well, I think it's actually the opposite.

And I don't think it's a question of whether it intrudes into physical space.

It's a question of whether it intrudes into some right related to real property.

And I guess I'm generalizing.

When I say real property, I mean into your spot on that real property, my spot in my house.

And it's the advance of technology that actually makes that work the other way

because now technology is so portable to be able to say that hacking is a real estate-related invasion,

I think is absolutely wrong.

We carry around laptops.

We carry around iPads.

We carry around all kinds of things that where the hacking has nothing to do with where you are,

the device is totally mobile.

So I don't think the difference.

So query does that render some ambiguity to the phrase hacking?

Well, hacking is not a phrase that's in the policy.

The question is whether or not the policy provision is ambiguous and I don't think it is.

But you're arguing that because hacking can be done on portable devices,

then that carves it out of potentially being an intrusion into one's real estate.

Maybe not.

I think that's a very big stretch to say that hacking, which is generally a sort of a non-physical,

unless you're talking about hacking with an ax, it's a non-physical.

Believe me, I have no idea how any of this works.

And I'm no expert on it either.

But it's not something that's a physical.

It's not a matter of somebody going in with a screwdriver.

It's something that's done in the ether and the internet and by email, whatever it is.

It's not a real estate related act.

But doesn't that cut against you?

But doesn't that weaken your claim?

I mean, Mr. Burt made the argument about the connection with real estate

and because of the language that he had, but that's not present here.

Well, but again, I think it is present because of the surrounding language of the provision.

Again, it has to be read not in isolation, but in context.

And when you read it in connection with wrongful entry or eviction, it is a real.

Can we consider these days, I mean, most of the time when you want a member,

a reasonable member of the public thinks about invasion of privacy,

what we hear about most is not somebody sneaking into your property,

but somebody getting into your private digital world.

Isn't that what you think of?

I'd agree with you if you're talking about invasion of privacy in isolation.

But when it's preceded by the word other and following two other actions

that are clearly real estate related, then other invasion of the right of privacy

has to be restricted to those that involve the invasion related to real property.

Thank you, counsel.

Your time is up, but Justice Lynn would like to ask you a question.

If I understood your opponent's argument with regard to the D&O coverage,

he seems to say that if your, if his client qualifies as an executive,

then if I understood him correctly, then it doesn't really matter whether the actions

that he's charged with sort of arose out of or were in his capacity as an executive.

And what do you say about that?

Well, clearly, you cannot be insured with respect to one thing

and then get coverage with respect to something that doesn't fall

within your capacity as an insured.

So you say it does, you do have to be acting as the, as the executive in order to?

Otherwise, there'd be no point in limiting the definition of insured to a precise definition.

You just say, as long as you are that, you're covered for everything in your life.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Do you need your reserve time, Mr. Smith?

Yes, just a couple of quick points for the court.

Just to rebut the arguments arising, addressing whether this arises out of real estate,

I think it's reasonably clear that if Mr. Todd had been accused of going

into the house and going into the office and opening filing cabinets and looking at the files,

there'd be no doubt this would relate to real estate or if he had gone into our office,

turned on our computer and started going through our computer files, it relates to real estate.

The fact that it may have happened remotely through hacking doesn't change that,

especially in light of the decision in Goshen that says that it doesn't have

to be a physical intrusion into the property.

And quickly addressing Vermont Mutual's argument about mobile society,

remember we're on a duty to defend standard.

All it has to be is a possibility that there's coverage under the policy.

And in this case, the allegation in the petition is that I awoke in the morning

to find my computer hacked.

That strongly suggests that the computer was within the home.

So it is an invasion into real estate based on the hacking allegations.

Quickly with regard to Judge Lynn's questions that just related to the other paragraph,

my simple answer to that is if you have to go through the mental gymnastics

that we had to sort those out, there's clearly an ambiguity in the policy

on those points as to whether there is a, what the policy means as one paragraph relates

to the other.

And finally just address that, you know, Judge Lynn had asked a question earlier

about, you know, the relationship between the parties and the rising

out of the MC and it is a retaliation based relationship.

So that does bring it within the scope of the coverage.

But even that under the personal injury arm of the coverage under the handover policy,

there isn't a requirement that the individual be acting in their capacity.

And I think that's pretty clear when you read through the policy language

which you guys can obviously do as you read through the materials that are submitted.

If there are no further questions, I'll rest.

Thank you, Mr. Shores.

I hope you don't run into any bad weather on the way back to Chicago.

Court is adjourned.
