This is case 2015-0539 Ohio Mutual Insurance Group at all versus Merle Wilbur, the third administrator of the estate of Merle Wilbur, the fourth.

The record should reflect the fact that while Justice Bassett is medically unable to be with us today, we expect him to participate in this appeal.

Mr. Scott, do you take a position contrary to mootness here this morning?

All right, then here's the way we'll handle this to make the best use of all of our time.

Each of you may have three minutes to argue the mootness one at a time, and then we will take that under advisement,

and then each of you will have 12 minutes to argue the merits of your case.

So shall we start with the mootness issue?

Mootness issue.

May it please the court name?

Let me get my Ohio Mutual Insurance Company.

I apologize for the late motion in this case.

There were some events that occurred after we filed the briefs,

and that was the expiration of the three-year statute of limitations with respect to any wrongful death claim in relation to this

unfortunate accident involving Mr. Plant and Mr. Wilbur's son.

This entire DJ that we filed is based upon the claim that the decedent's death was caused by the tort user,

Mr. Plant, who was operating Mr. Wilbur, the decedent's father's vehicle at the time.

They were trying to take down a tree in front of a residence.

They had tied a rope to a limb, and Mr. Wilbur, the third's son, the decedent, was in the tree.

Council, I don't mean to be rude, but we have the facts.

Why isn't it moot?

So with respect to the liability issue, it's moot.

Even if he were to, the claimant were to get over the hurdles of this appeal and then,

presumably, all of the coverage issues, which there are many, maybe five or six, get over those,

you still have the situation where even if liability coverage were to be found,

it wouldn't make a difference because of the statute.

Is there anything to a suggestion that you have waived the statute of limitations defense?

You're just finding about this now.

And you say the statute ran in December of 2015, about six weeks ago.

No, I think that the company would have to do something affirmative to waive.

So I don't think there'd be a waiver in this particular case.

As a matter of fact, I did contact Attorney Scott in November to see if a suit had been filed.

And he said it hadn't.

And then I contacted him on Monday or Tuesday.

Did you have a conversation in November about the statute of limitations?

We exchanged an email on that.

And I asked if a suit had been filed, and he said no, it hadn't.

But how, you know, I guess the thing I'm having some difficulty with is how,

suppose that we say this case is moot.

And then tomorrow Mr. Scott brings a lawsuit in the, you know, based on the underlying tort.

And somehow there's some, you know, a trial court rules well.

There's some discovery rule or some, there's some reason that the statute of limitations doesn't apply.

Then what happens to this case?

Is it no longer moot?

Yeah, I appreciate that concern.

I, you know, I'm not aware of it.

This is in Massachusetts statute of limitations.

But that would be an issue for remand down at the Superior Court, I believe.

And so it wouldn't be a issue for here.

So should that happen before we make rulings on the issues presented to us?

Well, we'd like you to uphold Judge Delker's order.

Because as Justice Lynn suggests, it may well be that for whatever reason the statute of limitations was told in some fashion.

And so we're giving essentially, we're ruling on issues that may not be properly before us.

So does it really make sense to remand it for a determination on the statute of limitations?

I think that does make sense.

I think it does.

Yeah.

Thank you.

Okay.

Your position on the mootness issue, counsel.

It's somewhat interesting that since their defense has been predicated on lack of notice or late notice,

I received notification yesterday that they're raising a statute of limitations defense.

And they rely upon MADDER-REES versus the National Municipal Association decided by this court, I think in 2002.

And in that case, the only issue that should be looked at is, A, does the underlying tort-feasor have coverage?

And if not, then the insurance company stands in the shoes of the tort-feasor.

There's nothing in the policy requiring an uninsured individual or a strike that.

A person making a claim under an uninsured portion of a policy to bring a lawsuit.

The only thing they have to do is notify the company that they'd like to go to arbitration.

And the claimant chooses an arbitrator, the insurance company chooses an arbitrator, and those two arbitrators choose a third.

That's only if your claim for uninsured motorist coverage prevails.

What about your claim for liability coverage?

Our claim, we are willing to waive our claim for liability coverage and proceed solely on the uninsured motorist coverage.

And so did you give, I mean, I assume that there would still be a statute of limitations which would require you to make a demand for arbitration

within three years of the time you at least reasonably knew that your client was an uninsured motorist.

So it was a victim of an uninsured motorist.

So did you do that?

Well, it seemed kind of baseless to make that claim based upon the fact that Judge Delker had ruled that notice had not been given properly under the policy

and dismissed any claims based upon that which would deal with the uninsured motorist claims.

In other words, you're saying that the DJ, since the insurance company is sort of the opposing party in both matters,

the fact that you joined the issue on that really was noticed to the insurance company that you expected to prevail if you wanted to arbitrate.

Right.

Once the insurance company claimed that there was no coverage for Mr. Plant, the driver of the vehicle,

then we would proceed against Mr. Plant for the uninsured motorist coverage,

but obviously cannot do so based upon the status of the case at this point.

Would you like to shift into your merits argument now?

Okay.

That's great.

This is an appeal of a motion for some re-judgment which this court reviews DeNovo.

You brought this claim at a time when Mr. Plant was not requesting coverage, right?

We didn't bring the claim.

We provided by way of chronology on December 24th.

The first piece of litigation is your litigation, right?

No.

Am I right on that?

No.

You didn't institute the DJ?

No.

Okay.

They did.

They did.

I misunderstood.

Okay.

So they bring a DJ action?

The DJ was commenced, and I forgot the month, but it was early in 2014.

So why are they named as the respondent?

We are named as the defendant in the DJ action.

I'm sorry?

We are named, it's Ohio Mutual versus Wilbur, Richard Merrill Wilbur.

Right.

Is there any other litigation?

Maybe I'm just way off here.

I'm confused.

I thought the name of the case is Ohio Mutual versus Wilbur.

You instituted the litigation.

No, I represent Wilbur.

Ohio Mutual instituted the case against Wilbur.

Switch the parties.

For a declaration that there was no coverage.

So let me ask my question properly then.

Okay.

At the time Ohio Mutual brings the DJ, Mr. Plant has not sought coverage because no claim had been made against Plant.

That's correct.

Right.

That's correct.

By way of chronology, when I was first contacted by the decedent's father, Mr. Wilbur, and I'll call him Mr. Wilbur and the decedent to try and keep it clear because their names are the same except third and fourth.

It was in February of 2013.

The incident occurred December 24th, 2012.

At that time we did not know whether the decedent was an employee of Plant and OSHA was doing an investigation and it seemed at that point that he was an employee.

In April OSHA wrote a letter saying we did not have jurisdiction because there was no employer-employee relationship.

We did not receive the final OSHA report until May.

And May when we got the final OSHA report we became aware that there was no insurance coverage for Mr. Plant.

In the OSHA report there is a 14-page statement taken by OSHA from Mr. Plant about what occurred.

It also addressed the issue of where the decedent lived for the two or three weeks before he was killed.

In addition there was a police report and this is referenced by the insurance company in their brief before this court and also in the Superior Court.

In that police report, and they also talked about redacted addresses, in that report, the police report there are six witnesses including Mr. Plant who we tried to contact five times without success.

And there are also two other witnesses, Brian Wolfe, W-O-E-F-U-L, who was the owner of the property where the incident occurred and was working along with Mr. Plant and the decedent and taking the tree down.

There was Eileen Wolfe who was in her house and observed the incident.

In addition, David Kimball saw the accident occur.

Coincidence though it might be is David Kimball is the owner of Kimball Tree Service who actually stopped to help.

In addition, two of Kimball's employees were following him in a separate vehicle and also stopped.

And there was no indication that the representatives of the insurance company made any effort to contact any of those individuals.

Well, did the insurance company know about this by then?

They were given, when I notified the insurance company in June of 2013, I provided them with a copy of the police report.

Approximately a week later I met with an investigator from the insurance company and at that time provided him with a complete copy of the OSHA report.

But if memory serves, the trial judge concluded that you were not entitled to the uninsured motorist coverage because of late notice to the insurance company, right?

He was. He did conclude that.

Okay, so why was that not late notice?

Well, the question is how was there was not at the very earliest we had an indication there might be a claim against Ohio Mutual in April of 2013.

However, at that point, it did not appear as though this would be a claim against the motor vehicle policy.

At that point, the assumption was that Mr. Plant, who was in the tree business, had insurance and that it would be a claim under his general liability policy.

OSHA, as a matter of fact, indicated in their letter of April 9th that the recommendations were there should be a tool used to detect raw on a tree and bucket trucks should be used.

So I take it your position here is that you were operating under the assumption that this would be insured by plants insurance, which it turns out he didn't have.

And oh, by the way, it might be an OSHA matter.

And it was at the moment that you discovered that neither of those things would turn out to be true that you notified the carriers here and made your claim.

And I also have to do an apology in that we did not provide the trial court with the full OSHA report.

We should have and we looked at in the index on the motion for summary judging filed by Ohio Mutual, it indicated the OSHA report.

In there were just a couple of photographs.

The OSHA report itself consists of in excess of 200 pages and 70 photographs including a photograph of the truck that was being used to pull down the tree.

So all of these facts go to your argument that the insurance company was not prejudiced by this elapsed time because they had a complete investigation in hand.

They could rely on and I take it from your brief that you're also saying this late notice business is simply not prejudicial to the insurance company because the mess had to be cleaned up.

And they couldn't very well make a claim to your client couldn't make a claim to the insurance company in the what hours days before the whole thing was cleaned up, right?

Absolutely correct.

It was going to get cleaned up.

It had to be.

And so they can't be prejudiced because once it was the OSHA was on the scene and did a complete investigation.

That's the nob of your argument.

It is, Your Honor.

And in addition, there are in excess of 70 photographs taken by OSHA of the tree, of the rot on the tree, of the equipment being used.

Were they on the scene before it got cleaned up?

Yes, they were.

They were.

Yes.

And some were taken.

OSHA was there.

This incident occurred on the 24th.

Some of the photographs in the OSHA report may have been taken by the police.

I can't determine which are which.

The police were there.

The state police were there.

The fire department was there on the day of the incident.

OSHA was there on either the 26th or 27th.

So they were there within two days.

Interestingly enough, is that there's a statement in the OSHA report on the 27th where Mr. Planned said he was told by insurance company, his insurance company, he, no, I'm sorry, was told by his lawyer that he should not be speaking to anyone regarding the incident.

OSHA served him with a subpoena and I think on January 17th or something like that.

It was in January.

He actually responded to the subpoena and gave a 14 page statement.

So the only thing that the insurance company has not been able to obtain, but neither have we, is a statement from Mr. Planned, personal statement from Mr. Planned.

And actually the trial judge even indicated that it was, this is my word, sort of speculated as to whether Planned would have talked to the insurance company had they contacted him before June.

Interestingly enough, the insurance company admits that they reached him by telephone.

And that's in Mrs. Sealy's affidavit attached to the motion for some re-judgment.

And someone spoke with him.

We don't know who or what they were told.

All that was told to us is that he wouldn't give his address to them.

Can I just make sure, I want to make sure I'm understanding one thing.

If I'm understanding correctly, you are conceding that, so we don't have to deal with the issue of whether Mr. Planned was an additional insured under the policy.

You're waiving that issue.

We're waiving that.

If the insurance company, I think there are some real legal issues as to whether the order applies to him.

But if the insurance company is contending that he doesn't apply, we're happy to proceed with uninsured motorists.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Okay, in that case I'll just deal with the uninsured motorist issue.

So the first question I have is how, I guess I really didn't understand the court's order on the idea that your client was prejudiced because the accident site was cleared.

I mean, when would it ever be the case that the insurance company, motor vehicle accident, when would it ever be the case that the insurance company would be on the scene before the accident was cleared?

And I actually agree with you on that.

The conditions probably wouldn't have been there, even if we were notified a lot earlier.

The main issue here is the sole living person who was involved in this accident was unreachable by the time we got notice of the claim.

So as I understand, Planned was at the funeral and your position is at the time of the funeral, the defendant should have notified the insurance company so that they could catch up with Planned?

Well, I don't think the funeral really is the trigger, it's just that according to the court.

Well, I thought you made the argument in your brief that at least at that point the defendant had had contact with Planned.

Well, there's two issues.

One, what did Wilbur know and when did he know it?

And Mr. Wilbur knew within the weeks, this is by his own admission, within the weeks following the accident, he knew that the truck was lost.

So let's say that within four weeks of the accident it was known that Planned was the one driving and may have been liable for him.

What would you have done differently?

Well, we would have been able to.

As Ayesha would already have done, gathered their information.

What else would you have done?

Well, one thing about the Ayesha report, it was not complete.

It was heavily redacted.

All of the statements except for Mr. Planned's statement was redacted.

And they ended the investigation claiming that they had no jurisdiction.

So it was never completed.

And really the Ayesha report and investigation related to workplace safety.

Other issues that were really pertinent for my client were things like employer-employer relationship, who was living, where was-

So you say if you were notified four weeks after this incident, you would have been able to get to Planned.

He was talking at that time.

We think we would have been able to because he was talking at that time.

The truck would not have been sold at that time.

He went dark by February 2013.

How does he figure pertinently to the uninsured motorist claim?

Why do you need him?

Well, we all know what happened.

Yeah.

He was operating a vehicle that was owned by Mr. Wilbur.

We all know that.

The question was, did he have permission?

Did he have a reasonable belief that he could operate the vehicle in that manner?

You don't really take a tree down that way.

Mr. Wilbur himself owned the vehicle.

There's an exclusion there.

Was there an employee-employer relationship between the two?

In which case that would trigger an exclusion under the-

So you say that was critical to your company's investigation would be contact with Planned.

Absolutely critical.

And so you say that if earlier notice had been provided, it is likely that Planned would have spoken to you.

Yeah.

He was talking at that time.

He was talking to Osha.

He was talking to the police.

He was talking to Mr. Wilbur.

And either he got spooked.

I don't know what happened.

He ended up speaking to our investigator one time after we were notified.

But after that he clearly did not want to be found.

But doesn't the trial court have to conclude that earlier notice would in fact have resulted with a complete interview with Mr. Planned?

And isn't that total speculation given his conduct?

His conduct is-

His hiding, apparently.

After February 2013, it's speculative.

I think before then I think he would have talked.

And I think it's reasonable to assume that he would have at that time.

But you do have access to his complete statement in the OSHA file, right?

And or the police file?

Responses to OSHA questions about workplace safety and such.

There are things like business pursuits, exclusions in the U.M. provisions.

There are all kinds of things that relate to the coverage issues, not even getting to the liability part.

What did they know about the status of this rotted tree?

Who told who to take it down?

Who supplied the tools?

Who told who to go up in the tree?

But it sounds like your opponent really was sort of in the same position.

I mean, I guess, what would be the harm if we said now this uninsured motorist goes forward,

and now both sides are going to have to make more of an effort.

I mean, to be honest with you, it strikes me that with a little more effort,

this guy Planned is probably going to be findable.

Presumably you can go to the motor vehicle department in either Massachusetts or New Hampshire,

find out if he has a license and where he lives.

We've done it all.

And I agree with you.

You would think you would be able to find him.

We have an investigation report.

It's the biggest one I've ever received.

They found child support orders, voter registration, all kinds of things.

We went to maybe four different locations, talked to people, canvas, talked to neighbors.

He disappeared.

And it's unusual, but if the UM case were to go forward, we have no tort freezer to talk to.

But you don't have a tort either.

You don't have a tort anymore.

There's no liability case going forward.

That's our position, sure.

And also, just on the UIM piece, not only is he not legally entitled to recover,

but they have prejudice or actually extinguished our subrogation rights.

So you still have some substantive issues.

So if we rule in favor of the defendant, it still has to go back to the trial court.

Absolutely.

But wait a minute.

They're all related to liability, which now is not being pursued.

Well, if liability is not being pursued, we have the UM claim.

Now we stand in the shoes of the tort freezer, so sure, liability is an issue.

But before you even get there, you have to determine whether or not this was an uninsured motor vehicle at all,

because it was owned by Mr. Wilbur, the name insured.

It was not.

It just simply was not.

So, you know, we're not arguing the substantive coverage issues today.

But if it goes back for those, there's very high hurdles in that respect,

not to mention the fact that the statute of limitation has expired.

Then you get to the point of liability at all compared to fault, that sort of thing.

Very difficult.

But in any event, your position is that if we find in favor of the defendant on the notice issue, it still has to go back to the trial court.

Yes, it does.

Court only addressed those technical issues of late notice and breach of the cooperation provisions with respect to the liability,

which we're not talking about anymore.

So it's at least a partial victory here today.

That's right.

I'll put it in the victory column whenever you can, right?

If there's nothing further, I'll submit my brief. Thank you.

Thank you. Case submitted.

Council may come forward in the matter of Hannaford Brothers versus the town of...
