This is case 2015-0720, city of Keen versus James Cleveland et al.

For the sake of folks who are in this morning's lineup, just so you know, we have five cases

scheduled for the morning session.

And we will do three without a break and then take the morning recess to be followed

by the final two.

Council?

Good morning, Your Honor.

Justices, may it please the court.

I'm Robert Dietel on behalf of the city of Keen.

I've asked for reserve two minutes this morning.

The trial court ruled that any injunction of any distance would be unconstitutional in this

case because it would have a significant impact on the methods used by defendants to

disseminate their speech.

The court effectively in doing this ruled that an injunction is per se unconstitutional

if it will have a significant impact on speech.

This is problematic for several reasons.

One, injunctions almost always by their very nature have a significant impact on speech.

And two, it's not the law that has emerged from the United States Supreme Court.

And three, the finding that this will have a significant impact is inconsistent with

the trial court's own factual rulings, which weren't.

The court found that the defendants frequently videotape and follow ten feet away.

It found that they have a series of actions that they wish to engage in involving talking,

videotaping, saving cars from tickets.

All of those things are in keeping with the city's request for a ten foot injunction.

But how can that, you know, I'm just trying to imagine this, how this could happen.

As I understand it, what the protesters want to do is they want to sort of follow

it generally.

And maybe they could do this from ten feet away.

They want to sort of follow generally one of the meter people.

And then when they see that that person is going to, going to go to some particular meter,

where maybe it's in violation, they want to then get there first.

And it seems to me that there are going to be times when they're going to get there

pretty close to each other.

In fact, isn't there something in the record that at one point, one of the protesters

actually did put his hand or her hand on the meter reader's wrist?

Yes.

There was an instance where I believe it was defendant Graham Colson had a physical exchange

with one of the parking enforcement officers.

But that's an assault.

That can be handled.

That's an assault.

And while we think that's indicative of the types of problems that can emerge, that's

not what I think the core problem is here under the standard review before the court.

The factors that Justice Lin were describing, those relate to the burden on the defendants.

Now the trial court denied injunctive relief here because it found that it was a significant

burden.

May I ask for a clarification?

We have a video as part of the record.

I have watched the video and I believe several of my colleagues have.

Would you agree that what is on the video is fairly representative of what was going

on?

Was that an unusual video or is it, do you acknowledge that it was representative of actually

what was happening?

In complete candor, I believe that it was representative of how things can boil up.

That that not necessarily was their daily interactions like that, but that's precisely

the type of conduct that we want to avoid.

If you're saying that that's an example of boiling up and that normally it's

even less than that.

I have to tell you that I looked at that video and this, I was not impressed at all that

the protesters were in some way doing something that they should be enjoying from doing.

To me, as I looked at that video, the most salient point about it was this other woman

who was not the meter reader who was walking by and basically blew off the protest.

Get away from me.

What are you doing?

She didn't seem to be intimidated at all and candidly, as I looked at it, it seemed

to me that the meter reader who is in a, it seems to me she's not a police officer

but she's in a line of work where she at least needs to expect that she's often

going to be not delivering good news to people by giving them a ticket or whatever.

Some of them are not going to be particularly happy about that.

Maybe she needs to, for lack of a better term, maybe she needs to sort of toughen up a little

bit.

Well, my reaction is that I think it's an unreasonable conclusion to view that in isolation.

We're dealing with three years of conduct here.

Well, but you say, you were the one that said in response to Justice Conquest question

that that is sort of a boiling up.

So that suggests to me at least that the sort of more routine things are less than that.

There is a routine aspect to this which perhaps if you view these individual incidents in

isolation they might not be all that bad.

But on a regular recurring basis for three years and the trial court finding that this

was still going on, that's an important point, the trial court found that this was still going

on by at least one defendant several days a week for several hours and I believe the

actual trial testimony from the defendant was three to four days a week for three

to four hours.

So there's a general diminishment of the activity over the course of time.

It sounds as though they're all getting a little tired of it for the most part.

There is a change.

But I think the core question before the Superior Court, it's really two buckets.

Has the city proposed a constitutional injunction?

It has.

I don't think there can be any reasonable debate on that.

And the reason why is because we have clear decisions from the Madsen case in 1994 and

the McCullin case in 2014.

Isn't there a big distinction that those are buffer zones at a sort of stationary place?

Here you're talking about, as your opponent points out, you're talking about trying to

impose a buffer zone on literally what is a moving target, which is the meter enforcement

people.

There is a moving target.

But these are more narrow actually than those cases because those cases could apply

to anybody entering certain areas.

We're talking about two individuals, and we're requesting a relief that's directly in line

with the directions from Justice Roberts.

Justice Roberts said injunctive relief needs to be pursued.

That's why the McCullin case was overturned.

The Commonwealth of Massachusetts did not first pursue injunctive relief.

And Justice Roberts admonished them and said, you need to look at this, injunctions

look at the precise conduct by precise individuals, and they get at the core.

That's more favorable than broader prophylactic measures like an ordinance or the ultimate chilling

effect, an arrest.

Is it irrelevant that an individual meter reader might have the ability to seek injunctive

relief personally alleging harassment, some other criminal offense?

From the standpoint of the city's interests, I think it is.

And the reason being is that the city needed to show to the trial court, and it did, that

it had proposed content neutral injunctions that were constitutional.

We know this because the trial court ruled they were content neutral.

It ruled that there were significant governmental interests.

Not just that, it ruled that they were ongoing significant governmental interests.

I take it there hasn't been any individual request for injunctive relief.

There is not at this point, Your Honor.

Am I correct in understanding that the city is not trying to stop the feeding the meters

itself?

Precisely.

Art, the injunction the city proposed, and this was the third finding from the trial

court, was what the trial court described as the most narrowly tailored that it could

conceive of to provide any meaningful relief.

Those are the prongs that the city had to satisfy from a constitutional standpoint.

Now, when you say, and I think your opponent, if I'm remembering correctly, raises at least

some question about this.

When you say this is content neutral, if I'm understanding correctly, you would not, your

injunction would not apply if I happen to drive over to Keene and I parked and I stayed

over whatever, I put in enough money for an hour but I stayed an hour and 15 minutes.

I realized, oh jeez, I better go out there and put some more money in and I went out while

a meter reader was walking in the area.

Would I be subject to the injunction?

No, you would not.

So it sort of depends on what the purpose is, isn't it?

If I'm a protester, then I'm subject to the injunction but if I'm not, then I'm

not.

Maybe there is some content to this?

No, respectfully, your honor, it does not.

The testimony before the court from the parking force and officers is that they would have

problems with this and I think rightfully so even if somebody was coming up to them

every day.

This is, it's the frequency aspect of this that is particularly troubling and getting

in their face and saying, great job, you're doing a wonderful job but following them

every day this close, day in and day out, emerging at times that they can't anticipate

or expect getting in their way when they're trying to get to meters, those impair significant

governmental interests, significant interests that the trial court recognized and the problem

is that the court finds that there are significant interests in play.

It finds that each of the elements that the United States Supreme Court requires

are satisfied and then it says, but I can't grant injunctive relief because it would

place a significant burden on the defendants.

Well that's going towards a strict scrutiny test that the Madsen court expressly

reject.

The Madsen court looked at this and said, Justice Scalia wants us to impose a strict

scrutiny test when we look at injunctions.

We're not going to do that.

Strict scrutiny would require a compelling governmental interest and that these are

the only way to satisfy that interest and protect it and they expressly adopted

an intermediate standard and that standard looks at what the burden is and that's

important.

There's always going to be a burden when there's an injunction and if the court

denies injunctive relief here because it says that there's a burden, well is

it truly a significant burden?

I don't think when there's adequate alternate channels for communication.

What is the harm, I guess this is what I'm having real difficulty with.

What is the harm of that is, you know, to the parking enforcement people?

That is that they are suffering at the hands of these protests?

Well the parking enforcement officers have sought counseling and there was testimony

in the initial hearings of the stress that they are under that was

uncontroverted and that the city has a significant interest in making sure that

its employees are mentally healthy on the job so that they can actually go

about doing their job.

I agree with you and I don't mean to be callous but isn't part of their job

description a warning that they may be subject to certain difficulties on the

job because of the nature of their job?

Yes, Your Honor, it is and that contemplates individual interactions

with individuals.

It doesn't contemplate years of recurring ongoing conduct.

It doesn't contemplate having people wait outside the bathroom for you.

That is something that at some point is going to wear down individuals.

It's therefore going to impair the city's interests and because the city

has articulated those significant interests the court should not, as a matter

of law, deny it on constitutional grounds and say so it's the mental health

of the employees that's the significant government.

That is one of the significant interests.

Name another.

Public safety and keeping the civility on the streets.

It's expressly recognized.

It sounds a little vague to me.

What do you mean public safety and civility on the streets?

In the video that was provided to the court we have an evidence of an

individual who comes in because she's seeing a PEO being what I would

describe as harassed and she inserts herself between the PEO and the

defendant.

That's one example.

You mean the young lady on the video?

Yes.

And in the initial hearings we had evidence of a fight where one of

the members of the public chased the defendants through a parking

garage screaming and threatening them.

That's public order.

Of course those people would be able to bring private complaints for

protection, right?

The individual public citizens or the parking enforcement officers.

The people who were chased.

You said in a parking garage.

Who was chasing who?

There was a member of the public chasing a defendant.

Oh, okay.

I misunderstood.

So isn't that, I mean, isn't there some case law that says you

know the fact that the fact that some people may react themselves

illegally because they don't like what you're protesting doesn't

mean to you that that's a reason to stop the protest.

No, it's not.

I see my time is up.

I'm happy to address your question if I may.

The interest here is one that's been recognized in numerous cases

by the Supreme Court.

Peace and order on the streets is a significant governmental

interest that the Supreme Court has held or in

subjunctive relief.

You know, may I just follow up even though you may?

I don't mean to personalize this, but I'm just, I'm trying to press

where the outer limits are.

A million years ago, I personally served in the U.S.

Air Force during the Vietnam War.

If I wore my uniform and walked down the streets of Boston,

I was harassed, called names, whatever.

Would there be sufficient governmental interest to give me a zone,

some kind of zone of protection as I walk down the streets of Boston?

Under the hypothetical you've set forth, I would say no, but I don't

think those are the factual circumstances that we're dealing

with here because harassment was pretty severe.

It certainly was more so than I saw in the video.

It was.

And individuals in service at that time certainly encountered

recurring harassment.

But these are two individuals facing recurring harassment for three

years every day when they go out to work or almost every day now

by discrete individuals.

That's something that can be enjoined and should be enjoined.

Thank you.

Yeah.

Mr. Meyer?

Madam Chief Justice, may it please the Court?

I'm here representing the two remaining defendants in this

case.

Again, my name is John Meyer.

This is the, this Court is being asked to do something

which, as far as I can tell, based on my research has never been

done by any Court.

And that is to issue an injunction against a small group of political

activists that covers the entirety of a essentially downtown,

municipal downtown.

I believe that that is completely unprecedented.

The closest case that either side has may have come up with

are the line of cases involving abortion clinics.

And the crucial distinction there is twofold.

First of all, they only involve a tiny sliver of the downtown, just

the area right around the entrance to the climate.

Can you give us a clarification, I'd like to have your answer to the

question that I asked your opponent.

Does that video fairly represent what went on routinely?

No, Your Honor.

It doesn't.

And let me just, there's a couple of responses, I think that's

an important question, because it really goes to the decision of

the trial judge.

The Court came back and said, in terms of remand order to the

trial judge, we want you to look at the specific factual

circumstances and anchor your decision in that.

So the Court then held another full day of hearing.

And that day of hearing came two years after the first three

days of hearing.

And it was clear as the Court, the trial court made evident

that the situation had changed dramatically.

And when was that video taken?

When was the video taken?

Video would have been taken sometime between the first

hearing and second hearing.

So the video was presented at the second hearing.

Now, the reason, Your Honor, why I don't think it's

particularly typical is that the video, there are only two

remaining defendants that still do any robin hooding.

One of them is Mr. Freeman.

The video is of Mr. Freeman.

His testimony is that he, in the two years in between,

he'd only robin hooded twice.

So this was one of two times in over two years.

Now, the parking enforcement officer who was asked, I think,

put it somewhere between, I think, 10 and 20 times, maybe,

or half a dozen or a dozen.

But any event is clear by all accounts that Mr. Freeman

is robin hooding no more than once a month.

So for that reason alone, it's not a typical scenario

because there's no claim.

The other thing is, in the remand hearing,

there was no testimony that any current robin hooder ever

got too close to any of the defendants.

There was no testimony to any of the parking enforcement

officers.

There was no testimony that they recruited

in personal space except to pass.

There was no testimony that they were ever

asked to step back.

So now, this is admittedly contrast dramatically

to what was occurring two years before.

The only robin hooder who was engaging in robin hooded

activity in any frequency at all was Mr. Eames.

And according to the trial court and according to the witnesses,

his presence was described as being unobtrusive.

He was the one robin hooder who

was described in the first set of hearings

as being respectful.

And he testified without contradiction that he maintained.

So at least part of your position

is factually the situation changed.

Absolutely.

And I think that was critical to the trial court opinion.

And I think, again, when this court set equitable discretion,

it made clear that the judge was

supposed to exercise the discretion based

upon the particular factual circumstance.

So if the circumstances had remained

as, for lack of a better word,

intense as they had been two years earlier,

the trial court might have been justified in joining

some of that conduct.

Well, Your Honor, I think from a First Amendment point of view,

I would still think that that would

have been unconstitutional.

But from a point of view of exercising equitable discretion,

which I think where all this, I mean,

much as I would love to talk about the First Amendment,

I think the trial court was looking at it primarily

from an equitable discretion point of view.

And I think it's clear that that was a crucial factor.

And the difference between the parties really at this point

is the defendants wanting you to look at what

was occurring years ago.

I'm sorry, the plaintiff wants you to look at that.

And the trial judge is saying, no,

we need to focus on what's happening right now.

And the court having exercised its equitable discretion

and focused on the recent time frame,

we have a very deferential standard of review at this

point, don't we?

Absolutely, Your Honor.

I think that's a crucial point.

The court has made clear that when it's a matter

of trial court equitable discretion,

it's not an issue whether the trial court was right or wrong,

but whether the trial court exceeded the broad extent

of its discretionary power or engaged in a mistake of law.

What was the strength of the evidence

that the employees were seeking counseling?

Two points on that.

Your Honor, first of all, that testimony came in the two

years ago, or now almost three years ago at this point,

the first set of hearings.

And it wasn't that they were engaged in counseling.

Well, the testimony was that the city hired

a counselor, city hired a counselor to talk to them.

However, all three parking enforcement officers

testified that they did not themselves

go to an individual counselor.

So there's no testimony of any need for individual counseling.

What their testimony was, was the testimony of the fact

that the city retained a counselor to meet with them.

But Your Honor, that goes, I think,

to the point that was raised earlier in question

to Attorney Deedle, which is even this court said

in the remand that the issue here

for the proud court should be a matter of public safety.

And I certainly agree that public safety

is a fundamental interest.

But there is zero evidence at any point

of any public safety issue, except, as Attorney Deedle said,

on a handful of scenarios where outsiders

attacked Robinhooders.

And again, none of that had occurred within the last two

years.

But in an earlier timeframe, it

had occurred that had race and public safety issues.

The PEOs are members of the police department.

If they need help, they testified

that their protocol was to go to contact the police department.

I asked them, did you ever go to the police department

in regard to Robinhooders?

The answer was no.

Now, in the most recent, except for the third party

assaults, in the most recent scenario,

one of the PEOs testified that there were two scenarios

which made her upset.

Both of those scenarios are a cause for apprehension.

Both of those scenarios involve people

who are not defendants, either originally in this case

or currently in this case.

And what she said was, these people, I didn't know them.

I know the Robinhooders.

I don't like the Robinhooders, but I

know the Robinhooders aren't violent.

These other people came by, didn't know who they were.

They yelled at me.

And I really was apprehensive.

So in fact, the testimony is that my clients are not

causing any public safety issue.

But the concern is that if you issue an injunction,

then the crosswalks are only five feet

wide according to the testimony in the hearing.

So they can't come within five feet.

They're going to have to be outside the crosswalks.

They're going to have to jump off the sidewalks.

So are you saying this is no longer a First Amendment case?

Well, I think it is a First Amendment case,

but I don't think it's necessary to decide this case

on the First Amendment basis.

I think that equitable facts that

will govern the trial court's exercise of discretion

are sufficient to support the trial court ruling.

But there is one point I want to make

which sort of relates to the First Amendment

and also to the equitable discretion.

And that goes back to what Attorney Deedle said earlier

because it's a somewhat subtle point.

And this has to do with the McCollum case.

And his interpretation was the McCollum says,

it's better to have an injunction which is narrower

than to have a broad-based ordinance.

That's not what McCollum says.

McCollum says there's basically a hierarchy

of three types of approaches.

The approach that's most preferable

from a First Amendment perspective

is a generally-based ordinance

because that only punishes conduct

that violates the ordinance.

It doesn't specifically,

it doesn't target anybody as a prior restraint.

So the preference is to have an ordinance across the board.

Only if that fails,

and McCollum would have an ordinance

that led to a number of arrests

because it wasn't here to,

only if the ordinance fails do you go to the next step

of considering injunction.

And one of the things that trial court said in this case

is the city of Keene has a host of other options here.

It has the ordinances it can enforce.

It has the rights and ordinances

vis-a-vis the public areas.

It can adopt new ordinances

which would apply to everybody

but would then wouldn't cover people.

They would cover conduct.

It also, if there's any violation of the criminal law,

there's the right to violate,

the right to enforce under the criminal law.

So the court said a far less restrictive way

to address this vis-a-vis the First Amendment

is to enforce the laws that are there.

And if the local ordinances are not adequate,

then to apply an ordinance that applies across the board.

The, essentially what this is about

is the right to be left alone.

Now in the Doyle case,

this court said strongly questioned

whether the right to be left alone was of constitutional,

was of compelling or even substantial government interest.

The Doyle case being the one of Mount Minadnok.

And then more recently,

the court, the US Supreme Court

really followed that theme in McCollum.

McCollum said the whole point of public sidewalks

in the First Amendment is the ability

to give unwanted messages

to persons who don't wanna hear them.

I mean, it occurs to me, Mr. President,

if we were to agree with your opponent on this,

would that mean that, for example,

let's say in Ferguson, Missouri,

after the shooting,

that the police could get an injunction against protesters

who were not ones who were doing anything violent,

but simply because they were walking up

relatively closely to the police and they were angry,

but let's assume they were not doing anything violent.

I would think it would be pretty hard

for the police to be able to get an injunction

in those circumstances.

Well, Your Honor, I think it should be.

And that's exactly the problem.

Even whether or not there's a right to be left alone,

which I think McCollum really questions

in terms of public sidewalks,

that right should not apply to public employees

because then for the exact reason

that Justice Lynn raises,

because that really cuts at the heart

of the First Amendment.

But the other point here is the real concern,

if you look at the testimony,

it's not the proximity, at least not in recent,

certainly in recent, in recent.

The real concern is about what my clients were saying.

And the parking enforcement officers made it very clear

that they found what my clients were saying

to be obnoxious.

And maybe, you know, depending on your perspective,

maybe what they're saying could be interpreted

to be obnoxious.

But again, that goes to the heart of the First Amendment.

And this court in addressing these type of cases

have really required that things be narrowly tailored,

that they're being narrow tailoring

between the restriction and the state interest.

In this case, it's the opposite of narrow tailoring.

First of all, it only applies to two individuals.

So out of all the people who might engage in Robinhooding,

only two people would be prohibited.

Everybody else could, again, would be unaffected.

So that doesn't protect the parking enforcement officers.

I guess I misunderstood the city's request.

Did they really request that it only apply

to those two individuals as opposed

to a class of individuals?

Right, they've never asked for a class.

They started off by asking for six-year honor,

and now it's been reduced down to two.

But there's never been a request beyond those two.

And the other way in which it doesn't serve

the interests that are stated is, again,

is the parking enforcement officers have made clear

that what they really are upset about

is what's being said to them.

Now, it's true when they're asked leading questions,

would you rather have the demonstrators stay further away?

The response to that has been yes.

But the core concern, which has not required

leading questions, is we don't like what they're saying to us.

We don't even like it when they ask us what the weather is.

And that, again, is whether you sympathize

with their feelings or not on this.

I mean, that is core speech.

And if the injunction were to be granted, what would happen

is that my clients, instead of being

able to engage in conversation, would

have to yell from a further distance away.

And again, going back to Justice Roberts in the McCullum

case, that really goes to the heart of the First

Amendment, the capability of delivering

an unwelcome message to somebody on a public street.

That is where the essence, I think, of the First Amendment lies.

And that's why I think the trial court properly

avoided the constitutional problems

by making a ruling based on equitable discretion.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you.

Anything to add, Mr. Dietl?

A lot of what we heard from Attorney Meyer

is attacking the significance of the government's interests.

That's not genuinely a dispute nor was it challenged on appeal.

The trial court found that the city

has ongoing significant governmental interests.

And so the error that we think occurred here

is one of law and one of fact.

The court applied a standard under constitutional law

that does not exist.

It found all three criteria to determine

that these injunctions were constitutional

and then imposed an extra analysis.

So to the extent that the court denied relief

on constitutional grounds, that's not sustainable.

That is an error of law.

So the only other way to look at this

is to say, well, did the court have a valid reason

to deny this just as an injunction generally?

And it doesn't.

There is an irreparable injury here.

The defendants would dispute how much the injury is,

but there is an injury, and that's

been recognized by the trial court.

What is the irreparable injury?

We fully expect that this is going

to bubble up and continue.

And that we can't know exactly what the consequences are,

but the two remaining parking enforcement officers

were once three.

One has quit.

And part of the reason why we believe

that the parking enforcement officers are still there

is because they've known that the court is looking at this.

We don't know if they're still

going to want to continue to work

under these circumstances going forward.

But isn't there something to the fact that they,

this is sort of inherent in the job?

If a police officer said, jeez, to go back

to the Ferguson example, I don't like

being on the street protecting businesses or whatever

when there are angry people that are out in the street

protesting, would we say that's the reason

to grant an injunction against the protesters?

Respectfully, I think your honor's comparison

is not directly on point here and not applicable.

And the reason being is that what you're describing

as individuals there, an expectation

that as a parking enforcement officer

you're going to encounter hostile people.

We're dealing with three years of ongoing conduct

by specific individuals.

I think that has a markedly different character and impact.

But the court, and I see my time is up.

You can finish your sentence.

The court also denied this because it found factually

that there was no significant impact,

that there was a significant impact.

I think if the court looks at the factual findings

that the city has requested a 10 foot separation

and that this can all occur at 10 feet,

that there is no significant impact.

Thank you, your honor's.

Case submitted.
