This is case 2015, 0155, state of New Hampshire versus Dominic Stanton, senior.

The record should reflect the fact that Justice Hicks is disqualified from this case.

And as well, although Justice Bassett is medically unable to be here today,

we expect that he will participate.

Mr. Johnson.

May it please the court, Christopher Johnson on behalf of Dominic Stanton.

The constitutional question this case presents is a choice between two rules to

define the scope of the waiver of the Fifth Amendment privilege.

The state's rule is that any testimony by a defendant waves the privilege,

even as to matters unrelated to that testimony.

The defense rule is that, as with any other witness,

the scope of the waiver of the privilege is determined by the scope of the witness's direct testimony.

The notable.

You acknowledge that New Hampshire is the minority rule.

That's what you're telling us.

As to the rules of evidence, yes.

And the constitutional question is apart from the rules of evidence.

And so you say we need to consider the constitutional limitation and perhaps narrow our rule of evidence.

Right.

Based on constitutional considerations.

Yes, precisely.

I mean, the way I would say, there's nothing unconstitutional about the rule of evidence,

except when it's applied against a testifying defendant under the circumstances where

the testimony on cross is unrelated to anything that the defendant would have said.

Can I just ask you this question?

Is there, your client, after the ruling, your client did not, in fact, testify?

That's right.

So is there some loose versus United States kind of issue that you didn't testify?

And so you therefore, this issue is not preserved?

I don't think so.

I mean, for one thing, the state hasn't argued that.

And secondly, a couple of the cases cited in the briefs,

the Vermont case in my brief and the Tim case in the state's brief,

involve circumstances where courts reach the merits of this issue,

even though there, as here, the defendant in response to the ruling didn't testify.

And more broadly, I think this is different than the Atkins situation under Rule 609,

because in effect it would be odd to require a defendant to undergo

the unconstitutional compulsion of testimony on cross when he's preserved

the issue pretrial in a way that fully presents it and there's nothing.

But isn't that sort of, I mean, isn't that, I mean, all those same

arguments applied in loose, didn't they?

And we followed loose in saying, if you don't actually testify, then, you know.

Yeah, I think, I guess I would, I just have to say that I think that

because it's not raised and because, I mean, isn't, I mean, I guess what I'm

really sort of saying is, isn't one of the real difficulties here is,

how do we know that your client really would have testified?

I mean, we don't really, well, I mean, I mean, you know, to the extent

that one can commit pretrial or a prehearing to a decision, he committed.

I mean, the council filed the motion saying it is our plan that

he will testify as to the June events.

We want to be clear before we put him up to do that,

that he can't be crossed on the August events.

And there was a reason why that line was drawn, which was his,

the underlying charges arising out of the June events had been adjudicated.

And so he sort of, he finished being in jeopardy for that.

But he hadn't yet, I mean, the court, even, I mean, despite what he said,

the court certainly couldn't, you know, he says, I represent the court,

I'm going to testify.

Then he doesn't, the court couldn't say, well, sorry.

Well, the, right.

But the other thing I would say is the state is, there's no, I mean,

it would be, I think, wrong to enforce a kind of preservation issue here

because the state hasn't articulated any way that it was prejudiced

by the fact that he didn't end up testifying at all.

I mean, they, they presented their arguments.

The issue was fully fleshed out.

The judge heard everything she needed to hear.

Okay. All right.

But let me ask, let me just ask you one other question.

The thing that seems to me that makes this case a somewhat

harder argument for you than it might be in other circumstances is

we're talking about sort of a, for lack of a better term, a single crime.

And what I mean by that is, although there were three incidents

that were alleged to be the basis for imposing the suspended sentence,

it was, that, the question was whether the suspended sentence should be imposed

and there was only one suspended sentence.

So I guess the, isn't this more like, if we accepted your argument,

wouldn't this be more like a defendant is charged with conspiracy?

And there's, you know, 35 over at Acts alleged in furtherance of the conspiracy.

And he says, Your Honor, I want to be able to get up and testify

that I didn't do Acts 2 and 3, but I don't want you to be able to cross examine me.

And it seems to me that the case law says you can't do that kind of stuff.

Right. Well, I think this is what I would say.

I think is that, in effect, what your question is,

is because this was all packaged under imposition of a suspended sentence

and the question was, did he violate good conduct,

it would be different than if it was packaged as the underlying

three separate underlying criminal charges.

Right. I mean, I guess what I would say about that is that,

you know, that elevates, in a way, form over substance

because the person has the privilege against self-incrimination

in any of, no matter how the proceeding is packaged.

But is there some difficult, I mean, I guess one of the things

that would be difficult is you say, for example,

that, well, that could be a sort of a severance.

But if the court, let's assume the court did that.

Right. If the court severed and then heard, you know,

like the first incident and said, OK, I find that you've violated

and imposed something, would there be some issue of, you know,

something like double jeopardy?

You can't, well, you can't do this again now.

You've already found me that I was a bad behavior.

You can't sentence me again.

No. I mean, I guess what I would say is one could conceptually

regard this hearing, subdivide this sentence in position

hearing into a guilt phase and a sentencing phase.

And in fact, he had two suspended sentences that were hanging

over him.

And so, I mean, I think a court could have adjudicated

the guilt of the good conduct violation separately.

And then, suppose the court, you know,

even after he was allowed to testify just as to June,

had also found that to be a violation of good conduct.

But the ultimate issue is whether he was of good conduct.

Yes.

And so, similar to Justice Lin's spinning out a hypothetical,

I was thinking about, well, what if we have a defendant

and there's a motion to bring forward

and the motion to impose is based

on the defendant's alleged possession of 100 photos,

child pornography.

And the defendant says, I want to testify on photo 73.

Right.

I didn't take that photo where I wasn't in possession of that.

But I don't want to be questioned on the other 99.

Right.

That's where your argument leads, doesn't it?

Right.

I think the question, you know, that the rule that I'm

proposing, the inquiry it would lead to,

is, well, in what exactly does the defendant say

in your hypothetical when he would get up and say,

I don't know anything about number 73?

If it's, you know, I have a broad understanding

of what relatedness would mean.

And if his testimony denying possession of photo 73

implies anything about the other 99,

they can cross them about any of them.

Because he has advanced testimony

that makes that cross related to what he said.

But as if, I suppose if each, he had 100 different houses

and there's 100 different computers or one computer

in each house, and they only, you know, in house number 73,

I can envision a situation.

I think your question is right, where a person could testify

about that one without giving testimony related to the rest.

But isn't that, you know what, here's

the other thing I guess I see as a problem.

Suppose that we adopt your rule.

And the defendant, let's make it simpler.

Somebody, the defendant is charged

with three sales of heroin.

He takes the position, look, I want to get up.

I'm going to testify that the first one, I didn't do it.

And I want to get up and testify.

So the judge says, OK, I'm going to let you get up

and testify.

So now the guy gets up and he testifies.

And all he says is, I didn't, you know, I wasn't there.

I didn't do number one, the first sale.

So now the prosecutor gets up on cross

and the prosecutor is prohibited

from asking him about two and three.

I mean, isn't there a danger, or at least

wouldn't there be a basis for the prosecutor

to ask for an instruction on this?

Because wouldn't there be a danger

that the jury is going to be saying, hey, wait a minute,

the state is alleging that he committed three sales.

The prosecutor didn't even ask him about the other two.

There must be something fishy going on.

So no, I think that could be fair.

I mean, I think ordinarily the instruction that's given

is when a defendant says nothing about something,

there's an instruction, you can't use that

against the defendant.

And if the defendant says something about one thing,

but nothing about something else.

Right, but stop and think about this.

Now, so let's say you agree that the court

can give an instruction.

So isn't there a real problem with that now?

Because now what's the court's going to say to the jury?

Ladies and gentlemen of the jury,

you have to understand that the prosecutor is not

allowed to ask the defendant about anything

other than what he testified about.

Isn't that starting to, and then the judge

is going to give the instruction about,

you can't, the Fifth Amendment instruction,

isn't that going to suggest a sort of highlight to the jury?

Gee, this guy didn't deny.

Yeah, well.

This guy didn't deny number two and three.

It must be that he didn't deny it for a reason.

I mean, that may be, but maybe that's the price

a defendant has to pay if they want to slice it this way.

But that's a defendant's choice.

My point is that the rule governing the scope of cross,

the waiver of the privilege, is a rule of fairness and need.

And if the prosecutor doesn't have any need

to cross about a subject, let me assert it,

the prosecutor has no need to cross about something about

which the defendant has said nothing.

You know, I wonder, this is an odd situation

in that the incident that your client wanted to testify

about had already been adjudicated.

And the court found him not guilty of the charge of loitering

and placed on file the resisting.

Right.

And so he got a pretty good deal on that.

So did he, I mean, it seems to me he was better off not

wanting to testify, because then counsel could argue, look.

This matter has been adjudicated already

in the criminal context, where the burden of proof

is beyond a reasonable doubt.

Here's what the circuit court did.

And therefore, Judge, I think you should not

find him more likely than not to have.

I mean, they could argue that, but I

think the state is certainly entitled.

This Court's case law makes clear.

They're not bound by his acquittal.

They think they can prove a violation of good conduct.

They're entitled to do that.

But you know what, can I?

No, I hear you.

I think let me just ask you this other question.

If you say that these other offenses that he didn't

want to testify to are not relevant,

and I guess my question is those other two offenses

are either of those felonies?

Yes.

They are.

So here's the thing that I guess I have some other difficulty

with.

You say they're not relevant.

But if these were convictions, if he

had been convicted of those offenses,

the judge would have discretion to say, this can come in.

I can consider this on his general credibility.

That's true.

And so I mean, so that sort of suggests that it is relevant.

And I guess what I'm sort of thinking

is, suppose that he were to take the witness van

and he was asked on cross-examination,

did you commit these other two felonies?

And he said yes.

I mean, wouldn't that be, if he said yes,

wouldn't the judge be able to take that

into consideration on the issue of credibility?

Now, obviously, it also has to do with the substance.

But I mean, that could have a bearing

on his credibility for the one that he

did want to testify about.

Well, but for one thing, the state

hasn't argued that here.

And that is a crucial fact about this case,

which distinguishes it from most of the case law,

is they have not said that the August events had anything

to do with credibility.

And the reason would be, because he hadn't been convicted,

that 609 wouldn't have brought them in for credibility.

And the state concedes, because they haven't argued otherwise,

that there is no other connection between the two

other than the same man as the defendant.

And so unlike all the case law,

or most of the case law, which these questions have

risen, the state does not have an alternative argument here.

And anyways, even if we don't get the benefit of this sort

of you're up there and then no holds barred rule,

in those other cases, the state had the argument also.

And you know, anyways, given what you said on direct,

this turned out it was related.

So you lose under a relatedness rule.

And that's why I think the court can't say

that this has been a decided issue.

Because in the courts, in those other cases,

the choice between rules becomes kind of dicta.

And blurred, because they're analysis,

they might sometimes state a rule favorable to us,

or sometimes state the rule as if it's the rule the state

prefers.

But then they apply a relatedness analysis often.

And so it isn't, so if you accept

that it's not a decided issue, then the question becomes,

what's the logic?

And again, I get to fairness.

The state has no need for this cross.

Insofar, and given that it's not

related to anything the defendant will have said on direct,

they have no need to cross him to put anything

he said in context.

He hasn't gained anything on the August charges

by what he will have said about the June charge.

And it's not a jury trial.

And it's not using.

So they're just getting a bonus, sort of,

you punch your ticket for testifying about anything,

and then we can talk to you on cross about anything at all.

And that is different from the way

this has dealt with any of the other cases.

I guess that's the thing I have a problem with,

is if it would be true that if he had

been convicted of these other things,

that that could be used, at least in the discretion of the judge.

For credibility.

For credibility, right.

So my question, though, is, I mean, my concern

is that it seems to me the policy of the law

is the reason we allow the conviction is it's very

firm, if you've got a conviction,

it's very firm that you did it.

And so what I'm sort of saying is,

if you put the person on the stand

and the state can ask, did you do that?

And if the person would truthfully say, yes, I did it,

isn't that even better than a conviction?

There's no question now.

He's admitted that he did it.

And that would have a bearing on his credibility

on the other charge.

But I guess my point would be it's not fair to ask him

that, because now he's incriminating himself

on appending charge by answering honestly,

yes, I did those August things, they

have no reason why they should be allowed to ask that.

And the one final point I'd make,

and I see my red lights on, is that there's

a paradox in the state's position

is that the defendants are treated differently

and worse than any other witness.

Because any other witness comes to these trials

and is allowed, question by question, to invoke.

And if they've already said something

on direct that sort of makes this question cross-related,

they're going to have to answer.

But if they haven't, they don't.

Well, except that, I mean, isn't the problem, though,

that if it's related to something to do with what's

on trial before the court?

And here, we're kind of back to the fact

that these are the three things that really all are an issue.

Right, right, but then the other paradox

is by virtue of the fact that they happened

to have been joined together, and they didn't have to be,

because the court could have, in this court

could avoid the whole constitutional issue

by saying under 97A or under the inherent authority,

they could have just severed it.

If they'd done so, then the constitutional question

wouldn't have arisen.

And so it's, isn't it arbitrary that the happenstance

of jointer has dripped?

Is it the dog, and the constitutional right

is the tail?

Thank you.

Thank you.

Good afternoon.

May it please the court.

My name is Sean Locke, and I represent the state

of New Hampshire.

The state asked that this court

affirm the trial court's decision,

because when a defendant chooses to cast aside or waive

his privilege against self-incrimination and testify

a trial, he cannot later, at his leisure,

re-invoke the privilege against self-incrimination

because he becomes like any other witness

and is bound by the same rules and conditions

as any other witness.

But Mr. Johnson points out to us

that other witnesses would be allowed to re-invoke

their rights.

And I guess it's slightly unclear to me

as to what those rights are.

I mean, another witness who testifies at any trial

would be subject to cross-examination regarding

any relevant issue presented at trial

or related to the issues being decided before the court.

Unless that witness is posed a question that

implicates his or her Fifth Amendment rights,

and then they can say, sorry, not answering that.

Well, at that point, then the court

would have to have a, believe it would

have to have a Richard's hearing to determine

whether or not it actually implicates

their Fifth Amendment rights.

It's not some sort of blanket power a witness has

to say, I'm not going to answer that question.

And even if that is the case, the United States Supreme Court

jurisprudence has been clear that the court doesn't

have to make wavering the privilege against self

incrimination a cost-free endeavor.

It doesn't have to have absolutely no consequence

to the defendant, with the exception of the rare circumstances

where maybe not so rare circumstances where

the defendant is presented with a Sophie's choice of,

either I vindicate this set of constitutional rights

and, damn, my Fifth Amendment rights,

or I sit on and protect my Fifth Amendment right

by not testifying.

That is not what was happening in this situation.

In this situation, the defendant was presented with,

as Judge Lynn pointed out several times,

a set of circumstances that were the issue before the court

was whether or not he had violated the condition

of good behavior that was as part of his suspended sentence.

And all three of the kind of chart allegations

the state brought are evidence that needs

to be considered determining whether or not the defendant,

or that go to that issue, whether or not the defendant

had violated the condition of good behavior.

So you say we can answer this question very narrowly,

because we have to keep our eye on the ball here.

This is a motion to impose based

on alleged violation of good conduct,

as opposed to a criminal trial where separate offenses

have been joined for trial.

Correct.

Your Honor, yes.

The defendant cites rule 97A as a persuasive point in terms

of whether or not these issues should have been severed,

but rule 97A applies to issues of jointer at trial.

It does not apply to a motion to impose.

And if the trial court were to decide

that it would be an exercise of its discretion

as to whether or not to sever issues in a motion

to impose if it even can, given Judge Lynn's point

about the potential double jeopardy implications

of trying this issue multiple times.

I mean, even beyond that, it seems to me

that the analogy between this proceeding and a proceeding

where, for example, there's one charge, the conspiracy,

but there are several over at Acts alleged in favor of it.

I mean, I guess the problem I would see

with severing this is what if the situation

were such that the trial judge would say,

if I heard only the evidence, the situation was that

if the trial judge heard only the evidence

of the first incident, let's say,

the judge might say, eh, I'm really not,

I'm really sort of not persuaded

that the person has not been of good behavior

based on this.

Just as a jury might say, at first over at Act,

I'm not really, I don't think the person's

committed that or whatever, but having heard

a number of over at Acts or a number of the violations,

it's the cumulative effect that persuades the judge

that the person's not been of good behavior

and to require the state to bifurcate that

would be like saying, in effect,

try your conspiracy case one over at Act at a time.

Right, and I would agree, and I agree with

what you seem to be suggesting,

there's no basis to have these issues severed

to begin with, but I was just kind of

going with the example here, and I think

what this court needs to be careful about

and considering this issue is that,

I mean, the defendant's position is essentially

trying to constitutionalize the majority rule of evidence

which the United States Supreme Court has declined to do.

I mean, there are decisions from state courts

that follow the minority rule that go as recent

as just 2014 and the United States Supreme Court

has not been without opportunity to say

the Fifth Amendment is limited to

what the defendant chooses to testify about

on direct examination, and the state cannot go beyond that

in pursuing a cross-examination,

and that it's consistent with what this court

has held for over a century,

and with respect to how a defendant,

once he chooses to cast aside

his privilege against self-incrimination,

must be treated.

The issue here, if you think about it,

is whether or not the defendant's really being compelled.

The defendant has voluntarily chosen

to testify at this hearing, if he were to have done so.

He's no longer claimed to have been compelled

at some point to testify against himself

because he's made the voluntary choice.

I don't know if this court has any other questions

at this time, I would rest on my briefs.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Council may come forward in appeal of Marti.
