This is case 2015-07-01 in the matter of Anna Grenoble and James Grenoble.

Good morning, may it please the court. My name is Michael Pearson and I'm proud this afternoon to be representing Anna Grenoble

in her appeal from the divorce decree entered by the Edd related orders entered by the Brentwood Family Division.

After 15 years of marriage, Anna leaves with primary responsibility to raise three children,

and marital property and debt basically evening out at $1,000. James, on the other hand, leaves with $292,000 of the marital estate

and no obligation to pay a cent of child support. And I'd like to make three main points in this.

As a matter of law, RSA 45816A requires that this determination of what property is in the marital estate is a pure question of law.

And we believe that the lower court essentially took the marital home out of the estate because it was a gift from James's mother.

You say essentially. How does that appear in the record?

I think that the lower court tries to cloak it with discretion and say that it's justified to be awarded to James

because it was a gift in the marriage. Supposedly, we, of course, dispute that.

And she earns more and she's younger and she'll be able to somehow make up $292,000 in the 10 years of age difference.

$292,000 of wealth. Not that she's going to earn that much, but she's going to, while raising three kids, be able to rebuild $292,000.

Well, if we accept the court's explanation at face value, isn't that a sustainable exercise of discretion in regard to the property division?

No. And I don't believe that it is, Your Honor. And that's the second part of this that I guess that I would make more specifically

is that that would be an abusive discretion to have such a lopsided distribution of the marital assets under the circumstances of this case,

which again includes primary responsibility for the children with the mother and 292 times more of the marital estate going to the father.

If there's nothing else that's an abusive discretion, that's an abusive discretion and it can't be justified the way that the court justified it.

The justifications aren't enough. The fact that she earns $63,000 compared to his $23,000, that's figured into the child.

Is it $23,000 or $30,500? Is my math wrong?

You know what, Your Honor, I just roughly calculated it just before I stood up, so I haven't looked at that number recently.

Okay.

But in any case, you have a disparity in their income and their income potential, but not to the degree that it justifies this kind of departure

from the child support guidelines and from the equal distribution that is required by the statutes.

The guidelines had him at $600 a month.

Yes, Your Honor.

And he was ordered to pay no support, not even the $50 minimum.

Not even a $50 minimum.

Any, the lower court determined that any child support order would be confiscatory under the circumstances of the case.

And I think that, again, within the context, and I guess the context I really keep referring to is the fact that Anna has primary residential responsibility

for all three children, exclusive residential responsibility over the oldest daughter.

Does the father have any physical disabilities that would impede his 51 years old?

Any physical problems that would impede him either getting a second job or looking for a higher paying job?

No, Your Honor.

There's no reason.

In fact, he's a certified drug abuse counselor, and he could possibly pursue something along those lines.

And I guess, to some degree, he was limited in his career just because, I guess, he felt that he had a wife.

Well, he was more or less, you know, not, he wasn't a stay at home, but he provided more of the direct childcare,

because of his hours and whatnot.

Yeah, because of his hours, he was able to be home after school when the children came home from school.

But at this point in the parenting schedule, which was stipulated to, he has the boys two days a week,

and then alternating weekends from Friday after school until Sunday at five.

So she has more than half a great deal of the residential responsibility plus exclusive over Anna.

And she has exclusive decision-making authority over all of them because of his conduct during the pretrial times in this case.

So we believe that, again, whether the court cloaks it as discretionary or tries to cloak its discretion over the marital home or not,

we think it's a question of law that was improperly excluded from the marital estate, number one.

Number two, even if it's not, even if you say, well, it's included, it's still an abuse of discretion to have such an unequal distribution of the property under these circumstances.

And if you look at the different cases.

Thank you, Councilor. Your light's on.

Thanks.

Yes.

Thank you.

Thank you.

May it please the court.

My name is David Balanson.

I represent James Grownwall.

And I'm happy to take any questions.

Mr. Balanson, is my math wrong?

Is your client earning $30,500 total a year?

I wrote down from the order their monthly income.

Mr. Grownwall makes $2,001 a month, and Mrs. makes $5,245.

But I thought the court said he also makes $541 a month in business income.

I added that to the $2,000.

Then I multiplied by 12.

I don't believe there's any additional income beyond the $2,001.

Really?

My client happens to be present.

Well, I know, but I'm working from the trial courts.

Okay.

Okay.

All right.

Well, the reason that I'm curious as to what his total earnings are, I suppose that's going to be reflected in the file, in the financial affidavit?

Yes.

Okay.

Whether it's the $30,000 that I calculated or a lower amount, I will just confess to you, and you appeared in front of me a number of times in family court matters when I was on the trial bench.

Even at the lower amount, I don't know that I ever relieved someone of the obligation to pay for three children finding it was confiscatory.

I'm really struggling with that in this case.

He has three children, and he was not even ordered to pay the $50 minimum.

How can that be justified?

I don't think that it's a reversible error for the court to rely on RSA 458C5 because of the significantly high income of the primary custodial parent.

She makes $60,000.

Am I right?

Yes.

Well, yes.

$52.45 a month.

Oh, all right.

So less than $60,000.

So we're not talking about that she's a surgeon making $350,000 a year.

That's correct.

And also the court notes in the order that James is responsible for 25% of all extracurriculars and uninsured medical expenses.

Right.

And for the reasons articulated earlier in the order with the marital homestead.

The court did conclude that it was a marital asset.

It chose to give it entirely to him.

That's right.

And the reasons I think are justified under 45816A as the court notes.

Would you tell us what those factors are, please?

Yes.

Can I have permission to be seated?

I have some nerve damage.

Absolutely.

Oh, my goodness.

Absolutely.

Thanks.

Thanks.

Sorry to hear that.

You should have said something at the beginning.

Thank you.

It's from diabetes.

And the diabetes went away.

Okay.

CDIN.

Right.

It's 11 years younger.

And the ability to make more money isn't custodian.

All right.

Take your time.

The statutory reasoning.

What was the overall distribution of the marital estate in terms of percentages?

It's all in the house.

So the house is, I mean, I've seen that sort of represented here.

One of the other factors was that your client had used a previous inheritance to pay off marital debt.

Absolutely.

How much?

$50,000.

Okay.

Your red light is on.

Thank you.

Okay.

Submit it.

Court stands adjourned.
