Good morning again.

This is case 2015, 0573, Thomas N. Bonoen et al. versus Joseph A. Cesario, trustee of

the Joseph A. Cesario revocable trust et al.

Yes, counsel. Before you begin, the record will reflect that Justice Delanis is participating

in this case.

Thank you, Your Honor. It may please the court. David Lafeevre appearing on behalf of the

Palence, Thomas Bonoen, and Kathleen Non-Bonoen. I welcome the court's questions at any time.

What if, I want to start with a little bit of a hypothetical here, what if property owners

within the profile state subdivision had done what they were supposed to do? What

if they had formed an association? And what if the original developer had transferred

a title to the association? And what if the association didn't pay the taxes? And what

if the town took the property for nonpayment of taxes from the association? Would the

subsequent purchaser at that tax sale then have to give the property back to the association

because there was a covenant in the declaration that says you have to transfer back to the

association? I think the answer has to be overwhelming.

You may be right on that, but that's a separate question, isn't it, from whether or not the

people who had other lots, who owned the other lots, would still have an easement to use? You

may be right that they wouldn't have to give it back, but they might still have an

easement, wouldn't they?

If I understand your question, Your Honor, and I'm going to maybe rephrase it a little

bit, if what you're saying is this covenant to convey, which is within the declaration,

would not survive a tax sale, but yet potentially there are other restrictions or easements that

would nonetheless survive the tax sale. Am I understanding that?

So if that's the reasoning of the court, we need to take it to complete circle. And

here's what I mean. Our baseline is this tax deed is fee simple, absolute. And the

reason for that is out of necessity because purchasers have to have a certainty of title.

There has to be a marketability of title. So we know that. There's an exception now

to the rule. Exception to the rule is certain easements and restrictions will nonetheless

survive a tax sale. And now what you're suggesting is there's an exception to that

exception, notwithstanding the fact that some easements will survive, others will

not. In this case, the covenant to convey. And so why is it that that style of restriction

will not survive? And I would argue the reason is because it completely undermines our

baseline, which is you get title and fee simple, absolute. And that would undermine the

tax sale process in its entirety. So if we're going to say there's a classification

of covenants that notwithstanding established case law will not survive, what's that

rule going to be? And then I would take that rule, which is, bear with me, your

honor, please, I would take that rule, which it completely undermines the tax sale

process. And I would say it's now possible that I can so severely encumber real

estate with private covenants and private restrictions that it renders it of no

value to the owner. And therefore, that would be no different in effect than

essentially a title to convey, which takes the whole, the entirety of it from

you. But do we not have to look at the entire declaration? The trial court found

that your clients were the developer's successor in title and put your clients

in the shoes of the developer and said the association was never formed. And in

light of that, it continued to be the developer and his successors' responsibility to

maintain the common area, that lot. Do you disagree with the proposition that

your clients are the developer's successor in title?

I think there's two components to that. If the trial court is correct and my

clients as the successor in title were responsible for the full maintenance of

the property, including payment of the real estate taxes, then that, out of

necessity, says the title they got was of the whole. I think I made that

argument fairly clear in my brief. The question with successor in title, and

I don't know that I necessarily agree with that characterization, Your Honor. And

the reason is because of the case law that talks about the tax title. It's a new

title. It's a paramount title. It breaks up all previous titles. You know, a

new title. But you know what, isn't the... So the answer to that question would

be if it genuinely is a new title, a paramount title, they would not be

successor in title to the developer. They would actually, that developer's

title would stop and there would be a brand new title issued. So the

characterization of successor in title, it's not something that we developed in

our appeal. It is something that's clearly in the trial court's order.

But you know what, isn't the whole rationale for the saying, for the rule

that easements that have, whether by adverse possession or granted by

deed, that easements survive a tax sale, if that wasn't the rule, then I would

have to be, if I had an easement over your property, or a lot of people had an

easement over your property, we'd have to be sort of conducting surveillance to

make sure that you were paying your taxes. And you know, generally people

just don't do that. If you are the owner of the fee and I have an

easement on your property, I don't, you know, in the normal scheme of

things, I don't sort of, you know, worry about whether you've, I don't get

notice of that you haven't paid your taxes and I don't conduct surveillance to

make sure that you are paying your taxes.

I would say, I would say that as a matter of public necessity, that is

what drove the exception to the rule, which is based on this tax

assessment. To answer your question, though, you need to, we need to be

clear of what we're talking about. There's one thing when we talk about

like a condominium style covenant where the covenants equally burden and

benefit everybody equally. Everybody is shares in the benefits and they

shares in the burdens. That's one style of restriction. Then there's something

like a building restriction that says only residential uses. Again,

everybody equally burdens and maybe that I can't use my property for

residential purposes, but the fact that you can only use your property

for residential purposes enhances the value. Then there's something like

you suggest, which is maybe what I would characterize as a typical

style easement and access easement across my property to your property,

across my property to the lake, a utility easement, public service can

access my property with an easement. Those types of easements, restrictions,

covenants are completely different factually than what we're talking

about in this case. Here's the big difference to go to your point

specifically. Title was supposed to be held by the association. The

association's membership is supposed to consist of all

the property owners, interestingly enough with the exception of the owner

of the property we're talking about. By virtue of their ownership

interest in the property, they would have the obligation to pay the

taxes. With the cases you're talking about, a great analogy is the

difference between title by adverse possession to title interest in the

real estate and prescriptive easement where the court has said a

tax sale, a tax title will eliminate a title by adverse possession.

Well, only if it hasn't been 20 years. If you claim title by adverse

possession, you've held title for 20 years. Tax sale extinguishes your

title because as the owner of the property you know you have to pay

the taxes. The distinction between a prescriptive easement is you don't

have to pay the taxes. That's one of the reasons why you'll see that the

and I'm saying adverse possession for title and I'm saying prescription

for just the easement, it survives. Whereas in this case, the owners

through their association had the burden of paying the taxes just

like somebody who takes title by adverse possession, they should

know that they have to pay the taxes. One of the things that's

really troubling to me about. Yeah, but isn't that I mean isn't

that you know I understand that this is a little bit different and I

tend to think that that that that the court's order was wrong in not

requiring the the the people that are that on your opponents to

have to reimburse you for the taxes that you pay. But it still

seems to me that you would be placing a real burden on every owner

of the association to sort of say, you know, we've got to

because we that if that if we didn't sort of, you know, if we

weren't active members of the association and we're sort of

following what should have been done, we were going to lose our

we were going to lose our our prescriptive easement. I mean,

our we're going to lose our our beneficial easement. That

seems like a big burden to place on people.

It makes but for the fact that the declaration says the

burden is on the owners to form the association. It's not on the

developer to create it. We can't place all the blame on the

developer. And and and that's one of the things that I was

about to say is troubling to me about this case is the trial

court seemed to place all of the fault on the plaintiffs. You

should have known better, etc. But the reality is the

property owners who have been in the Profile States

subdivision, certainly the original owners, one of whom

actually purchased the property. When I say original owners

when there's Mr. Goman. Yes, yes, Mr. Goman. He purchased the

property and original owner clearly. And this and this was a

tax sale, not a tax lien. So the distinction being the sale

occurs. There's a two year right of redemption, as opposed to

the way we do it. Most municipalities do it now.

Anyone of these owners could have stepped up. Mr. Goman

could have stepped up from the association redeemed the

property. I think it was $86 back in 19. Whenever this

happened, it was it was nominal sum of money. But you know, if

we're if we're talking about equity, why wouldn't I mean,

you're you know, your client got this property for $100. It

really it seems to me that Gomot, you know, that Gomot

was sort of trying to do a benefit for the for all the

other owners. He wasn't intending to sell this

property, make a lot of money, develop it, do

anything like that. Because presumably he knew that this

property was so heavily burdened with all these other with all

these other with all the easements of all the other

homeowners, that it really wasn't worth very much. Now, you

could say maybe he should have, you know, he should have

he should have sought a tax abatement of sales. He

didn't. But why wouldn't an equitable result here be to

say, Okay, the property has to go back to at least the an

association consisting of at least the people who who

responded to the quiet title action, the ones that were

defaulted, that seems to be a different story. But at least

the ones that responded to the quiet title action, but it's

on condition that they have to proportionally reimburse your

clients for the taxes he paid over the since 2001.

Number one is because my clients hold title and fee

simple. And to order them to convey that property for no

consideration is is is a taking, in my opinion. And this

declaration doesn't contemplate any circumstance other than an

association of the owners holding that title. And from

that flows their rights to use the property. I do want to

touch on the notion of the equity though, and well,

didn't didn't the people who bought the property at the

inception of the subdivision, they had easement rights

before the creation of the association? Right, I think

that's a fantastic question, Your Honor. And I was thinking

about that immediately before coming coming up here. And the

way I would characterize that is there's clearly this time

period where, you know, when the development has been

approved, but it hasn't been built out at all. And so at

that point, the developers paying the all the real estate

taxes in his entirety. And then now one lock gets

subdivided off. Okay, and then at that point, still,

the developers paying the entirety of the real estate

taxes on this common land. And in three, four, five, six

down the line, until eventually at some point, that burden is

going to be transferred to them when it becomes feasible to

do so pursuant to the declaration at 51%. And so at

some point, there's going to be this in between time. And

what you're getting at is, well, what are the rights of

the property owner at that time to use the property before

they take title? And they had a right, didn't they? And I

would characterize that as essentially an interim right to

use. I would characterize that as a permissive use. Well, it

wasn't permissive. It was under the declaration. It would be

with the permission of the developer. I mean, at that

point in time. And again, what that brings me back to is is

the whole manner in which this analysis works is is the tax

title, the basis of the tax title is a tax assessment. We

know that the developer was paying the full value. I know

it's a disputed issue of fact, but the trial court assumed that

the developer was playing the full amount of the tax assessed

value at the time of the taking. And the tax title is

derivative of that. You got the assessment as the basis

of the title. If I could, actually I know I'm going to

run out of time in a minute, just speak to the equities of

it, the $100 consideration. Number one, you can have

a deed that has recites zero consideration, you know, for

love and affection, if you will. And the value of the

property is not lessened by virtue of the recital of the

consideration in the deed. The other thing that I think-

But this was by quick claim, not warranty deed.

And in New Hampshire, what's the difference between a

quick claim deed and a warranty deed? The quality of the

title is the same. I issue title insurance for quick

claim deeds and I issue title insurance for warranty

deeds. The quality of the title is the same. The

distinction to be had are the covenants of the grant tour,

which warrant, quite frankly, the title during the time

fit of orange ownership. So that's the distinction to be

had there.

But you're not saying that you actually paid more than

$100.

What I'm going to say is this, Your Honor, and if you

look in the record, and this argument because we

argued, it wasn't developed, but the transaction

involved purchasing of their house lot and this

associated acreage. It paid $265,000 for their home.

That value that they paid may very well have reflected

more than one of these standard lots because it came

with all this additional acreage. The fact that the

transaction came through with two deeds, one with

a $40 tax stamp on it and the other without

doesn't mean that's not the value of the property.

My time is up, Your Honor, but can I just complete my

thought a little bit?

Would you just complete your thought?

Well, with my time's up, I'm done with my thought.

Thank you. Thank you very much, Your Honor.

May it please the court? My name is Matthew Dulude, and

I represent the Apelles, Ronald, and Rita Dulude, and

I'll welcome questions at any time.

Can I ask you a first question then?

Yes, indeed.

What about the people who defaulted on this

action, who never answered it as to whom a default

judgment was entered?

Do, I mean, my inclination would be that as to those

people, there was a petition to quiet title, they

didn't respond, they no longer have any interest

in this property. Why would I mean, is that, what's

your view on it?

I don't think that's fair, Your Honor. Partly

because we don't know why they defaulted. We

don't know that they were properly served. We

don't have any information as to whether or not

they got proper notice of this action.

Oh, sure. But I would, subject to their being

to be able to make that kind of a claim.

Somebody comes in and says, I didn't get notice.

I didn't. But assuming that there was no such

claim as that, or that that sort of a claim wouldn't

survive, aren't those people barred from having any,

they can't come back. Somebody couldn't come

back later and say, well, I did get notice.

I didn't participate, but now I want some, I

still have an easement over this property.

There may be a question as to whether or not

they could affirmatively seek to prevail in

the case below. But the fact that we've got a

declaration, we've got an order from the court on

summary judgment saying that the decoration is

enforceable. Once that's filed on the land's

records, if it's affirmed by this court, then

that holds true for all the other property

owners. Their easement rights are going to be

enshrined just as every other property.

Would those members who were defaulted be

equally responsible to reimburse the plaintiff

for taxes if that is what we ultimately

conclude?

Yes, Your Honor, we wouldn't believe that that

would be something for this court to determine

anyway, but if it were to come to that result,

let's say if it's reimbursement of taxes or

something along those lines, that has to be

borne equally by all 70 law owners. I believe

it's 65 in this case when it really comes

down to the numbers. But those all who

take, all who are part of it.

That's what you anticipate because even though

they were defaulted, these other people who

will now become members of the association,

nonetheless, you say if we ordered reimbursement,

they would still be responsible to

participate equally.

That's correct, Your Honor. We'd have to be distributed

equally. Essentially, they're saying whatever

judgment comes from this case, we don't

contest it, we let it go forward. In this

case, we've achieved a determination that

the declaration is enforceable. We would

seek to file that on the land records. If

their third count, count three, were to be

granted in some limited fashion, let's say,

by reimbursement of the taxes, then that

amount would have to go to them as defaulted

individuals. The fact that they didn't come

stand and say, I shouldn't have to pay it for

one reason or another, that would...

So you're saying that no part of the order,

quieted title, sufficient to extinguish

defaulting party's interests in this

property?

I don't believe so, Your Honor. No, because

ultimately, this is the way this is

going to happen in almost every land

transaction. There are going to be

certain individuals who are going to press

this more strenuously than others.

True, but the statute's pretty strict. It

says that people who default shall be,

the title shall be declared, I'm paraphrasing,

that they have no interest in the property.

But then there would be a problem where

we had achieved victory on the

declaration. We had determined that it

was enforceable, and then there would be

this problem now where some people

weren't able to continue their rights

versus others. They may take that

position. It wouldn't... It would

make more sense if the decoration

were enforceable for all of the

residents, because that's the terms

of the declaration. And they were on

notice. And they were on notice. And don't

forget, Your Honor, we requested below

when we filed the motion for summary

judgment, we requested not only relief

on behalf of ourselves, because the

first count specifically asks for a

determination as to whether or not

this declaration is enforceable.

Right. And we said, yes, we call

your... We want to talk about the

declaration being enforceable, and we

raise you... We're entitled to

enforceability. And we said in our

pleadings that we seek this on our

behalf, and we seek this on behalf of

all the other respondents who have

been sued in this action. But I

guess, let's follow this through. Let's

suppose that we say the

trial court got it right, except

that it really is sort of

inequitable for your clients to

have sort of sat back for all

these years and let... And not form

the association and let your

opponent and Mr. Gommant pay the

taxes for all these years. And you

didn't do anything. And that... It

does seem to me that you're...

At least that part of your

opponent's argument has some merit,

at least as an equitable matter,

that you shouldn't be able... He

shouldn't be stuck with paying

the taxes all those years. Your

clients get the benefit. You were

really, if you had formed the

association, would have been

paying the taxes. But so what I

wanted to get at though is let's

follow this through. Let's suppose

we say, okay, all of the... You

know, even the people that were

defaulted were... They still get

the benefit of this. They're

not... They haven't lost their

easement over the property. Okay.

But we say though, you know,

they have to... Everybody who's

going to get the benefit

proportionately has to pay back

your opponent for the taxes he

paid. And, you know, however

many, 10 of those people or

whatever, whoever, however many

were, you know, that defaulted

say, hey, what are you talking

about? I don't care about

that. I didn't... I'm not

paying this tax. Then what

happens? Do they... Does that

mean that, you know, your

opponent only gets back the

proportion of the people who

are willing to pay it? Why

wouldn't it be more equitable

to say, listen, only those

people who defended the quiet

title action are the ones

remaining to have an

interest, an easement interest

over that property. And so if

there's only 10 of them that

are left, it's those 10

people who defended who have

to pay the proportional share

of the taxes. And they're

the only ones that can use

the easement. The other

people, they didn't, they, you

know, they didn't defend.

They're out.

Because, Your Honor, the terms

of the declaration apply

equally to all. We sought

the relief on behalf of all.

They didn't respond. They had

to cross... They objected

and cross-moved for some

of your judgment. They did

not respond saying that we

were not entitled to really

come behalf of all.

But there's another factor,

I suppose, and that is that

the order was that the

association be created. And

that's a legal animal. So

that ultimately all members

of the association will have

to ante up if there's an, if

we order reimbursement of the

plaintiffs. But it's through

the association, which is a

legal entity. So presumably

it wouldn't matter whether

one of the defaulting parties

says, I'm not interested

in this, as a member of the

association, they would have

the legal obligation to

participate.

That's correct, Your Honor.

And they would be required to

be members of the association

under the terms of the

declaration. So ultimately,

if that part of the order

were to go through and

then, but let's step back

for a second. It's not

equitable for us to have to

pay the taxes that he paid on

this property. Equity speaks

against his relief in that

regard. And we stress this

quite a bit in our brief

and below. This court has

said in National Hospital

that when equitable

distinguishable legal relief

is sought, equitable

distinguishable legal

defenses must be

considered. And delay in

seeking relief is a

particular problem with

seeking equitable relief.

And the problem here is,

in 2001, his clients

got a quick claim deed for

less than $100 on this

property. It's undisputed

on the record that they were

on. Notice of the

declaration. And they

didn't do anything about it.

They didn't go and find

out. If they hadn't brought

a quiet title action like

they do today, back then

in 2001, they would have

had one or two things.

But your clients never

formed the association

either. In the words you

got, I don't disagree

that they certainly

could have sort of

insisted in some way

that the association be

formed, or they could have

moved for a tax abatement

saying this land really

isn't fair market value.

But you could have done

all of those things too.

Your clients could have

formed the association.

They then could have moved

for an abatement saying

this property, we shouldn't

be paying market value

on this property because it

really doesn't have any value

because it's so severely

encumbered. But you

didn't do any of that.

Well, we didn't need to.

We were enjoying the

common land, or my clients

and the other respondents

were enjoying the common land

without having to go

through the...

So your argument is

because Gomond, who owned

the property before the

current plaintiffs,

never did anything to

reflect that he wasn't

allowing the land to be used

commonly for recreation

so that the other owners

just assumed that things

went on the way they were

supposed to go on.

They had a right to use

the property for recreation.

That's correct, Your Honor.

He didn't build on it.

He didn't prohibit people

from coming on them.

That's correct, Your Honor.

The trial court made a very

specific determination

on this point and said that up

until July of 2014,

there's no evidence

that the judge had a record.

That was when the variance was granted.

Right. And that's the only

indication that they had

that they were going to act

contrary to the easements.

The trial court was very clear on this.

And this is really an important part.

But isn't that really...

I mean, you're sort of saying, OK,

well, it was OK for us

to just sort of sit on our duff

and allow Mr. Gomond

to sort of act

to do things that were sort of

in our interest,

even though we should have been paying our...

We should have formed the association.

We should have each been paying

our fair share of the taxes.

Hey, we don't have to do anything

because Gomond's doing it for us

and, you know, he's such a nice guy.

So it's OK for us to just sit back.

Is that really equitable?

It is, Your Honor,

because the way this course precedents

Buckles, Gowan, Marshall

have always come down on this.

The easements, covenants

and restrictions on a property

are not something

that are incumbent upon the dominant

estate holders to police

and make sure that they're done

one way or another.

Well, and presumably,

your clients had an estate

that was benefited by the easements

and they could have been assessed

some of that value.

They could have, Your Honor.

And that's how it should have been done

in terms of the town assessing the value.

It should have anewered

to your clients' valuation

and they should have been taxed on it.

And very few people go to towns

and say, well, excuse me,

you should be charging me more.

That's correct, Your Honor.

Nobody tends to do that,

that people don't like paying taxes.

So if there's a fault here,

it's in the valuation by the assessor.

Right. So under this court's decision,

particularly Marshall most recently,

the tax assessor is presumed

to properly assess the value

of the property.

And this court's decision

to Marshall says that the burden on correcting that

is through an abatement.

The burden is on the property holder

of the serving estate.

To go to the town and say, look,

my property's not being properly assessed.

That burden is on the serving estate holder,

not on us.

It's not on the dominated estate holder to do that.

And that presumption is conclusive.

It's conclusive in the cases of prescriptivision.

It's where it's more tricky.

In Gowan, it's a couple of wheel tracks

and some brakes in the wall.

How is an assessor gonna actually,

as a practical matter,

tell that that needs to be properly assessed?

But in this case,

it's on the record,

it's on the land record.

To assume that the assessor doesn't do their job

when it's on the land records,

in many cases you see, like in Marshall,

where the discussion is,

well, maybe that's okay

to have this conclusive presumption

when it's a recorded easement.

Maybe that's one thing.

But for a prescriptive easement,

we shouldn't do that because there's no way to tell.

Refresh our recollection.

What did the deeds say?

Did they acknowledge the declaration,

the deed to Gomont,

and then the deed from Gomont to the plaintiffs?

So there's the property deed

that they actually had.

That's specifically referenced.

The property deed to their home

referenced the decoration specifically.

The original covenant and decoration

was recorded on the land records

in index with respect to Lot 71,

which was the common land.

The tax sale deed,

and this is actually another important critical point

that's an independent basis for affirmance

of the trial court's transfer of the property.

The tax deed itself said

that it conveyed the whole property with the pertinences.

It didn't even,

it's not like the Buckholz decision

where it was a quick clean deed with no covenants,

where it attempted to eliminate the covenants.

The tax sale deed in this case said

it was the conveyance of the whole estate

with the pertinences.

And the pertinences in this case is the decoration.

And then Gomont quick claimed to himself and his wife,

and then it was subsequently conveyed

by quick claim deed for $100 to the petitioners.

And that's the deed that ultimately existed.

But when they got that deed,

they also got a deed to their own house

that specifically referenced the decoration.

And the trial court correctly held

that it was undisputed in this case

that they were on record notice of the decoration.

And they didn't dispute that

in the summary judgment record.

And that's another critical point here.

We have RSA 491-8-A for a reason.

A lot of these arguments,

they have to be raised in the summary judgment proceedings.

We didn't have any explanation,

a lot of things on the other side.

And when you have these arguments

and these arguments aren't defeated in summary judgment,

then summary judgment stands in our favor.

And it does for a lot of reasons.

And in addition to the law

and to the actual nature of the tax sale,

I just wanna make one other point

on the conveyance of the property,

the transfer of the common land.

It can also be sustained or affirmed

as an equitable order by the trial court

because this court specifically said

where the record establishes an objective basis

sufficient to sustain the discretionary judgment,

it'll be upheld by this court.

And there's an objective basis here

because here what we had is,

we had a problem where they were saying,

okay, look, the decoration renders my property

effectively valueless.

And I'm not gonna have as much benefit

from the value going forward

because I no longer live there.

Don't forget, they lived there for 14 years

behind this seven acres of wooded land

that apparently petitioner enjoyed quite a bit.

Now he's not living there anymore.

So the trial court said to itself,

well, look, he's not gonna be living there anymore,

but the maintenance obligation

under the declaration and the law

still rests with him as the developer,

successor and title.

And by the way, that is undisputed

on the record below.

The trial court made that specific determination.

But they said, look, in the future,

this maintenance obligation is gonna be on the petitioners.

We have to find some way to stem that future obligation.

And we had asserted in our briefs,

if you wanna convince the association,

the people to form the association

and receive the common land, that's fine,

but you can't require us to pay for it

because there's no contract for specific performance.

What I believe happened is the trial court said,

look, 100 people, some odd people,

got sued by this individual.

They're not gonna be in a charitable mood.

Let's not leave it in their hands

to decide whether to form the association

and receive the property.

Well, do they have the power

to decline to form an association under the declaration?

Are they not required to form the association?

That is a good point, Your Honor.

Under the terms of the declaration,

they are required to form the association.

Okay, so I don't get a choice.

But that's true, that's true, Your Honor.

So, but in any event, the trial court

cut right to the heart of the matter

and said, look, you've gotta form the association,

you gotta receive this property.

And the thought process was, look,

going forward, this maintenance obligation

won't be on the petitioners anymore.

We can stem their future tax obligations.

And speaking about the tax obligation,

they have claimed $40,000 in payments

and taxes over those years.

But we asserted that they got $20,000 in value

of this property when they sold it to the Eel and Dallos.

They sold their home to the Eel and Dallos,

where the new residents of their house in front.

And they never contested that they received

the $20,000 in value from that.

It's in the deed.

How much is the taxes?

I have $14,000 in my head.

It's $40,000.

The assertion is $40,000.

I'm sorry.

$40,000.

$40,000 for the 13 years.

Is there any way to go back against the town?

Or is that a question?

The abatement period is, I believe, a year or two years.

Well, I understand that, but is there any other way?

Not that I'm aware of it, Your Honor, no.

To the extent that town bears any responsibility.

I'm just curious.

I don't believe so, Your Honor, no.

Okay.

No, I don't believe so.

Your light is on, Councilman.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you very much.

Case submitted.
