Take your time, don't rush.

This is case 2015-0392, state of New Hampshire versus Michael Bovair.

May it please the court, my name's Joe Frankel.

I'm here for Michael Bovair.

I intend to focus primarily on the sufficiency of the evidence argument.

Time permits address the emotional relevant point.

Talking about the AFSA that alleged digital penetration.

In the trial court, the prosecutor's only direct evidence on that issue of digital

penetration was contradictory to the required element.

It was testimony from the alleged victim that the defendant's finger did not

penetrate her vagina.

It was clear, it was unambiguous, that the defendant's finger stayed on,

quote, the outside.

What do we do with Dr. Gladstone's testimony that she identified a

pinpoint of blood, which she said was a sign of a recent injury and

consistent with the victim's disclosure?

Sure.

I mean, wouldn't that, that's circumstantial, obviously.

But doesn't that go to looking at the whole picture and

seeing if there's enough evidence, sufficient evidence of penetration?

It does, Your Honor, but I think you raised the right issue that it is

circumstantial and only circumstantial, and it's not conclusive on the issue about

penetration.

It's part of, yes, the whole picture, but it's not conclusive.

Dr. Gladstone recognizes in her testimony when the prosecutor's initially

talking about inserting objects that she sometimes sees injuries from this

insertion.

The prosecutor didn't ask follow up questions of the alleged

victim in the case about whether there was any insertion of objects.

Whether she inserted any other toys.

Sorry, yes, but to be that blunt, yes, yes.

I mean, the alleged victim here was four years old, right?

So how does that affect her into our thinking in terms of her anatomical

descriptions of what happened?

I mean, she's not a sophisticated witness.

You're absolutely right.

She was six, and that doesn't make you sophisticated either.

But at the time of the testimony, she was six.

Four at the time of the allegations.

The state still, though, Your Honor, bears the burden of proof.

And there was zero follow up on the questions about anatomy, questions

about the toy incident that had been documented, or any possible toy

incident between that documented time and the allegation.

There was no follow up.

The question was asked, did the finger stay on that?

Did his hand, did his finger stay on the outside?

The alleged victim's response was, yeah, on the outside.

And then they moved on.

The victim then gave testimony that was quite detailed

about other parts of anatomy.

There was some discussion using an anatomical.

Well, but the victim also testified

that I have it in my notes.

He was rubbing her private hard, and it hurt a little.

She followed up by saying his finger stayed on the outside,

but as Justice Bassett asked, a small child

may assume that outside is as opposed to really inside.

And of course, our statute says penetration however slight.

So the trial court seemed to conclude

that that testimony, rubbing her private hard,

and it hurt a little, was enough to support an inference

that there was penetration however slight.

Together with Gladstone's testimony.

Together with Gladstone.

Again, it's still, even though the statute, yes,

includes the language however slight,

the burden of proof doesn't shift at all.

And the prosecutor needs to prove those elements.

Case law is pretty clear on that point.

Well, couldn't a jury say, with a combination of all

that evidence, particularly that he rubbed it hard,

that given that fact that there was,

that by rubbing the outside of the area and questioned hard,

that would be hard enough to hurt and inferentially

to cause this blood drop, that that did result

in some penetration however slight?

Again, there was no follow up about the question of pain.

And it has to be blunt.

There was no description given.

And the prosecutor didn't ask for about what type of pain

it was.

And that question could have been asked.

It's uncomfortable.

I guess I'm not following what type of pain it was.

There was no.

And the case law goes into this

when we're talking about O'Neill or, I'm sorry,

losing another name, or on Fennel

when they're talking about the finger was in my,

or went around my.

They said, yeah, that's descriptive,

but there needs to be more.

Here there could have been more about what the pain was.

Did it?

But that's not the test.

The test isn't could there have been more.

The test is was there enough that a reasonable jury

could have found beyond reasonable doubt?

And because the only direct evidence, I think, your honor,

is contradictory, it's really only the circumstantial evidence

that the case relies on.

So the state also bears the burden of excluding

all reasonable conclusions except for guilt.

So it has to go beyond that.

Your light is on.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Because your time is short, could you address the second issue?

Why was it relevant to know what the mother's reaction was

when she learned about this, that she fell to the floor?

What relevant point was that probative of?

So there are two points of relevance

where that would support, kind of that information support.

One, as the trial court concluded,

it kind of explains the subsequent actions

the mother took and the fact that she acted with urgency.

Why are her subsequent actions important?

She took her to the hospital.

How does that go to guilt or innocence?

It goes to explaining, I mean, I guess

I'll touch on the second point then as well.

Maybe stronger on preservation, because I'll tell you,

I wasn't impressed with.

We need to know what the mother's reaction was

to explain her subsequent steps.

But I'm asking myself, OK, what's

the relevance of the subsequent steps?

I really did not get that.

I was more impressed with your argument

that it wasn't preserved.

So maybe you could tell us a little bit about that.

Right.

Brief here.

I think the, what's the term we're calling, off the top of my head.

You say in your brief, the defendant's argument to us

on appeal is that the mother's reaction constituted

an inadmissible lay opinion testimony

and suggested that that was not the argument made

before the trial judge.

Is that your position on that?

Yes, yes.

I apologize.

No, yes.

So the argument here, I mean, yeah,

it relies heavily on this idea that she's providing lay

opinion testimony about whether or not

the victim's allegations are true or not.

And a trial, that's not the, our objection,

that was raised was relevance.

I mean, the question of whether or not

this information is relevant.

And the issue here is then we're now shifting.

I mean, you.

So you don't think we need to address that at all, then?

Right.

You say it's flat, not preserved.

And in any event, the defendant

hasn't demonstrated prejudice.

Well, aren't you saying that there

was an objection on the grounds of relevance at trial?

There was no objection.

Not on inadmissible lay expert testimony.

Right.

So there was a valid objection, whether it's right or not,

but there was one that's preserved,

which is it's irrelevant and should be excluded.

There was, but the defense, I mean,

as rule 103B1 clearly states, you

have to raise a specific objection at trial.

And that's what you're stuck with when you go to appeal.

Well, isn't relevant.

I've heard that objection a lot of times.

That's irrelevant.

Right.

And that's, I mean, that's the objection that was made at trial.

Right.

The argument has shifted, and it's no longer

a question of relevance.

It's a question of whether or not this

was kind of some inappropriate opinion comment

on the credibility of the victim in this case.

So because it wasn't articulated in the same way,

we are foreclosed from considering whether it

was or wasn't relevant?

That, I mean, that is my understanding

of what rule 103 requires.

And even, I mean, and as I've said,

and as Justice Campbell, you pointed out,

even if you decide to reach the issue,

there's still the issue of whether or not

this was a prejudicial to the point

that it influenced the outcome of this case.

Well, I'm sorry.

The mother in this case had what you would expect

to be a standard reaction to hearing an allegation

that your four-year-old child was sent to the hospital.

But she didn't even hear that allegation from the child.

It was from someone else.

Right.

It was from her mother.

Right.

Let me just go back.

Looking at what I believe is the transcript.

It is an objection on the grounds of relevance to elicit.

This testimony is to elicit the sympathy of jurors.

How she reacts is not relevant to whether something happened.

That seems like that's a classic relevance objection.

What more can you say?

I mean, I guess my confusion is that's not my understanding

is that's not the argument that's being raised on appeal.

That I'm not disputing that there was a relevant subjection

made at trial.

On appeal, aren't they really saying

that there's a number of reasons it shouldn't have been admitted?

It relevance, it constitutes a comment.

And I agree with you that the argument

that it constitutes an opinion on the child's credibility,

that wasn't raised below.

But that's not the only thing they're saying on appeal.

And that's why the state addresses the relevance issue

and raises the present grounds where it thinks

it is relevant and the prejudicial value.

Yeah, but that's the part that really bothers me

is I don't get how the mother's reaction is

probative of whether this really happened.

But I think the trial court also concluded

that it's probative in the sense that it allows the jury to weigh

the mother's credibility as well in terms of whether or not

these allegations are false, whether or not they're true,

whether or not the mother kind of took the appropriate response

as opposed to looking at the defendant's wife in this case

who didn't really disclose this information to anybody

or bring it to the family's attention.

You kind of have these polar opposite reactions

that allow the jury to weigh whether or not

you're getting the truth from this particular witness

about what was done here.

And it goes to her arrest.

But again, as I say as well, the issue

of whether or not it's prejudicial

is still a question as here.

Your basic argument is this, even if it's error,

it pales in comparison to the victim's testimony.

That's what you say in your brief.

Thank you.

Thank you.

We are adjourned.
