This is case 2015-0624 Exeter Hospital Inc. vs. Steadfast Insurance Company.

Mr. Shirley? May it please the court. The basic issue we're here to deal with today in this de novo appeal is whether or not Steadfast will be able to impose on Exeter Hospital, STAC, in essence, a retained limit obligation on top of a $4 million aggregate under the insurance policy.

The hospital has paid the $4 million. The hospital has also been obligated for the payment of a very substantial amount of defense costs.

The retained limit obligation is estimated by Steadfast to be in excess of $3 million.

And the position of the hospital is that the policy does not justify and because of its ambiguity cannot compel the payment of this additional retained limit obligation.

This is a case and a policy which has problems built into it. And I think the problems are very well illustrated by comparing the current policy in 2012 to the 2009 policy that we've made as part of our appeal.

And essentially what Steadfast attempts to do with respect to the 2012 coverage is to impose an obligation that would have been effectuated by the 2009 policy.

The problems with the policy, the current policy, are numerous but they seem to flow from a very fundamental issue.

It's a policy that provides two types of coverage. It provides claims-made coverage and it provides occurrence coverage.

And it also attempts to deal with differing situations that involve both underlying insurance and underlying self-insurance.

So to read and understand the policy, the insured has to balance these varying conditions under the policy in order to understand what exactly the policy requires.

And so is your bottom line position that the relevant provisions are ambiguous? Is that what you're saying?

Yes, your honor.

I mean it's been acknowledged as a result of our proceeding before Judge Anderson that the policy could have been clearer.

That was acknowledged at the transcript of the lower court proceedings at page 33.

It's page 57 of the of the appendix, of the supplemental appendix.

Of course the policy could have been clearer. And indeed it could have been.

So we come to the provisions of the policy that we say are fundamentally ambiguous.

And I will leave aside for just a later comment the fact that the insuring agreement itself presents problems.

But the fundamental difficulty here is that the application, the definition of applicable underlying limit when coupled with the insuring agreement,

Exeter Hospital says and contends is ambiguous.

And in fact believed did not result, produce the result that steadfast and outrageous.

Make sure I understand something. You say that the $4 million limit does not reduce as claims are paid. Is that correct?

We're saying that we're not obligated for a retained limit under the wording of the insuring agreement.

But isn't part of your, that the policy language reasonably suggests that the applicable underlying limit is a fixed amount

and that it doesn't reduce as claims are paid. Isn't that your position?

For the purpose of the insuring agreement, that is our position.

Right. So, but I guess the thing I, the thing I have a problem with is if that's true,

wouldn't that mean that the $4 million would apply every time to every claim?

In other words, wouldn't that be, wouldn't that be antithetical to your position?

Because that would mean that the $4 million, they pay the, the limit's $4 million.

They pay claim number one. Now when claim number two comes along, it's still $4 million.

And you have to pay the $4 million. And then at claim number three, you have to pay the $4 million.

So, so the insurance company's off the hook.

If you look at insuring agreement B, which is the occurrence-based coverage,

that same argument was made by Steadfast.

And under coverage B, both parties I think are in agreement that there would be no retained limit obligation imposed on the hospital.

So if you look at the wording of coverage B, we will pay only such damages that are in excess of the retained limit,

specified in item four, or that are in excess of the amount payable by alternative insurance,

insurance as listed in the schedule of underlying insurance.

So payable by alternative insurance is the under insurance.

So they, they are trying to produce a result here that's number one inconsistent,

where in occurrence-based coverage, the hospital would not have a retained limit obligation.

And the, the very point that you raise, would they be confronted with an aggregate limit each and every time?

The answer is clearly no, they would not.

If you turn-

Because the premium-

Pardon?

The, the $4 million is set initially.

And regardless of what gets paid against it, it's still the underlying insurance, correct?

It's the underlying self-insurance.

And that's $4 million.

No matter what gets paid out of it, because that's how the underwriters determine the premium at the time of an issuance.

They, uh, determine the premium based on the assumption that the aggregate, or, or the possibility that the aggregate self-insurance limit will be paid before their obligations kick in.

So the $4 million does get exhausted as these claims are made and paid?

I think that's true.

The policy says there is an exhaustion.

The question before the court is whether or not there is going to be a retained limit obligation imposed on top of that $4 million after it has been paid.

And so the, the nub of this case comes down to the, uh, I'm looking at page 2 of your brief, where the provisions are set forth.

We see that, uh, section in the middle of the page 1A1 says it defines applicable underlying insurance.

Then we go up to coverage A, and it says we will pay only such damages that are in excess of the retained limit, that's $100,000, specified in item 4 of the declarations,

or that are in excess of the applicable underlying limit, whichever is greater.

Your opponent says that because the $4 million gets exhausted, and eventually is exhausted, there's no longer an applicable underlying limit, and so the $100,000 kicks in.

I understand that.

Oops, after.

Well, I'm trying to make sure that I understand it.

That's their position.

That's their position.

And yours is no, uh, because, um, let me just get it right.

The dispute is whether the, quote, available limits in 1A1 modifies just the underlying insurance or modifies both underlying insurance and alternative insurance.

Correct.

Right?

That's what the court found, and you disagree with that.

I do disagree with that.

We do disagree with that.

And that makes the difference from your standpoint.

Yes, it makes a very great difference.

Okay.

They have, in, in the lower court proceeding, great weight was put on the word available.

The insured is supposed to read the insuring agreement.

It's supposed to read the definition of applicable, applicable underlying limit, which has two further defined terms, and conclude because of the word available, they are going to be hit with a retained limit obligation.

I have two things I will say about that.

Steadfast wrote eight reservation of rights letters.

The reservation of rights letters exceeded the policy for their positions.

They did not mention the word available in their fourth and fifth reservation of rights letters.

So, even they did not interpret the policy as until their position evolved and, in the thrust and parry of the lower court proceedings that this came forward that available had a very significant meaning.

What, you know what, I guess the thing I don't understand is if we, if we accept your construction, what is the purpose then that is served by the $100,000 limit?

Why is, why is, why is that, why does that serve any purpose at all under your theory?

I think it's, it clearly can serve a purpose in the policy as a whole, because if you consider coverage B, which is the occurrence-based coverage,

if for some reason there is a failure of coverage under coverage B, the retained limit would be the obligation of the hospital.

In other words, as, as has been stated in the briefs, the hospital would have skin in the game.

In other words, they would, in a, in an occurrence-based situation with multiple occurrences leading to multiple payments, they would, the hospital would have a retained limit obligation of $100,000.

How much are we talking about here in the aggregate, these claims under $100,000?

Excuse me?

How much are we talking about in the aggregate here? What are, what's the nut that's being fought over?

The aggregate retained limit, now that all the cases have been settled, is something, is $3.3 million.

All right.

Additional to the $4 million and additional to the $2 million of defense costs.

And who controlled that litigation? Did, was Steadfast involved in resolving the claims that were disposed of under $100,000?

Yes. They were involved. That's correct.

And so no settlement was made without their consent?

No settlements were made without, without, it's not a required element, but they, Steadfast participated in all of the settlement negotiations, as did the hospital.

There's mischief here, and, and I'm not, I'm not claiming it's intentional.

But the position that Steadfast took was not inserted until after the hospital had settled seven cases and had exhausted its self-insured retention.

Certainly the, and, and, and I think that says two things.

It says, first of all, that the hospital's understanding of how this policy was meant to operate was an, in good faith understanding.

And secondly, it robbed the hospital of any opportunity to resolve as many of the, of the smaller HIV cases as they could, or HCV cases as they're called.

The hospital could have had an opportunity to settle the low value cases and get as many of them out of the way as possible before it ran into this retained limit obligation.

Which as I say, the HCV situation was discovered in May, June of 2012.

But in any event, you still had a $1 million obligation per claim. No?

That's right. Yes.

Yes.

So when you say, you know, we were, you were deprived of the ability to negotiate very small amounts, the very small amounts you're still on the hook for.

No.

For $1 million.

I'm sorry, I, I, I agreed to the wrong thing.

Okay.

We're talking about single limit. If it, the hospital would, would be up responsible for any single limit claim up to the extent of a million dollars.

Right.

Until it's, until it's aggregate limit was exhausted.

Correct.

But no, if the hospitals, the first seven cases that were settled were settled with all hospital money. Retained limit didn't come into it.

It's only.

Because those seven cases, each of them were settled for less than a million dollars?

Yes.

Because we have to look at the individual settlements, keeping an eye on the 4 million aggregate.

So the first seven cases, each one of them settled for less than a million, your, the hospital's obligation to do that.

As each settlement is happening, the, the, the pile is growing as to the $4 million annual obligation, right?

The $4 million aggregate.

Aggregate.

Yes.

Right.

So aggregate, aggregating each and every one of those claims.

So if, just for the sake of argument, if the first seven each settled for $1 million, you would pay the $1 million.

And then we would, well, I guess my example isn't wrong.

You have $4 million aggregate.

So the, once you got to the first four and you paid out a million dollars, hypothetically for the first four, you're reaching that aggregate.

Correct.

The $4 million aggregate.

Yes.

It is at that point that we then look at the umbrella policy.

What happens then?

Once you have exhausted your self-insured $4 million annual obligation, then we look at what the umbrella policy provides, right?

Right.

Okay.

I think I agree with you.

All right.

And I'm, I'm just trying to understand where you diverge.

And you, they say once the $4 million is exhausted, that means there is no longer any underlying insurance or alternative insurance because you were self, the hospital was self-insured.

So they say that those provisions are satisfied, there's no more underlying insurance, no more alternative insurance, and therefore, as more claims are coming in, they say, you've got a retained limit of $100,000.

That's what they're saying.

That's what they're saying.

All right.

Help us understand your position on that.

And they base that position on the definition of applicable underlying limit, where they say applicable underlying limit means the total of all available limits of insurance for the underlying insurance.

And in this case, the policy defines underlying insurance as essentially commercial insurance.

Which you don't have.

Plus any alternative insurance.

Which is your self-insured.

Yes.

Your self-insurance.

Okay.

And they argue that, that the available limits, they get to their result of imposing the retained limit by saying that the term available is what triggers the obligation.

And available limits of insurance means available underlying insurance plus any available alternative insurance.

We read it differently and find it to be ambiguous for the, for the, the rule that we've cited in, in the series qualifier canon.

I don't want to take up time describing as well described in the brief.

But, they argue that, that it must mean what they say because of the total.

They say the total.

Total must mean that available modifies both underlying insurance and alternative insurance.

They overlook the fact that underlying insurance in the policy is defined to mean, underlying insurance means the policy or policies.

Of, of insurance listed on the schedule of underlying insurance.

But you had none.

And we had none.

So, you fit into the alternative insurance term here.

Excuse me?

We.

The reference to plus any alternative insurance.

That means your self-insurance.

That's right.

Okay.

So, if we leave out the underlying insurance, because you didn't have any.

And we read that term.

Applicable underlying limit means the total of all available limits of insurance.

Plus any alternative insurance.

Help me understand why you say that your, your interpretation means that you do not have to apply the retained limit.

To each claim.

Maybe, maybe I'm not being clear with that question.

No, I, I'm, I'm, I'm.

This policy is a struggle.

And we have struggled with it for a very long time.

Steadfast has struggled with it for a very long time.

I think it goes back to how you.

Ironically, the, didn't the trial court say the plain terms led him to his conclusion?

I believe the trial court, if the trial court had before it, steadfast 2009 policy where the result that they advocate for here is clearly spelled out in clear terms.

With definitions that, that, that, that make the, the purpose clear.

They define retain limit.

This is the minimum amount for which the insured is liable on each and every claim according to the terms of section one.

This is the amount that the insured is responsible for in each and every.

That's the 2009 length.

That's the 2009 policy.

Which the trial court didn't have, which was introduced in the record before us.

The trial court did not have it because it didn't become accessible through PACER until after the, the trial court's decision had been made.

And it's ruling on our motion for reconsideration had also been made.

Thank you.

The trial.

Excuse me.

Your time is up.

Thank you.

Good morning, Your Honors.

Joy Langford for Steadfast Insurance Company.

Welcome to New Hampshire.

Thank you.

Um, we would respectfully request that the trial court's ruling be upheld, um, for one simple reason.

There is no ambiguity in this contract.

The reading that extra one.

Do you agree that the 2009 contract is pretty clear in comparison with this one?

Well, first of.

More clear.

The 2009 policy, the way it's being described here is unfair.

And it's not a fair comparison.

If you look at the 2009 policy, um, at, pay, at 247 in the record, you'll see where the coverage A, the professional liability coverage is, um, addressed.

And it doesn't require that there be any comparison between the retained limit and, um, the, uh, underlying self-insurance.

It just simply says that the comp, that the Steadfast will be liable for that, those amounts in excess of the, um, underlying self-insurance.

There's no comparison to be made.

There was no underwriting testimony at trial, right?

This is all summary judgment?

That's correct, Your Honor.

And that is our other problem with the 2009 policy.

That while the idea that this is a de novo review may allow the extra to make different arguments as to how to interpret the language within the four corners of the, um, insurance agreement,

it certainly doesn't allow them to bring evidence into this court that the trial court did not have an opportunity to review.

And just correct me if I'm wrong.

In the ordinary underwriting circumstance, isn't the retained limit in cases like this simply a throwaway and a number picked out of the air and not rate determinative?

Well, I, I think in this situation, that question would have to be answered by the individual underwriter, and this-

I'm trying my best.

You're not an underwriter.

Right.

I'm not.

I spend a lot of time with underwriters, but I'm not an underwriter, so I can't give you that, that answer.

Um, and, and I think the problem here is to accept the idea from Exeter that there's an ambiguity, um, requires you to find that, one, the retained limit is completely superfluous.

It serves no meaning here.

And, two, it reads out of the contract this idea that in determining the application of coverage A, you make a weighing decision of whether the applicable underlying limit is greater than the retained limit.

If there wasn't a comparison to be made, if this wasn't a very-

Why isn't that frozen in time from the issuance of the policy?

In other words, regardless of how it's paid down, the- why isn't the appropriate or proper moment or most important moment in time when the policy is issued and what that aggregate limit is then?

Well, in, in this situation then, it does so.

Because what, what, what happens here is, you, for every claim there is a, uh, an amount that the underlying, that Exeter is expected to pay.

And for every incident, it's a million dollars.

Well, the break that Exeter gets is that, that million dollars goes away with the aggregate.

But what, what's trying- the policy does here is say, okay, you're not gonna have to spend a million dollars for every medical incident that walks in the door,

but you are going to have to spend something.

And so the way to protect them is to have the aggregate on the self-insurance.

And once the aggregate is hit, you go from having to take a million dollars for every claim,

to having to take a hundred thousand dollars for every claim.

And if you did- if you wanted your financial obligation to stop once you paid the aggregate,

then you had to do one of two things.

The hundred thousand dollars had to be recorded as zero,

because then the retained limit would be equal to or less than-

Which does happen in some policies.

It could. Yes, Your Honor.

Or, in coverage A, you don't require that weighing of whichever is greater,

which is exactly how the 2009 policy that's been, um, attached to the paper reads.

And the weighing has to be done at the point that each claim gets settled, right?

Correct.

Because that's- as the trial court said, it's going to change.

It's an ever-changing- up to the four million dollars.

Correct.

It's an ever-changing amount that you compare to the retained limit of a hundred thousand dollars.

That's correct.

And that's also the other problem with the interpretation that, um, Exeter puts forward.

In- in some cases when you come up to a provision that has alternative insurance referenced,

they want you to recognize that that's a variable number that is exhausting.

Um, but in this particular situation, they say, no, it's fixed because it works to their advantage.

But if we read alternative insurance not to be a variable amount on, um, say the- where the duty to defend kicks in, um,

the duty to defend would never kick in because that under- the aggregate limit would not exhaust and

steadfast would not have a liability to defend and settle these claims.

So, if- if- if we follow just the very basic canons of contract construction and start with- first we have to determine if there's an ambiguity at all,

which requires not only looking at the applicable underlying insurance definition in a vacuum, um,

but looking at it in contact with the entire policy, the only interpretation that makes sense is the one that steadfast makes here.

Because otherwise you've got to change your mind as to when alternative insurance has- is a variable amount versus when it's not to make the rest of the policy work.

And the- the- the case law is very clear that there's no reason that this court has to jump through those-

Why did it take steadfast so long to come to that conclusion?

Well, it- it didn't, Your Honor. I mean, up until the time that the aggregate limit was exhausted,

steadfast, um, had no obligation to do anything. It wasn't defending these claims. It wasn't settling these claims.

It was waiting for its insured to advise them that the aggregate had exhausted.

Once the aggregate exhausted and they came in, they said,

okay, we are going to take over the defense now, and- but you still need to sit at the table,

because as we settle these claims, you'll still have money on- on the hook.

And that's the obvious time to make that, um, point to the insured,

because that's when the- the, um, responsibility for defending and handling the claims changes.

Up until that point, it was just a hypothetical of when and if it would happen,

and steadfast had no idea that, um, extra was going to take the position that it did,

because in steadfast mind, that position doesn't make any sense on the four corners of the contract.

So, the bottom line is, if you read this with the four corners of the contract,

the contract is not ambiguous, and this idea of talking about the reservation of rights letter,

and the 2009 policy, um, that we have to look at that, because that proves there's an ambiguity,

that goes against contract construction.

You don't look outside the four corners of the contract to prove an ambiguity.

If you find an ambiguity within the contract, you might then allow extrinsic evidence in to see if you can resolve that ambiguity,

but you don't look outside the contract to find an ambiguity.

And if we stay within the four corners of this contract, it's very clear.

With a professional liability claim,

steadfast is going to pay once its retained limit, um, I'm sorry,

once the underlying insurance has, um, exhausted, or where the retained limit has been paid.

It's going to be one of those amounts. The contract makes that very clear.

The question is, which amount?

Um, and, you know, instead, extra wants it to, uh, be static for purposes of keeping it from having to pay the retained limit,

but it's not offering to pay anything extra.

It's, if you understand it the way extra is suggesting, we, steadfast would never have any liability,

because every time a medical incident came in the door,

if that, if the alternative insurance is not being eroded,

then the alternative insurance is still in place.

And again, that shows how...

And if, and if you, if I understand correctly, if you adopted your opponent's,

if we adopted your opponent's position on that, there would be no reason,

and it was four million dollars, which it was at the beginning of the policy period,

then there would be no reason to have to, to have to do a comparison with,

with, with the, uh, alternative insurance, because we know, we would know.

It, it, I mean, at the beginning of the year, four million dollars is obviously more than a hundred thousand dollars,

and so there's no, there'd be no reason to have that comparison language in the policy,

because you'd know, you'd know what that, that would be a fixed number,

and that would be the number that applies throughout any claims.

Absolutely, that's correct, and there'd be no reason to have a retained limit there.

That would be an awfully high premium to pay for no coverage.

I agree, but, and again, that goes to why that interpretation of the policy is incorrect,

because it's not as if the Exeter didn't get any coverage.

Steadfast has paid out over fifteen million dollars in, in claims here.

And so, what this is...

Probably, there's a practical matter.

It's very unusual for a situation like this to develop.

Um, you know, people, people would normally expect that these policies would cover individuals,

one incident, maybe a few incidents in the course of a year,

but these were dozens of incidents, right?

Claims, dozens?

Your Honor, yes, I think that's correct.

I think that, to some degree, we are a victim of, um, circumstances of where there,

the frequency of claims in this given year was abnormal,

that you wouldn't expect in an underwriting year to have as many claims as Exeter had,

and claims of the size that they have.

But, because there's a frequency, um, that is different in one year,

isn't a reason to read the policy any different than you would in a year where you had three claims.

Um, I mean, to some degree, that is the nature of insurance,

and the parties determine ahead of time what the risk is they're willing to take.

And there's always a risk that you may have, um, five medical incidents in one year,

and 35 in another year, and 52 in another year.

And the parties do the best they can based on, um, history.

I think you've said somewhere in your brief how much you have paid to date.

The claims are all settled at this point.

Um, the claims that have any relationship to the hepatitis C outbreak have all been paid at this point.

Um, because we've only paid out 15 million dollars to date,

I believe that there remain two additional claims that have nothing to do with the hepatitis C,

that are out there to be negotiated or settled.

And, um, so in that situation, there's still the possibility that Steadfast will continue to pay out, um, additional amounts.

But even in those cases, Steadfast takes the position that the retained limit will apply there,

um, because the underlying, um, aggregate for the self-insurance has been exhausted.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

That's right.

Anybody else, I'm curious to know,
