This is case number 2015-457, the state of New Hampshire versus Kyrie Rice. Mr. Johnson.

May it please the Court, Christopher Johnson on behalf of Kyrie Rice.

The central dispute in this case was whether Rice's use of deadly force was justified because Clay was using deadly force.

Both issues on the appeal directly relate to this dispute.

My plan this morning is to address first the jury instruction issue and then the evidentiary issue.

Beginning with the jury instruction, I'd make a couple of points about the merits and a point about preservation.

With respect to the merits, it is essentially the state's position that the statute is redundant.

The jury never needs to be told of the principle that it contains.

I offer three points in response to that.

First, in gingress, this Court emphasized the importance of completeness in jury instructions.

This particular provision wasn't enacted yet in gingress and so it didn't have to be told and couldn't have been told to the jury then.

Didn't we say in gingress that the jury could have inferred had it been given the sentence in question that this was not the use of deadly force.

And it sounds like the legislature actually amended the statute to make that explicit.

Well, here I think the key is, as a matter of logic, you can't infer what this statute says from what the jury was otherwise told.

What they are otherwise told and were otherwise told in Mr. Rice's case is that shooting a gun at a person is deadly force.

That is not the same as telling them displaying a gun is non-deadly force.

But wasn't there more than just a display here?

Why isn't the trial judge right that this section of the statute, the amended statute, wasn't designed to address this conduct?

Well, it's a factual question that the jury should have been told.

In its closing argument, the prosecutor said to the jury, Rice used deadly force when he pointed the gun at Clay.

You know, if the jury doesn't hear the principle that's in this paragraph four, you know, and they hear that, that that is deadly force,

they are insufficiently completely informed about the law.

Isn't the trial court right though that in this case that instruction would have been superfluous?

Because regardless of whether he brandished at one point, he shot somebody at another point.

Very true, but when in closing the state says the relevant moment for you, the jurors, to consider about who introduced deadly force first,

they said Rice introduced deadly force at a moment during the interaction when there is no argument that Clay had yet used deadly force.

And so if that is the essential moment where you measure the lawfulness of Rice's force, he loses.

But that isn't what the law doesn't say that that is the moment.

The moment is when he...

Was there an objection to that then?

Yes, yes.

And at what point were the instructions given in relation to the prosecutor's argument?

Did the prosecutor argue first before the instructions were given or after?

I don't recall. My recollection about this is I think the instructions were given before the argument, but I'm not sure.

But in any event, I mean it was preserved because once the defense lawyer had heard that argument, he then says to the judge,

you have to tell them this principle because it is contradicted, or it contradicts,

or at least substantially undermines the position the prosecutor was arguing.

So the prosecutor, excuse me, defense counsel at trial wanted the court to not only give the normal, complete instructions,

but also to say that brandishing is not deadly force.

My question is, if the court had done what the defense counsel wanted done,

would that not have confused the jury because they would be told while brandishing is not deadly force,

but by the way, shooting a gun is deadly force?

Well, I don't think so because the jury is already told by the prosecutor in closing argument

to pay considerable attention to the brandishing moment in the factual scenario.

They're told by the prosecutor, Rice forfeited his right to use deadly force because he's the first one,

or you should measure whether his deadly force was justified at the moment he pointed the gun at Clay's belly.

And that is not the moment he fired the shot. Other events intervened.

And so when the jury hears, that's the moment that matters.

And then they're not told. I mean in the legislature enacted this statute,

this is not, the legislature doesn't enact redundant statutes by and large.

And this court is properly very elected.

Don't you think the legislature enacted the statute in response to a specific case that we had?

Yes, but it applied, the principle applies here, especially once the prosecutor made that argument,

that Rice lost his right, or he used deadly force before he was entitled to.

And they say that argument, and there's a statute that says,

maybe what he did is more than displaying, but it is certainly less than shooting.

But really, is it fair to slice and dice a sequence of events?

It's all part of one event. You seem to be arguing that you've got to look at the beginning of the event

without considering what ultimately happened with the shooting.

Well, the prosecutor sliced and diced it that way.

And is the prosecutor who said, let's talk about this sequence of events,

and in their closing argument, the prosecutor said about the moment when Rice pointed the gun,

but before he shot it, the prosecutor said, and it's quoted in the brief, that's the moment.

You seem to be saying that in fact the prosecutor was making a statement of the law that was just not accurate.

That pointing, that brandishing a gun or whatever is not, amounted to deadly force,

and you're saying the statute says that that's not the case.

Almost. The prosecutor's argument, I don't think was improper.

No, I'm not saying improper, but I'm saying a misstatement of the law.

Exactly.

Your time is limited. Can you move to the other issue, please?

Sure. My quick point on preservation is that no reasoning was given by the trial court for its statutory interpretation,

so there's no reasoning to answer.

With respect to the evidentiary issue about Clay's use of...

Except that she... I don't mean to delay you, but...

No, please.

Except that she did say that she didn't believe that this statute was enacted to cover this circumstance.

Yes, but she didn't... She asserts that, but there's no explanation why,

and the state on appeal certainly doesn't argue that that's a correct interpretation of the statute.

And so there's no reason. If she had said, I think this because X, Y, and Z, then I would have had to address X, Y, and Z.

With respect to the evidentiary claim, I guess I'll focus, given that time is short, on the substantive relevance.

That is the use of the cocaine and marijuana evidence to show that Clay's degree of aggression and his degree of deadly force.

And make a couple of points.

Isn't your problem both as to the substantive argument and the impeachment argument or the credibility argument,

the lack of expert testimony?

So here's what I'd say about that.

For this substantive issue, we had an expert.

Dr. Galletta said in the deposition, and it was proffered, cocaine use is associated with aggression.

But Dr. Galletta couldn't say, as I recall it, what level of cocaine might have been in his system at the time.

True. True.

And this is... I think this is a crucial question, and this is...

I would distinguish the Phillips case on which the state relies on this ground.

In Phillips, the victim was deceased.

And so there was no way to know when he had used the drugs, how much he had used.

In this case, Clay would know.

He knows when, he knows how much, and he knows how strong, and he's the witness we wanted to ask these questions of.

So we have an expert who will link aggression with... or cocaine use with aggression.

We have the witness sitting on the witness stand who knows better than anybody else on earth

whether he had used cocaine and how much and when.

And we say, we're allowed to ask.

I think it is not the law, as the state suggests, on foundation.

In the common situation when a lawyer at trial is asking a question,

sometimes if it answered one way, the question and the evidence will be relevant.

If it answered another way, the question and the evidence...

What if the trial court had allowed the witness to say,

yes, I used cocaine in marijuana?

Wouldn't the jury have to speculate about what effect those two drugs would have had in this situation?

That's the real concern, it seems to me.

I don't think so, because Dr. Gallietta, who was also a witness at trial,

when it was proffered, he was able to say,

cocaine use in his experience as a doctor is associated with aggression.

And so we have that link for the substantive use.

I think for the impeachment use, I think it's important to say,

with all due respect to the state's position,

I don't think it's necessary to have an expert to say that cocaine and marijuana use

impair or intoxication by those substances impairs perception and memory.

Surely it's a function of...

How much more evidence?

I'm sorry, I couldn't hear you.

Surely it's a function of the amount ingested,

and I don't think a normal juror would have that type of calibration in their general sense.

True.

No, I understand.

But again, we had the witness, Clay, who could say how much,

and we had, especially for the aggressive, the substantive use of the evidence,

we had Dr. Gallietta, who would say,

cocaine use or cocaine intoxication is associated with aggression.

I don't think...

Given the degree of violence in this restaurant,

how much more aggression do you need?

Well, I think it's not cumulative,

because when asked on the witness stand, Clay was asked,

did you use the maximum force for which you're capable?

And he denied, at pages 346 and 352 of the transcript,

he says he didn't minimize and deny that he had used deadly force.

Sure, but bodies were dropping, weren't they, when he hit them?

Yes, yes.

But I mean, this is the whole case, is this dispute,

is whether Clay's use of force was deadly,

because if it was, Bryce was justified in shooting him.

And if it wasn't, he wasn't.

And when Clay says, I didn't use deadly force, in effect,

that's huge evidence.

This case was unusual in that there was an actual videotape of the melee.

Yes.

And did that, that tape is available to us to review?

I believe so, yes.

And does the tape, we haven't reviewed it yet, of course,

but does the tape actually show what was going on

between the victim and the defendant's brother?

Yes, I mean, the court looked at it, I mean, it's not perfect,

it's not cinema quality, and the location of the cameras in the restaurant,

of course, they were preset, and they, you know, it's,

you can roughly see, there's a lot of people around.

The video is, you know, I think to answer the motive behind your question,

one cannot watch the video and know what the verdict should be.

You needed the testimony of the witnesses also,

because it isn't that quality.

You can't see how powerfully Clay, a large man, is striking Raheem.

You know, it was, that was a genuinely disputed issue,

and Clay said, not that hard, in effect, what his testimony was.

Is my understanding correct that in regard to the blood alcohol level,

there was testimony as to the level, but there was an expert testimony

connecting the level with level of aggression?

So why is this different than with cocaine?

Well, we didn't, so I think the alcohol testimony was admitted

for the impeachment use of memory and perception,

and so the question that was asked Clay was, had you been drinking?

Yes, were you very intoxicated?

Not really was his answer.

And so it wasn't, we don't get any aggression points,

and the defense lawyer wasn't really trying to get any aggression points

out of the alcohol evidence.

It was the cocaine evidence that Dr. Galleta said,

you know, cocaine use is associated with aggression.

Well, but the jury would know, presumably from its own experience,

that alcohol is a depressant,

and cocaine does the opposite to the body.

No one was there to tell the jury if you've got cocaine, marijuana,

and alcohol in your system how those drugs interact, right?

I think that's right.

I mean, we had Dr. Galleta, who was in the deposition,

was, you know, gave, like I said, information

associating cocaine with aggression.

You know, he didn't give a kind of a global tutorial

on the interaction of these substances,

but we don't have to have evidence of that quality

to meet the relevance level to get this admitted.

This is, you know, the whole case is about Clay's degree of aggression,

and cocaine use...

Well, I guess, I mean, you draw a distinction,

and I think correctly that there's a diff...

I mean, I tend to think you may be correct on using it for impeachment.

If you wanted to use it substantively, though, doesn't it...

I mean, it seems like the doctor was, you know,

this was sort of, for lack of a better term,

something of a sort of an aside in his deposition.

There was really no effort to develop what he meant by that,

and so I'm wondering for substantive purposes,

is it really... did you really have a proper foundation?

I mean, yeah. I mean, it is what it is.

You know, what we have is what Dr. Galleta said,

but, you know, I think it is enough, again,

because this is the issue he said enough.

He said cocaine use is associated with aggression.

They could cross-examine him on that

if he was allowed to give that testimony,

and, you know, the jury would have been better informed

than the jury actually was without it,

and it's not...

And an important point about prejudice in respect to this.

If Clay had when asked, did you use cocaine that night?

If he had said no, the state has suffered no prejudice,

but if he'd said yes, it is relevant to this crucial issue,

and so we have to be able to ask a question of a witness

who we know knows the answer.

I mean, Clay knows how much he used, when he used it...

But he can lie to you and you're stuck with the answer.

That's true, but witnesses are presumed to tell the truth, I think,

and so we would have to assume if he would have said the truth.

Thank you.

Thank you.

May it please the court, Elizabeth Leahy,

on behalf of the State of New Hampshire.

I'd like to start by addressing the evidentiary issue

and then secondarily address the jury instruction question.

The defense's argument, at least to credibility,

is hinged on a statement of the record that's incorrect,

and the statement is that the standard in this case

is that to prove relevance for impeachment purposes,

the defendant was required to establish a nexus,

and that nexus would be that the evidence of cocaine ingestion

is related to one's perception or ability to remember events,

and in the brief he states that there was no dispute at trial

as to the effect of cocaine on memory and perception,

and that's incorrect.

At transcript 316 to 317, there was a discussion

in which the court said that it didn't believe

that that was something that the jury could decide

without expert testimony.

May I ask you a question about that?

The court seemed to say the average person,

the average jury would understand

what the effect of alcohol is.

I wonder whether the same logic

can't be applied to cocaine in marijuana.

Just assume with me that over time,

our population becomes comfortable

with what the effects of, say, marijuana are.

So should our law change, I guess is my question,

should our law change as the population

becomes more familiar with certain drugs,

using marijuana as an example?

Have we gotten to the point in our society

that the general population does understand

what effect marijuana has because people are using it?

So to answer that question, I would say no,

and that's not what the trial court found.

The distinction between the effect of marijuana

and the effect of cocaine is important

because the argument on this issue at trial

focused on cocaine, where it's presented

as both the effect of marijuana and cocaine in the brief,

the discussion about this issue

was really limited to the effect of cocaine.

I guess the thing I'm having difficulty with is this.

Isn't it obvious, in fact,

I mean, that's the reason these substances,

at least cocaine, is against the law to present,

is that it has an effect on behavior.

I mean, if cocaine didn't have any effect on behavior,

it wouldn't be illegal.

So isn't it, I mean, isn't it to expose

the fact that somebody did or did not use cocaine

where the question is, what was their behavior?

Doesn't that, it seems to me that that's pretty relevant.

Right, and so I think the court didn't find

that cocaine doesn't affect behavior.

What it found is that it doesn't affect memory

and perception, and Dr. Gaeta specifically testified

that cocaine can evoke feelings of wakefulness,

alertness, and clearer user's thoughts,

which is directly contrary to the proposition

that they wanted to use it for to impeach Mr. Clay.

So I think when you look at it cumulatively,

and the court found, and there's no argument

that this was an unsustainable use of discretion,

that the effect of cocaine on one's memory

and ability to perceive events is something

that's outside the knowledge of a lay juror.

And when you couple that with Dr. Gaeta's testimony

that it can evoke feelings of wakefulness,

alertness, and clearer user's thoughts,

I think the court was correct to say that you needed

an expert to tie the cocaine use

and the effect on that reason.

But was that the only thing that the defendant

was saying this cross-examination

was relevant to simply memory?

Or wasn't it more generally this,

the question is what was this witness's demeanor?

And you know, not only his memory,

but his demeanor.

And doesn't that have some bearing on,

couldn't a lay jury say,

if somebody was using cocaine,

that could have some effect on his behavior?

Now exactly what that would be,

maybe that's the subject of some redirect examination

or your state calling another witness.

But I have some trouble understanding

why it's not relevant in general

to the issue of credibility of the witness.

So the defense was not offering it

for the general proposition that it affects one's behavior.

He was offering it for two specific purposes,

the credibility piece that I've discussed,

and then also substantively to prove

that Mr. Clay was acting particularly aggressive

or using increased strength.

And even if there was evidence to establish

that that may be the case,

or to suggest that that may be the case,

that's not relevant to the issue that was before the court,

which is whether the defendant reasonably believed

that it was necessary to use deadly force on Clay.

And the key inquiry is what Mr. Rice,

the defendant, perceived at that moment.

And we have sufficient evidence of what he perceived.

We have video, we have expert testimony.

What may have driven...

...the firm in having let the cocaine use in, though,

just to round out the picture?

Because that wasn't something that Clay...

I'm sorry, that the defendant was aware of

at the time that he perceived the event.

So it didn't bear on his...

There was no testimony that...

Thank you.

He was intoxicated.

In fact, Dr. Gaeta testified

when he examined the defendant at the Elliott Hospital

that he exhibited no signs of impairment.

But to follow up on Justice Hick's point,

I guess on the other side of the balancing test,

it does seem that Justice Hick has a point

that, you know, this isn't a situation where

the jury was likely to think that any of these people

involved in this encounter were choir boys.

And so the idea that, you know,

the victim may have been using cocaine,

it seems to me on the prejudice side of the scale,

it's not particularly prejudicial that they would use it for...

that the jury would use it for some improper purpose

and would have thought, you know, that this person

who was otherwise a pillar of the community

is now placed in a terrible light.

And I would go back to the point that...

to even get to the point of addressing the potential prejudice,

it would have to be probative.

And what I was focusing on is the substantive piece.

And it's not probative to what the defendant perceived

on the night of May 24th.

He can testify directly to what he perceived.

There's video, there's other testimony from other witnesses

who described the aggressive conduct

that I think Ashley Francis testified

that he was acting like a wild man and came flying in.

And that... there was ample testimony

to impeach or undercut Mr. Clay's testimony

that he wasn't acting aggressively.

And so there's no probative value in the evidence

that the defendant was not aware of

at the time he perceived the events of what drove that conduct.

One position is it is totally irrelevant

what was in Clay's system.

It didn't matter.

Correct.

Period. It just doesn't matter

because in order to succeed in the defendant's defense,

everything rises and falls on what he saw happening,

even if he was mistaken, I take it.

Correct.

And what he learned after the fact has no bearing

on what he perceived at the time.

And what he perceived at the time is what drives this analysis

about whether his use of force was reasonable.

Can I ask Mr. Clay on the second issue?

I guess here's the thing that I have some difficulty with on that.

As I understand our decision in Gingrich,

we said in Gingrich that where the statute at the time said

firing a gun in the direction of someone

is the use of deadly force

and where in that case the person hadn't fired a gun.

If the jury had been given the instruction

on the firing the gun thing, they could have

or they might have inferred that not firing it

did not involve the use of deadly force.

So that would have been an inference we said

they could have drawn and that was the basis of reversal.

Now we have a legislature amending the statute

to specifically say what we sort of said

the jury might have inferred before.

And that is that just drawing a gun

is not the use of deadly force.

I have to say I have a real trouble understanding

why it was not important in light of Gingrich

for the court to give that instruction.

So in this case the required instruction was given

and that was the self-defense instruction.

In terms of the fact supporting that

or the defense of others instruction I should say

that hinged on whether the defendant

at the time he shot the gun which he concedes

was a use of deadly force

believed that it was necessary to defend his brother Raheem.

And so because there was no dispute

as to whether the shooting of the gun

was deadly force or not.

But apparently the prosecutor thought

that it was very important to tell the jury

that there was deadly force used even earlier

which is the point that your opponent makes

that this was not, you know,

this was a point emphasized by the state

that look, you know,

he didn't use deadly force at the moment that he shot

because it was reasonable for him to do so.

He wanted to shoot his gun,

I mean this is me speaking not the prosecutor

but I think it's a fair summary of the point of the argument

he wanted to shoot his gun even earlier

and therefore he used deadly force earlier

by pointing the gun which is not the law.

Correct and I want to point out that the state

obviously their closing argument came second

and the defendant argued first

the counsel in his closing

that the jabbing of the gun was non-deadly force.

So the state was simply responding

to an argument that was made first by defense counsel

and to the extent that was a misstatement of the law

there was no objection to that

and there was no request for a curative instruction

to say that's a misstatement of the law

the jury should disregard it.

Instead what defense counsel asked for

was an additionally

A correct statement of the law.

But related to, I mean if the proposition that

the jabbing of the gun

if I understand the defendant's argument

is that that's irrelevant to the

defense of others defense and that that was

an improper statement of the law

the correct remedy would have been

to instruct the jury to disregard that

to not further compound the error

by providing an additionally irrelevant instruction.

Was the defendant charged separately

with showing the gun initially?

That's not my memory.

So the charge was the shooting.

Correct.

So the jury would understand

presumably that their focus is on the charge

which is the shooting

as opposed to the displaying of the gun.

Correct.

So your position is no harm no foul

because it wasn't related to the charge

that the jury had to find.

Correct, correct.

The jury had the complete improper instructions

as to the defense of other instruction

and there was no objection as to that.

But regardless of the merits of this particular issue

the state's position as I understand it

is that the defendant waived it.

Correct.

Implicit in the trial court's ruling

that the jury instruction was irrelevant

was an interpretation of the statute

and the court does make a misstatement

in the record and uses the word brandish

but the statutory language is produce and display

and for the defendant's argument to succeed

that this was somehow relevant to the facts of this case

it would really have to be produce and display

plus something else.

And the trial court interpreted it

I think by its plain meaning

and produce and display and nothing more

and there's no factual question here

that he did more than produce and display.

He produced it, displayed it

and then jabbed it into Mr. Clay's stomach

during the course of an ongoing argument.

So I think the court was correct in finding

that there was no evidence to support reading that instruction.

Am I right in this case as in most cases

there are all cases that the trial court said

that you shouldn't take the law from the lawyers

in the closing statement anyway.

I give you the law and whatever the lawyers say

you should disregard in terms of the law.

Correct.

The court made instructed that it would be providing the law

at the beginning of trial and then in the instruction as well.

Sure, but here but now if it's correct

that the prosecutor made it

that the defense counsel made it

if I'm understanding what you're saying

the defense counsel made an accurate statement of the law

the prosecutor made an inaccurate statement of the law

in his closing argument and the court just didn't

I mean it gave that general instruction

to Judge Bassett points out

but it didn't give an instruction on what the correct

what the correct statement of the law is

with regard to the issue that the parties

had been arguing about.

So I'm not quite sure how that kind of

corrects the problem.

I don't think that the defend

I think the court

the prosecutor or the state

made it necessarily an incorrect statement of the law

it's whether that the fact that jabbing

was even relevant to the self defense analysis

and there wasn't the defense

or the state never argued that if you find

the gun into Mr. Clay's stomach is deadly force

then he's foreclosed from

using this defensive other statute

that was never argued.

All that was argued is

the defense counsel made an argument

that the jabbing of the gun is deadly force

is non-deadly force the state responded and said

it's deadly force

but that fact

if I understand their argument correctly

the defendant's argument is that

whether it's deadly force or not

has no bearing on

the defense of others

the availability of that defense.

But in any event the jury never had to decide

whether showing the gun

constituted a crime.

They never were asked to make that decision.

Correct.

No further questions.

Before you go would you tell me again

why the issue is waived

because you say here you did not address

the proper interpretation of the statutory provision

I read his brief it looked to me like he did.

For the defendant's argument

to be correct

so that the statute is relevant

that there was evidence

that would make that instruction relevant

you would have to have a more expansive reading

of the term produce and display

than the trial court interpreted that trial

and so there they

the defendant's brief is

sort of based on an assumption

without argument or support

that produce and display can actually include

something more than produce and display

where the trial court read it more narrowly

and so there's no discussion about why that should be expanded.

Thank you.

Case submitted the court will take a brief recess.
