This is case 2015-0029, state of New Hampshire versus Gregory M. Maji.

Morning, may it please the court. My name is David Rothstein. I represent Gregory Maji.

I plan to address the first issue in the brief. In this case, the prosecution sought to imprison Mr. Maji for more than 30 years after he was convicted.

Before this trial ended, the judge and the prosecutor concluded that a witness, a very serious witness, material witness,

had recanted a prior sexual assault allegation. Under these circumstances, justice demanded that the trial court determine whether that evidence was admissible.

And it now demands that this court remand this case for the purpose of making that determination.

In this case, SM, the witness that we're talking about here, accused Mr. Maji of rape both by intercourse and orally.

And his defense at trial depended on his success or his ability to cast doubt on her truthfulness.

And this court has found, as other courts have found, that a prior false allegation of sexual assault can be highly probative of truthfulness.

And there was, as the trial court found, a recantation or a prior false allegation.

Are we bound by that finding or a recantation, or can we look at it and make our own assessment of that?

Well, I believe, two answers to that question. First of all, the trial court did make that finding and use the word recantation at around page 945 or so.

Is that a factual finding, or is that a mixed finding of fact and law?

I would submit that it's a factual finding, but in the alternative, the facts support that finding.

I think it would be fair if the court could certainly find that it was potentially clearly erroneous, or the court could find that it's a mixed question.

But if you look at the two, that would cause the court to look at the information that it has.

And the information that it has is the information in the CAC interview that was submitted to the court that's attached to the appendix.

And the information that was conveyed by the prior prosecutor, Melissa Pierce, during what was called the Howard hearing before trial.

I'm looking at those two pieces of information I would submit.

But isn't that, you know, as I looked at that, it seemed, I mean, you're right that the court did make some statement about recantation.

But it seems, you know, it seemed to me from the context that this was sort of, you know, kind of an offhand remark as opposed to a really sort of, I mean, the court never heard from the actual source of the recantation, right?

I mean, in other words, never heard from somebody saying, you know, that this was not, this is a different story.

I heard a different story from this witness than what she said in the CAC interview.

And part of our critique here, and one of the main reasons in the brief that I take the intermediate position of a remand as opposed to just ordering a new trial, is the critique of the trial court here is, you know, you're a judge, you're presiding over obviously a very serious case where the stakes are very high.

And you have evidence that clearly captures your attention regardless of whether it was an offhand remark or a finding that is entitled to the deference of this court.

This court realized at this stage of the trial, around page 945, that this was something.

I mean, this was, you know, wait a second, on one hand in one interview she said, oh, somebody, you know, he touched my chest, it was no big deal, it wasn't reported, street justice took care of it.

On the other hand, it was a prior allegation of really what sounds like very graphic rape, something worse than what the oral sex that her sister was subjected to and it was reported to DCYF.

So part of my argument here is that as a judge in this situation, the court has an obligation to stop the press, so to speak.

Let me ask you this, couldn't it, I mean, you, doesn't this, it would be, it seemed to me this would be one thing if there was evidence that the witness said I was raped on one occasion.

Right.

And on the other occasion said, what are you talking about?

There's nothing, nothing at all happened.

This is less than that.

In other words, if what the witness is, what the witness, if I understand it, even viewed in the light most favorable to you, you have the witness saying I was raped at the CAC interview.

And in some other context saying, well, it wasn't really a rape, he touched my chest as opposed to raping me.

And apparently it was at least something that was of enough concern to her that she had, she arranged for street justice to take care of her.

I mean, it wasn't, it wasn't like, you know, he bumped into me, he might have, he might have accidentally had his hand on my chest, but you know, life went on, I never did anything about it.

Right.

You did do something about it.

So I guess.

Right.

We are, we are operating at, at somewhat of a deficit of detailed information, which again is I would respectfully.

You were about to say before you were interrupted the last time that you think the trial judge has an obligation to put the brakes on.

He did.

And you, okay.

And what else should have happened other than what happened?

Well, the trial judge had, and I want to address your question too, Justice Lynn, but the trial judge had under these circumstances an obligation to say, I find this is a recantation,

and I am going to determine whether this witness can be recalled, which we have good reason to believe that, that she could.

And I'm going to allow you to pursue it.

Or in the alternative, I'm going to stop.

I'm going to do some research and to see where we're at here.

This is a serious situation.

And just to get that dovetails into your point.

If you look back to what Melissa Pierce had said, she said to SM, has anyone done anything like what Mr. Maggi did to you?

What you're saying, Mr. Maggi?

And SM said absolutely nothing.

There was this time when an ex-uncle touched my chest.

The CAC interview, on the other hand, is far different than that.

So I would say that you have such a gross disparity in those two stories that you have either the type of extreme embellishment in the CAC interview that would be a severe concern,

tantamount to a recantation, or you have at least more cause to investigate the situation, to pause the situation, to have a hearing,

to look at the Miller factors and to make a determination.

And that did not happen here.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you.

Good morning, may it please the court.

Susan McGinnis for the State of New Hampshire.

The first thing I have to say here is that there has been a lot of mischaracterization of what Melissa Pierce said,

which led the court to characterize it as a recantation.

What Melissa Pierce actually said at the hearing in March was I spoke with SM, she indicated this uncle,

now she said the uncle raped her and then said he raped my sister too.

Well, that wasn't rape, it was oral sex on him, basically.

Now, Melissa Pierce says that SM indicated this uncle touched her chest area.

She then put her hand down into her lap.

I asked, did anything occur with your uncle that was similar to what happened with the defendant?

SM indicated absolutely not that that's not what happened, but SM never said nothing happened with the uncle

and she touched her chest, said it was her chest and then touched her lap.

So later on, all the way down...

I thought she said that she touched her lap, not that her uncle touched her lap.

No, yes, this uncle touched her chest area, then she put her hand down on her lap.

So the victim said he touched my chest area and then she put her hand on her lap, the victim did.

I don't know what she meant by that, nobody asked her, maybe she meant he touched her vagina too.

We really can't tell based on this record.

But what happens then, we get all the way into August, pre-trial conference,

and the defendant makes a representation that Pierce said that SM said that it never happened.

Well, that's not what SM said, she didn't say nothing ever happened.

So after he does that on the fourth day of trial, the judge says you need Pierce here.

It's here, say from Pierce, I don't remember the statements,

and defense counsel and the state weren't there,

and the defense counsel expresses...

State's counsel expresses some trepidation about the defendant's offer of proof.

So on day six, they have this discussion on day four about that hearing.

When it was, what was exactly said.

So day six comes and defense counsel doesn't give the judge the tape of that hearing

or quotes from what Pierce said or a transcript of that hearing.

What he does is he gives the judge the statements SM and JD made at their CAC interview and says...

And so the court says, I just want to thank Mr. Maggi for pointing out...

I don't know if you heard him, but he said that on the record,

Melissa Pierce said she had spoken to Sarah Matthews, Kwama,

who recanted this allegation that she was raped.

So I don't think that's upholding that it was a recantation.

The judge is saying the defendant has told us that Melissa Pierce said it was a recantation.

And then defense counsel goes on and says...

Melissa Pierce in court said she had spoken to the victim and the victim had indicated that she recanted it

and said no, he didn't rape her.

But that's not what the victim said and that's not what Melissa Pierce represented.

So first of all, I don't think the court made a finding of recantation.

Second of all, if it did, it did it based on erroneous misrepresentations about what Pierce had said.

So at best, in your view, it's an equivocal recantation.

It is, and it's not the kind of recantation that this court talked about in White and Cornbrek

in that line of cases, because in those cases victims made allegations of rape

and then completely recanted them.

And can I just make sure I understand the sequence...

The CAC interview, do we know this from the record that the CAC interview took place

before whatever the discussion was between Pierce and the victim?

Yes.

Okay.

There was the CAC interview, then they're getting ready for trial.

They're on the eve of trial in March.

It's within a couple of days of trial in March and they're having this discussion.

And the defendant says at the CAC interview, the victim said she was raped by her uncle.

That would go to her ability to fabricate.

What he was talking about is her knowledge of sexual matters, essentially.

And then the prosecutor said, well, I've spoken to her.

She spoke to her preparing for trial.

And said she indicated that nothing similar to what happened to the defendant,

with the defendant, had happened with the uncle.

But it's not clear what the victim meant by that.

Well, doesn't the mere fact that it takes so long to tell this story

and who knew what and who's relating what doesn't that speak to

maybe there should have been a hearing or maybe there should be a hearing

to sort this out and that we not do it in the first instance?

Well, that gets me to the next point.

It's the defendant's obligation, if he wants evidence in,

to give the court a sufficient offer of proof for the court to decide the issue.

The defendant waited until after the redirect of the victim on the fourth day of trial

to raise the issue and defense concedes they didn't give the court enough then.

Then he waits till the sixth day of trial to even give the court the CAC transcripts,

which is the last day of the state's case.

So the court still has not been given enough information to figure this all out.

And the court told the defendant on the fourth day of trial,

you need peers here and I need to know what was said at the hearing.

And the defense still doesn't give the court that on the sixth day of trial

when the state's resting its case.

One inference to be drawn is that the defense counsel was doing the best job he or she could with what they had.

The defense counsel, it's clear from the record that the defendant was bringing these issues up

and then making defense counsel raise them.

And that defense counsel could have gotten that transcript to the hearing.

He could have had, he had the transcripts of the CAC interviews months before trial.

And he had peers on his witness list and he could have gotten the judge what it needed.

So now we're talking sixth day of trial into the state's case

and you're going to stop the whole trial for days when they've already lost all but one of the alternate jurors.

And the case has already gone on for days and the defendant's already continued it nine times.

So the chances of still having a complete jury when they finish all this are pretty slim.

The defendant's request was too late and it was never sufficient enough to warrant any kind of investigation.

Thank you, counsel.

Case submitted.

Counsel making.
