Good morning.

This is case 2015-0485, the Bank of New York Mellon as trustee versus Eugene Daugert.

Thank you. The record should reflect that Justice Delanis is unable to be here today, but she is participating in this case.

And she will join us for deliberations and the issuance of an opinion.

Council?

If it pleases the court, I have informed the court monitor that I'd like to reserve two minutes for rebuttal.

May it please the court?

I am attorney Stephen Martin and I represent the defendant appellant Eugene Daugert.

Today I ask this court to conclude that a plea of title filed in response to a possessory action is a defense and

therefore not subject to RSA 479252's bar.

If we accepted that position, wouldn't we essentially read the provisions of 47925 out?

We would read them out of the statute books, wouldn't we?

I don't think you would, Your Honor, and there's a couple of reasons for that.

The first is the absence of any affirmative relief available to a person filing a plea of title in this situation.

In this situation, the defendant is entitled to ask that the writ of possession not issue because

the evicting party is without title to the premises.

Right, but I guess what I'm saying is let's assume we accept your position.

Then why would anyone file an injunction action before the foreclosure?

They'd say, hey, I mean, as often happens in this case,

the person in possession of the property is not paying the mortgage anymore.

So the person says, why incur any time, effort or

whatever to file an injunction action in the Superior Court?

Let's just sit back, let them go, they want a foreclose, let them go ahead, foreclose, do whatever you want.

And then when they try to actually get possession by going to the circuit court, then I'll challenge.

Again, a couple of reasons.

The first is that the affirmative relief available to the defendant in that situation is lacking if they wait until the eviction stage file their plea of title.

They can only request that the writ of possession not issue.

If they do it prior to the foreclosure, then they have a whole variety of other remedies available, including damages,

and maybe other injunctive relief available to them at that point in time.

The other reason that we're not doing a disservice to 479-252 by adopting our position

is because we also have to look at the landlord tenant statute which puts the burden

on the evicting party to prove that in this case it was the purchaser at a mortgage foreclosure sale.

And RSA 540-17 and 18 presume that the defendant has the defense available to him

that in fact they did not obtain title through the foreclosure.

What do you say the burden is on the foreclosing party?

I'm sorry, on the evicting party.

Okay, what's the burden on the evicting party?

The burden on the evicting party is to establish that it has a right to a writ of possession because it was the purchaser at a mortgage foreclosure sale.

And why wasn't that satisfied here?

It wasn't satisfied here because Mr. Daugert raised the issue that the Bank of New York Mellon did not actually take title to the property through the foreclosure sale

because the Bank of New York Mellon could not have transferred title in the first place through a foreclosure.

Could you explain the significance of your client's subsequent motion to vacate the circuit court judgment?

We get a circuit court ruled that the bank was entitled to possession

and then subsequently the circuit court granted your client's motion to vacate that judgment.

What are the consequences of that?

And I'm going to ask the same question of your opponent because it isn't clear to me.

What was the basis for the motion to vacate the original circuit court judgment?

The basis to vacate the original circuit court judgment was because Mr. Daugert was unable and didn't realize that he had to file a separate plea of title in the superior court.

Based on that confusion we made the argument to the district division that considering the circumstances they should vacate the order

giving judgment to the Bank of New York Mellon and we asked that the time to file a superior court be enlarged

and once the district division gave us that relief we promptly filed the plea of title in the superior court.

And how does that relate to the triggering of the one year, one day statute of repose?

Is it your argument that that moved the beginning of the clock ticking to a later point?

It wasn't clear to me what your position was on that.

Yeah and I want to clarify our position with RSA 479252A and that is that we didn't really raise that as an issue in this case.

That was raised by the superior court.

Now we defended what our position would be with respect to that because the superior court made it an issue

but we didn't raise the issue of ineffective service of notice as to the foreclosure.

But having said that filing the plea when Mr. Daugert filed his plea of title in the district division

that was within compliance of the one year, one day limitations period.

Is initial in the district division correct?

And that was before the trial court vacated its judgment.

That's correct.

And you're relying upon that filing date?

Of the initial plea, correct.

Right, okay.

And you say that the subsequent motion and granting of the request to vacate really doesn't change that.

No, the only thing that the request to vacate changes is the effect of the judgment that the district division issued.

In other words, the only thing that it changed was that the bank of York Mellon was not entitled to a written possession.

Everything prior to that still stays in effect and that's based on our motion to enlarge the time to actually file the plea of title in the superior court.

We took notice that that order was still outstanding where we just asked for additional time to file in the superior court.

Did the client recognize to the evicting party?

Yes, your honor.

And is your client still paying the recognition?

It's mine.

It's not in the record but it's my understanding that he is.

Yes.

But again, I don't think this court needs to get to the question of RSA 479-252A and that is because if the court adopts our rule with respect to RSA 479-252, again, we don't need to get there.

Have you got any case law from anywhere around the country that, I mean, I assume most states have a summary eviction proceeding statute and most states have some kind of foreclosure legislation.

Have you, is there any cases around the country that interpret the eviction statute in the way that you've advocated?

I haven't found any law from any other jurisdictions, no.

Well, I guess what I'm really asking is have you looked?

Do you know if there's any law?

I mean, have you actually conducted any research on that?

Not in other states and there's a reason for that and it's because we're not arguing the possessory action itself, I guess, specifically in terms of researching the law under there.

What I'm advocating for is the fact that when a plea of title is filed in response to a possessory action, it's only a defense.

And the only reason why it looks like a separate action is because the Superior Court is the only trial level court in the state that can hear title actions.

If we think of it this way, where if the district division did have jurisdiction to hear title actions, it wouldn't change the roles of the parties at all.

What would happen is the Bank of New York Mellon would say I'm entitled to evict you and Mr. Dowgert in the same court would say no, you're not because you don't have title.

And then the district division would make a determination in that case whether or not the Bank of New York Mellon is entitled to a writ and whether or not it has title.

But that's not the case because the Superior Court...

I guess the thing I don't understand is why should somebody, let's assume proper notice of the foreclosure, why should somebody, given 479-25, why should they be able to wait to argue title?

They've got... Bank says we're going to foreclose, you've got notice of it. It says you can seek an injunction if you wanted.

What's the policy reason that would allow somebody to sort of sit on their hands and do nothing and let the foreclosure go through?

Two things. In this case, Mr. Dowgert did not receive notice at all, but that's besides the point.

The reason why we should be allowing this rule is because, again, the landlord-tenant statute places the burden on the evicting party to show that they have title.

That's not really an answer to the question. Let's assume all that's true. Why does that say when you're given a remedy that you can stop this in its tracks, why does it make sense to say,

oh, really, that's just an option. You don't have to do that. You can just sort of do nothing.

I don't think that's the case with RSA 479-25. I think RSA 479-25, too, is meant to bar any future actions requesting affirmative relief.

I don't think it's meant to bar the defendant's right to...

How can you say that? It says you can get an injunction to stop the foreclosure.

You're trying to... That's a defense, isn't that almost by definition?

A defensive action? Now, maybe you're right. You may also be able to sue for damages.

But it seems to be that on the face of the statute, it says you can invoke the statute to stop what the bank wants to do.

Except that the statute specifically says that you're only barred from bringing actions and rights of action in the future.

So if we're looking at the plea of title in the context that it's brought in this case, it's not an action or a right of action.

It's a defense. It's a response by Mr. Dahlgert saying...

Well, that's a semantic distinction. It's something that, on which your client would have a burden of proof in a basically a court of equity.

That sounds like a claim to me.

I don't think so, Your Honor, and I don't think Mr. Dahlgert would bear the burden of proof.

I think Mr. Dahlgert...

Well, what about the language of RSA 540-17 that once a defendant makes a plea of title, he enters, he shall enter his action in superior court,

and shall prosecute his action in said court.

It doesn't sound like a defense here.

And, you know, how can we ignore that particular language?

I don't think you need to ignore the language, but I think it needs to be understood in the context in which it's raised.

I think in this case it's sort of used as a description.

The superior court is the only trial level court that can hear title issues.

And so in that sense, when Mr. Dahlgert files his plea of title, he has to bring it to the superior court.

In that sense, he's starting a new case, invoking a new case in the superior court.

But again, for the reasons I explained earlier, and I think this is supported by the fuller case that I put in my brief,

and also the Blackburn case that the appellee cited, and that is the parties don't actually change their role.

It's a matter of the only reason the case is in the superior court is because the superior court is the only court that can hear title issues.

Otherwise, it would remain in the district division as a defense.

But it doesn't follow automatically that the entire case is decided in superior court.

That issue results from what the original plaintiff does.

If the original plaintiff asks the superior court to issue a writ of eviction, it can do so.

But if it doesn't, and that's what happened in this case, I understand.

The bank never said to the superior court, we want you, by the way, to issue a writ of eviction.

In that case, the action in the circuit court is just stayed and it goes back to the circuit court.

Isn't that true?

That is correct.

And there is one slight factual difference in this case versus the Willette case, which I think you're referring to.

But I don't think we need to get there.

I think even if this court makes the same proposition that the case in the district division is only stayed,

it doesn't matter who at the end of the day issues the writ.

The fact of the matter is that the plea of title is only stating that you're not entitled to the writ,

because you don't have title to the property.

But as to that issue, the burden shifts to the individual challenging title.

I'm having trouble understanding that it's in a defensive posture.

Even if that's the case, and I'm not really sure he would have the burden,

but even if we presume that he does, you could still be treated as just the same as an affirmative defense.

There are affirmative defenses out there by which the defendant bears the burden to prove the defense in that case, too.

But that doesn't convert the affirmative defense to a separate action.

And that's what I'm saying here.

This is not a separate action, even though it's placed in a different court.

If the district division also could hear title matters, it would be in the district division.

I mean, it would still be an affirmative defense to the foreclosure, not a separate claim.

Your light's on, counsel.

I am out of time.

And so I would just ask that this court reverse the Superior Court based on that rule.

Thank you.

Counsel.

Justice says, may it please the court.

My name is Christopher Fisher, and I'm the attorney on behalf of the Appellee Bank of New York Mellon.

This case boils down to whether a plea of title is a defense or a separate cause of action from the possessory action.

And if it's a cause of action, it's too late.

Subject to the statute of limitations set forth in RSA 479-25.

As I was preparing for oral argument, I was reviewing my brief, and I was struck by something that I think simplifies this case.

And when I say struck, not for the right reasons.

I was struck by something because I misinterpreted a RSA 540-18 on page eight of my brief when I discuss the meaning of the second part of that statute where it says,

but the action may be entered and prosecuted in Superior Court as if the same had originally begun there.

As in support of asserting that the action that the statute is talking about is a plea of title, I cite to Catoldo,

Bank of New York Mellon, first Catoldo, which endorsed the view of an order as being consistent with RSA 540-18,

in that the order from the district court directed the defendant, tenant, to file as action the plea of title action directly in Superior Court.

After review and some further analysis, I came to the conclusion, and it's my opinion, that the action that's referenced in RSA 540-18

is not the plea of title that it's talking about.

It's talking about the possessory action.

And this gives, construing it in this way, gives the plaintiff in a possessory action the option and the ability to enter the possessory action

instead of having it stayed.

No comment seems to agree with you.

It can go one way or the other.

Right.

And then I believe it would take the form of a counter claim because you would have to request the relief of a writ of possession.

And that is subsequent to the defendant in a possessory action filing his plea of title with the Superior Court.

And in this case, you never asked the Superior Court to issue the writ.

Exactly.

And that's why this lines up perfectly with the recent decision in Willett in that my client, Bank of New York Mellon,

did nothing after the plea of title was filed.

They moved to dismiss the plea of title.

They did not request that the Superior Court issue the writ of possession.

The Superior Court did not issue the writ of possession.

And this appeal filed.

So this case lines up perfectly with Willett.

And the point that I'm trying to make is to clarify the argument articulated in my brief as to the meaning of the second part of RSA 540-18.

I believe that the action, it's not clear what action it's talking about, whether it's a plea of title or the possessory action.

But I believe that statute is referring to the possessory action.

Well, I think it is clear.

So what follows from that?

Well, I think that because these two statutes, they treat the possessory action as different and distinct.

And RSA 540-17 treats a plea of title as distinct.

And therefore, because these are two separate actions that can get to the Superior Court via two distinct and separate statutes.

And they form the basis of the jurisdiction of the Superior Court to entertain the argument challenging a plea of title.

And the argument that a party is entitled to possession of the property via a counter claim to a plea of title.

That it firmly establishes and confirms that the Superior Court was correct in treating the plea of title as subject to the statute of limitations set forth in RSA 479-25.

What's the significance, if any, of the granting of the motion to vacate judgment in the circuit court?

Well, the Dowgert in this case, he cites the order vacating the judgment that was entered in Bank of New York Mellon's favor as jurisdiction for the Superior Court to entertain the plea of title.

The judgment, by the time the court granted the motion to vacate, the judgment had become final.

And I believe that the motion to vacate was granted in error.

But you didn't appeal that, did you?

No, that was not appealed.

So the vacating of the judgment meant no judgment in the circuit court.

And my question is, to what extent does that have a bearing on our analysis of the issue?

Well, the record shows that the vacating of the judgment was cited as the grounds for jurisdiction of the Superior Court to entertain the plea of title.

And the record also shows that the order vacating judgment was granted in error.

Because there's a procedure set forth for how you challenge it.

How do we get behind that when you didn't appeal that?

Let's assume we would agree with you that if your client had appealed the vacating of that judgment, we would have reversed the trial court.

But you didn't.

So why isn't that, you know, that's, you know, trial court's errors all the time.

But if somebody appeals to them, that's the law of the case.

Right.

And the reason that we can get to this argument and entertain it is because it's put front and center in the plea of title.

They specifically rely on the order vacating judgment as grounds for asserting the jurisdiction of the Superior Court.

And they also...

Why isn't, why aren't they correct?

Because the proper venue for them, as would have been for us to challenge that order, was to appeal the entry of judgment in favor of Bank of New York Mellon.

That didn't happen.

Nor did we appeal the order granting the motion to vacate.

But they did challenge it.

They effectively challenged it.

They vacated.

Got it vacated.

But I guess our position on that is that after the judgment became final, it should not have been vacated.

Have been vacated subsequently.

Because judgment...

So if we go back further in the case...

But we can't get behind that.

At this point, you didn't appeal it.

The issue is simply not before us.

So we have to accept the proposition that there was never a judgment in the Circuit Court.

So then the next question becomes, given that there was never a judgment in Circuit Court,

how does that affect the triggering point for the one-year, one-day statute of repose as the trial...

So in my brief, I'd go into this discussion about theoretical tolling that could be attributed to RSA 540-17.

But there was a foreclosure deed recorded.

Correct.

Correct.

So after the foreclosure deeds recorded, RSA 479-25 requires any claim or action challenging the validity of the...

or challenging the notice of the foreclosure sale.

It needs to be brought within one year and a day.

So in this case, the eviction action was entered on August 12, 2014.

Shortly after that, Daugert appeared and he filed what he characterized as a plea of title.

In response to that, the district court entered an order,

and this is actually the order that was submitted in connection with the plea of title by Mr. Daugert himself.

That required that the plea of title be entered in Superior Court by the first Tuesday of...

And he didn't do that.

He did not do that.

He did post-recognizance and all of that.

But how do...

I was having difficulty following in your brief how you say the failure, in your words,

he had broken his reconnaissance promise.

How does that affect our analysis of when the statute of limitations was triggered?

So because RSA 540-17 requires that the action be entered in Superior Court,

I believe that the triggering for the statute of limitations is when the action is, in fact, entered in Superior Court,

not just when it's raised as a potential claim before a court that lacks jurisdiction to entertain that claim.

But for argument's sake, I present a circumstance where I believe the way reconnaissance was characterized in Contaldo

is that the defendant in a possessory action is making a promise,

and that promise is being made to not only the court, but to the defendant.

And the promise is, I promise I will enter my action in Superior Court by this date,

and I promise you that I will pay you X amount or whatever the reconnaissance order may be.

So I equate that for argument's sake as a tolling agreement

that could toll the effect of the statute of limitations in RSA 479-25.

And I further argue that because Mr. Dowgert broke his promise,

there's no argument that the statute of repose in RSA 479-25 can be told.

And therefore, because he didn't observe his promise, he's not entitled to any tolling argument.

So you would say, let me give you this example.

Let's suppose the bank forecloses gets a foreclosure deed,

and they buy the property from themselves essentially.

So they now own the property.

So the day before one year, one year minus a day after they do that,

they seek an eviction.

And in response to the eviction, the owner of the property

asserts a plea of title.

But because he only has a day,

he doesn't have a chance then to actually file

the plea of title in the superior court within the year.

Is he out of luck?

Yes, and I think the important thing is the plea of title,

unlike a landlord-tenant writ, it doesn't have to take a prescribed form.

It's just a very broad concept of if you challenge title,

if you bring title into question, then you have to file.

Then the action is stayed and it has to go to superior court.

So a plea of title can take many forms and could in fact be brought

before the eviction action in the form of a quiet title,

which was really, for all intent and purpose,

the type of claim that was asserted by Mr. Daugher.

That's your opponent's argument.

He filed a plea of title before the judgment was vacated,

and he says that means he was timely.

What vitiates the timeliness of his plea of title

in circuit court before the judgment was vacated?

The fact that he did not enter the action

in accordance with the proposed order that he submitted

that could theoretically be characterized as a tolling agreement

because the operative date is when the action is entered in superior court.

But when it's raised as just when the defendant and the courts put on notice

that they intend to argue this, I believe that it could be construed

as effectively tolling the preclusive effect of RSA 47925.

So had he submitted the plea of title in superior,

entered the plea of title in superior court prior to the,

well, before the deadline that he self-imposed in the proposed order,

then his title issues would have been heard by the superior court.

But if we, I guess, if I understand the way that the superior court

was interpreting 479252A as a statute of repose,

that would mean that it's not subject to any tolling.

Is that your view?

Yes, that is my primary view.

So in other words, if we, and that may well be the,

I mean, if you consider the purpose of the statute,

that may well be the, you know, to clear the land records and stuff like that.

That may well be right.

But if I'm understanding correctly, that would mean that, for example,

let's suppose somebody foreclosed, a bank purports to foreclose,

and they don't send any notice.

What they, you know, they stay, or somehow they'll notice,

you know, they send the notice to the wrong person or whatever.

So there would be no question that there was defective notice.

So they, so now they foreclose, they get a deed, they file it,

and a year goes by.

If I understand the trial court's ruling, it would be,

once that year goes by, even if they did those things incorrectly,

in the sort of interest of preserving the integrity of the ability

to transfer property and all this and that, too bad.

You're out of luck.

And I guess the message would be to property owners,

you better keep track of your property.

I'd like to, you know, go off to Margaritaville for five years

without talking about, you know, without making provisions

to control your property.

That's too bad.

You may lose it.

I agree entirely.

And that's the purpose of the Registry of Deeds

is to put the general public on notice, constructive notice.

So under those circumstances, there would be a preclusive effect

because the claim wouldn't have been brought within the one year

and one day time limit imposed by RSA 479.

25.

So I guess that wouldn't there be some due process

limitations on that notion?

I'm sorry?

Wouldn't there be some due process limitations on that notion?

I believe that the constitutionality of RSA 479

and the fact that you don't have to,

actual notice is not required.

It is simply to provide constructive notice

and just as my time limit has gone up

and if I can briefly respond to the...

Please.

So RSA 479.25 only has to provide constructive notice.

Actual notice is not required

and I believe that satisfies the due process argument.

Thank you.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you, Justice.

Do you need your two minutes, Mr. Martin?

Okay.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

I also may come forward in La Valley versus State Farm.
