This is case 2015, 0658, State of New Hampshire versus Daniel P. Tussie.

Good morning, Christine List.

Please the court, Christine List on behalf of Daniel Tussie.

I'd like to discuss the reckless mental state.

The state was required to prove that Daniel Tussie acted recklessly.

And what that means in this case is unusual from our normal assessment of recklessness.

We're talking about what proof of what Mr. Tussie thought,

about what B.D. thought, about what he might do.

In other words, a defendant's state of mind about how someone will perceive his actions and

what they will infer from that behavior.

And I think it's important to note when we're talking about the subjective awareness element that we talk about the definition of that fear for

personal safety that the statute does require more than unsettling, uncomfortable, or even socially unacceptable,

that it requires a specific response and therefore a specific awareness on Tussie's part.

Would you grant me creepy?

I would say that it is creepy, not criminal.

That that is a separate category that the statute requires more than not.

Well, you're deciding on the issue of recklessness.

Wasn't the evidence in the record sufficient for the court to find that your client

offered sort of explanations that could easily be

regarded as baloney, which would tend to support consciousness of guilt as to the appropriate mental state?

If I could add just two points on that.

I think we're discussing both the state realism, both his statements to the police and his testimony at trial.

Both can be classified as false exculpatory statements.

And false exculpatory statements can be circumstantial evidence of a consciousness of guilt.

However, it's in this case that they're insufficient circumstantial evidence because there are reasonable explanations for his statements and his motivation to distance himself from the situation that don't rise to the level of him's understanding.

Well, that might be a great argument for a jury, but as a matter of law, I mean, if they can't a fact finder say, well, wait a minute, this person made a false exculpatory statement.

Now, I understand that one side says, well, there's an explanation for that, but I don't buy that.

As a fact finder, I don't buy that.

I think that this shows that he knew exactly what he was doing and he knew exactly what effect it would have on the person who was the victim, and I find him guilty.

I respectfully disagree.

I think that the jury's rejection of his testimony rejected potentially one reasonable conclusion consistent with innocence.

Or that doesn't exclude all other reasonable conclusions consistent with innocence.

And so the jury is free to reject his testimony.

However, they can only infer a consciousness of guilt from that if it is the only reasonable conclusion consistent with those statements.

And I'd submit that his statements to the police and his testimony both demonstrate that other motivations for

distancing himself from the situation other than his subjective awareness that he would cause that specific response.

This was a three-day jury trial.

It was, Your Honor.

It was long.

I take it that there was a lot of testimony about how close these two people lived together.

There was, Your Honor.

And that downtown Laconia area is really quite tight.

And so was the argument made that the defendant only,

there were six incidents at issue, but in only three was their actual eyeball to eyeball contact, right?

Yes, Your Honor.

And so I take it that the argument made to the jury is that on three occasions the defendant wasn't doing anything,

except being where he otherwise had the,

there was nothing that, that ultimately shouldn't be there.

These people didn't know each other before.

There was no prior restraining order, nothing.

Correct, Your Honor.

And the, he was not in an unexpected location.

And I think that also goes to his subjective awareness and also factually is very distinguishable from cases cited by both parties in which the defendant appears in very

unexpected circumstances and which case therefore being there is unusual for that and puts a different connotation on the factual circumstance.

We're talking about in the middle of the day in downtown Laconia, in fact, the jury went on a view and was able to view this area themselves.

I don't, the view was not on the record, but the fact that they went was.

So we're talking about interaction between the two of them in broad daylight in downtown Laconia,

in the middle of the day, in three.

Doesn't the fact that there's a view strengthen the state's case, though?

I'm not sure I followed.

I mean, there's circumstantial evidence that we can't really evaluate, but it was before them to evaluate.

I don't, Your Honor, I think it was more the setup of the downtown and where things were.

There was no, there was no argument from the state that this was an unusual place for him to be.

I don't know if that was my, I, I delayed you.

Please go ahead.

The fact that this is, I'll just finish my point, I apologize downtown in broad daylight where we're talking about three instances of interaction between the two of them over the course of a three month period that that conduct is unlike other conduct that there's an inherent risk of causing a specific result.

And that conduct does not support, is an insufficient evidence itself to show that Tusi would be aware that he would cause BD to have that very specific reaction.

There are no further questions.

Thank you, Council.

Good morning, Your Honor.

Elizabeth Woodcock for the State of New Hampshire.

The defendant certainly acted recklessly in this case.

He was aware, particularly after he was interviewed by the police, that the police were concerned about him following.

But of course, your opponent says the police had the facts wrong.

They did have the facts wrong.

They thought that the, that the stocking was occurring near the school because the report had come from the school assistant principal, I think.

The little girl had been out with her friend.

They'd seen the car.

They'd taken the picture of the license plate and they'd reported it to somebody in the school.

And I think it was an assistant principal who then called the police.

The police acted quite quickly and went to the defendant and said, look.

Did they, did they confront the defendant with the fact that they, that she had taken a picture of the car with the license plate?

I don't know that that was in the record.

What they, what the, the statement was, and it was a question asked of the police officer.

So it's, it's not his words.

It's the lawyer's word.

But the, I think it was on cross examination.

The defense attorney asked the police officer, did you tell him that you were concerned about him following a girl, a little girl?

And the answer was something to the effect of yes.

So the, the defendant at that point knew that the police were concerned that he was following this child.

And after that, he showed up on her street as she was waiting for her siblings to get off the bus.

So I guess your point would be, even if this, even if, even if the police got it wrong, even if they, I mean, I don't think this happened here.

But even if they had sort of referred to another person, the fact that they've, they've told the guy,

you know, your conduct is, is questionable.

Even if it had been a totally different person, that would be, I suppose your point would be, that would be enough to put somebody on notice.

You know, I, to the extent that I'm sort of doing something that's, that's causing concern to people,

I better, I better change my behavior.

Correct.

The, the, the defendant at that point knew that the police were concerned enough to come and interview him and to tell him,

you know, you're, you're making this person worried, essentially.

And then he did the act that I think is really the most concerning.

And that's the turning around.

Waiting for.

He was on one side of the bridge, staring at her, is the evidence?

He's, he, right, she's waiting for the school bus and he comes by and stares at her.

And you have to think back, I guess, a little bit about what a 13-year-old, actually,

what the, what a person of that age is command of the world is.

Even if it's happening in broad daylight, even if, even if there were other people around,

but the record doesn't suggest there were.

This child is being terrorized by this man.

Well, I think you make a very important point.

I mean, it would seem to me, I, I would tend to say that this would be a much closer and maybe,

maybe not a sustainable case if we were talking about an adult.

If this was, if this was a, you know, somebody that was 20 or 25 years old,

it would seem to me that then is just staring, even if it might make somebody uncomfortable,

that would that reason, would that put a reasonable 25-year-old in some fear of some kind

of physical injury.

I, I think that might be a closer case.

When it's the 13-year-old child, that seems to me to make a much, make a big difference.

And, and that's why their behavior is so reckless.

Because he's, he's not just, I mean, this isn't standing on the corner watching all the girls go

by to quote a, a 60 song.

It's a, it's following a child who is very, very vulnerable.

Was he, was there evidence that he was employed?

What was he, how was he able to drive around downtown Laconia in the middle of the day?

I don't recall that he testified that he was employed.

He lived down there and he was living in an apartment.

And, and that, that was the, sort of the argument that was made to the jury was, look,

this guy lives here, he's, he's, this is innocent presence in essence.

But I think that once he's told by the police that this child, that they're concerned

that he's following this child, he's on notice that his behavior is causing a problem.

And he went right ahead and did it again.

I see my yellow light is on if there are no further questions.

Just one more question.

When he had the interaction with the police, did the police say to him, don't do this?

I don't know that, I don't know that that was the conversation because I don't think

that he admitted that he had been doing it.

I think the police said to him, words to the effect and you'd have to look,

it is a question on cross-examination.

So the officer is not, sort of, volunteering this information.

But the, the question is, did you tell him that there was a concern

that he was following a young girl?

And the police officer's answer was yes.

So I think that any reasonable person being told that there was a concern

that you're following a young girl would say to themselves,

I guess I better not do that again.

I see my red light is on now.

If there are no further questions, I would ask that the case be submitted.

Thank you, council.

Case submitted.

Court stands in recess.
