This is case 2015-0368 Elizabeth Trekkis at all versus State Farm Fire and Casualty Company at all.

Good morning. May it please the court? My name is John Fagan. I represent the appellants in this case.

I'd be happy to take your questions at any time. Beth Trekkis is not an arsonist. She has never been an arsonist.

She's a wife, mother, and a school teacher. And yet, as a result of the negligence of Nefco on October 4, 2010,

Beth was subjected to the possibility of going to prison for up to 10 years due to the charge of felony arson,

which was founded upon Nefco's frankly absurd notion of how this fire began and how it sequenced.

In addition to that, in addition to the harm that Beth suffered to her person and that her husband also suffered through,

she lost the contract benefits that were hers to obtain under the State Farm Policy.

Consequently, Beth Trekkis and the appellants generally in this case have two claims.

They have a contract claim for the benefits that were not paid under the State Farm Policy, which should have been paid.

And they have a tort claim for the negligence of Nefco and vicariously State Farm for the negligence in conducting the investigation,

which led to the horror they endured.

If Nefco is immune, can State Farm be found liable?

Well, State Farm was not part of the evidentiary hearing, Your Honor.

And there is a question that was raised in the evidentiary hearing.

And one of the things that Mr. Wheeler said during the course of that was, well, you know, my opinions were entirely preliminary,

but State Farm told me to stop work.

And if you go back to the Morve versus Hanover case, one of the issues addressed by the court was the insurance company

has the opportunity to restrict the scope of the examination.

What Mr. Wheeler said in the testimony at the evidentiary hearing was I told State Farm this was a preliminary opinion,

but they told me to stop work anyway.

So my opinion would be State Farm, if that is accepted by a trial of fact, could in fact be sued for negligence

because they then sent to the State a report from Nefco which was not couched in any terms of preliminary findings,

which was not in which there is no suggestion that Nefco had not done a complete investigation.

So my opinion would be, Your Honor, that State Farm could be found liable.

Because in fact remember what the evidence was at the evidentiary hearing was State Farm did not report.

It was Nefco that reported.

And so I think the answer to the question would be yes, Your Honor.

In order to establish the liability of Nefco, ultimately don't you have to prove fraud or malice?

In terms of the negligence case, Your Honor, or in terms of 15313A?

Negligence.

No, I don't believe so, Your Honor.

The evidence that we would submit to a jury is that based on what was available to it at the time of its investigation,

and remember that we cited to it in the brief that Mr. Wheeler and Mr. Mulcahy, when they got to the fire scene,

were not under any restrictions from State Farm in terms of the scope of the investigation,

the time they could spend upon it, and the time that they could consider it.

And yet after spending 15 minutes examining the refrigerator and less than a minute examining the trash can and the piece of paper found in it,

Nefco stopped its investigation without consulting State Farm and reported this to the authorities.

Our opinion, our expert's opinion, is that that was unreasonable,

and that no reasonable investigator would have stopped the investigation at that point and reached the conclusions that Nefco did.

The fraud and malice component of this is the immunity question under 15313A.

So on a negligence claim, we don't have to establish fraud or malice, just lack of reasonable care.

Your expert never gave an opinion as to the cause of that second fire.

Correct.

And it was pointed out by what he said was it was undetermined because they had not gone through the whole electrical analysis

and pulled the side of the refrigerator off and looked at all the electrical components.

Mr. Peralt noted in his brief that the issue that we were addressing at the time was reason to suspect,

and that had we had a full-blown hearing on negligence, he would have an expert addressing causation, the full scope of causation.

The same was true for the plaintiff.

I mean, we were addressing the question that was present at the time which was, was there reason to suspect?

And what Mr. West testified to is based on the burn patterns, based on the physical evidence that was there on the day of the examination,

this was not an incendiary fire.

And you reject the trial court's analogy to a police officer who has reason to suspect that a crime has been committed?

No.

In fact, your Honor, what we suggested, because this court has never addressed 153.13A and what reason to suspect means,

and what the burden of proof is.

And so what we suggested to the court was, look, in the context of an investigatory stop,

do you then have, what do you then have to have available to you as an officer to do a protective risk?

And there was a, you have to reasonably suspect that there's a presence of what?

The crime has been committed is about to be committed.

And so we analogized to that, and we suggested to the court that what was needed was the ability to point to specific objective,

particularized facts that actually made some sense.

And we cited the court particularly to the broadest case.

And in that case, as you recall, the police officer stopped two young ladies in the car,

determined they had lied to him about the presence of drugs and or alcohol in the car,

found that one of the suspects was not looking him in the eye.

And this court said, well, no, none of that adds up.

It doesn't lead you anywhere specific.

It doesn't establish what you need to establish for a protective risk.

In this case, what we suggested to the trial court was you need a level of objectivity based on the education

and the experience of that person making the report.

In this case, that would be David Wheeler.

And so that's what we were addressing there.

But it shouldn't be forgotten, Your Honor, that one of the questions...

So Wheeler had accepted there was another fellow who made an initial...

Mulcahee.

Mulcahee, the forensic electrical engineer.

Correct.

He passed his brief conclusions on to Wheeler.

Correct.

And one of the things that Mr. West addressed there was,

the electrical inspection was completely visual.

And didn't even include all the electrical components of the refrigerator.

And so that to the extent...

And he's also a Nefgo employee.

So to the extent that Nefgos relying upon Mulcahee to establish there's no refrigerator causation here,

they didn't even do a complete exam,

even though Mulcahee said that.

So again, it lacks the objectivity required under the bonus decision.

I mean, if we allow this kind of lawsuit to go forward,

doesn't that...

And the statute does say that in the absence of fraud or malice.

So, I mean, you have, as I understand it correctly,

you have this duty that is imposed on investigators,

or the insurance company, I'm sorry, who hired the investigator.

You have, as I understand it, there can be...

If the report is not made, that can actually be a misdemeanor.

So, in that circumstance, to make negligence the standard

by which somebody is going to be an insurance company

or an investigator that's hired by an insurance company is going to be liable,

seems to really put the insurance company

or the investigator between a rock and a hard place, doesn't it?

I don't agree with that, Your Honor. No.

And the reason I don't agree with this is very simple.

Remember this Court's case law is,

if there's going to be an abrogation of the common law,

the legislature must clearly state it.

So when you go to RSA 15313A Roman IV, which is the immunity statute,

it provides immunity to the insurance company

or one acting on its behalf who provides information

necessary and required by the statute.

Well, RSA 15313A Roman IV doesn't tell us what's necessary and required,

so you have to go to the other parts of the statute.

So you go to 15313A Roman II,

which is the only provision of that statute,

which has an impositivism, affirmative obligation

to give information to the authorities about a suspicious fire.

That's where the reason to suspect language is found, 15313A II.

15313A II says if an insurance company has reason to suspect,

it shall then provide notification to the State Fire Marshal

through a recognized bureau or through an agent.

But let me ask you this.

Here's the thing I have some trouble with.

If reason to suspect means sort of the absence of negligence,

then I guess I'm not sure what does the immunity provision,

which says that in the absence of fraud or malice.

In other words, why would you, if the insurance,

why would you need that?

Because if you have, if reason to suspect,

if you don't have reason to suspect, that is,

i.e., you were negligent, you can be held liable,

why do you need this?

Well, Your Honor, first off,

we didn't argue for a negligence standard

in providing immunity to Neff go under the statute.

That's not what we argued below

and that's not what the court imposed.

But secondarily, as we pointed out in the brief,

there are circumstances where you could have,

out of a single investigation,

a report which is necessary and required,

but is at the same time malicious,

depending on who you're referring to.

And I just referred to the court to the brief.

We provided hypotheticals.

And one of those was, let's say you have an investigator

that in an attempt to please its client,

decides that they're going to find that there was,

in fact, an arson when they know beyond any doubt

that there wasn't.

You tell their client this was arson.

You could find Malice in that situation.

The insurance company then says,

well, we have to notify the authorities.

The insurance company doesn't know that this is a made-up

situation by the investigator

and they report as required by statute.

That was a necessary report

because they believed their investigator.

There would be a necessary required report.

The insurance company would be immune,

but the investigator would not be

because they acted with Malice.

That's one situation in which that could operate

as we indicated in the brief.

So remember, the court is obligated

to apply the statute as the legislature drafted it.

And in terms of the way the trial court addressed this,

the trial court ended up saying,

look, I don't have any information about

what State Farm told Nefgo

to do with the fruits of its investigation.

There was no testimony from State Farm.

Dave Wheeler testified he never talked,

excuse me, never talked to State Farm,

didn't know what they knew,

didn't know what they wanted him to do

with the fruits of his investigation,

and he called on his own,

not talking to State Farm until after he had done so.

So the court applied an agency gloss to this

and it's something that was taken up by Nefgo

and his appeal.

The legislature didn't provide for that in the statute.

It said only if the insurance company

has reason to suspect

does that obligation report get triggered.

There is a separate statute, 106F,

applicable to investigators,

which does not contain reason to suspect language.

It talks about if you have knowledge

of an actual felony that's been committed.

Do you then have an obligation to report?

It's a different statute.

It's a different standard,

and it wasn't asserted by Nefgo.

So our position in this case

is that there is simply no

statutory immunity given to Nefgo

under the facts it testified to.

Very briefly, I know you haven't addressed

any questions to the State Farm claim.

I'd like to go to that very briefly,

although I'm willing to certainly take

any further questions you have on Nefgo.

The trial court aired

in dismissing all claims against State Farm

on the premise that the single notice

it gave on October,

I believe it was October 7th or 8th,

after the fire, which complied with 40715,

that that notice would then get applied

to all other insurers and still be affected

even in the presence of two further notices

which were sent by State Farm.

And that notice that you just referred to

went to the named insured, correct?

Correct. The first notice was October 11th, 2009.

Went to the named insured.

To the named insured.

Only.

Only.

The second notice was October 15th, 2010,

and that included the language this court rejected

in McGuire that was addressed to

Beth Screckus, power of attorney for Virginia Martin,

but it was the salutation was Dear Ms. Martin.

The third notice was approximately nine months later

directed to Beth Screckus alone,

which referred to New York law.

Our position is that if you

read all three notices together,

State Farm suggests you should

because a notice to one insured

is noticed to any insured according to them.

The notices together are ambiguous,

they're confusing, and they impose on the insured

an obligation to try to figure out

which is the correct notice.

I'd simply point out that State Farm then says,

well, look at our policy.

Well, if you look at State Farm policy

at Appendix page 74,

what you'll find is the statutory provision

still doesn't track the statute

because it says you have to file suit

within one year of the date of loss.

You mean the policy provision doesn't track the statute?

Correct.

In order to the notices, the two notices.

State Farm is telling us that the version

of 407.15 at the time

is different from the version

you are relying on in your brief.

Can you respond to that?

I mistakenly cited the current version

as opposed to the 2010 version,

but as I noted in the reply brief, Your Honor,

it doesn't change the analysis

because you still have three separate notices,

the final two of which do not track

the version in effect at the time of the loss.

So you say we've got to look at all three of them.

We can't just focus on the first one,

which is arguably proper notice.

You say in the context of the other two notices,

that is confusing to the policyholder

and isn't clear.

More importantly, it doesn't strictly comply

with the notice under the statute

which McGuire says it must.

Because it conflicts.

Two other notices conflicted.

Correct.

And the two other conflicting notices

do not comply with the statute.

That goes back to McGuire.

I'd also like to briefly address

the question of the tort claims against State Farm

because I think this is one that really sticks in my craw.

The tort claim against State Farm

is premised on the idea that

Beth's Grecus was subjected to a prosecution

that was not part of the policy.

There was no promise in the policy

that there would not be an investigation

that would lead to prosecution of the insured,

nor is the investigation itself a promise of the policy.

If you go through the case law that preceded Lawson

in which succeeded Lawson,

Lawton rather, by red lights.

Let me just clarify something.

Their reason for not paying

was that she didn't cooperate

because she wouldn't give the required statement.

So that's what they're basing,

principally, their position on.

My red light is on.

You may finish.

There are two claims, Your Honor.

There's the contract claim.

And the denial of coverage under the contract

for failure to give a statement

is in fact a contract claim

for which there's only economic loss.

The tort claim

is the extra contractual damage

which was caused by the investigation

which subjected the insured in her person

and her husband to the prosecution

for 18 months for a felony.

If you go back to Lawton,

you can have both.

You can have a breach of contract

and you can have a duty that supports a tort claim.

Bennett was one of those instances

where the investigation,

which was not required by the policy,

led to the insured being unable

to recover uninsured losses.

He suffered a loss to his person,

to his property.

That was permitted.

The trial court aired by finding

that there was a difference

between investigating for subrogation

and investigating just after the fire

because if you go through the testimony

of Mr. Okay, you'll find

he thought he was investigating

the subrogation loss initially.

I think that's a distinction with a difference

and I urge this court to look at

the difference between tort claims

as we addressed in the brief

and contract claims.

I know I'm holding you up,

but you were saying that the policy,

the claim by State Farmers,

there's no provision in the policy

that requires an investigation

or requires, I suppose,

even good faith in an investigation.

What is your response to that?

I think every contract

requires good faith in fair dealing

and its execution.

We know that.

What State Farmers is saying is,

look, we have these contractual,

we have these statutory provisions

under the Unfair Claims Practices Act

and we have certain insurance regulations

that require us to investigate.

Let's point out in the brief

what the statutory

and the administrative provisions actually say

is you have to do a prompt investigation.

It doesn't say anything about

the nature of it or the scope of it

and unlike in Lawton,

it doesn't provide or ensure

any revenue if the scope

of the investigation

and the way in which it's performed

causes damage.

It's a completely different situation

and I don't think it's applicable.

Thank you.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Mr. Peralta.

Thank you, Your Honor.

May it please the court.

My name is Donald Peralta.

I'm here on behalf of Nefco in this case

and I'd be happy to entertain

questions as we go along.

Do I understand correctly

that you and Mr. Ducharm

are dividing your time equally?

We are, Your Honor.

Okay, go ahead.

Nefco really has just two points

that it wishes to make here.

Essentially our position

as it's made out

in our pleadings

we believe that Judge Temple below

got the ruling absolutely correct

in finding that the immunity statute applied

but he did so through a

employing a stricter standard

than we believe the statute requires.

With respect to his arriving

at the proper decision,

I think if I understand

my brother's arguments in this regard,

he interprets the statute

as requiring some super punctilious

interpretation of when and how

and to whom reports are to be made

that would suggest a formality

and an approach that sort of defies

the practical considerations

of what actually happens

in the real world of fire investigation.

This case is not unusual

in its factual pattern

in the way things arrived at it

and I think the reading

of the statute is clear

or suggest a clear intent

on the part of our legislature

to address those circumstances

which perhaps happen more frequently

than we care to acknowledge

in New Hampshire and other states

where fire investigations,

the resources of our community

and even our state fire investigators

are somewhat limited

and that frequently circumstances

like this result in situations

where in this case

a private investigator

is handed a scene after a time

when a fairly limited

and perfunctory investigation

was done by the authorities.

What's your response to the argument

that the Section 2 duty to notify

only applies to insurance companies

and not to someone like your client?

Well, I think, again,

that's sort of reading that

section of the statute out of context.

You can't satisfy that section

and also read the immunity portion

which refers to employees, agents

and other people acting on behalf

of the insurance carrier.

I think the approach that was taken

by the trial court

and addressed extensively

in the court's opinion,

lengthy opinion in this case,

was an agency analysis

and determined, I believe, correctly

that Mr. Wheeler, in fact,

that Nefco was working

on behalf of the insurance carrier

and the statute is at best silent

on the issue of at what level

does the reporting requirement

from the insurance company arise?

Is it the president of the company

or is it the ingester in the field?

I would suggest to you,

in this particular case,

the contact between Nefco

and the insurance company

was an ingester who called

and directed them to investigate

the cause and origin of this.

Is it totally irrelevant to our analysis

that if an investigation

is not conducted fully,

the consequences can be very severe

as is alleged in this case.

This woman was under charges

for, I don't know how long,

a year and a half or whatever.

They were ultimately null prost.

Does it matter what the potential consequences

to the policy holder are

or should we just say,

nope, we are going to put blinders on

and we are going to connect the legal dots

and it doesn't matter

what the consequences may be.

You're right.

It's an excellent question

and here's where I take issue

with my brother's analysis

in terms of the causation there.

Nefco and I think Justice Flynn,

Lynn rather correctly described the situation

as being between a rock and a hard spot.

Nefco hired for a purpose

directed by its agent,

its principal to conduct an investigation.

In the course of that investigation,

they come across evidence

that gives them reason to believe

that the fire is other than accidental.

Mr. Wheeler testified that he was aware

that he had an obligation to report that

and that he acknowledged that he then believed

he was in the presence of a crime scene

and acknowledged that he was aware

that there were penalties for not reporting

and so on that particular day,

he called the local fire person,

Mr. Dooby, who had been working with

from the Hudson Fire Department,

he called the State Fire Marshal

and spoke with them

and he called the insurance company.

But he was certainly aware

they were going to rely on his opinion.

But he testified and I think

he was credible in this regard

that it was asked, I think specifically

my brother, would you be surprised

to learn that there wasn't any further investigation done

because the testimony is also

uncontroverted, that he was directed

on that day to cease all activity

with regard to that investigation.

He was asked, would you be surprised

to learn that either the State

or State Farm or anyone else

didn't take any further action

to further up, follow up on your investigation

and he said, if that's the case,

shame on them.

And so he was in a position

to acknowledge and I take issue

with my brother's characterization

that there was never any question

but these were preliminary findings.

And so if fall lies, it lies

with the authorities of the State

of New Hampshire in their fire investigation

with the local police department

with the carrier for not following up

but Nefco was essentially done

as of that time.

You said he was directed to stop.

Who directed him to stop?

Well, both the police officer,

the police officer said,

I believe that's a crime scene

so you should stop.

But Nefco told them,

cease your activities

and send us a copy of your report

which he completed some 10 days later

after the opponent was actually charged

in this case.

The report didn't actually cause

the charges being brought at all.

You alluded earlier to the fact

that you thought that even though

you prevailed the trial court

applied the wrong standard.

And I was going to get to that point.

You spanned on that?

Yeah, I mean it's really,

the argument isn't terribly complicated.

If in fact the preliminary requirement

is some showing,

and there's a concession in this case

that there has been absolutely no showing

of either fraud or malice,

then it's hard to imagine that that standard,

that statue would require

that there be an objective determination

because as was noted, if in fact...

We don't like crossing bridges

that we don't have to cross.

Do we really have to address this issue

if we conclude that even under

the more stringent objective

standard, there was sufficient

support for suspicion?

Perhaps not for the purposes of this case,

Your Honor, but I think that the issue going forward,

we shouldn't...

I would ask the court not to lose sight of the fact

that by employing a standard

of objective reasonableness,

if you will,

the purpose of this immunity statue

was essentially defeated.

We spent three days in hearings

trying to establish the reasonableness

of his findings as opposed to

the simple determination.

Without any preliminary showing

that anybody from Nefco

was motivated by fraud or malice,

and so if you get to the determination

that it was a reasonable suspicion

that there was a fire caused by arson,

then I would posit for the court

that whether or not they were motivated

by malice or fraud is really irrelevant

and so you essentially are reading out

the requirement for a preliminary showing

of fraud or malice in the statue,

and that just doesn't make sense.

It seems to me that in the absence of fraud or malice,

as the statue suggests,

if an investigator has reason to believe

that it's other than accidental,

he or she should be afforded the protections

of the statute that's intended to encourage

the cooperation between private investigators

and the official authorities

who are charged with the prosecution of arson.

Thank you.

Thank you, Your Honor.

May it please the court.

I'm Dennis Dusham.

I represent State Farm, Your Honor.

With my seven and a half minutes,

I'm going to do my best to cover

the tort issue in about five

and when the light goes on,

switch to the notice issue,

so I do intend to try to get to both.

As the court knows, we're here on a tort claim

which has no relation to 407.15

or 407.22.

Those only apply to the contract claim.

The contract claim simply arises out of the policy.

The tort claim arises as Justice Convoy

is noted out of Elizabeth Screckus's failure to cooperate.

On the tort claim, what Mr. Fagan asks for

is one of two things.

He's asking for this court to either overrule

Lawton and Jarvis,

which have been the law in the state for almost 40 years,

or squeeze this case into Bennett.

Both arguments should fail.

This case is nothing like Bennett.

As you've heard from both counsel,

Mr. Wheeler gets there on day one or two.

I think the record is a little fuzzy on that.

He gets there on day one or two.

He makes a report to the locals.

Mrs. Screckus is indicted

and eventually the claim is denied

for her failure to cooperate.

That's nothing like Bennett.

The court knows that Bennett is a case

where a carrier paid the claim in full,

made an extra contractual promise to an insured

beyond the policy,

led the insured down some primrose path for three years

and completely dropped the ball.

That is nothing like this case.

It's absolutely not there.

What State Farm did in this case

was pure and simple normal investigation.

There's a little bit of fuzz

in what Mr. Mulcahy thinks he was there for.

He suggests it might have been a subrogation claim.

So what?

It's totally different from Bennett.

Mr. Wheeler says,

once Mulcahy's work was done,

I was told to do an origin and cause investigation.

That's part and parcel

of an adversarial type first-party claim

where a carrier is looking at a potential arson.

This was a second fire there in a week.

Doing what State Farm did

is part of its contractual obligation.

Mr. Fagan...

What contractual provision provides that?

There's not a specific provision.

There's no laundry list in an insurance policy

that says after this loss,

a carrier will do this and this and this and this.

And the notion of a test,

as argued by the appellant,

that only things that are specifically listed

as mandatory fall within

meeting contractual obligations

is just ludicrous.

If that were the case,

every reasoned decision to deny a claim

could potentially give rise to tort.

But if a carrier simply said,

well, we'll deny this one and we'll accept this one,

because they didn't think about the claim,

there wouldn't be a tort.

Plaintiff really turns logic on its head

in the effort to argue

that only things, quote-unquote,

directly related to or mandated by the policy

would prevent a tort claim.

They really argue for something that proves

far too much wrong.

What is the standard?

Let's say we agree with you on that point.

Do you say that malice is the only thing

that prevents immunity?

In other words, it...

You're speaking to the immunity statute

or the negligence count against state firm?

I'm sorry you're on it.

My mistake.

Would an insurance company

never, never under any circumstances

be liable for a negligent investigation?

Is that the bottom line?

I certainly could conceive of such a theory, Your Honor,

but I don't see how we get there in this case.

Why, just because of the alleged failure to cooperate?

No, no, because state firm's conduct

was nothing like what the court recognized in Bennett.

Bennett amounted virtually to fraud.

Right.

And this is nothing like that.

So you're talking about defenses to such a claim rather?

So could I envision a situation where

an investigator goes out and...

Is there no duty?

Maybe that's the better way to put it.

Is there no duty on the carrier

to do a reasonably competent investigation?

However you want to phrase that.

Sure, sure.

Our negligence law just puts a duty on everyone

to act as a reasonably prudent person

would act under the circumstances.

So does that general negligence standard

not apply to insurance carriers

vis-à-vis their policyholders?

In the first party context,

there absolutely is a duty that has been read into the policy

and it's a duty of good faith and fair dealing

and I think that amounts to a negligence standard

but Lawton and Jarvis make very clear

that that entitles you to foreseeable contract type damages.

It doesn't entitle you to tort damages.

And just briefly, I'll address that.

One of the things the appellant argues in the reply brief

is that the type of damages being sought by Mrs. Screcchis

make this different from Lawton and Jarvis

and that's just not true.

If the court rereads Lawton and Jarvis,

the type of damages being claimed in Lawton and Jarvis

were irreparable damage to Mr. Lawton's business

and credit reputation,

Mr. Lawton's pain and suffering and mental anguish,

and Jarvis's full panoply of tort damages

in a denial on a health policy.

There's nothing more...

I'm really struggling with this.

What we know is that this woman was under indictment

for a year and a half for arson

and we know that the authorities apparently accepted

your agent's views on what caused the accident

even though they didn't name her

but the logic followed from it.

So I guess I just keep coming back to my question about

is there no duty aside from contractual duties

that an insurance company would have under these circumstances

where the consequences potentially are as dire

as they were in this case?

I would say on these circumstances the answer is no,

there is no duty in negligence.

There just isn't a negligence claim here.

Your Honor, I know I've run out of time

and I did not get to the notice issue.

Why don't you just consider that submitted on your brief?

Thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you, counsel.

Case submitted.

Counsel may come forward in the matter of...
