This is case 2015-0499, Thomas Reed versus New Hampshire Attorney General.

As the Chief Justice mentioned, Justice Hicks will be participating in this case,

even though he isn't present this morning. She, however, is disqualified.

May it please the Court. My name's Tom Reed, and I appear as the appellant in this matter.

This case is about democracy.

This case is about the public's right to have access to information.

This case is about part one, article eight of the New Hampshire Constitution, and the right to no law.

And fundamentally, the right to no law provides

that we as the public have the right to obtain the utmost

information about what our government, and in this case the Attorney General's Office and the Rockingham County Attorney, are up to.

911A is based on the theory that public knowledge of the considerations upon which government action is based and the decisions taken is essential to the democratic process.

Can I ask you, Mr. Reed? Let me just ask you this question. If I understand correctly, we don't have in New Hampshire

sort of the equivalent of what the federal government has.

That is the Freedom of Information Act on the one hand and a privacy act on the other hand.

We have the right to no law. We don't have these sort of the equivalent, at least not as robust in any sense, as the privacy act at the federal level.

So my question is this. Let's suppose we disagree with you.

At some point in the future, for example, if there were a change in administration and there were a new Attorney General,

could the new Attorney General decide, unlike my predecessor, I think it's important to the public to disclose this information related to this investigation.

And so I'm going to disclose, could he do that, or would some of the people that the state are saying their privacy interests are at stake?

Would they have a basis to say no, you can't do that, Mr. Attorney General?

I think the Attorney General would have an ethical obligation to release this information.

What the Attorney General did is he removed an elected official. Back in November of 2013, for months, no information was provided to the public.

Now, with the purpose of the right to no law in Part 1 Article 8 being to protect the democratic process, what can be a greater front to the democratic process than to remove an elected official?

What, besides that, does the public have more right to know about?

Well, of course, of course, we can't throw the right to no law exceptions out the window.

My concern here is that the trial court never conducted an in-camera review of the documents.

When I looked at the Vaughn Index, I see that the state identified some, they set forth document 1 through 10.

The exception that applies is the right to no law exception for personnel-related documents.

It also included the Vaughn Index presented by the Attorney General.

Also included identifying materials that were, they say, protected by privacy, the general privacy.

My concern here, and I'll be very candid because I'm going to ask your opponent to respond to this,

is the trial court seemed to accept the characterization by the Attorney General of these documents as falling within acknowledged exceptions,

which we can't, we can't ignore the law on that, but the trial court never actually looked at the documents.

Are you asking for us to remand with instruction for the trial court to do that?

I didn't quite get that from your brief.

What are you asking us to do?

I am asking for the documents to be released.

I think that's appropriate under the circumstances.

But how can you want us to jump over and just say, okay, release the documents?

There is a process that we need to follow under the right to no law.

We can't ignore what the legislature has told us.

There are exceptions and those exceptions, the documents have to be held against the exceptions and a decision has to be made.

Can we just jump over that responsibility and do what you ask us to do in your brief?

I think it would be appropriate for the court to remand it with specific instructions in terms of what kind of in-camera review and balancing test has to happen.

And it's important in this case to note that there was a complaint for removal that ultimately was filed.

And so the concerns under public policy that we want to encourage employees to go forward to their employers with complaints and make sure that they're fully investigated.

There's a public policy that those internals are kept protected for the good of the employees as well as the agency that needs to make sure they're running things correctly.

Do you take issue with that?

No. And the internal was done by Rockingham County a year and a half before the Attorney General got separate complaints from the same employees who knew that their protected internal still existed at the county.

If people then decide to independently go and share their information with someone else, it's not protected.

The end game, if you go to the Attorney General's office with this kind of complaint, if it's a sexual harassment type of complaint,

once the internal has been done at the county, the employee can go to the Human Rights Commission by statute.

That's your avenue of appeal. The EEOC, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, the Labor Department, that's where the employee can go.

But the character of the information that they're sharing when they choose to do that has stepped outside of the protections of internal to the agency,

whose records I might be requesting, but to Rockingham County, where that internal is and could have remained protected.

If I'm understanding correctly, it sounds like what you're saying is that when the Attorney General starts an investigation on the basis of some complaint or whatever,

when somebody from the AG's office shows up at the Rockingham County Attorney's office or whatever saying I'm conducting an investigation,

presumably the people that give that information understand that this may lead to a proceeding where they may become a witness.

Absolutely. They showed up with the FBI. The public has no idea why to this day. What the heck was going on?

The FBI came in, they said, you're talking to us. They didn't say it wasn't the context of your with your employer.

You've gone to your HR department. That already happened. Remedies were in place the way policy dictates.

They showed up with the FBI and said, you know, we're going to ask you some questions and if you say something wrong, you'll be prosecuted federally for lying to a federal agent.

This is not an internal. And the Attorney General's office can't claim it's an internal. The internal is done by the county.

So is your argument that the context of the investigation eviscerates the right to no law? In other words, are you saying it's irrelevant what the right to no law is because of what was done in this case.

We need to understand what your argument really is.

I'm certainly saying that the exception for records related to internal personnel practices that the court made a mistake to apply that to the AG's investigation.

Because to do so ignores the word internal and simply creates a subject matter exemption for any time anyone talks about personnel matters with anyone anywhere.

It's internal to the agency. And we do look to FOIA for some guidance sometimes. And there is section 2 of FOIA.

Okay, so from your standpoint, the threshold question was, was the foundation for the exceptions established here because there are clear exceptions to the right to no law.

You say, given the circumstances here, because you say this was not an investigation by the employer that the foundation for the exceptions isn't there.

For that specific exception.

At least for that exception.

Yeah.

Then we have the privacy exception.

Yeah.

Which is a different analysis because the legislature essentially has established a protocol, for want of a better word, where there's a balancing.

We have to do a balancing according to the legislature on the privacy exception.

Absolutely, absolutely.

And the problem in this case.

So do you say that's appropriate for the court to have done, should have done?

I requested the court to do a balancing test.

And the court could only do that if it had the documents.

Correct.

In regard to the privacy exception.

Right.

Correct.

What about, isn't there another, and I know it's not specifically written in our law, but haven't we sort of accepted as generally by analogy to FOIA the, you know, investigatory records compiled for law enforcement purposes?

And wouldn't, what about that?

Wouldn't these, wouldn't, would these records fall under that, that these were investigatory records compiled for law enforcement purposes?

And the fact that the investigation is over and no, you know, the case resolved, so what?

They're still, they still were investigatory records compiled for law enforcement purposes.

But, but at a certain point, if there's no longer the potential for release of the records to harm the investigation, the records can be released.

Well, is that the way, is that the way the federal courts have interpreted that exception?

My, my impression is that it's not quite that simple.

That, that even if, you know, you know, if, you know, aren't there cases that say, for example, if Carlo Gambino, you know, went after the, his case was dismissed or there was no grand jury didn't indict.

If he went to the FBI and said, listen, you were investigating me for loan sharking.

I want all the records of that.

The case is over.

Right.

And the, and the government.

That the government doesn't have to turn it over.

I think the government has the burden of demonstrating that it would cause potential harm or impede their ability to conduct investigations.

This is certainly not the exception that the Attorney General relied on.

And as you saw in the index, they, they wrote, you know, personnel exemption.

So if we were to remand, could the AG's office expand the list of exemptions that they're withholding under or that they relied on earlier so that, for example, the privacy exception would be implied?

To give the most protection to records that should be protected. Absolutely. Absolutely.

And, and would have the opportunity to respond to that, certainly.

What about your constitutional claim?

The state says that it's not preserved below and that the argument wasn't made below that this categorical exemption is unconstitutional.

Well, isn't that right?

That appears to me that the state's argument is well founded.

Well, I, from the beginning, I had certainly made the argument that we're into the public was entitled to the records pursuant to Part 1 Article 8.

And the argument is preserved in that it was made that, I did say that it would violate Part 1 Article 8 not to produce the records.

In arguing that in a balancing test and the purpose of the right to know the law so that we can hold the government accountable, know what they're up to, we're entitled to see these records.

Nothing has been released.

And in that index that you saw, Judge, where they wrote documents and then they wrote in the column disclosed, that's misleading.

As I filed in subsequent pleadings, 100% blacked out pages.

They disclosed a page that was blacked out.

100% blacked out?

They don't get to count that because they tell us that, what, 7,000 documents were disclosed?

You get an interview that's 88 pages long.

The first and the last page which say who's here and what time it is are the only ones that aren't 100% blacked out.

That's a withheld document.

And then they charts the public 20 cents a page for the PDF of it.

What's gone on here is outrageous.

That this much time has gone by, that elected official, the public, the people are denied the person they chose to be in a position.

And the information is controlled completely by a government entity that removed them.

Well, you know, I, as a trial judge for many years was involved in many right to know cases.

And a party could say, I don't want to produce this document because I believe it is covered by one of the exceptions.

And routinely, I would look at the document in camera, all by myself.

And I would say, does that fit?

And I would make a judgment.

So regardless of the political overtones here, isn't this simply a straightforward question of whether a trial court can make a decision about whether a particular document falls within an exception?

Did the trial court air because he didn't look at the document in order to make that judgment?

I mean, I appreciate your passionate arguments based on the authority of the AG's office.

But doesn't this really come down to a pretty straightforward technical question?

Could the trial court have made his decision as he did without looking at the documents?

No.

And the attorney general had argued that we're going to identify them as categorical exemptions.

And in our phenomenon, you shouldn't do a balancing test.

And I submit to you that that's improper.

First off, they weren't internal, so the exception doesn't apply.

But even if it did, under the subsequent case law, certainly there should be a balancing test.

And the idea of a categorical exemption where you don't have to do a balancing test, I'd refer you to FOIA and Department of the Air Force versus Rose.

Wait a minute.

That's a different question.

If I as a trial judge have a Vaughan index that says documents one through five are exempt under the personnel exception, I didn't do a balancing test.

If the argument was documents five through ten are exempt under the privacy exception, then I do the balancing test.

You're merging the two, and I think that's not right.

You're saying there needs to be balancing under both exceptions.

Absolutely. There needs to be a balancing test.

And the subsequent cases-

That's not what the right to no law says.

Well, the case law from this court, which includes subsequent cases after Fenneman, talk about, and just give me a moment here.

In Goode versus LBA 148, New Hampshire 551, there's an argument that materials are categorically exempt.

And the court held that while work papers is a category of confidential information, there still must be a balancing test.

In Union Leader versus Finance Authority 142540 1997, the court said identified categorical exemptions.

But since these categorical exemptions mean not that the information is per se exempt, but rather that there is sufficiently private that must be balanced.

The court was dealing with the alleged confidentiality of the information, not that it was personnel documents.

Right?

You just said that case dealt with the exemption that covers alleged confidential information.

But they all fall under, if I may answer, they all fall under the same part of RSA 91A5.

And whether it's records related to internal personnel practices or the other confidential records, they're all categories that are identified as exempt.

And so while Fenneman said, you know, we're looking at the internal investigation.

But they're qualitatively different.

Are they not personnel records?

Isn't that qualitatively different from documents as to which it is asserted there is privacy interest or confidentiality interest?

Well, the idea is, is there a document that you can say is of no real significant interest to the public?

And if that document has a category of no significant interest to the public, then you can say when we see that category of document again, there doesn't need to be a balancing test.

And that's what the federal government had said in the case I was going to cite, that the items that they recognize as those internal records,

they have said that disclosure of internal agency matters that are so trivial and that there is not, quote, a genuine and significant public interest in them, that those are exempt.

Everything else is subject to a balancing test as it should be.

Or part one article eight means nothing.

Or the ability for them to be the only person putting forth information in here, a very comprehensive complaint for removal was put out.

So the privacy interest of people who didn't want their information out, it's out.

What's not out is what the rest of the witnesses said.

What's not out is information that might show if the Attorney General misrepresented things or lied, all possible.

The public doesn't have to take their word for it.

In regard to your constitutional challenge, is it as applied or facial?

As applied.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Good morning, Your Honor.

Frank Frederick is on behalf of the Attorney General.

This Court has held that 9185 categorically exempts from disclosure records pertaining to internal personnel practice.

Can I ask you the same question I asked your opponent?

Could the Attorney General here or if not this Attorney General, a successor Attorney General,

would he or she decide, I'm going to release this information?

No, the right to no law controls this.

There's a category exemption for documents pertaining to internal personnel records.

Right.

I mean, on the face of the right to no law, that talks about requests.

I mean, is it your view that if something is exempt from the right to no law,

that not only means that somebody, a member of the public, can't request it,

but that the Attorney General or whoever the agency is can't disclose it?

I see what you're saying.

And I think that that would be a complicated question for the Attorney General.

And I definitely think that something like the right to no law would guide that.

And I do think that it would be difficult to justify releasing personnel information.

I would lean towards answering that question still as no,

that you have Rockingham County Attorney's Office's internal personnel issues

that were discussed in these interviews.

And I would say that that would not be appropriate to release.

So here the Attorney General's Office investigated personnel practices

at the Rockingham County Attorney's Office through numerous employee interviews

and through reviewing the documents.

And the information that they received.

If this case went, let me ask you this.

Suppose that the case didn't settle, the case for removal of Mr. Reems as the County Attorney.

It didn't settle.

And so now you were going to, now there was going to be a trial before the Superior Court.

And you wanted to call one of the people that was interviewed.

Could that person say, I'm sorry, you can't disclose this information.

You can't disclose my investigative.

You can't disclose the interview I gave to the FBI or the state or whatever.

You can't do, I have a privacy right.

You can't disclose that.

And if that means that, you know, the case doesn't go forward too bad.

I think that's really outside of what's happening here.

And I know it's a difficult question,

but I don't think that it really bears on this category.

But isn't that, to the extent that you're saying privacy interest of these people

that talked with the Attorney General's Office.

I mean, if they talked under circumstances where it should have been pretty clear to them

that if this case went forward, if there was a trial,

or for example, I suppose, I mean, maybe this isn't out of the question,

what if Mr. Reed tomorrow decided to bring some kind of a claim against the state

saying that he was, you know, unlawfully forced out of his position.

Or Mr. Reems did that.

I mean, and there was some discovery in connection with that.

Would they be able, could you sort of resist turning over the information as part of discovery,

even if you were going to call some of these people as witnesses?

I think it would most likely be handled that it would be turned over with an attorney's eyes only,

or some sort of protective.

I mean, this type of very specific person.

Ah, the court would have to see the material to make all the judgments.

Yes.

And so why is it your position that an in-camera review by the judge of the documents didn't have to happen here?

Well, we did offer sample transcripts to the trial court to get a sense of the fact that this was internal personal.

But in the end, didn't the trial court have to accept your representation as to the character of the documents?

As for this category exemption, yes.

And it's really important to note that when Attorney Reid filed his motion to compel,

what he challenged in that was not the other, the privacy exemption, the financial exemptions.

He did not challenge those in his motion to compel,

which is really the center of this argument was his interpretation of 9185's internal personnel practices exemption

and what the word internal in that statute means.

What if we were inclined to remand it for the court to actually look at the documents?

What effect does Attorney Reid's failure to appeal that issue have?

My understanding from reading the briefs is he didn't notice up for appeal the court's failure to conduct an in-camera review.

Does that mean we can't order a review because he didn't appeal that issue?

I don't think that it's necessary and I do think that the issue that we are focused on here is the word internal in that statute.

And here we have Rockingham County Attorney's Office employees talking about specific issues at their employment.

And so the Attorney General in this case has statutory oversight of the Rockingham County Attorney's Office.

So his interest in conducting this type of personnel investigation,

and keep in mind that a component of this was personnel and that's what was redacted,

the financial component and the potential criminal, the financial information, as I understand it was disclosed.

When I looked at the Vaughn Index, there were many, many entries identified as not disclosed for privacy reasons as opposed to personnel reasons.

There are many that we called out and in his motion to compel Attorney Reid called out that we were misapplying the internal personnel practices.

Right. And how could the trial court make the judgment without seeing the documents?

I know I'm sounding like a broken record, but I'm very concerned about that.

Well, I think the fact was that when it came to the motion to compel,

we were arguing the application of the category exemption, which doesn't require the balancing test and he did go on our representation.

One part of it arguably does not require balancing. That's personnel.

Yes.

The other privacy does require balancing in any event, in any event.

It seems to me that he's concerned about the trial court accepting the state's characterization as to both.

I understand the concern. I think it's within the trial court's discretion whether or not to accept our characterization.

Without looking at the.

And when we, in fact, we put two transcripts unredacted and two transcripts redacted.

As a sample.

Yes. And he could have requested more.

He felt that was unnecessary.

He ordered us to produce a thorough affidavit.

And that's what we produced.

I mean, I guess the thing I have that I have some difficulty with is the idea, if this was an internal personnel investigation, it would seem to me it's a pretty unusual internal personnel investigation.

Generally, I would suspect the FBI is not involved in, or even the Attorney General's Office is not involved in internal personnel investigations at agencies.

They get involved when there's a bigger, when there's a bigger, and particularly with the FBI, when there may be some criminal wrongdoing, don't they?

And I think it's complicated by the fact that there were multiple facets to this investigation.

And as I understand it, the FBI was interested in the financial piece.

The Attorney General obviously was interested in all of it, but had a very crucial focus on the internal practices that, the internal personnel practices that were occurring.

Your basic argument, as I get from your brief, is that the Attorney General in fact has a statutory obligation to oversee the criminal work of the County Attorney's Office.

Yes.

You use that. You say that is a reasonable justification here for treating these as internal documents vis-a-vis the Attorney General's Office.

Correct.

And I think that it's clear in the statute, and as a practice, the Attorney General approves the prosecutor hires as they come up through the County Attorney's Office, so that there's a layer built in.

And when there's a personnel concern raised that are at the top of the management chain, so to speak, at the County Attorney's Office, well, the Attorney General is the person that's going to look into this.

The Attorney General's interest in acquiring this confidential personnel material is not different than the employer.

It's really what the court has to look at is whether they're going to interpret this categorical exemption based on substance or based solely on circumstance.

And Attorney Reed wants us to look at just the circumstances, note that it's unique, and then it doesn't apply with-

That's the thing I still have having difficulty with is the process by which that you're describing ends up with a situation that a public proceeding happens by the state to in court in a public proceeding remove the County Attorney.

But I don't think that that was necessarily known that that was where it was headed.

You start an investigation trying to figure out what is going on.

We hear the problems at these offices and eventually it did take that.

So you say the fact that Judge McNamara, I think it was ultimately found that the AG did not have the authority to essentially fire the County Attorney.

I can't drive our analysis because all of that is at the end of the road.

And we have to look at what the court was faced with at the beginning.

Well, true.

And then also, I mean, that is a lot of circumstance based analysis.

And what drives these exemptions is employees' privacy interest.

And I know that there's a difference here because when it comes to personnel.

But the trial court I think correctly noted that this exemption is for the benefit of the employee.

It's not for the benefit of the employer.

To the extent that privacy interest was asserted by the state and withholding some of the documents, is that unappeal?

No.

This appeal is limited to these few words at the outset of the statute, internal personnel practices.

And I'm using the phrase privacy here not to say that that's what we're justifying the exemption based on,

but rather that that is underlying these other items that are called out and deemed exempt.

And in this case, this has been deemed categorical.

And I think that it's the substance.

I mean, these are employees raising their specific person.

No, it may be dealing with semantics a little bit because it may be a cat.

The personnel documents may be a categorical exemption, but somebody, i.e., the trial court,

has got to look at particular documents and say, well, are those personnel documents?

Right?

Well, he could do that we offered or he could accept our representation.

I haven't seen anything that says that's outside of the trial court's discretion.

And I understand that it seems you take a different view.

Well, let me just look down to the nitty gritties.

I mean, I had many cases or some cases when I was a trial judge where there were disputes over whether something was a personnel document

because organizations would keep personnel documents in various places in the company.

So we weren't just talking about an employee's personnel file hanging in the human resource officer's office.

It could be notes that were casually made and stuck someplace by a suitline supervisor.

And so I would have to have made decisions as to what gets included in that category of documents.

And I had to look at them to figure it out.

I think that that was appropriate, but I don't think that necessarily what Judge Smuckler did in this case was wrong or outside of his discretion.

And I do want to touch on one more aspect of this in that this court has noted that public disclosure of records underlying personnel investigations

could deter reporting of misconduct by employees or participation in the investigations.

This court has found that and the trial court found that.

And I think it's important to factor that in here.

I mean, these were employees at the Rockingham County Attorney's Office explaining specific situations that were personnel related.

And I do think that that is a factor, that there are real consequences that can come from disclosing this type of information.

The state as the party that's trying to withhold documents has the burden here to establish whether it fits within an exemption.

Did the state offer to produce all of the unredacted documents for the trial court's examination?

No, and I believe what my recollection is that this internal personnel practices was raised and the record will show if I'm incorrect.

But I believe that that's why we showed two transcripts redacted and unredacted was for the court to get the sense of that this was internal personnel practice related.

It was employees talking about their employment and raising their personnel issues.

And I think that's why we did it.

We didn't, I know we didn't do it for the sake of a balancing test.

We did it to give the, I mean, there are many, many interview transcripts here and the redacted information on the personnel grounds is redacted because it's very similar.

So we thought that this would give the court a sense of what type of information we were redacting to, you know, give him, this is the type of material.

There's a lot of it.

This is the type so that he could get a sense of it.

And he opted to have us provide the thorough affidavit and index.

And is part of our record those samples?

In other words, how are we going to then look at what the trial court did and say that was sustainable under the trial court's discretion?

Do we have those two transcripts?

They, I'm not sure.

They may be in the court's file.

He may have given them back to us, but I would assume that they are there.

But in any event, we don't, as the record stands right now, we don't have any documents to look at.

No.

Correct.

Could you give us some sense of, if we were to send this back to the trial court to look at, you know, all of these documents in camp, how much, what are we talking about in terms of the volume of documents?

I think that Attorney Reed was focused on the interviews.

I think there were 74 witnesses and approximately 100 individual interviews of varying lengths.

It would be, it would be quite, quite a high volume.

Thank you.

Thank you.

We're in recess.
