This is case 2016-0694, State of New Hampshire versus Alyssa A. Turcott.

Council?

Good morning, Justice. My name is Stephen Brown. I represent Alyssa Turcott in this matter,

who's present with us today. And I just would also like to reserve two minutes for rebuttal

as well. I think there are some axioms or principles here that are applied in this

case. It's important for this court to understand, especially as it relates to the district

courts, that it's first that no defendant should be punished for being mentally ill.

Would you speak up a little bit, please?

That no defendant should be punished for being mentally ill. There's probably no more disturbing

aspect of life that we go through than being blamed for something that we didn't do, that

we didn't have any responsibility for, and not have anybody believe us.

I think third, that is Benjamin Franklin, I think Justice Blackstone said that it's better

that 10 guilty persons go free than one innocent person be convicted. And I think that adding

to this case difficulty in finding some of the facts in the case is that pursuant to

this court's recommendations at times to asking for motions for reconsideration, I specifically

asked the district court for findings of facts and rulings of law on the decisions that she

made in this case. And they were not forthcoming. So in your record, you will not find anything

other than a blanket statement that no facts were misapprehended or law in error.

I'm sorry, you know, counsel, what point of your argument are you addressing, I

mean, what point are you focusing on with?

My first argument in your honor is that this is my next...

About insufficiency of the evidence?

Yes, sir. Argument number one, issue number one.

Okay. So what I guess the thing I have some difficulty with is the evidence showed

that the client had bloodshot red and red eyes, dilated pupils, difficulty in understanding

the questions that were being asked of her, if I understand correctly from the evidence,

refused to submit to the test. I mean, isn't that...

Isn't the statute saying if you refuse to submit, that can be considered as evidence

of guilt?

I think that's correct, Your Honor. And I think, though, in States v. Lorton, this

court addressed that. And it said that the way to be given the refusal in any

DWI case relates to the circumstances. And these circumstances, as they were, it's

2.30 in the morning. She's driving home in a snowstorm. The trooper pulls up

behind her, follows her from anywhere from 200 yards to a quarter to a half

a mile. There's no erratic driving. There's no difficulty driving. She pulls

over. There's a snow-covered window that she's pulled over for and a

alleged license plate light that's out that the trooper then testifies that

she could see some furtive movement, but although...

How does all of that undercut the probativeness of her refusal to submit?

I don't think there's any facts that show any erratic driving or any impaired

driving prior to that.

But she's got an equipment violation, so she can be stopped.

She could be stopped. We're not denying that. There was a legitimate stop.

And the officer, if I understand, he also says he smelt burnt marijuana

when he approached the car?

The trooper said she could smell burnt and fresh marijuana after she approached

the car, that the defendant had her license available but did not have the

registration, told her she didn't have the registration.

Is it your position that in the absence of erratic driving this

result can't be sustained?

I think that's a legitimate argument, Your Honor, that there is no erratic

driving at this point, but there's also no evidence of impairment.

I think that's the piece in this case that I think the court needs to

look at, is that I could have read glassy eyes.

Your point is that the smell and the fact that there was a smell of

overwhelming odor of burnt marijuana and an odor of fresh

marijuana is insufficient to prove impairment. Is that correct?

That's correct, Your Honor. And there's two reasons for that.

Number one, is that the trooper even admitted that marijuana can stay

in material or in the car, you know, for some period of time.

It could be days or weeks or in clothing. There's no

evidence, there was no smoke coming out of the car. There's no evidence that had been recently

ingested. You know, Counselor, it seems to me all the points you make seem like

really good points for the fact finder. In other words, maybe a

fact finder should say not guilty under those circumstances.

But on the legal question of was a fact finder compelled

to do that. Given all the

different circumstances, including the refusal to take the test,

it's hard for me to see how we could say as a matter of law

a fact finder could not have found your client guilty.

Your Honor, they have to be rational conclusions. What the evidence

in this case say, if you read the transcript or you read the summary of the arguments

is that when she was taken to the station, there was no

evidence of impairment per se. I mean, other than the fact that

the glassy eyes, the days look, the

confusion, as she looked through them. But in the context of everything that was

presented, this went on for 30 to 45 minutes. This argument

about giving her the registration and she said,

why do you need that? You can just call it in. I don't have the registration.

And they went on for about a half hour discussing, get out of the car, because I wanted

to investigate the lack of a registration.

There was no discussion about impairment what the officer testified to

during that hearing is that later on she says, I've smelled this

odor. I didn't mention it. I didn't ask her about any of this.

I just kept it to myself and I said, I want you to get out of the car now to do

further investigation about the registration. There's still no evidence of impairment.

Her speech is fine. So we have somebody here

that the evidence clearly, if you look at all of it. Well, let me ask you this,

could a fact finder find from somebody's

sort of argumentative behavior that that is

itself some evidence of impairment? Certainly not conclusive, but isn't that

some evidence of impairment?

I don't think so, because it's not against the law to be lack of

a better word a jerk, or difficult, or resistive, or

disrespectful. Those are all consistent. Wasn't there some fumbling around though?

The only evidence that there was any fumbling around was when she

was yanked out of the car, or as Officer Skelly says in the transcript, ripped out of the car

and put to the ground and cuffed, that she was

escuing her back 10 to 15, 12 feet somewhere back to the cruiser

that she says that she was swaying and unsteady on her feet.

That's all there is. Not fumbling for the

registration in the center console.

The center console was that, Melissa said

that she did not have the registration. The trooper insisted

that she look in her center console. So she looks

in her center console, but she does it too quickly for her.

And she says it's not there, because she later explains to her that I gave

it the other day for a stop that she had, or an accident or something,

and she had left it in her apartment. The state says that you

haven't preserved your sufficiency argument. What's your response to that?

I don't know how they could say that, because

first of all, the argument actually was that

it was actually twofold, one more. There wasn't sufficient evidence.

No rational trier of fact. Taking the light

into each evidentiary item was what the case law requires.

And looking at that rationally, that you could find beyond a reasonable doubt

that there was enough evidence to convict her of DWI

from marijuana. There was no test. And going back to

Justice Linda, I think you asked about the refusal.

She got back to the station, and all of the testimony is that

she was asking cogent, clear, cognitive questions about

what test are you going to give me? Where, who's going to do it for me?

Who's going to give me the test? And those answers not being forthcoming,

you know, that's why she refused. It was a legitimate explanation

as she... And so we so, and you're saying we have

to accept that the trial court as a matter of law

should have come to the conclusion that this was not evidence of guilt.

Yes, because I think the

what you've said earlier about the way to be

effective in any sort of refusal depends on the circumstances

of the refusal. There was no admissions here, other than the fact

she said, she goes, I know you're going to take my blood.

It would be a rare situation where somebody said I'm not...

I'm refusing to take the test, the breath test

or the blood test, because I know I'm over the limit.

I mean, that does happen sometimes, but it's pretty rare. There was actually cases in this court

that there was cases, certainly I've represented where they've said things like that,

but where there's an explanation or reason that they distrust the process,

that they distrust the machine, and of course, you cannot

give a breathalyzer with marijuana.

That's something strictly related to drugs.

So at this point, the only test that she's going to be given, although she couldn't

get the answer, is a blood test and who is going to do that?

Just out of time, I'd like to turn to the speedy trial issue,

which is one question, is

do you agree that there's no case law that you've identified

that supports the proposition that the clock keeps running once the trial starts?

Your Honor, there is not.

And again, this is the troubling aspect of speedy trial,

is that you're sort of darned

if you don't because you give too consents to continuances

because people have issues and you're encouraged to be

courtesy to the other party when doing this.

But once the clock starts, then you're saying that it doesn't run.

That doesn't make any sense to me. Once the trial starts.

I haven't been able to uncover any case law that the clock

keeps ticking once the trial starts, and you can't point us to any.

No, sir. I cannot point you to any other than common sense that if I were

to come here to argue this today and you put me off four times, how many times

do I have to prepare? How much do I remember? How much are you going to remember if we have partial

arguments to the court? And is it your position that if we say that

well, the clock does stop when the trial starts,

that there was a violation of constitutional rights

that had matured even prior to the

state of the trial beginning?

You hadn't filed a motion at that point, had you? No, I had not. Before the trial

began, I had consented to two state motions to continue for professional reasons.

So the whole thing turns really on the legal issue of whether the

clock keeps running. I mean, your ability to make the argument turns

on our recognition that the clock keeps running once the trial

starts, right? And I think the court needs to do that simply for the fact that otherwise

we're abused. Here we continue the case after 45 minutes to take on

a small-claim civil case. Well, that's not exactly

it was known ahead of time that there was a limited amount of time on that day,

correct? And the parties had sort of agreed to a limited amount of

time for this trial. They notice you 30 minutes

and I filed an email and I do it with all my cases for an hour and a half

once I believe the case is going to trial and the negotiations are not

really able to be consumed. What's the level of this

offense? TWI first offense, marijuana.

What is that? It's class B. Class B, Mr. Mayor.

It is. So there's no possibility of

jail time? No. Does that affect

the speedy trial, right? I don't know.

It's a class B so it is a criminal case.

I just wonder if there's case law that says

that the fact of whether you can on the one

hand or can't, on the other hand, be sentenced to jail has some

impact on whether the right exists.

No, Your Honor. I don't think it does because I mentioned

this case had to be, we went back four times.

This client traveled from Madison, Maine

one and a half hours each way with her parents to come down for this trial.

There's the preparation, there's the recording, is trying to figure out where he left off

there's some discussion in the record of where do we leave off.

The consistency in the uniformity of presenting the case

of having to... From July when the first trial for the half hour

a little more than that in July and then was continued over to

September 15th, there was no objection at that point, correct?

Yes, there was, Your Honor. July 21st, I asked for an hour and a half

we got there, the state did not have their lab expert there.

Right, but there were issues of law there. I'm talking about at the end of that time frame

when the trial was continued to September 15th.

That was basically by agreement. There was no contemporaneous

objection at that point in time. I believe, Your Honor, there was because it was

about 45 minutes and they would continue it to do a civil case and I said

do this and I objected that to continue it at that time

and the state wanted to continue it and

so the other thing I asked is to give me some latitude with regard to my own schedule

as to when it was going to be scheduled. And then when it was continued September 15th to

I guess January at that point

I think the court went till after 4 p.m. to try and

get some more testimony or vaudeer or whatever

it was going motion practice in and that was

there was no contemporaneous objection then either, correct?

As far as continuing the case, we were told

it was going to be continued. Your time is up but Justice

Bassett has a question. Can I just ask you if we look at the

time that passed between the beginning of the trial and the end of the trial

what is the prejudice that your client

sustained? The prejudice is ongoing

having to keep to come back and forth and as you actually

heard in her testimony, it's in the transcript, she was suffering and had been diagnosed

later with anxiety, bipolar disorder, so she had mental

illness during this whole period of time, the anxiety of going through this whole

thing and the attendant

discomfort she was feeling as well as the inconvenience

knowing, not knowing exactly because the other charges were

Class A's. Thank you. Thank you, Your Honor. Good morning, may it please

the court. Susan McGinnis, I'm here today representing the State of New Hampshire.

First, Justice Hansmer Coney, to answer your questions

on when the trial was stopped after 40 minutes on

the first day of trial, the defendant did object and said it would be unfair

to stop it because he had asked for 90 minutes

though the defense has never produced that email

and the judge repeatedly said that the court had never gotten any such

email, so there is no evidence but even if he had asked

for 90 minutes, the trial testimony of

just the first two witnesses took well over two hours

over the two days, the trial testimony was actually

not completed until they had put in about, I believe it was

about four and a half hours of time, so the 90 minutes

would not have been sufficient anyway. Let's assume that we agree

with you that there's not sort of a constitutional

speedy trial violation. Isn't there some, isn't it

a little troubling that the court

decided to have this go on for what, four

sort of trial events

that, you know, and apparently gave

gave, not just on the first occasion, maybe that made

sense, but apparently gave other matters,

non-criminal matters, precedence on

a number of occasions to the criminal case.

Well, Your Honor, only on the first occasion was there preference given to someone

who had been waiting for several hours and even people not facing

criminal charges still have anxiety over things hanging over them.

I don't know exactly what kind of civil case it was, but those people

had been waiting too to have their cases heard, and regardless

they could not have finished the trial that day, and part of what

caused this problem is I know that the district court

rules allow suppression motions to be filed the day of trial

and orally, and the part of the problem is

the morning of trial, the defense filed two suppression motions.

The day before trial, the defense disclosed

a witness to the state, but none of the witnesses anticipated

testimony, so the state that's not expecting a suppression

motion may have different witnesses than they would have if there's a suppression motion

and different evidence, because despite the defendant's claims to the contrary, there is

evidence admissible at suppression hearings that is not admissible during

trial, including hearsay testimony. So

the part of this problem was created by the late filing of these

motions, and those suppression motions took up

over the first, the 40 minutes in the first day,

the two and a half hours on the second day when the defense had told

the state that they could finish up in an hour on the second

day, and the court reserved two hours, and

the defense started re-litigating suppression issues that had been decided

the first day, and by the end of two and a half hours the court actually

kept the staff there late to try to get it done,

and they had still not finished, they just barely

finished with the suppression issues the second day. There were still other

witnesses to be presented, and the bind the court was in is that

once a particular judge starts a trial, this court held in

common that the defendant has a right to have the same judge decide the entire

case in the trial context, maybe if we were in

a separate suppression hearing you could substitute a judge, but once

jeopardy attaches and the trial starts the same judge has to hear it.

Well in this case the judge wasn't sitting in the town where this trial

was taking place within the jurisdiction but had been moved and was hearing cases

in Portsmouth. So the judge is in a bind, either the judge

continues everything she's supposed to sit on in Portsmouth

to get back to the court this case is in, Dover Court

to hear this case, or continues this case

until she can get back to Dover. It looks like eventually

there was a waiver of jurisdiction because the last two days of trial

actually did take place in Portsmouth, but it really

does kind of put the judge in a bind, plus when she continued the trial

the first day defense had a bunch of dates when the defense

council was not available over the next two months, then when the judge

continued the trial the second day the defense said again had some

conflicts so it's a real fine balancing trying to find a date

when the judge is within the jurisdiction. Didn't the judge leave it

to the parties on the second

continuance to say how long they needed to finish and when

to come back? Yes, and then there was juggling that happened

at one point the trial was scheduled much sooner, the third day of trial

but there was a conflict. Now the defense alleged at the hearing

that the conflict was because the state was unavailable but the state said it was

because the judge was not sitting in Dover that day and there was another judge

present and the other judge can't sit on a continuation of a trial

but anyway this court, No Court has ever recognized a

speedy trial claim for a during trial delay and in two juvenile

cases this court reviewed the juvenile

which are basically speedy trial statutes that have very strict

limits for juvenile cases and held that the juvenile does not

have a right to a speedy completion of their trial within those

deadlines only a speedy start. So is it the state's position

that there can never be a time when

a trial delay during a trial would give rise to constitutional

concerns? It could raise a due process concern

but for a due process claim you have to show actual prejudice

and this court, I could not find a single court that has recognized

mere anxiety from having to return

as prejudice sufficient because it's prejudiced

to your defense and here it did not prejudice the defense because the defendant

and her witness were still both available and presented the same case

they would have presented if the trial had completed the first day.

In the other thing I wanted to mention is in the speedy trial analysis the court

excludes time that is taken up litigating motions

for the defendant's benefit and the suppression motion

took up the first two days of this trial.

I agree the delay was not great in this case and it's unfortunate it happened

but there's no actual prejudice. I'd like to move on

to the sufficiency of the evidence claim.

There was plenty of evidence of impairment here. There's evidence

first of all on the refusal. The defendant said

she was refusing to take the test because it would

turn up that she had been smoking marijuana and had taken Adderall.

There was the smell of burnt marijuana in the car

and the smell of fresh marijuana in the car. The defendant had a pipe

and marijuana in the pocket on her coat which she

continued grabbing and this court has held before that the officer does not

have to see impaired driving or any kind of driving offense.

They just have to have a basis for the stop.

This defendant had red bloodshot eyes. She had

dilated pupils that did not react well to light. That would certainly

affect your ability to drive. There were no other cars on the road but if cars

with headlights on are coming at you and your eyes are not reacting

to light. Well who doesn't that require expert testimony to establish that?

I don't think we can do that. First of all the officer was a

drug recognition expert but I'm just saying that's common sense. If your

eyes aren't reacting to light could affect your ability to drive. But here

the defendant was confused. She had slow reaction time

and you asked about fumbling with for her registration. Her passenger

testified that the defendant was looking for her registration but was

not doing so effectively. That the defendant wasn't

listening. The officer testified that the defendant was dazed

and confused. That he often had to repeat questions several time.

Her judgment was off. Those are all things that are

impairment. What was the test that she refused?

She refused to do field sobriety tests. She refused to do a DRE

evaluation and she refused to take a blood test.

She refused to do any of those and when the officer asked her to get out of the car to

discuss the registration he didn't mention marijuana or impairment at that

point. He just asked about the registration. The defendant refused to get

out of the car. Put her foot on the brake a couple of times.

Tried to turn the key and then when the officer tried to pull her out of the car

he grabbed onto the steering wheel with both hands and they had to physically

drag her out of the car. Now council began his argument with reference

to mental health issues. What was the state of the record regarding mental health

issues in this case? There was no evidence presented of mental illness other

than the defendant's testimony that she

her roommates said that the defendant had symptoms

of anxiety and panic attacks.

She was out of control this night and the defendant said that she hadn't

been diagnosed with mental illness before that. She'd been diagnosed with

attention deficit hyperactivity disorder but that she was later

diagnosed with bipolar disorder.

Who testified to that? The defendant did. There were no medical

records submitted and supported those claims though.

The defendant also claimed she had not smoked marijuana at trial

but when she refused to take the test she said she was doing it because she did

have marijuana and Adderall in her system. All the state had to prove

was impaired to any degree. It's common

knowledge that you need to be able to think clearly.

You have coordination, concentration, the ability to multitask

to drive safely and the defendant had none of that.

It's impaired because of the marijuana use. Not impaired

because you have poor judgment. No. Other

infirmities. No. Is there evidence

here to connect the impairment to the marijuana use?

Yes. The officer who was a drug recognition expert testified that the

defendant's red eyes, her dilated pupils

that would not react to light, her confusion,

her lack of coordination and her mood swings

were all or could be signs of impairment by

marijuana. The officer directly connected the symptoms he

saw with impairment by marijuana. She'd also

note that the defendant testified that she didn't even know there was a police

officer behind her until the blue lights went on.

And she did not clear her window and her

passenger testified that before the officer got behind them

the car was slipping all over the roads in the snow

that the car was swerving so there, contrary to the

defendant's claims, the evidence did not show that there was no problem with her driving.

There was overwhelming evidence of impairment

and all the judge had to find was impairment to any degree and this court cannot

overturn that finding unless it finds that no reasonable trial of fact

could have concluded that she was impaired by marijuana.

If there's nothing further. Thank you. Do you need your reserve

time counsel? Please just don't repeat

yourself. Just for clarifications.

It was represented to the court when we went there that day. The prosecutor actually

said we're only anticipating 20 minutes to do a trial today. The court actually

said when it was represented an hour and a half that

was going to be okay with her. And the civil case

was, we started at 12.30 there so they hadn't been waiting a long time

and that civil case was over in 20 minutes so there was another hour and something

left. And there was no expert for the state present at that time.

Do you agree that the first couple of hours of

the trial were suppression hearings and

otherwise responding to your client's motions?

No, Your Honor, I don't. It's all mixed in when you have a trial

and you basically hear the suppression evidence at the time.

You're hearing the same evidence. It's all related. It's all going to be presented.

So the only thing that's different is that you will voidier and then go back

and cross-examine on the suppression issue. It doesn't add a lot of time because it's

generally all information and evidence that has to come into evidence anyway.

Who was the witness who was absent at that time? The lab analyst

did not appear. He was not subpoenaed. And my intention was to move to dismiss

the end of the state's evidence on that issue. Well, what was the lab

analyst going to testify about if there wasn't a test? It would have been necessary to have him there

to testify that the substance that was taken from her was marijuana.

And as soon as that was brought up, and again, I brought that to the attention of the court

prior to the trial, just so if we could move things along. And at that point

that was denied. But was there a possession charge? Yes, there was.

But that's not in front of us, right?

It was DWI marijuana. I'm sorry? Only the

DUI is in front of us, right? So what would the

lab analyst, why would that testimony have been necessary

in regards to the DUI? There would be no way for them

to convict her of DUI marijuana if there's no evidence that she

had possessed marijuana. The only evidence that you have

that she even had marijuana is that she admitted that maybe if you tested her blood,

you might find marijuana and Adderall in it, but that's metabolite. I mean, that could be

half-life of weeks or months. There was nothing that established

a link that night that she'd smoked marijuana that was under the influence of marijuana

at that particular time, at that particular time. You mean the burnt marijuana couldn't

have the smell of burnt marijuana, couldn't have supported that influence?

Only if you're assuming something, and that is that the burnt marijuana smell

was present in recently smoked, and there's no evidence of that. Marijuana

can stay within materials, cloth or otherwise, for days

or weeks. Thank you. Thank you, Your Honor.

Okay, submitted.
