This is case, this is case 2016-0187, in raise search warrant for records from AT&T.

Mr. Locke.

Good morning, and may it please the Court, I've asked for two minutes of rebuttal time.

The State, I represent the State of New Hampshire, and the State asked that this Court reverse

the trial court's decision, because the court aired in its construction of State

being mellow and concluding that it limited its authority to issue a search warrant

against, or for records held by AT&T in this case.

I'd like to begin by first just kind of explaining why the search warrant in this case is so significant,

and kind of give play out the federal law that's at play here.

Under the Federal Historic Communications Act, it's a requirement, normally, or prior to the Historic Communications Act,

the third party doctrine would be what governs here, and this information because it's being shared with

an outside organization would be subject to, essentially, subpoena, wouldn't be protected by the Fourth Amendment.

Congress passed the Historic Communications Act and the Electronic Communications Privacy Act

to protect this information and create kind of a series of gates through which the parties

or a State entity could get this information to get what is at issue here,

which would be content of communications records required,

the Federal Government requires a search warrant in order to do that.

Without advising the suspected criminal that this was going on.

Right, exactly. If the State were to get, you know,

advise the party, then I'd leave a subpoena or a court order.

Was that the only role that the Federal law plays in your analysis?

That's the only role. It's just kind of setting up why we're in this situation and why the search warrant is so important.

What a lot of these communications companies have done in response to that is requested that the search

warrants go to particular offices of theirs rather than have search warrants coming from all the local

agents in the 50 plus States that would be affected.

They would rather it go to everyone send their search warrant to one specific agency,

one department. In the case of AT&T, that record keeper is located in Florida.

In Florida has a statute that basically provides that a search warrant that is validly issued by a court

in another jurisdiction or any company that does what AT&T does and stores electronic communications

must honor a search warrant that has been validly issued by another jurisdiction as if it had been

issued by a Florida court.

I know it's not an issue here, but aren't we talking about something different and perhaps

more advanced than the normal custodian? Aren't these either on a series of servers or are in the cloud?

And this is just a conduit through which the information flows?

Yes. This information in theory could be accessed anywhere.

It could be accessed here in New Hampshire. It could be accessed in California anywhere.

But they've asked that it go through this Florida office.

In your reply brief, you say that a so-called long arm search warrant statute is unnecessary

because AT&T is registered to do business in New Hampshire with a registered agent.

So my question is, are you taking the position that it could have been served on the registered agent?

Yes.

It wasn't served on the registered agent in this case, right?

But it wasn't issued.

Pardon?

The search warrant wasn't issued in this case.

It wasn't issued at all.

So in response to the defendants' argument that there is not an affirmative grant of authority to the circuit court to issue search

warrants beyond the jurisdiction of New Hampshire, do you say that alternatively?

I just wasn't clear about your reply brief argument.

I just wanted to say, well, then the search warrant could have been served on the registered agent in New Hampshire.

Yes. It is an alternative argument to issue.

So who does the search? Let's say that happened. I was just trying to play this out in my head.

So the search warrant is served on the registered agent in New Hampshire.

What police do the search?

I guess there's the second piece of what the federal law describes.

The police don't do the search. It is the company that will do the search and provide the records to the police.

And there's a myriad of federal law that deals with this particular issue.

So police are not involved at all?

Police basically serve the warrant on the registered agent or to the Florida office depending on what their practice is.

And then that office, that entity is the one that performs the search and returns the records to the state.

It goes first to the New Hampshire agent, registered agent.

Yes. So if it went to the New Hampshire registered agent, it likely occurs that they would simply forward it to this Florida office.

The Florida office would be the one that would conduct the search and return the requested documentation.

What has happened and what some agencies and practices they'll send it to both, the registered agent and the designated office.

So do you say the ability to do that really trumps all of defendant's arguments?

I think that's part, that it's an alternative mechanism.

I think the stronger mechanism here is the fact that Florida has essentially in the way I would describe it as the limitation on the court's authority here.

But can Florida control the jurisdiction of our judges?

Well, that's my point here is that the limitation here isn't the jurisdiction here is imposed by the existence of the sovereign authority of the other states.

And that limits the ability of New Hampshire to exercise its sovereign authority within those particular states.

If Florida asked the law saying, you know, we will honor search warrants for premises in Florida issued by any state.

Would that give a New Hampshire court the authority to issue a search warrant for a house in Orlando?

Yeah, my position would be yes. If Florida did that.

It just might not be any good.

I mean, that may come down to what this particular court decided, how this court would decide to view that particular search warrant.

I mean, the issue as well would be maybe executing authority because in that circumstance police would be conducting the search.

And the question would be, does that mean local Florida police would conduct the search?

Or does that mean someone from New Hampshire would have the authority to go down there and conduct the search as opposed to simply honoring the search warrant?

The point, or continue kind of my earlier point, the idea of the sovereignty here is that with statutes like Florida's, those states in particular have led to those legislatures have chosen to relax their sovereign, their sovereignty

and allow other sovereigns like New Hampshire to exercise authority within that state in certain limited circumstances, which in particular would include this, or specifically includes this particular circumstance with regard.

Is it really authority that they're authorizing or is it just a matter of recognition that a valid subpoena in New Hampshire will be accepted?

In other words, I don't see that this is a case of New Hampshire exercising jurisdiction in Florida.

It exercises its jurisdiction in New Hampshire. It just so happens that Florida will accept it.

And that would also be, I think that would also be a valid way to look at the situation.

Well, it would seem that the world has to evolve to catch up with the fact that the digital data is everywhere and nowhere. There are no borders on it anymore.

Right. And that's kind of the issue that we're grappling with here is that we're talking about a search warrant, which historically has been viewed as a mechanism to search physical property and physical spaces.

And we're talking about now intangible property that can be accessed.

I guess it seems to me that why do we have to go to this broader issue of whether the Florida statute is enough when you've got the fact that AT&T is doing business in New Hampshire?

To me, that makes a lot of difference because if you had, suppose this was a small phone company that maintained the records, and that was located in Florida, that only did business in Florida and southeast or something like that.

But somebody from New Hampshire, it was somehow relevant to a New Hampshire investigation.

I think that would be a different issue about whether New Hampshire could get a New Hampshire search warrant to conduct that search as opposed to having to go to call up the Florida people to get a search warrant down there.

Right. And I think this court obviously has the ability to issue its opinion as narrowly as it would like, and it can focus and choose instead to adopt the registered agent alternative argument that the state puts forth in its reply brief.

But it can also, I think in terms of...

Did the trial court deal with that alternative at all?

I do not believe it did in any kind of, I mean, if the court has looked, the orders are simply margin orders that have a couple of sentences.

I do know that the search warrant that was filed or that application that was filed included the registered agent, I think, as one of the parties to be served.

Was the argument made below about the registered agent being sufficient once we serve the registered agent and the rest of this stuff we don't have to worry about?

My understanding is that it was, but it wasn't. I don't know, I don't believe there was a hearing in this case, so I believe the way it would have been done was just through what was said in the search warrant at the David.

And then there was the memorandum of law that detailed both the federal and Florida law that was at issue here to kind of address kind of the main argument that the state makes and its appeal.

And so that's kind of, those are the two ways that these arguments came up.

Given the world that we live in with all these cell carriers that are mostly national, isn't it a simpler rule and New Hampshire's right to get this information or the police's right to get the information,

isn't therefore dependent on some law in some other state if we use the registered agent approach?

It wouldn't. The issue that's going to arise and the issue that I believe, and this is more of a practical circumstance that's going to come up here, is that the concern is that there will be pushback from the companies themselves

that will maybe decline to comply with warrants that are issued to registered agents because they've set up their...

Well, they may be pushing back, but they're doing business and they have a registered agent to accept process.

And if they are pushing back, isn't the answer to that that, you know, go to the legislature and tell them to act like Florida?

Yes, those are all valid answers.

If you'd like New Hampshire customers, then this is one of the prices you pay.

Right, and I agree with much of what the Court has said here with respect to the fact that this is kind of a cost of doing business in the State of New Hampshire and the fact that it shouldn't...

If you are coming into New Hampshire and doing business here, you shouldn't be able to kind of...

Well, the carriers shouldn't actually care.

Right.

They just want to make sure they're acting under lawful authority.

Right, and that's in many circumstances where this issue has come up.

Most of the times these issues come up, they come up after the search warrant has been issued.

I believe this may be one of the few if only cases where it's...

This is interesting because police aren't involved.

So this really resembles more of a subpoena, doesn't it?

It does.

So calling it a search warrant may be getting us involved in a tempest in a teapot.

This really looks like a subpoena.

In the way and essentially how it's functioning is a subpoena where the company is producing the records here.

I think...

And this is...

I haven't gotten into any of the great history of this particular language and why it was chosen.

But my understanding would be probably to attach the search warrant requirements of probable cause as opposed to, you know,

just being able to get a much lower burden to get a subpoena.

You at least have to kind of make the showing of probable cause before you're getting what the Federal Congress has kind of...

Because we're dealing with criminal cases.

Right.

And so that's, I think, where some of these issues are in these languages coming up and why these particular issues are arising.

Might not New Hampshire be bound by the full faith and credit clause to recognize the validity of the Florida statute?

Well, and that's part of what my main point...

My main point is in the opening brief is the idea that these statutes and our recognition of them,

but their recognition of the search warrant issued by our court are essentially kind of saying,

we will give full faith and credit to a search warrant issued by a New Hampshire court.

We don't have the mirror of that statute in New Hampshire.

But I don't...

We don't, in the State's position, we wouldn't need...

There's no need to have that mirror because the authority of New Hampshire courts would...

I mean, basically, Florida has withdrawn its jurisdiction from these particular circumstances to allow the other States to fill that void.

But it all depends on your main argument, which is the circuit court does have jurisdiction

aside the registered agent business.

You say the circuit court has jurisdiction to exceed the boundaries of New Hampshire.

Well, I say that the justices of the circuit court have the authority to issue something,

issue search warrants that would reach outside the State of New Hampshire.

In the first instance...

Right.

You say without going through a registered agent.

Right, where there are these particular laws that allow them to intercede.

I see my light is on, so I will.

Thank you.

Mr. Johnson?

May it please the Court.

Christopher Johnson for the Appellate Defender is amicus in this matter.

My plan is to address the search warrant law and also the registered agent argument,

and I'm happy to take questions.

Because I'll start, since it was raised first in a reply brief,

I'll start with the registered agent matter.

That is in effect an attempted end run around search warrant law.

And I think the State has the problem that it chose the search warrant mechanism.

It got itself in this position and so search warrant law is implicated.

Do you think they would have had better legal standing if they had called it a subpoena?

I think the problem there is that New Hampshire law authorizes subpoenas under some circumstances

and federal law discusses them too.

But my understanding from the State's opening brief was that a subpoena would not get

virtually detailed information as a search warrant would get.

A subpoena gets something, maybe a call list, but not content or something like that.

So, and I'm not convinced I'm exactly right on the details,

but I think there was a strategic reason why they wanted a search warrant

as they're hoping to get more in some sense.

But it's AT&T and not police officers who are making the judgment

as to how to respond to whatever this is called, right?

So that's interesting because now we have a civilian agency deciding

how it needs to respond to this summons.

That's right. But again, I mean, the State has chosen the vehicle of a search warrant

to accomplish its goals in this case.

Well, did it need since it chose a search warrant as the vehicle?

Do the police have to be involved in actually doing the search

and making judgments as to whether materials comply with the warrant?

Well, I think that, yes, probably, but even more importantly,

the court that's asked to issue the search warrant has to put the boundaries

on what probable cause shows and what they'll be allowed to get.

And so while I understand that in this new world,

this is a search warrant that gets executed in a kind of unusual way,

it is nevertheless a police-initiated gathering of information

that they couldn't get otherwise.

Are we bound by the State's use of the word search warrant?

Yes, I think so because that's what they're asking for.

And so what the question here is, can they get one or not in this context?

And to finish the...

Sorry.

No, no, please. To finish the registered agent point,

the registered agent detail means that the State of New Hampshire

has personal jurisdiction over the corporation.

And when somebody sues the corporation in New Hampshire,

they serve that agent.

But having personal jurisdiction is not the same as having authority

to conduct an out-of-state search of corporate property.

And so the State has personal jurisdiction over me.

But isn't the out-of-state in some sense artificial?

Because presumably they could...

Yes.

Presumably if they had the right information,

the registered agent in New Hampshire could type a few keys

and get that pop-up on the screen.

I think it's artificial in the sense that the AT&T has defined Florida

as the location where this stuff is to be found.

But the State of New Hampshire has to live with that.

And I'm not saying that there's nothing that can be done.

What they should do is what they do anytime they want to search some place in Florida

is you go to the Florida police, and here's...

I've written it up for you. Here's the affidavit.

Could you please do me the small favor of presenting this to a magistrate?

Then would it be Florida police that did the...

I don't even...

I mean, it would be...

They would just walk over to the...

Well, they would go to walk over to the court in Florida

and the court would issue the search warrant.

Florida police would probably say, okay, here it is.

Go drive over to AT&T.

So then how would challenges be made?

Let's say AT&T gets this search warrant

and it assigns some technical people,

comply with this warrant, pull all the stuff.

Well, what if they're overly generous in what they produce?

Do they have some liability?

I think the way those kinds of questions would be litigated

would be just the way they would be litigated

if we were talking about somebody's cottage in Orlando.

Except that the police would not be executing the warrant

and be making the judgments as to how to satisfy it.

Well, Florida police would be.

They would be executing the search and...

Well, I thought you just told me all the Florida police would do

is hand it to AT&T and keep it.

Well, I mean, in the searching somebody's cottage in Orlando,

I mean, New Hampshire police don't go do that.

It's my understanding.

Or maybe they ride along,

but there's a Florida police officer there executing it.

And so in this context, I mean, in effect,

once this Florida court issues the warrant,

it doesn't really matter who delivers it to the company.

The company will do what it does.

What matters is the company then has to make judgments

as to how to comply with the warrant.

That's right.

And then those judgments would get litigated

in the New Hampshire court the way they would any time.

Any kind of a search happens in another state

where the evidence found in the search

gets introduced in a New Hampshire trial.

I said, you know, in many cases.

Well, that, you know, it raises all kinds of issues.

It's fascinating because, you know,

we've got a bunch of case law about what police

can and cannot do.

Right.

But we don't really have any...

I'm aware of law on what a civilian receiving a search warrant,

what that civilian's obligation is.

Right.

Well, I mean, in this...

Yeah.

No, I understand.

I think it's...

No matter what the court says with this case,

that problem exists.

Right.

So it's not like this case...

It's just interesting to contemplate where this all goes.

Okay.

But...

So back to the first issue.

So the question, you know,

setting aside the personal jurisdiction

in run around search warrant,

this is a registered agent question,

you go to the...

It becomes a question of New Hampshire search warrant law.

And the question then is,

can a New Hampshire court issue

an extraterritorial search warrant?

And I think there's three possible answers

one could find in the statutes.

It could be yes, no, or silence.

We don't...

You know, Florida has a statute

which says it's giving and receiving sort of...

We don't have a statute like that.

Why do we need one?

Why do we need one?

Because I think when...

So that gets to the question of what happens

if the statute say nothing,

which is our situation, maybe.

Then you look at background principles.

What is it that New Hampshire courts can do

in other states?

And when you look at background principles,

you look at federalism and the common law

and the full faith and credit clause.

Yeah, right.

Constitution, but that just means...

I think federalism means that

Florida is sovereign in Florida,

New Hampshire is sovereign in New Hampshire.

A New Hampshire court can't issue

an extraterritorial search warrant.

Why do we have to deny Florida the right

to accept such a warrant?

Well, that's great, but that's only half the question.

That doesn't mean...

The New Hampshire legislature, if asked,

would you like to have a statute like Florida

so that we get the benefits of going to Florida

on our search warrants and getting information?

It's a little awkward and probably wouldn't be done, though,

to get those benefits without also accepting the cost.

But that's Florida's problem.

Well, I mean, I think it's our legislature's question.

Well, it might be if Florida tried to do the same thing

and were denied.

Right.

But no, that's my point is why unless you have a statute...

But you're saying that as far reaching

as the Florida statute is,

it is simply illegally...

illegal for Florida to grant jurisdiction

which you argue does not exist in the first place.

That's right.

Nothing Florida law says can affect

what New Hampshire courts can or can't do.

But the subpoena is still issued within the boundaries

of the state of New Hampshire

and ostensibly with the jurisdiction of the trial.

If they sent it to Georgia,

it probably wouldn't have any effect.

They probably don't have a statute like that.

Well, I mean, two things I would say.

One is, again, this wasn't a subpoena.

This was a search warrant.

I'm sorry, did I say subpoena?

This is a subpoena.

The difference matters, but why?

Well, because the state has chosen

the search warrant mechanism

because probably for the reason I suggested,

the federal government did too.

Right, and Florida statute.

Actually, I think Florida statute,

they would accept any kind of court order.

So maybe if the state had chosen

to try to do this through a subpoena,

the problem would be,

is there a New Hampshire statute

authorizing a subpoena that would get not just the...

But all of this is not to say

that there is an alternative under existing law

to get this search warrant served in Florida.

Oh, yeah.

We've got a statutory scheme that permits that.

So my point is, the police have a perfectly good option.

As you go to Florida,

you knock on the door of a Florida officer

and say, could you please file this in your court

and get a search warrant?

And that's just what they would do

in any other kind of circumstance.

So they're not like in this hole

where they can do nothing.

Yes, but that begs the question

of where is this information?

And this information is no more in Florida

than it is in New Hampshire.

But for purposes of the law,

AT&T has said it's in Florida.

And that's the...

AT&T just doesn't want to be inconvenienced.

Well, and that's fair enough,

but that they have said,

if you want this, you know, it's in Florida.

But why do we have to accept that?

Why does anybody have to accept that

if it's floating around in the ether?

And so maybe, I mean,

maybe we'll all be back here in four months,

is if the state says, OK, forget that,

we're going to try to issue an order

on the registered agent and see what happens.

And maybe they will get it.

But you know why?

But in terms of why, in other words,

if there's a registered agent in New Hampshire

so that AT&T is subject to jurisdiction in New Hampshire,

if this were, let's say,

if this were a civil suit,

a court in New Hampshire could,

there might be reasons why it wouldn't do that.

But for example, a court in New Hampshire

might order somebody in Florida

to come up to New Hampshire for a deposition,

even though, you know, that's sort of an inconvenience.

Now, maybe they wouldn't,

maybe there would have to be some balancing and all that,

but they would have the power to order, you know,

a records custodian in Florida

to come to New Hampshire for a deposition.

So if that's the case,

it's hard to understand why is this any...

It's a little more parallel, if you don't mind my adding,

because, as you know, in a civil case,

there is an alternative mechanism to take out a state deposition

to get a commissioner appointed, yada, yada.

So it's really the same example.

And so my answer was,

well, then why did they choose a search warrant?

Because it's a criminal case.

Because it's easy.

But then they have to live with the legal implications of that.

So maybe if they issued an order,

a subpoena on the registered agent,

you know, I'd be standing here making a different argument.

But they chose a search warrant,

which implicates extraterritoriality

because, you know, for better or worse,

or for good reason or poor.

I'm not sure it would be that.

I mean, they could...

The state of New Hampshire can't issue a subpoena

to a bank in Florida, for example,

saying, bring your records here.

I mean, there has to be some...

Whether it's a subpoena or a search warrant,

it doesn't have extraterritorial effect

unless there's some basis to give it that.

Right.

No, but this is where I get to my example,

you know, the state has personal jurisdiction over me,

because I'm standing here,

if they were to serve me with something,

right now I would have to honor or interact on it.

But that doesn't mean my little storage locker in Massachusetts,

New Hampshire court can issue a search warrant

just because they have personal jurisdiction over me

to search in place elsewhere.

But no storage locker in Massachusetts that allows it.

Or in Florida, if I have one in Florida.

Well, but couldn't they order you to put aside

Fifth Amendment issues from it?

But couldn't they order you to produce the...

you know, produce whatever it is

that stores in Massachusetts.

Right.

I know, yes.

But then they've chosen the search warrant

because they don't want to go to...

for good reasons and I don't deny them.

They don't want to obviously go to the New Hampshire resident

whoever he is who's the subject of this whole thing.

They've gone to AT&T

and they framed it as a search warrant

and AT&T has said, you know,

chosen to define it as a search in Florida

for better or worse.

And so if this court were to just ignore that,

it corrupts search warrant law.

That's an example of a company very similar to AT&T

that doesn't do business in New Hampshire

and has no registered agent.

Right.

What happens then?

Well, then the state would do...

I mean, if we had this kind of a statute like Florida has,

they would go for a search warrant.

If we don't have this kind of statute,

they're not going to have their personal jurisdiction argument.

The same old thing we would do is that police in New Hampshire

who are investigating the case would go to the police

and whatever state that is and say,

did you do me the very modest favor of filing this thing

that I've written and getting a search warrant

and the police would say, yes, of course,

and it would be fine.

And that's what they need to do here.

And the legislature of New Hampshire wants to fix this.

They are, you know, the model is out there.

It's the Florida statute.

And they just haven't done it yet.

This is another question.

Thank you.

Do you need your reserve time, Mr. Block?

Yes.

I'm going to give you, hopefully, quick points.

I'm going to ask you, since you're standing there,

take the example of a different company,

not AT&T, that doesn't do business in New Hampshire

and does not have a registered agent.

Do you say that a New Hampshire court could issue a search warrant

and send it to Minnesota?

Yes.

If Minnesota had the statute similar to Florida.

Minnesota does have a statute similar to Florida.

And, yes, they would be able to.

I'd like to make a few quick points here before.

On the basis of simply the language of the Minnesota statute.

Yes.

Because the Minnesota, and to kind of support that,

let me read here, I have two cases that I said in my brief

that are outside authority, and I'd like to read

a couple of pieces of language from them.

First is a U.S. Supreme Court case called

I'll Overview the Gordon.

And the court specifically says,

the several states are equal dignity and authority,

and the independence of one implies

the exclusion of power from all others.

I read that to say where in this circumstance

those other states have kind of essentially invited

other, you know, the remaining states to enter in

and use their to kind of issue these search warrants

that would be served, not necessarily executed

because the police aren't doing the search,

but served in that territory.

They've made that conscious choice.

They've made that choice to subject those people

who choose to do business under their laws

to that requirement.

And if those businesses didn't like that,

they could relocate, or they could move somewhere else.

Those businesses have accepted that obligation

to submit to that particular provision

and allow New Hampshire search warrants to be served,

and then they would execute them there in that territory.

I also want to make a point here

because there's a lot of talk about the state choosing

to use a search warrant in this case.

The state did not choose to use a search warrant.

Under pure constitutional principles,

there's no obligation to get a search warrant

for this material.

It is federal law that has designated

that a search warrant has to be used

to get the contents of electronic communications,

not any active decision made by the state to do this

to comply with some internal requirement of state law.

And I see my time is up, so I ask the case to be submitted.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Court is in recess.
