This is case 2016-03-04, Dartmouth Corporation of Alpha Delta and versus the town of Hanover.

The record should reflect the fact that Justice Bassett is disqualified from this case.

Council, you may proceed.

May it please the court.

My name is Carolyn Cole.

I represent Appellant Dartmouth Corporation of Delta Delta.

This is an appeal of the trial court's interpretation of section 902 of the Hanover Amended Zoning

Ordinance as it applies to the Appellant.

The trial court's order stated, quote, in the April 23 administrative decision, the Zoning

Administrator found that the occupancy of the Alpha Delta property violates the town's zoning

ordinance because the property no longer constitutes a student residence as that term is defined

under section 902 of the ordinance.

However, by law, Appellant's property has never been a student residence as that

term is defined under the ordinance.

Appellant has continuously used its property since 1921 as a fraternity house which predates

the first zoning ordinance.

It has never applied for a special exception to operate as a student residence.

But isn't the trial court's reasoning that it the you needed to show that it was that

when it that yes, it was a preexisting use, but you needed to show that it was a preexisting

use that was conducted without the approval of the or not in conjunction with the college.

Thank you, Your Honor.

The in conjunction with the college language of section 902 of the amended town's zoning

ordinance is part and parcel of a later enacted ordinance.

But they were never out of compliance with the ordinances all the way along from 1920 or

whatever.

Not once, no.

There was no finding of that.

And there was no finding of substantial change either.

And there was no allegation of substantial change which has been recently alleged.

But to Judge Justice Lin's point, the town has already conceded that the property

is a lawful nonconforming use.

RSA 67419 protects a lawful nonconforming use from any later enacted ordinance which would

include section 902.

So, but if it's a lawful, pardon me, lawful nonconforming use, that doesn't give a property

owner carte blanche then to, for example, could this property then build a wall mark

on it.

That's a terrific point, Your Honor.

No.

That's not my understanding of either nonconforming use law or grandfathering because it strikes

me that your client was grandfathered in that it did not have to comply with the later

enacted zoning ordinance that, you know, there could only be three unrelated people

in a house, right?

It was protected from all lawful.

It was protected from that requirement because in all other respects, my understanding is

this property was in compliance with the zoning law as later amended.

Let me add.

I mean, you don't get a free ticket.

Let me address.

In the nonconforming use area.

Two points of that, Your Honor.

First of all, you're correct that it could not simply become a wall mark.

A lawful nonconforming use may be terminated in three ways, abandonment, willful relinquishment

through, for instance, the conversion into a special exception, which of course we

do not have, or substantial change in use.

Recall, the town's notice of violation did not allege that there was a substantial

change in use by the recent derecognition of the tenant's fraternity tenant, the

appellant's fraternity tenant, thus terminating the grandfathered use.

That has not been alleged or litigated or is not right today.

But let's look at whether or not the, if this amendment applies, I don't know whether

it does or it doesn't, but if it applies, do you concede that the fraternity is no

longer acting in conjunction with the college?

No, Your Honor.

We don't concede that point.

In what way is it acting in conjunction with the college?

Our point is that we don't have to act in conjunction with the college because the

in...

No, you forgot my premise here, that this applies.

If it does apply, in what respect is the fraternity acting in conjunction with

the college?

It would be acting in conjunction with the college by virtue of the fact that

there are students attending the college, but that isn't...

But they're not limited to fewer than three.

Your Honor, the fraternity has existed since before the first zoning

ordinance was enacted.

The 1976 amended zoning ordinance brought the in conjunction language as a

prohibition that fraternities may not operate unless operated in conjunction

with the college.

So, back to my question.

If this applies to your client, it may not.

But if it does, what is it now doing in conjunction with the college since

the college has de-recognized or whatever it did?

The appellant has never ever operated in conjunction with the college.

The appellant is the landowner.

The appellant is not on the Dartmouth College campus.

But is there...

You know, it was there, in other words, before there was zoning, right?

Did the college...

I would have...

Correct me if I'm wrong, but would the college have had the

authority to say to students, here's where you can live and here's where

you can't live?

You can't live in that house.

Would they have done that?

Your Honor, we're not debating the procedures and policies of a college

between a neighboring landowners.

We have a landowner on one plot of land and a landowner on another.

This is about zoning, and the issue before us is whether the recent

2015 zoning ordinance applies to a lawful, non-conforming use.

Right now, we are being accused of having violated a special

exception restriction, although it has been admitted by all sides that it is a

lawful, non-conforming use.

But you see, the court, if I understood, and I'm not...

I don't know whether the court was right or not, but what the court

seemed to be saying was, in order to show that you were non-conforming

and are entitled to continue to operate the way you want, you have

to show that at the time you started to use this as a fraternity

house, you were doing it in a way other than in conjunction with Dartmouth.

Because if you were doing it in conjunction with Dartmouth, then as

to that issue, there's been no change.

Justice Linn, a couple of things.

First of all, we believe that the requirement to prove that you were

not acting in conjunction with the college is not the right burden

of proof.

And the reason that is, is that we are being accused of violating

a present-day ordinance.

The burden of proof to defend against a violation of a present-day

ordinance is to prove that the use is lawfully non-conforming.

This court has instructed us repeatedly in Bruce in the

London Land Association in town of New Durham that it is sufficient

to prove that by showing that the use pre-existed the zoning

ordinance.

So you would say, let me give you, let me draw this analogy.

Suppose that you represent a client who owns a junkyard, right?

And it has two neighbors on either side.

And at the time it starts to run the junkyard, there's no

zoning.

So it's perfectly legal.

Then the town enacts the zoning ordinance.

And the zoning ordinance says, in order for you to be able

to operate a junkyard, that at least the neighbors on both

sides of you have to approve, have to agree.

That's what the zoning ordinance says.

It seems like what the trial court was saying is that for you

to establish that you were a pre-existing non-conforming

use, you would not only have to show that you operated as

a junkyard before the ordinance went into existence, but you'd

have to show that your neighbors on both sides at that

time didn't agree that it was okay for you to operate as a

junkyard.

And I would submit to you, Your Honor, that that is an

argument of substantial change of use.

If, in fact, the burden is to show that we were not

operating in conjunction with the college at the time of

the 1976 ordinance, but that now, because of

derecognition, that has substantially changed the

use, well, that would be a very different argument.

We would be here under different facts and circumstances,

but the facts are that we are here because we have been

alleged to have been violating the special exception

restriction of a student residence.

A student residence is a use that is permitted only by

the issuance of a special exception.

The ZBA and TriCap, the TriCap decision that I put

to you was clear that a fraternity cannot simply

be acting like a student residence to, in fact, be

a student residence.

Do you say that it would be okay, given the history

of this case, for 18 people to continue to live

in that residence, and all of them claim that they

are students, but they operate under independent

study programs that they put together for themselves?

They could do that?

They could do that, Your Honor.

That is our position, that this is a lawful,

non-conforming use that pre-existed to the ordinance,

and thus, our...

And regardless, you say we don't have to consider

all of the decades that these students, obviously,

were students of Dartmouth.

That's my understanding.

Am I wrong on that?

And still are.

Okay, so they've always been students of Dartmouth.

They continue to be students of Dartmouth,

but you say it would be okay if none of them

were students of Dartmouth.

They just said, we're all freelancers,

we just do independent studies on our own,

and we're not students of Dartmouth, and that's okay.

No, Your Honor, I believe the answer is that

this has been operated as a fraternity.

If Dartmouth College went out of business,

went bankrupt tomorrow, that would not obviate

the landowner's vested right to operate

a fraternity on that site, which it did

before the ordinance was enacted.

Well, I know, but they operated a fraternity

of students who went to Dartmouth.

I mean, we can't peel that apart.

But I don't believe that the nonconforming use

simply says that a fraternity is something

in which the students go to Dartmouth.

A fraternity is defined by its plain and simple definition.

Well, I understand that, but I'm looking

at how it actually operated, because it seems to me

we have to look at how it operated

before the original zoning ordinance,

how it operated before and after the amendment.

And the way I understand it operated was,

it was a fraternity of students

who went to Dartmouth College.

And still is, Your Honor, and that is the case.

The idea of recognition that the town has brought up

because of the recent derecognition

was something that was an invention of Dartmouth College

in the 1980s, which was almost a decade

after the 1976 zoning amendment even came into place.

So that couldn't have possibly been in the mind

of the voters in 1976.

So I would submit to you that there is no change of use,

but that isn't what we're here before.

We aren't here to discuss whether this is a change

of use.

We're here to ask whether or not we violated

a restriction of a special exception,

student residence, that it never became

by virtue of the fact that it never opted into zoning.

And if anything, I implored the court

to review the tri-cap decision that we presented

to the case, which shows unequivocally

that the Board of Hanover, the zoning Board of Hanover,

has held repeatedly that fraternal institutions

that have never opted into zoning,

whether recognized or derecognized by the college.

Are we bound by that?

Are we bound by that?

Well, a zoning board acts in a quasi-judicial manner.

Its decisions have the force and effect of law.

Were any of those deregulated, the examples

you used in your brief?

They were.

Zeta Psi was.

Yes, it was.

D, registered, whatever.

Derecognized.

Derecognized.

Yes.

Zeta Psi was derecognized, Your Honor.

And the Tricap decision unequivocally

shows that even when a fraternity is recognized

by Dartmouth College, the town does not

consider it a student residence simply

because it never applied for or received a special exception

to operate as a student residence.

And therefore, the restrictions of a later enacted ordinance

are protected by RSA 67419.

And that would include RSA, I'm sorry, section 902

of the 2015 amended zoning ordinance.

Thank you.

Council?

Good morning.

And may it please the court.

My name is Laura Specter Morgan.

I'm from the Mitchell Municipal Group.

I represent the town of Hanover with me at the table

as my partner, Judith Whitelaw.

And here in the courtroom today

is the zoning administrator, Judith Rotman.

I'm happy to take questions at any time.

Well, maybe you can tell me.

Yes.

Where?

In section 19 of RSA 674, it says

that it has to apply only to non-conforming uses.

It says what has to apply only to non-conforming.

Actually, the statute says a zoning ordinance adopted

under 16 shall not apply to existing structures

or to the existing use of any building.

Absolutely, honor.

Any use.

So why isn't that dispositive of the case?

Because in order to determine what the non-conforming use is.

It doesn't have to be non-conforming.

It's any use.

Well, in order to determine what the use was in 1976

when the zoning ordinance was changed.

It was a frat, wasn't it?

It was a frat.

But what happened in 1976 is the zoning ordinance was rewritten.

And the definition of fraternity and sorority was removed.

And it was replaced with the definition of student residence,

which incorporated fraternity, sororities, and dormitories.

19 says that doesn't apply to this fraternity.

19 says that a zoning ordinance cannot make

an existing use illegal.

So it says it cannot apply.

It cannot apply.

So if the use exists and we change the zoning ordinance

and that change makes the zoning, makes the use illegal,

the use gets to continue.

Right.

It becomes a non-conforming use.

The use in this case was only non-conforming

because it didn't get a special exception.

Because student residences in the institutional district

were only allowed to exist by special exception.

But the whole statutory and regulatory array

of special exceptions by virtue of section 19

doesn't apply.

Absolutely.

And there is no contention from the town

that this property has to get a special exception.

But here's what I guess I don't know.

Is there?

You seem to be saying that the trial court seemed

to say that the house had your opponent, rather.

Your opponent had to show that it

was operating without the approval,

for lack of a better term, that's the injunction.

Without the approval of Dartmouth in 1920,

whenever it was, before the zoning ordinance went into effect.

What alpha delta?

Why does that make?

I have trouble understanding why that makes sense.

I mean, do we even know, for example, was there,

did Dartmouth have the ability in 1920 or whatever

to say students, this is where you must live?

The applicable point in time is 1976,

because that's when the use became illegal.

The only reason it became illegal.

Why was it illegal if the zoning law then adopted doesn't apply?

It would become illegal.

It became no longer permitted by the zoning ordinance.

And yes, the zoning ordinance doesn't apply.

But the only reason it was not permitted

was because it didn't have a special exception.

That doesn't mean it didn't also fall

within the definition of student residence.

It's making me sound like a voice in the wilderness.

I'm sorry I'm not answering your question,

if I'm not answering your question.

The only reason it's nonconforming

is because it doesn't have a special exception.

But the use still falls within the definition

of student residence.

And that definition of student residence,

and this is what the use of the property was in 1976,

a building designed for and occupied by students

and operated in conjunction with another institutional use,

which may include individual living units

with social rooms and kitchen facilities

for any number of students.

That's what the use of the property was in 1976.

So that use was existing before the amendment.

Yes.

And after the amendment.

Yes.

And the only reason we're here is that the,

the D, I keep.

D recognition.

D recognition.

Yes.

Decoupled.

Yes.

The way the use always was,

which was use for students attending Dartmouth College.

It's still, it still would be used

for students attending Dartmouth College.

The argument below was that this property

would still be used in conjunction with the college

because it would still house only Dartmouth students.

But that doesn't satisfy the

in conjunction with requirement.

What the zoning board found

and what the trial court affirmed

is that the in conjunction with requirement

is actually there to create a degree

of oversight of these properties.

And in making that determination.

So you're saying being a Dartmouth student

isn't enough.

Correct.

That somehow the college had some kind of control

over what was going on.

Had some sort of oversight

over what was going on, yes.

And do you say that that oversight

existed historically?

That oversight in fact existed historically.

Before and after original zoning

and before and after the amendment.

And then what happened was that oversight

was cut off because of the derecognition.

Correct, Your Honor.

The record supports that Alpha Delta

has been recognized by the college

since the late 18th century.

That is in the appendix of page 72.

Sure, but that's different than saying,

I mean, I would be surprised

if in the late 18th century Dartmouth,

you know, Dartmouth was sending out inspectors,

so to speak.

I mean, not faulting Dartmouth anyway,

but just being attuned to sort of safety issues

and all those kind of things,

presumably was not as hot a topic in the late 1800s

or even up to 1920 as it is now.

Presumably that's true, Your Honor.

But what the ZBA found, apparently

they did not brand students back in the 1800s.

They may have apparently it wasn't as much of a concern

as it was in 2014 or 2015.

What the zoning board found,

and this was a factual finding

that was entitled to deference by the trial court

that's entitled to deference by this court

as long as it's supported by the record,

is that the appellant failed to present any evidence

that the fraternity ever operated in a manner

which was not in conjunction with Dartmouth College

prior to the adoption of the zoning requirement.

That's the thing that troubles me,

that it had that obligation

because in the analogy I drew with your opponent before,

isn't the junkyard,

wouldn't that mean that if I had this,

if the town now adopts a zoning ordinance that says

you have to have the approval of people on both sides,

even though I've been operating long

before that zoning ordinance went into effect,

I not only have to prove that I was operating,

but I have to prove that my neighbors at that time

didn't object, which seems like, wow.

I don't think so, Your Honor.

I think a requirement that your neighbors not object

is similar to the requirement

that you get a special exception.

And here no one's saying they have

to get a special exception,

but if you were operating a junkyard

and the town adopted a definition of junkyard

and at the time the town adopted

the definition of junkyard, you complied,

you could not later change your use of the property

to a junkyard that does not comply with the zoning ordinance.

And that's what's happened here.

It's not that we're saying

you have to get a special exception.

We're saying the use of your property in 1976,

that's when the non-conforming use was created.

Those are the sets of facts we look at

under the New London case,

under Wixom versus Salem.

You look at what was the use

when the non-conformity was created.

And the uncontroverted facts,

before the zoning board, before the trial court,

before this court, are that in 1976,

this fraternity operated in conjunction with the courts.

Was there evidence, was there any evidence

in the record about what,

you talk about the sort of oversight safety,

that kind, about what that entailed?

There was some evidence, Your Honor,

because there were a couple of letters from Dartmouth,

they're in the appendix and one's in my appendix.

And it's clear from Dartmouth that Dartmouth says

we no longer consider them to be operating

in conjunction with us.

Dartmouth does have a rule that says Dartmouth students

cannot live in unrecognized fraternities.

So Dartmouth students could not live in this fraternity.

But there was evidence that recognition brought with it.

And did Dartmouth, I mean,

I guess that's part of what bothers me a little bit here

is it sort of seems like if Dartmouth can say

they can't live there, why don't they just do that?

And that'll be the end of it.

That'll be the end of this, I assume.

That would be lovely from the town.

But from the town's point of view,

and Dartmouth did say that, Dartmouth said,

you are no longer allowed to live here,

we are happy to rehouse you in regular dormitories.

And what the town said was students can stay there

till the end of the semester,

we don't wanna interfere with your studies.

But as of the end of the semester,

no one can live there.

And no one does live there now.

Ah, so I misunderstood what your opponent said.

No Dartmouth students live there anymore.

My understanding is that no one lives there anymore.

Okay.

And this building, the property,

is owned by the national fraternity,

and it had leased the property.

National fraternity?

I'm not entirely sure what the organization is,

but it's owned by the corporation leased to the fraternity.

I see, okay.

So your honor, there was evidence in the record

that recognition brought-

Is that in the record?

I'm sorry?

What you just said in the record?

It's in the brief.

I'm not sure it's in the record.

There was so much in the brief that wasn't in the record.

I've really focused my arguments today

on what we're in the brief,

bringing in what was also in the record.

But there was evidence in the record,

your honor, as to what recognition brought with it.

Now in the 1960s, it brought something-

Was there evidence in the record

that the building was empty or occupied or not?

There was evidence in the record

that the students had moved out,

if I'm not mistaken.

Because this wasn't a normal zoning case.

We had our argument on the record,

and then we had a supplemental hearing

because there were these other cases

that the court wanted to hear some testimony on,

how, if at all, they applied,

and it was prompted to testify.

The students don't own the premises, right?

The corporation owns the premises.

Right.

So what does it matter

whether they're students there or not?

The point is that the zoning ordinances

don't apply to the owner of the building.

Correct.

They don't apply as long as the property

continues to be used as it was in 1976

when it became conform-

Right.

When it became non-conforming.

Because we can't make a general statement.

Zoning ordinances don't apply across the board.

Exactly.

Because that would allow the building

to be used as a CVS pharmacy,

a mini Walmart, whatever.

Exactly.

And that takes the non-conforming use law

to an absurd place.

Exactly.

Exactly.

The non-conforming use-

Despite the plain meaning of the statute.

Well, the plain meaning of the statute

as interpreted by this court

is that the non-conforming use

in existence at the time it became non-conforming

may continue.

But it may not change.

And in this case there was a substantial change.

Whether or not those words were used

by the zoning administrator-

But you know, can I just,

I'm sorry, can I just ask

sort of a practical question?

Absolutely.

If Dartmouth has said as a matter of

it's sort of its control over its students,

you students who were formerly living there,

you cannot live there anymore.

Right?

And you seem to be saying that that's true,

that that has happened.

So now, what, I mean,

if Dartmouth students can't live there anymore,

presumably, I mean,

what is the practical implications

of what the reliefs the plaintiff is asking for?

Suppose we were to agree with the plaintiff.

Presumably that doesn't mean

that the property can just be used

as to house nine unrelated people,

you know, who all work it somewhere

other than at Dartmouth,

but live in the Hanover area.

I don't think it could.

I think Alpha Delta is making the argument

that we could put students in there

if they were willing to risk the wrath of Dartmouth.

We could put alumni in there during Homecoming Weekend

or if they happen to be in town.

Alpha Delta is saying we can still put people in there.

They're not doing it for whatever reason,

presumably out of respect for the court's order,

but their argument is we still want people to live there.

Your Honor, this is a very simple case.

This is a non-conforming use case.

What was the use in 1976

when the non-conforming use was created?

It was a student residence,

as that term happened to be defined in the zoning ordinance,

used in conjunction with Dartmouth College.

It was non-conforming

because it didn't need a special exception.

It still doesn't need a special exception,

but in order to remain the same non-conforming use

and therefore be exempt from the zoning ordinance,

it has to be the same non-conforming use.

So as I'm thinking about this,

suppose we rule against you.

Suppose we say that the plaintiff is correct

and we say, no, this was a prior non-conforming use.

What slows from that?

That there will be no Dartmouth students

that can live there

because if they do, Dartmouth is gonna say,

I assume would say, you're out of Dartmouth

if you wanna live there, you can't live there.

I don't know what Dartmouth's gonna say,

but frankly, Your Honor,

the zoning of the property and the town's ability

to regulate who lives there shouldn't depend on Dartmouth

and what Dartmouth might do to its students.

For those reasons, Your Honor,

the town asks that you affirm the trial court,

which affirm the zoning board,

which affirm the zoning administrator

and they're finding that the property

may no longer be used as a fraternity.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Did you reserve any time?

Well, you should have told me.

Do you still need it?

Okay.

Very briefly, need to rebut a couple of points.

There is nothing in the record

that has any reference to whether Dartmouth provided

any health and safety oversight prior to 1976-60.

That didn't even come up until the court ruling.

I mean, see the ZBA ruling.

There is one fact that is important in this case,

and that is that all parties agree

that the property is lawfully non-conforming,

and that means, as Justice Hicks has said, 674-19

means that no later enacted ordinance,

which includes the ordinance that they are actually now saying.

And so they can operate a CVS, a mini Walmart,

that is your argument, isn't it?

Your Honor, you have a very good point,

but I think you are misunderstanding

when a non-conforming use may be terminated.

It may be terminated if there is a substantial change

in the use.

That is true, or if it was abandoned

or if it was converted into a special exception.

But we are not here arguing, as counsel has now said.

You're not here arguing a substantial change of use.

That wasn't alleged.

I mean, isn't a substantial change of use

a foregone conclusion if Dartmouth says

you can't, students cannot live there?

Let's assume we agree with you.

Who's gonna, what's gonna happen to this property?

Who's gonna live there?

Justice Lin, for your information,

the corporation and the fraternity

is presently in discussions with Dartmouth

for re-recognition.

So the zoning of this particular property.

That's not our problem.

That's right, the zoning, that's my point.

The zoning for this property should not depend

on whether Dartmouth College allows its students

to live there or not.

This is a private landowner with vested

not performing rights.

But the point, I guess the point is,

I mean, isn't it, maybe it's not the CVS

that Justice Convoy asked about,

but let's suppose that there is no change.

Dartmouth doesn't re-recognize, right?

What are you gonna do with this property?

Who are gonna be the nine people

or whatever that live there?

Is it gonna be nine people that just live in Hanover

and they work?

Justice Lin, the fraternity is comprised

of 1,300 members worldwide.

They have reunion events, they have other events,

they have the ability to house other students,

for instance, graduate students,

that are not in compliance with the,

they're not bound by the undergraduate student

requirement of Dartmouth.

So the property still may be used as a fraternity

as it always has been since time in memoriam.

But what is being asked today of you

is whether or not Section 902,

a later enacted ordinance applies

to a lawful non-conforming use.

You're no longer answering Justice Lin's question,

so with that, the case is submitted

and the court is in recess.
