This is case 2016-0635 102 Plaza, Inc. versus Jared Stevens at all.

May it please the court.

I'm Arthur Gormley III.

I represent Jared Stevens, a tenant with respect to a commercial eviction case.

And if the court has any questions.

So can I just ask you then for about the second issue, Mr. Gormley?

If I'm understanding your position is that the lease required

not only the landlord to give 30 days notice of eviction,

but to also affirmatively tell your client that you have within that 30 days, you can cure.

But the lease doesn't say that, does it?

It doesn't use the phrase, you have the right to cure.

It does say that you have 30 days to correct the default.

Right, but no, I agree with that.

And it doesn't say anything about that the landlord has an obligation to notify you of your right to cure, does it?

No, I mean, I would agree with that.

The landlord does not have an obligation to say, again, you can't do what you're in default for.

I agree with that, and that goes to the first issue.

We raised two issues with respect to the trial court's decision.

The first one is concerning the interpretation of the contract of the lease.

And under the New Hampshire case law, you interpret that as if it's a contract.

And in this case, the contract provided in paragraph 26 that if you're going to evict this tenant,

you have to give them a notice of what they're doing wrong, what the default is.

And didn't your clients receive notice of a default in this case?

No, they did not.

The record is that there was no written evidence of a default notice that was provided to Mr.

Stevens.

There was testimony concerning whether or not Mr.

Stevens received some type of notice.

But there's no evidence as to what that notice was.

It could have been for rent, it could have been for damage to the property.

Nothing that says default.

Nothing that says default.

There may have been a letter that was not an exhibit that said that you're in default.

So my understanding, looking through the record, is that there's an email that was

Exhibit G that purports to be from Katie to Jared.

And that that's what was offered as the notice that stated February 9th.

But it actually, this copy that's the exhibit doesn't go to Jared.

It's internal email.

Yeah, yes, I mean that-

Is that what purports to be?

Is that the only written evidence in the record of what purports to be the notice of default?

That's correct, Your Honor.

And if that's the only written evidence of the default, then the contract,

the lease wasn't followed because paragraph 28 of the lease says that all notices

under this contract have to be in writing and they have to be by certified mail.

That email doesn't mean the task.

So that's what's on page six of the appendix, right?

Yes, Your Honor.

But there was some trial testimony about, well, there was a certified letter sent later.

Is that right?

The letter itself wasn't admitted, but there was testimony about that?

It's true, there was testimony for Mr. Stevens that he received a letter, I believe it was in April,

that you're in default again.

And why isn't that sufficient?

Because he has to be, because the record doesn't have anything for

the trial court to make a finding that he was given written notice that he's in default because he's having entertainment.

You mean the test, but isn't the testimony sufficient?

I mean if somebody testifies that there was written notice given, isn't that as,

and even though you don't introduce a copy of the letter, isn't that good enough for

trial court to find that the letter was sent?

It is, if the testimony is that I got noticed that I'm in default because I'm having entertainment, but

that's not the state of the record.

In fact, the principle of the plaintiff, Mr. Antonelli, testified that he never sent

any type of written notice with respect to the defaults, Your Honor.

I mean, I guess that goes to the sufficiency of the evidence perhaps,

which is an uphill battle maybe for us concerning whether or

not the plaintiff complied with the lease, but-

Did I hear you correctly that your opponent admitted that there was no notice of default in trial?

He did, he did, Your Honor, on questioning.

So the first issue with respect to contract interpretation,

that's a DeNovo review for the court, it's clear that the trial

court didn't review the contract, didn't allow Mr. Stevens the right to cure.

And now he's in a situation where he's in year one of five years and he's going to be out the door and

he's going to lose five years of possession.

That's not an equitable-

Can I just ask you paragraph ten as the operative provision in terms of use of the lease premises?

And it talks about using the premises for pizza and sandwich sales.

Yes.

Do you agree that it went beyond that?

I do, I agree that the use continued to be pizza and sandwich sales.

Did it continue to be pizza and sandwich sales?

It did, and in 2014 it included the use of alcohol.

And in 2014 it started to include the use of entertainment.

And the plaintiff knew that, and we know that because we have the email in February of 2016 saying,

you're having entertainment, it can continue, but we need to talk about it.

So-

And is there any provision in the lease that would say you can't have entertainment or

you can't have music as opposed to allowing them to sell pizza and sandwich?

No, there's nothing in this commercial lease that says the exclusive use is pizza and

sandwich sales or you can't have entertainment.

And, you know-

I gather it's not in the record, I'm sure, but I gather this is a permitted use under the zoning ordinance.

It's not in the record.

I mean, I was doing it for many, many years.

I was assuming just one other point with respect to the trial court's review of the evidence is that

the trial court found that we had to obtain written authorization to modify the lease.

That's not anywhere in the lease.

So, again, it's just the weight of the evidence is that the lease was modified.

Thank you, council.

Thank you.

Good morning, Your Honours.

Attorney Michael Merer here on behalf of 102 Plaza.

I'd like to just briefly, I'll take questions at any time.

I'd like to briefly address the issue on the default of whether or not there was any admission of default on trial transcript.

There's not only an admission of default on the trial transcript, it's at page 60, line 3.

So, did you get something- here's the question.

So, did you get something from me notifying that you were in default?

This was Mr. Stevens was under cross examination by Attorney Conakas, and the answer was in April, yes.

Trial transcript, page 60, line 6.

Do we know what that was?

Excuse me?

Do we know what that was?

What the default notice was?

What it said.

Default because what?

I think the default notice was contained, the language of the default notice and what they were concerned about was contained in the February email, which Mr. Stevens denied getting.

But he knew as of April, which was long before the 30 days before they had to be notified, that he was in default of the lease.

And then ultimately it was-

But the February email doesn't use that term.

It doesn't say you're in default of the lease.

It talks about have a conversation with Cliff.

That's what it says.

Right, and that email doesn't instruct him to stop doing what he's doing, although they did give him permission to go forward another month, but then it had to stop.

It was a gradual process over about 18 months where things changed.

There was a beer and alcohol license that was allowed.

And then from there, they built the stage, they modified the kitchen, they had karaoke.

It started slowly, there was entertainment on one night and then two nights and before you know it,

it was basically a full live entertainment all the time with hard liquor, which went on to the night.

Do you agree that in terms of paragraph 10 that the premises shall be used for pizza and

sandwich sales that that continued?

That did continue.

And there's no prohibition.

It doesn't say exclusively for that or no alcohol or no music, does it?

It doesn't say, correct your honor, and there's also nothing in the lease that requires a written modification.

But the parties, now my client testified several times in the transcript at trial that he never agreed to the expansion of that use beyond pizza sales,

with the exception of allowing beer and wine sales at some point right at that day.

Did he contest that he knew of it as opposed to agreeing to it?

Did he agree, did he know that it was going on?

He testified he did not know that it was going on until sometime in early 2016.

He said that between July 2014 and early 2016,

an 18 month span he was at the property one time and they were paying the rents on time so there wasn't a need to be there that often.

He was at the property and he went inside from the back of the building.

Apparently there was a roof issue and that's in the transcript as well.

That was his testimony at trial.

They had every opportunity to say that testimony's not correct.

We'll present affidavits and other witnesses that you hear on multiple occasions.

That evidence was not presented.

My client testified he had been there once and he said that he never noticed the stage.

He never noticed any of those other modifications and he never agreed to any of that.

And we also think that the lease is very clear,

that there's no requirement that the landlord has to present a specific language in the notice of default,

saying that you have a right to cure it.

It's already in the lease itself.

Secondation.

And I agree with that under 20 in paragraph 26 it talks about that,

but it does give a 30 day period to correct after a written notice.

It does.

And presumably you need to have a notice of what you need to correct.

I believe, and I can't cite to that particular section of the transcript,

I believe in the transcript, there were conversations that occurred sometime in the spring

before he acknowledged the default that he was specifically told what the landlord disagreed with.

No hard liquor, no live music, and no more basically threats to public safety that were occurring.

The police were going out there on a regular basis.

They had one incident where someone pulled a knife in the,

I think it was just outside of the building and it led to a high speed police chase.

They had another incident where someone stumbled out of the bar and fired a gun in the air.

But assuming that those problems grew out of this,

the liquor and the music, wouldn't it have been possible for the less see to have said,

okay, well I thought it would be a good business model, but it's not.

So we're just going to go back to selling sandwiches and within 30 days, I'll stop that.

Our argument, your Honor, is that was allowed, and that was the testimony at trial,

that he was informed of that, that my client testified at trial.

He was verbally informed that he had, that was the limitation of what he could do in the least premises.

That's it.

He was verbally informed.

He was verbally informed.

Not in writing.

I know that it was in the, in the ultimate notice to quit.

All of those items were identified.

All of it was verbal, I believe.

Thank you.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you.

Case submitted for purposes of, for the information of counsel rather and parties in the courtroom.

The court will take a brief.
