This is case 2016-0177, In Ray, estate of Kathleen Mullen.

Council. May it please the court. I have requested two minutes reserved for rebuttal.

My name is Pamela Newkirk. I'm a hearing on behalf of Patricia Jekyll,

who is the administrator of the estate of Kathleen Mullen.

I'd like to focus on three

undisputed facts that were found by the lower court

and are undisputed by either of the parties.

These three findings are the foundation

of our appeal and why we think that the lower court's order needs to be reversed.

The first such fact is that Kathleen Mullen resided in New Hampshire since 2008

and was a domiciliary of New Hampshire when she died in 2014 without a will.

The second fact is that Kathleen Mullen

in 2008, 2012, established a trust

while she was visiting in California.

The third undisputed fact that was found by the lower court

is that after establishing the trust in 2012,

Kathleen Mullen never transferred title to her New Hampshire real property,

to her car, to her stocks, to her bank accounts,

and most importantly, she left her estate as the designated beneficiary

of three annuities that were worth in excess of $2.3 million.

Are all these assets in New Hampshire or some of them in California?

The citus of all those assets is New Hampshire,

as far as we are concerned. The physical assets, the New Hampshire real

property, the car, all has...

What about the stocks and their personal property?

The stocks all have a citus of New Hampshire.

I thought your opponent told us that there is some real estate in

California that she owns. There is real estate in California

and she deeded that California real estate to her trust.

Oh, I see. Which makes it all the more significant

that she... She did that. She funded the trust to the extent of the California

real estate. Correct. But what do you say about the...

As I understand it, you don't dispute, and correct me if I'm wrong,

that your opponent's position that under California law,

the deeding of the property to the trust, put aside the New Hampshire real estate

for a minute, because I think that's probably a different situation,

but you don't dispute your opponent's position that

under California law, it's not necessary to deed

property to the trust. As long as you establish the trust

and list the property that's going to go into it, that's enough.

I actually... We dispute that. Under California law?

That under California law, a New Hampshire domiciliary

could go to California and execute a transfer that would be

governed by California law. Isn't that an

issue for another day? Aren't we just concerned? Okay, you go ahead.

That's correct, yes. And that's why we we did not concede that issue,

but that issue was not before the court, and is not... Is that being litigated in

California? There are competing actions presently.

There is a California case that was brought

after probate was opened, after the inventory was filed, there is a

California case that's pending. There's my motion that was brought

before the probate court, which is the basis for the ruling that we're here on

today, which did request that the court order that

title to the property that's listed on the inventory belongs

in the hands of the estate and the beneficiaries. It seems to me

that the court may have conflated the concepts

of jurisdiction and choice of law, and I want

to understand because your brief didn't quite say that.

It seems to me that the threshold issue is

what kind of jurisdiction does New Hampshire have?

If it has exclusive jurisdiction, it keeps the case, but arguably

it has to do a choice of law analysis, and it may then be required,

it may conclude that it is required to apply

California law to its decision. If New Hampshire has concurrent

jurisdiction, then it can decide whether the other

jurisdiction is more convenient, but it seemed to merge both concepts.

Do you agree with me? I agree with you.

Well, I don't. Form non-convenience necessarily includes

locations of witnesses and the type of law to be applied by a court that has the

greater expertise. So why isn't concurrent jurisdiction

the correct decision in this case? The issue that the proceeding

in the probate court for the administration of this estate

is an in-rem proceeding. So basically you're only proceeding against the

Hancock real estate? No, all of the property of the

deceit. So an in-rem proceeding need not just

concern real estate. An in-rem proceeding concerns

tangible property and intangible property as well.

So let's say you've established jurisdiction by whatever means you don't

need the in-rem. She's here, or her estate is here.

Correct, and that is the point. So there is a proceeding in New Hampshire,

and whether you want to call it in-rem or not,

there is a proceeding in New Hampshire which is

established by the New Hampshire legislature

for the purpose of transferring title of a decedent's property

to the heirs or beneficiaries. But just because it's

just because New Hampshire may have exclusive

jurisdiction, and I understand that's one of the arguments,

that doesn't mean it can't apply California law.

Correct. And we're not there yet. It seems to me the only issue we

decide here is whether the court was wrong in treating this as

if jurisdiction was concurrent. Then it went into the forum known

non-convenience. If we find that New Hampshire had

exclusive jurisdiction, it goes, it gets litigated in New Hampshire,

but it may get litigated under California law.

Right? That's correct. But let me just ask you this exclusive

jurisdiction thing here. I guess what I don't understand

about about your claim on that in that regard

is this. This would be one thing, it seems to me,

if another court was sort of fighting, for lack of a better

term with New Hampshire, about whether it could exercise

jurisdiction. But here, I mean clearly there are

courts in California that have authority to adjudicate probate matters.

And here we have a court in New Hampshire that has said it's

appropriate to give up jurisdiction for various reasons to the

court in California. And I guess I'm having a hard time

understanding why it can't do that. I mean other than put aside the

New Hampshire real estate, I think we have case law that

you know says if just like New Hampshire couldn't,

I assume you would agree that even if the property in California had not

been transferred to the trust, an administration here

couldn't, couldn't decide what happens to the house in

California. And so put the put the New Hampshire

real estate aside for a minute. Why, what's the problem

with our court saying New, there's a probate court in California

that can adjudicate all of these things. And although

I, the trial judge in New Hampshire, could say I'll do it,

it makes more sense for the, for a court in California to do it.

What, what, what's wrong with that? Because it opens the door

for establishing a judicially acknowledged cloud on title to all

personal property that would pass through probate from this point forward.

And here's the reason why. There, when you go through a probate

procedure, and again this is statutorily established.

Cloud on title to what? To the assets that are passed to the

heirs and beneficiaries. Once the court of competent jurisdiction

decides that it's over. But when does that question arise?

I expect you'll come back here and tell us someday.

Well, let me ask you this. As a matter of law,

if a court has exclusive jurisdiction, can it cede jurisdiction

to another state? I don't think it can.

If the, if the issue is title to the property

in an a probate proceeding, that is the issue. Title to the property

was in the hands of the decedent and it is passing on

to the heirs and beneficiaries free and clear of any claims.

So the New Hampshire court should not ever cede that jurisdiction to

each. Forget about the facts of this case.

Once a determination is made that a court has exclusive jurisdiction,

does it have the power to cede jurisdiction to another state

under the concept of a forum known convenience?

I, I do not believe that they do. Well, but that, isn't that a problem

for example. I think in the, in the interstate

custody and, and child support areas, I don't have the statute right at the

top of my head, but I think that there are provisions in those statutes that say

even when, even when a court in let's say in New Hampshire has exclusive

jurisdiction to make, let's say, a custody determination,

that doesn't prevent the court from saying I'm going to transfer it to another

court even though it doesn't have to do that. It could say no and, and in fact

could prevent another court from exercising jurisdiction.

It, it doesn't have to do that. The distinction however is that those

cases involving custody and support are not

procedures to transfer property and this is a procedure to transfer property.

Well and that, and the custody business is all controlled by statute

and that's not the case here. Correct.

Let me ask you this question which is I'm a little confused about the

conversation earlier about choice of law because

it seems to me on page six of the order the court says

thus it is California law that must be applied to decide the issue of

whether the decedent's assets or in her trust or

her estate regardless if the California court or the

New Hampshire court hears the case. So didn't it decide

the choice of law issue or is there something I'm missing?

Well the, to the extent the the lower court decided

that the choice of law provision within the trust instrument itself was

controlling on the choice of law regarding the transfer of property

that is an error. But it did decide it it just you say it's wrong.

Correct. We have asked that we're asking that that

part of the ruling also be reversed. Right but you know why the thing I guess

one of the things that you say that I'm not sure I understand why this

should be true is if I live in New Hampshire and let's

have put aside issues like you know taxation or the

government having some interest in it but if I live in New Hampshire

and I decide I want to make a trust that's subject to

California law and it's and I do so voluntarily and you know

there's 50 bishops that say I wasn't that being

unduly influenced or anything like that. Why shouldn't I be able to do that?

Why should you know what's our interest other than some tax

thing let's say of saying I can't do that. I just note my light.

No go ahead answer the question. The reason why you could establish that

trust but the rules for whether or not your

property is transferred to that trust that you've

established here in New Hampshire governed by the trust

instrument is governed by California law. The rules for

transferring your property to that trust are governed by New

Hampshire law and that's what we're saying here. But that's what I'm but my

real question is why should that be true in other words if I

decide you know for example many let's take the corporate setting if I decide

that it's much easier to incorporate in Delaware

even though I'm located in New Hampshire I think I can do that

so why shouldn't it you know and and presumably

then I would have to follow what Delaware says to

have you know to to carry on the organization.

There's a distinction between the law that governs

the internal operations of a corporation a trust

an LLC or some other entity and the distinction between

whether or not your house your stocks your bonds your life insurance policy

your annuities are actually transferred to that trust

and we think New Hampshire has the exclusive.

Thank you. Thank you. Good morning and may please the court. My name is

Henry Clementowich and I represent Laura Bushley who is the trustee

of the Kathleen Mullen trust. I'm happy to take questions at any time.

So why doesn't New Hampshire have exclusive jurisdiction over all these

assets? Thank you that was where I was going to go.

New Hampshire does not have exclusive jurisdiction because the proceeding

in California is not an in-rem proceeding.

The proceeding in California is an impersonum proceeding

that specifically is targeted to adjudicate the validity of the

transfer of property into the inter vivos trust.

It does not establish all of the interests of everyone in the world

against the property like a quiet title proceeding would

or like a estate administration case would.

It doesn't even conclusively adjudicate all the interests between the

trustee and the administrator because before we get there don't we have to

answer the question does New Hampshire have exclusive

jurisdiction to probate this estate? If so, if so,

can it cede jurisdiction to another state? I acknowledge that there is a choice of

law issue here because the provision in the trust

says California law will apply and that would be litigated

in New Hampshire. So let me back up. Is there law that says

once it is determined that there is exclusive jurisdiction in a

court can that court cede jurisdiction to another state?

Okay so I'm going to try to break that out into a couple parts if I may.

Yes. First the California court is not probating the estate.

The estate administration which involves filing of inventories and

accountings and finally determining assets

is happening in New Hampshire regardless of where the validity of the

intervivos trust is established. So I think that's the first step.

The second step is the law says that there's no exclusive in rem

jurisdiction where under Markham versus Allen

a federal court has jurisdiction to entertain suits quote in favor of

creditors, legates, and heirs and other claimants

against a decedent estate so long as the federal court does not

interfere with the probate proceedings or assume general

jurisdiction of the probate or control of the property. So that

justifies concurrent jurisdiction in this matter.

It does and I think. Wait a second. Is it concurrent

jurisdiction or is it jurisdiction over the parts?

Because I thought I understood you to say New Hampshire has jurisdiction

certainly at the very least over the New Hampshire real estate

and any other the intangible stock ownership

whatever New Hampshire has jurisdiction then you say but

California has jurisdiction over the trust. So I think the question is

jurisdiction over what and the New Hampshire probate court will have

jurisdiction to assume the probate of the estate whatever assets

end up being in that estate they'll divide it amongst the heirs at law

once the inventory is finalized. So what's determined what's in the

estate gets determined in California well it's in essence

it is but I think it's a little bit more if I may

subtle than that because it's not a question of what's in the estate it's a

question of whether this property was validly transferred

to the trust and so I think if the California court were to conclude

that the property was never validly transferred into the trust then the

New Hampshire Supreme Court would have I'm sorry the probate and New Hampshire

make that determination by applying California law.

I think the New Hampshire court can apply California law in this case

but I think that in addition to whether there's

what law is applied I think that there's likely going to have to be an

evidentiary hearing at some point because under California law in order

to establish a trust in items you have to prove

trust intent and I think that there would have to be evidence taken of

what Ms. Mullin said to her California attorney what she said with her

California financial advisor what she may have said to other

people about her estate planning goals and I think that that

evidence would be more convenient so assuming that there isn't exclusive

jurisdiction I agree with you that the New Hampshire probate court

could address this matter but the New Hampshire probate court found that

it would be more convenient to do so in California.

In other words let's let's I wonder if it let's assume for a minute that

Ms. Mullin had transferred all of had established a trust in California

and just as she did with the real estate she had transferred all the stocks and

bonds and all the personal property the cars all this

net to the trust and then she does she's still a resident

a domiciliary of New Hampshire and she died in New Hampshire.

I would assume that there would be no question

that the probate court in New Hampshire

would not have there would none of those assets that had been transferred to the

trust would be subject to probate in New Hampshire even though she was a resident

of New Hampshire. That's exactly right and I think that she should have

transferred those assets into the trust but under California law where she

drafted the trust where she signed it in front of a

California notary she wasn't required to do so

because under a state of Haigstead

and I quote the authorities provide abundant support for our conclusion

that a written declaration of trust by the owner of real property

in which he names himself trustee is sufficient to create a trust.

So in other words if the if the I mean for for example

suppose at this hearing you were talking about

the lawyer said you know well I told in fact we had this I had this

discussion with Ms. Mullin in fact I told her one of the reasons you

should you should do this in California is you don't have to go

through the the ritual of sort of transferring all the personal property

into the trust you just list it in a schedule and that's good enough

and and she was you know she was very receptive to that

that idea presumably that would be strong evidence that

that California law ought to apply and I guess to me then the question is

should that hearing be held in New Hampshire where all the witnesses

are in California or does it make more sense for the

for that hearing to be held in California where the witnesses are

I agree with pretty much everything you just said witness number one is that

lawyer who might be on the hot seat in that testimony that's right

and the proceedings in California have been

stayed temporarily pending resolution of this appeal but there's an exception

to this day allowing the trustee to take

discovery in the event that a potential malpractice claim is brought

and what's our standard of review on forum non-convenience it's highly

deferential it is it's unsustainable exercise of

discretion and I think the court made ample findings about the

availability of of the witnesses including the

California attorney and financial advisor but also

the heirs that law including the administrator are all residents of

California so the bottom line is that the New Hampshire court

found that only the New Hampshire real estate was within its jurisdiction

I don't believe that the New Hampshire probate court found that the New

Hampshire realty was exclusively in its jurisdiction

and I can explain why that is I think that

so the terms of the trust provide that California law shall govern the

validity of the trust except for real estate

whose laws govern the laws of the state of the real estate

govern in this case I still think that the real estate was

transferred validly under California law I also think it by the way it was

validly transferred under New Hampshire real estate

yeah I think it was validly transferred under New Hampshire law the trust

I think so we don't have an unestate of Hegstead case which is probably why

there's some of this dispute here but I don't know of anything that would

prevent that happening and the law says that as soon as

you create this in California at least and I imagine it would be the same in

New Hampshire as soon as you create this testamentary

I'm sorry this this trust intent and a written declaration that satisfies the

statute of frauds you've created a trust in that property

and so the analogy is you have a couple in say

South Carolina who's divorcing who owns real estate in

North Carolina a divorce court in South Carolina would have jurisdiction

because they have personal jurisdiction over the couple

to adjudicate their relative interests but they wouldn't be able to quiet title

so I think a California court could say yes this asset was validly transferred

into the trust but what it would not be able to do is issue an order

which was recordable under at the registry of deeds quieting title

so it might be afforded full faith and credit I imagine it would be

if it had jurisdiction its orders would be on the question of

that was asked I think justice convoy asked it before

about whether if you if if you assume that excuse me that New Hampshire had

exclusive jurisdiction then could it sort of cede that

jurisdiction I mean it it's nice me that the the only

thing that I mean in order for us to say no it

couldn't do that wouldn't we basically have to say that

constitutionally there's some problem with uh with a court

doing that and I'm I'm having some difficulty seeing where the

how it would be unconstitutional for a court to do that so I

I think the answer going back to mark versus allen is that

where by analogy a federal court can't assume general probate but it can

determine um claims as long as it doesn't interfere

with the probate with the state court's proceedings and I think in this

case whether it's a question of ceding

jurisdiction or just saying we don't want to make this

determination your determination isn't going to

interfere with ours and so I this is an unusual

circumstance because typically where this problem arises is

one court says one thing and another court says another thing and they are

in conflict in this case that's not going to happen because

judge quickly below said that the decision should be made by the

california and so do you envision the process

that california decides the the transfer of assets into the trust

issue yes but new hampshire keeps the estate open until that has been

determined in order to address the title problems that

attorney newkirk was concerned about yes and uh in this

case I don't believe that there are any other assets that would pass through

probate but it's conceivable of a situation in which

the decedent had other assets that she never specifically

assigned and those cases would pass through probate in new hampshire

no matter what clarification in the trust there was

what an an attachment that listed all the assets

so did it list the new hampshire real estate it did

it did it did there was an there was an assignment property into trust and

there was a schedule of assets and I know that

to the trust and they were executed on the same day I think there might have

been some assets which were listed on one but

not on the other but all of the assets were listed on either

the schedule of assets for the trust or the transfer of property

so your position is the analysis really doesn't start

with whether new hampshire had exclusive jurisdiction

it focuses on which court had jurisdiction over which

pieces of this dispute and california doesn't have jurisdiction over

probate matters it had jurisdiction only over the trust

matter new hampshire maintains its quote exclusive

jurisdiction over the probate of estates that's right and I think

just to add a one point on to that in addition the

the adjudication of the validity of the transfer doesn't

otherwise significantly interfere with the probate of the estate

such that you would have a different problem like that let me ask you this

in regard to choice of law if we were to affirm on choice of law and

essentially affirm the case and it goes to california

for adjudication of what's in the trust

is cal is a california court bound by the determination of the choice of law

made by the probate judge here i believe it would be bound by

the choice of law determination under res judicata

and full faith and full faith and credit um i'm not sure that the subject

matter jurisdiction question it would be bound by i think it's

entitled to address its own jurisdiction and may or may not

anyways but choice of law i certainly think it would be bound by that

so my yellow light is on but if you don't have any further questions

hearing none thank you very much case submitted

i believe they were you did you reserve some time i did research please

please go right ahead i think there's a um a lack of

understanding about this quasi and rem claim um

a quasi and rem claim has to have its foundation on an underlying claim in

other words it's not a claim of ownership to the property

but it is based upon in some instances of mortgage where you have

a judicial foreclosure proceeding that is a

quasi and rem where a party who has a

legal interest in the property seeks to um foreclose upon it

the second type is the um claim against a party where you seek to make an

attachment or a garnishment or somehow seek to use property to

satisfy that claim the trustee has no claim against

Kathleen mollin or her estate she only has a claim to the property

that is presently before the probate court

and an abdication of all um but isn't that isn't that in a sense really

circular because another in other words you're saying the property is before

the probate court but that's only true if it's not in the trust

in other words if suppose that all the personal property had been

transferred to the trust you know there there had actually been a deed

or whatever you do you do to transfer personal property

and then miss mollin had died in new hampshire

you would would you then say that we have that the probate court has

jurisdiction over that property if it was in the trust

indeed into the trust and held title ownership was in the name of the

trust right no all right so so but but but but your

opponent what i mean that's the problem that's why what you're saying is

circular because your opponent is saying under california law that's

really true even though it wasn't sort of specifically

deeded you don't have to under california law and it's already in

the trust and and your honor has touched upon

the consequences of affirming the lower court's decision

that there would be uncertainty about whether anyone

owned property that was presented for probate from this point forward

because we don't know what other jurisdictions

have rules when those rules could be pursued for example if probate is

closed within a year as it often is or maybe even six months and property

is distributed distributed there could be a collateral

attack two years later if that was authorized by the foreign jurisdiction

to collect that property and make it part of a trust or some other entity

and that's exactly the type of uncertainty that we don't want to create

and that is why new hampshire does have exclusive jurisdiction and it

should not ever abdicate that jurisdiction to decide whether or

not property of an estate that's collected by the

administrator under the authority granted by the court is in fact an

asset of that estate that will pass to the heirs thank you count

thank you case submitted
