This is case 2016-0468 in the matter of Leslie Dow and Harry Dow IV.

I'm John McCool from Salem, New Hampshire. I represent the appellate Harry Dow.

I think the first issue I'd like to address with time, probably the only issue,

is the issue of the judicial interpretation of the statute, the alimony statute.

I think it's important that that be resolved by this court because of the potential.

The different judges will interpret that statute differently,

and it'll be applied differently to different litigants.

I've been doing divorce law, regrettably, for 43 years.

This was the first time I was ever confronted with a court saying it can't impute.

And before I get into the statute, with regards to their brief and the claim

that the court's denial of our request that the court impute is somehow to be interpreted

as the court finding that she was not voluntarily unemployed is not appropriate.

The court determined that it cannot impute income.

Therefore, it denied that request.

The court never said that she was not voluntarily unemployed.

In fact, the court's own order said,

I anticipate and you should be looking for work.

There were two prior cases that addressed this to some regard.

The appellate takes the position that they're not applicable.

The appellate cited them on Spenard.

In that case, the court, in its decision,

identified the issues that had been presented and what they claimed they heard

and if I can quote that the petitioner claimed that the court heard,

quote, imputing income to her of $4,000 per month

for purposes of child support and alimony.

There's also the Parker case.

And the Parker case is important for the victim.

In that case, the wife was claiming that the court made an error

by giving her less in the final decree by way of child support and alimony

than the husband had been voluntarily paying.

Of note is page 662 on that decision where the court specific,

this court specifically said the master could reasonably have found

based on the evidence before him that the defendant was in good health

and had the ability and training to earn sufficient money

to contribute to the provision of her own and her children's needs.

That's imputing.

If you can't impute income and considering this court's rulings

that any determinations of alimony and child support

can't be based upon historical earnings,

but is based upon current earnings.

Let's assume we agree with you on that.

But isn't there some evidence here that basically the court was saying,

you're right, use some language.

She should be looking for work and all that.

But didn't the court also say, look, given her age,

the fact that she's been out of the workforce for a while,

that kind of thing, the chances of her being able to earn

any substantial amount of money are not particularly good.

And isn't that something that seems to be reasonable under the circumstances?

Yeah, I think it's... Well, first of all, the statute is an equation.

And like any equation, it's got to be equal on both sides.

Now, it may be she can't make enough to support herself

and need some alimony.

I don't know.

But there is an obligation.

When you determine need, what is need?

It's the difference between what you can reasonably generate yourself

and what you reasonably need.

On the other end of the equation, you have a man who is older than her

and collecting unemployment.

Under their theory and the judges of what is a changed circumstance,

any changed circumstance would be sufficient.

That's not what that stipulation said.

Under their theory, if he, after he couldn't find work,

and nobody refutes that he tried, he was 60-something years old,

couldn't find work, if he had taken a job

paying $20,000 a year collecting tickets at a theater,

that's a changed circumstances under the stipulation,

but it wouldn't be a basis for modification of alimony

when none was entered when he was getting $36,000 by way of unemployment.

Mr. McCool, let me ask you a question.

What do we do with the fact that you requested a finding of fact

that the husband, on behalf of the husband,

you requested a finding of fact that the wife was voluntarily

unemployed or underemployed and the court denied it?

How could any court grant that having determined

that they lacked the jurisdiction to impute?

That's what I'm saying.

The court never, and its decision said that she is not

voluntarily unemployed, the court never addressed it.

What the court said is under the statute

and the court's interpretation of the statute,

the court cannot impute.

All divorce law are statutory.

If it isn't granted statutorily,

there's no subject matter jurisdiction.

How could the court grant that?

Well, when I proposed that request,

I never envisioned the judge was going to say

the only time we can ever impute income in an alimony case

is only to an obligor and only if he remarries

and only if he voluntarily quits work.

So that was propounded based upon what I believe is the law

and what I believe most judges interpret the statute

to mean that they can't impute.

This judge said, I can't impute.

How could he possibly grant that request, that juncture?

That's all he did, Judge.

That's all he did.

Thank you, Captain.

Thank you.

Good morning, may it please the court.

For the record, my name is Bill Priebus,

and I represent the petitioner below Leslie Dow.

I respectfully disagree with Attorney McCool's

interpretation of the court's finding

with respect to my client's under-employment or volunteer.

I'm sure you do, but can I just focus on another issue

that seems to me to be particular?

You seem to say, even in your papers,

and it seems to me the evidence really supports this,

that the husband here, the former husband here,

had started a business which was not profitable

even as of the time of the hearing

and that he was losing money

and that that was evidenced by the fact

that he was taking money out of his retirement

to support the business.

So, you know, I guess I do have some trouble

in that circumstance seeing where finding...

I mean, I understand that the court said something about,

you know, he bought a ring for his new fiance

and it cost $13,000,

although apparently it was bought on credit,

and there was some...

what seemed to me to be pretty sort of tenuous evidence

of like high spending.

I mean, this was not...

it didn't seem like the record showed, you know,

they were off to Aruba every weekend

or they were buying a...

they bought a vacation home in Florida

or something like that.

It seemed relatively tenuous

what the high on the hog spending was

compared to they're taking...

the business is losing money

and they're taking money out...

he's taking money out of his retirement.

That's the thing that troubles me the most

about the trial court's order.

So, it's not this court's job

to put itself in the shoes of the trial court

in way of the evidence.

The standard is whether or not there was sufficient evidence

to support the fact that the husband

had an ability to pay our money.

Do you agree that the court had jurisdiction

to impute income to your client?

Statutory ability?

I agree with the trial court's reading of the statute

and that is that the trial court

cannot make a specific imputation of income

to my client based upon what she was earning before.

I think the statute is pretty clear in that regard.

It doesn't, but I guess...

doesn't the statute talk about...

it seems to me it deals with a really different situation

about when there's a remarriage?

I mean, it doesn't...

it talks about imputing income

under a very limited circumstance

and I haven't been practicing force laws

as long as the training pool,

but I have been at it for a while.

I frankly never thought too hard

about the issue of whether for alimony

you could impute income.

And then when I took a close look at these statutes,

why would the legislature be saying

in this specific instance

you can impute income based upon somebody's voluntary...

Because it seems to me

it would seem to me a very logical reason

to answer to that would be

to assume that you could impute income

to either a husband or a wife,

you know, either the obligor or the obligee

as sort of a general proposition,

I could see the legislature saying,

you know, we want to avoid an argument

by an obligor that, well, look,

I didn't really have to go...

you know, it's not a situation

where I really had to go work

because I had somebody else.

I had a sugar daddy or a sugar mommy

that was going to take care of me

and so I didn't have to do that

and the legislature wanted to be sure

that argument was not going to have any legs.

I read it as the legislature not recognizing

a general right to impute

and therefore feeling it needed

to be explicit under these circumstances.

And if we look at the definitions

for the child support statute

at RSA 458C2, you know,

the legislature shows us there

that they know how to be very specific

when it comes to authorizing

trial courts to impute income.

They say the court in its discretion

may consider as gross income

the difference between the amount a parent

is earning and the amount a parent has earned

in cases where the parent voluntarily

becomes unemployed or underemployed

unless the parent is physically

vaccinated.

So for the child support statute

and I would submit that's why these cases

dealing with child support

are on a posit here.

For the child support statute

they have very clear and explicit language

saying you may impute.

There is absolutely nothing like that

in the alimony statute.

It says you may impute

but only under these very...

But let's assume we accept that interpretation.

Correct me if I'm wrong

but is there any evidence here

that the husband's new wife

was sort of a sugar mommy

that she had all kinds of money?

No.

So in that circumstance

isn't what the court did here

in effect to impute

to your opponent

to say that the court really said

well the business is losing money

and he's drawing money out of his retirement

but he's bought this diamond ring

and maybe they went to Florida

or something on a vacation

so he must have more money.

That's a very good point

and it's a bit of an intellectual

struggle in this case

and my response to that would basically be

what the trial court was confronted with here

was not a request that

you should find that Leslie has some vocational skills

or that she has something of that nature

the things that the statute says you can consider

instead what was asked for

is a very specific request

I want you to impute income to her

of $24.50 an hour

what she was making when she worked

for the daycare center back in the day

and the trial court when faced with that

very specific request

said no the statute doesn't authorize me to do that

there's nothing in the statute that says I can do that

and therefore I'm not going to do it

but I think in terms of Mr. Dow

the court could fairly consider that

he had these vocational skills

he had this business that was turning the corner

of his business that he was buying

a very expensive jewelry and that sort of thing

so I believe the statute

the court was allowed to consider

Provost let me ask you a question

you filed a motion yesterday for partial remand

yes

and as I understand it

the husband here

has gotten a new job

we learned of this last week

and I want to be clear on that

I hope it wasn't interpreted

I wasn't trying to duck this argument

or anything like that

I was confident of that

just under the circumstances

I didn't think we could grant it

explore that for a second

I take it it's your position that this paragraph

of the stipulation

has a continuing life

it didn't just get you into court once

for a

because there was a change in employment

but now there's been what you say

brings you within the stipulation

he's got employment

and so therefore

your clients entitled to go back

to court to have an adjustment in alimony

is that your position

that certainly would be Leslie's position

and it would also be our position

that even if that language

was not in the stipulation

then there's been a change in circumstances

we're within five years of the decree

and within five years of the award of alimony

which is not even final yet

and therefore under the statute

we have the right

but given that that's new employment

how does that moot the issue here

don't we have to deal with

the situation at least up through

the husband's employment

the argument we tried to make

in that filing was basically that

these divorce decrees

and divorce orders are fluid

and they remain fluid up until the time

they become final

I modeled the pleading after a pleading

that was filed in a case before this court

a few years ago, Walters v. Walters

and in that case there had been a significant

change of circumstances that occurred

while the matter was on appeal

and this court in response

to a request from the wife

said well we need to send that back

down to the trial court

so the trial court can deal with this change

of circumstances because

by nature of the fact that it's on appeal

the order is not final yet

and the case law is replete with

holdings that

until a divorce order is final

that is it's gone through the appellate process

and stuff

the trial court in its discretion

can change that order

thank you counsel

thank you

case submitted
