This is case 2016-0050 in the matter of Edwin Potter and Melissa Turcott.

The record should reflect the fact that Justice Lynn is disqualified from this case.

Council.

Good afternoon, and may it please the court.

My name is Israel Piedra for the appellant Melissa Turcott, and I've reserved one minute for a bottle.

The trial court aired by failing to distinguish between the RSA 461A11 standard,

the clear and convincing modification standard, and the RSA 461A6 best interest standard applied to initial parenting determinations.

Does it matter that at least the record that order shows that the parties agreed that the new parenting plan that would be resulting from the hearing would cover both children,

meaning it would be the same for both children as I take it?

Correct.

Yeah.

I don't think that changes the fact that the two children need to be analyzed under separate standards.

But theoretically, would that potentially result in each child getting a different schedule?

Well, I guess theoretically, yes, that's true.

Obviously, the courts almost never do that, and it would be disfavored in this case.

But I think that should have been taken into account along with the best interest standard.

Do you agree that the parties agreed in the trial court that there would be one plan and both children would be exchanged for residential responsibility together?

Well, I don't think there was any agreement that the parenting plan would necessarily lay out the same exact schedule for both kids,

I think just that the hearing would apply to both children.

As I read the trial court's order, unless I missed something, it seemed to me that it both expressly and impliedly analyzed each child under the proper standard set out in the statute,

the older child according to the modification standard and the younger child according to the best interest standard.

Well, I disagree.

I think it's unclear.

And it's certainly the fact that the court's narrative order doesn't distinguish between the two standards in that it doesn't state that the modification standard is stricter

or more rigorous or more exacting than the best interest standard.

It also doesn't apply any of the 11 enumerated factors under RSA 461A6, which the court shall apply under a best interest analysis.

And that's relevant because the whole impetus to this hearing in the court below was that the appellee had been convicted of a crime for endangering the welfare of a child.

And that would have implicated at least a few of the best interest standards directly, particularly F and G, likely to result in the harm of the child to the child.

Except that the trial court expressly in its order said, you know, dad hasn't been a saint here.

But considering the history of these folks, I don't think that that conduct, what was it? The DUI with the child in the car?

Is that what it was?

I don't think that conduct is bad enough to warrant disrupting the arrangements that have been in place with this child for however long they have been.

I understand that you might disagree with that, but isn't that a discretionary call for the trial court that we can't really second guess?

Well, I think that it's possible, it's possible that the court would have come to the same determination how to apply the best, the correct standards.

But I don't think that it's clear in the order that the court did apply the correct standards, and I don't think this court can determine that the same conclusion would have been reached.

Considering these best interest standards that, factors that were, would have been directly implicated or discussed.

So it's your position that even though the trial court said it was in Lennox's best interest that this plan be instituted, you say that doesn't do it.

Just using those words doesn't do it because the court didn't articulate its analysis of the factors.

Well, I think that's a secondary argument.

First of all, I think the major thing is that the court never acknowledges the two standards have different burdens.

And secondly, I think it's unclear whether that best interest standard is in the initial parenting sense.

When it mentions that, the end of a paragraph that talks about Mr. Potter's request for a minimal modification, which is also judged under the best interest standards.

So I think it's ambiguous whether the court may have just been talking about the minimal modification.

And maybe it wouldn't have used the same analysis that it should have used under a initial determination.

So I think the trial court was obligated to provide enough detail and analysis to allow for a pellet review.

And it's just unclear and it should be remanded considering these are children's, this is a child safety we're talking about.

So the third factor under the best interest statute that would have been implicated was the safe environment subpart, which is B.

I think that the endangering the welfare of a child crime should have been discussed in that context seems to directly implicate it.

Unless the court has further questions on the parenting thing, I'll move on to the tax issue.

Well, the tax issue hasn't been preserved.

I mean, it was raised in the motion to reconsider, Your Honor.

Well, you may think it was, but my understanding is that it wasn't. How do you articulate its preservation?

I don't have the motion to reconsider in my file right now, but I think it was the last claim of error in that motion to reconsider pretty explicitly.

Go ahead and speak to it if you'd like.

Okay. Well, I think it's just outside of the realm of a state court in New Hampshire to allocate federal tax exemptions.

Federal income tax law is very much within an arena which is totally governed by the federal government.

In this case, the trial court saw fit to allocate one exemption, dependency exemption, to each parent.

Even though it's undisputed that the appellant Ms. Tercott had what is called under the Revenue Code,

she was a custodial parent, the parent who the children spent the majority of the time with.

How did that break down when you say the majority? How did the time break down as between the two?

Well, it's a little bit skewed in that there was an ex parte order at a time Ms. Tercott had full custody, full parenting rights.

But under the new parenting plan, it's four nights for her, three nights for Mr. Potter.

I think the preservation problem is that while you may have mentioned it in a motion to reconsideration, for reconsideration possibly,

the trial court was never alerted to the fact that the only way it could do this, consistent with federal law,

would be to get her to sign some kind of a written declaration that it was okay with her that it be done.

And so if the trial court doesn't know that it made a mistake, it can't correct it.

And therefore, how can we look at it in the first instance?

Well, our position isn't that the trial court should have had her sign something.

It's that the trial court can't have made her sign anything, can't have stripped her from that federal exemption.

Well, maybe not, maybe not, but she didn't sign anything.

Right.

But she didn't tell the trial court, you can't make me sign anything.

And if I don't sign something, you can't allocate the deductions this way, correct?

She never said that explicitly.

And if we consider from my memory, simply argues that she is entitled to both exemptions under federal law.

She might be.

But it's sort of like when you get to us, it's two or three steps removed.

Okay.

So in that case, I don't have to address the issue any further unless the court has any other questions.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Council.

Good afternoon.

My name is Jared O'Connor.

I'm with the firm of Shaheen and Gordon.

And I'm here representing Edwin Potter.

I'll take questions at any time.

Is there a preservation issue from your standpoint?

From my standpoint, no, the motion for reconsideration is located in the specific relief that you were talking about, chief, is at page 36.

So the issue was.

Isn't it correct, though, that as to the, no matter what we say, the IRS is going to give him the, her rather, the two deductions?

Actually, I don't think that's correct.

It's clear that federal law, Trump's state law, that's not the issue.

Right.

The issue is that the Internal Revenue Code requires this written declaration for a custodial parent to give their deduction.

Their deduction to the non-custodial parent.

Right.

So we don't have that here.

Right.

But the question is, what kind of written declaration counts?

The regulation goes on to state that a mere court order isn't enough.

It requires form 8332 or whatever IRS form is required.

But I think as the chief was alluding to, if the trial court orders that the custodial parent assign their dependency over to the non-custodial parent,

all that's required at that point is that they fill out the proper form, that they sign the proper form.

It's really no different under my view than a trial court that orders the parties to sell a marital home within 90 days.

It doesn't have to go further and say, you need to sign this form, that form, talk to all these various people.

Just, this is my order, go have it take effect.

And they need to file whatever forms they need to at that point.

But the regulation itself authorizes this kind, what was contemplated here.

But the act has not been completed, right?

That's correct.

But their position, as I understand it, is that the trial court has no authority to even order such a thing.

And my point is that they do have such authority.

The question at this point is that if she-

Was it implied or not? That's your position.

I'm sorry?

The question is, was the court's order implied?

I think, yes, I guess that's a fair way to put it.

That she take whatever action necessary.

To give effect to the court's order?

Exactly, exactly.

And your client's not taking a position on the merits of it?

That's correct.

In my motion, in my memo of law in response to their brief,

my client took no position one way or the other.

But I spent time looking at it for today just in case you had questions.

I think our research would indicate that there are cases that go both ways

in terms of the state courts having jurisdiction to order something,

order an allocation.

Is that, did you look into that at all?

It's not anything I looked into, I will tell you.

I did review the McDonald case that was cited, the 1982 case.

And I noted that McDonald found, as a matter of law,

that the trial court didn't have the authority to order this particular dependency benefit to shift.

But that's because the regulation it was construing at the time

was the same as the one we're dealing with here today.

But at the time, that was in 1982, the laws changed since.

And so the provision at issue in McDonald had to do with the dependency could only shift

under certain circumstances having to do with the amount of child support that was being paid.

That's not what's going on anymore.

Now if you look at the regulation, 1.152-4, if you look at that regulation now,

it doesn't address child support.

It's strictly a matter of custodial and non-custodial as defined as the amount of time the child has.

And so again, the idea here is that if the custodial parent has greater,

by definition has greater time, they still can assign the dependency benefit

to the other parent if they sign the right form.

Presumably on the grounds that the IRS doesn't want to look through

divorce decrees and parenting plans from all 50 states to page through

and find out who's the custodial parent, this is just a matter of notice to the IRS

that the parties are taking this position.

So that's our position.

If the court has no further questions about the parenting plan,

then I have nothing left to say.

Well, what do you say to your opponent's argument that, as I get it,

the court said that the plan it was ordering is in the best interest of Lennox.

Right.

He is the younger, but the court didn't do the analysis explicitly

that your opponent argues should have been done.

Right.

I guess I have a couple of things to say about that.

I will say that it was explicit.

The standard was called out explicitly for the older child.

Right.

You can see the statute cited.

And I will concede that the statute under the best interest test is not explicitly cited.

The court didn't say I'm analyzing this under A6.

I don't know that there is an explicit requirement anywhere in our case law

that the court do such a thing.

The statute says that the party or any party can ask that the trial court put its reasons in writing

for why it entered the parenting plan it entered.

But it doesn't say and it doesn't require that the trial court go through

and march down every single one of the 11 or 12 states for factors.

Did either side submit requests for findings and rulings?

Not the record doesn't appear to reflect that.

No.

But I will say that under the best interest test under A6 everything is relevant

and nothing is determinative.

The trial court is allowed to look at all these different factors

and they seem to be arguing that if there is for example a criminal conviction

under or for a particular crime that therefore as a per se matter

the other party will get primary parenting.

I don't know that they've said that explicitly

but that's the kind of argument that they're making.

And I think in response to that my point is that the trial court is allowed to look at all the factors

to figure out what's in the child's best interest and the two children in this case.

And what it concluded was given the existing parenting plan it was working with

and that as you pointed out the parties agreed would govern the two kids going forward.

The initial.

Is that your interpretation of the agreement that the same residential responsibility hours would apply to both.

I don't know that I can be that specific.

I know that the representation was made that the parties agreed that there would be one parenting plan

whether it was one schedule.

I don't know that I can be that specific about it.

But I do think it wouldn't make sense to have varying schedules for the two different children.

And in fact one of the things that I was impressed by the court's order is that

it makes sure that the two brothers are with each other at all times.

They shuttle back and forth between the various families

and are exposed to both families and the extended families

because you remember this is a young couple.

They both at least at the time of the hearing were still living at home

with their own respective parents.

So the grandparents are involved on both sides.

Both both families in this case are involved in the children's lives.

And the ultimate conclusion the trial court came to

was to try to keep that as stable as possible for the two kids.

So I think it's an entirely reasonable order and shouldn't be disturbed.

Thank you.

Had you reserved Mr. Peter a minute.

Do you need it?

Okay thank you.

Case submitted.

Council may come forward.
