This is case 2016-0201, State of New Hampshire versus John J. Cochran.

Council? Chief Justice, members of the court, my name is Harry Starbranch. I represent Mr.

Cochran of the Appellant in this matter. The defendant or the Appellant in this matter

preserves his state constitutional due process claim for your review. He did

this because he raised his claim with the trial court. Further, he specifically

invoked the provision of the New Hampshire Constitution in which he relied. He raised

this issue in the trial court when he filed a motion to vacate his condition.

Mr. Cochran, it seems to me one issue that you have not really touched on is

you're assuming that Boykin and all the constitutional provisions that go with

it apply here. But why is that true? In Arsenal, we specifically said because

nobody was claiming otherwise, we would assume that they did. But isn't that, you

know, why should those apply here? We have a situation I think under our rules

now that many of the violation level offenses are done by mail. I mean, if

we were to now apply the Boykin rationale to all of those, it seems to me we'd

be in a world of hurt, wouldn't we? I don't believe it would be. I think

that it's traditional at least in our jurisdiction to look to the federal

rule and the federal authority for guidance. We have our state constitution

offers more protections when there's a question than the federal

constitution does. Relative to the new rules, it appears to me that the new

rules really codify what essentially is the Boykin colloquy. It does exclude

plead-by-mails and I understand that this court has not addressed the issue of

whether or not violations are allowed the same protections under a colloquy

or under trial rights which must be waived, understood and waived prior to...

Why should they be? Violations aren't crimes. No, they're not. And so why would

criminal rights attach to things that are not crimes? Sometimes violations are

enhanced upon those conditions being entered. Sometimes they impact some

things of potential for incarceration or liberty interest. Sometimes they

affect something not quite so serious but arguably still an interest

relative to a habitual offender law. Where would we ever draw the

line? Especially in a state like this where you get points for various

misdeeds with an automobile and there's various consequences including state

prison if you're really bad enough. Where would we draw the line? The way

you would draw the line, in our opinion, would be major violations versus

minor violations. I would agree with you that your basic speeding ticket ought

not to be the subject of any kind of colloquy, Boykin or other

one. How do we know what's a major violation and what's a minor

violation? Well, it's in the statute. It's defined by statute. Major violations

are driving on intoxicated, con-adapted accident which is before the court

now, disobeying a police officer, operating out the suspension. Those

are statutorily major violations when you assess somebody for being a

habitual offender, which as the court has pointed out has very serious

repercussions. Can result in imprisonment, can result in extending

the loss of license, which is not a right, but still something ought to be

considered when you draw the line as to when someone should get a colloquy or

have trial rights and when you can do this by mail. What do we do about the

fact that you did not brief this issue? You just assumed that the rights

would attach, but we haven't ever said that they do. I understand that.

I think, if I was remiss in briefing the issue, I understand what the

court is coming from. I don't know that the court has ever reached this

particular issue. We do. We haven't. Arsenal, there's a 3GX case, Percy,

Arsenal, that does correct. I don't know that it's necessarily incumbent upon

me to address an issue that is not on the horizon quite yet. Well, that's

what you're asking us to do. Well, I disagree because in this case the

rules of criminal procedure are relatively new. I don't know that it's...

Well, I guess what reason did you have to believe that the state would say,

oh, we agreed in Arsenal, so that's going to be our position going forward.

Wouldn't it be reasonable for you to assume maybe the state is going to

say after the Arsenal decision, maybe we shouldn't do that again? Wouldn't

that be reasonable for you or anticipate they might do that?

I don't think it would. I'm not sure you can anticipate the state's every

argument and where the state has repeatedly not raised this issue.

Well, in fact, the state didn't raise it below, did they? They didn't

raise this issue, say, oh no, those rights don't attach, and the trial

court assumed they attached. That's correct.

Everybody assumed they attached. Everybody assumed they attached.

So you kind of won that issue. The court applied that standard and moved

forward. And I would prefer to believe that, to be

honest with you. Not only did it appear that way, but the

colloquial involved the Class B acknowledgment and waiver of

rights. The court, when it did a colloquial with the defendant,

said you have these rights, these rights attached to you.

Even though you are putting to a violation, these rights are now

more than you normally would get. And it would appear that, or in my

opinion, to tell a defendant that on the one hand what would give you

these rights, even though maybe you don't deserve all of them or are

entitled all of them, and then on the other hand take those

rights away and say, well, we've changed our mind about that.

We're not going to give you these rights. I think that the

boy can call Korea as it exists in the acknowledgment waiver of

rights, the rule 11 rights that are enumerated. I think

they attach to this case. Going forward, perhaps this will be an

issue. But in this particular case where he was explicitly

told you have these rights and now I'm going to go through them with you,

I don't believe you can take them away at this point, or you shouldn't take them away at this point.

I think the rule of this case ought to be whatever

there are personal issues develop, however they develop.

No, but I guess the problem is, Mr. Trevins, you're saying that there's something

more. I mean, nobody's, you're not contesting, if I

understand correctly, that the form that was signed was

signed and you're not saying that there was something wrong with the form.

You're saying that when the court and engage in a colloquy

with your client, the colloquy didn't

live up to the boy can standard. Isn't that correct? That is correct. That's what I'm saying.

Okay, so I mean it's not a question of

sort of the rights in the form. Nobody's suggesting that

it would be okay to say

whatever is said in those forms doesn't really

matter, but you're saying that it had to go beyond that.

No, I'm not saying, what I'm saying is first of those rights attached

for no other reason than he was told they attached. And fairness would suggest

at this point that they do attach. And I'm saying once they've attached, they have to be done

incorrectly. And the problem with this case

in my opinion is largely the trial course interpretation of the record.

We must have a transcript that will show

us exactly what the trial judge told your client. You do.

You do. Is it accurate that the state mailed the defendant

an offer letter in late July and that notified him of the financial

outcome he would face and that even that would be in his CDL license?

Is that accurate? There was a letter that was, I don't believe it was made

in exhibit, but there was a letter that was known as an offer letter. The offer letter

and I think the part of the salient issue was it said something to the

tune of we will reduce this to a violation. And I think the

states argued that well, this is why this is a violation. This is

why the rule 11 doesn't apply. But my suggestion that is

if that is the case, rather than send an offer letter saying come to court

we'll negotiate then and then we'll reduce it. What

the state could have done and should have done was send an appeal by mail complaint

so the person doesn't have to appear. This complaint as it

stood even after the plea letter was a must appear. It was a must

appear, which is why rule 11 ought to apply. Let me ask you this question.

I understand that there are a number of places in the transcript

where a question is asked and the

transcript indicates inaudible or something like that. That's correct.

But for us to accept your

sort of theory that this shows your client didn't

waive his rights, don't we have to assume that the trial

court was prepared to kind of

that even though the transcript sort of says inaudible

that the trial court didn't hear your client and was willing to

just proceed over that. As opposed to wouldn't it be more reasonable

this was an experienced trial judge to say that if

the trial judge really didn't hear your client make a response

the trial court would have said something more. And that what the transcript

really reflects where the trial court is not

sort of saying I'm sorry I didn't hear you or did you understand what I said

that that means the trial court did understand what your client said.

I don't think you can make that assumption. I think the record has to be clear.

You can't assume because this is just your court when things move rather

rapidly. I understand that your honor is an experienced superior court

justice. Things are a little different.

Does that mean that if let's assume that the recorder

wasn't working, unbeknownst to anybody, the recorder wasn't working

does that mean that that's too bad

those pleas are just open for

subject to being vacated because the recorder didn't work?

It could be. I'm not sure that that's something I'm prepared to say today. The reason why

this case is a little different is that there was a legitimate

issue of fact on an element that was demonstrated. It was

something that the court had an opportunity to correct. The record does show that

the court did have the opportunity to correct this error when

the court was filed when the court reviewed the audio.

The court actually reviewed the audio a number of times.

The defense counsel also reviewed the audio and set the record at the motion hearing

that he could make the audio out. That's more in line with what

the court is suggesting but where you have that dichotomy, I think that

it has to fall in favor of the defendant. I don't think there can be a finding.

I guess what I'm saying is that you're saying that we should

find basically on a

sort of, you know, not complete record

or a record that maybe doesn't reflect

perfect responses. We should

find that the court was willing to sort of allow

that to happen as opposed to, I mean, wouldn't that be pretty unusual

that the court, for us to sort of assume while the trial judge must have

been asleep at the switch today as opposed to

another inference that, you know, maybe the transcript

wasn't exactly pristine but the trial, we

presume that the trial judge did what trial judges are supposed to do.

It's actually a little worse than that because it wasn't just that the audio recording wasn't

pristine as the court says. The original transcript also had problems.

There had to be an errata sheet that was issued at the state's motion.

I think where there are

these gaps, one possible solution to this would be

to remand it back to the trial court for further hearing on the motion with the corrected

transcript. Let me just ask you, are you referring to gaps in the briefing?

Are we talking about the inaudible portions

that Justice Lin was just alluding to or is there something

more that's referred to as a gap? There's something more. The court makes

a specific finding that an offer of proof was waived.

That's clear on the original transcript and the corrected transcript.

The question of the court was, do you want to hear the facts of the case

or do you waive an offer of proof? It was either or.

The defendant answered, yes. That does not constitute

a waiver. If you wanted to speculate, which you shouldn't,

I'd like to point out that the first part of the question was in English and the second part

was the term of art. The first part of the question was do you want to hear the facts?

The record shows that this is an unsophisticated defendant. Clearly he speaks

English, however, and do you want to hear the facts? It's something he likely understood.

But when you go on to say you want to hear the facts or waive an

offer of proof, waiving an offer of proof is the term of art. If you had to guess

one he was saying yes to, it would have been I want to hear the facts. What difference was the absence

of, well, what difference does the absence of an offer of proof make here?

Doesn't make anything less voluntary, does it, or knowing? Well,

as a matter of fact, when he's asked if this is his voluntary act, he doesn't answer that either

or there's an inaudible response. The difference that makes is that throughout this hearing

and the notice that framed it, there was a

issue of material fact on an element. That's what the difference was.

Hearing an offer of proof would give the defendant an opportunity to say, I disagree with

that. In fact, he tries to a couple of times. But didn't he say

at one point acknowledged that there was damage? He said it was

minimal, but he acknowledged that there was damage. Then he goes on to say

in the motion hearing that it was to his vehicle and it was minimal damage.

Then he goes on to say, and by the way I stopped and talked to her and we agreed it was fine.

So there was, from the beginning,

from the motion hearing at least, and from the filing of the motion to vacate,

there was outline for the Courts Court to review

that issue of material fact. In the plea colloquy

the reference is damage, but it doesn't say to which vehicle. Is that right?

Well, it doesn't. Not in the plea colloquy, only in the motion

to vacate that comes up. Also, as far as

the colloquy goes, the court actually

seems to suggest at some point that he doesn't need

there doesn't need to be an accident necessarily. He can plead no role

and issue the question, litigate the issue of damages

at a later time, which is more confusing, doesn't

really solve anything. I understand that the court was probably trying to help the defendant

out with a civil lawsuit, but it really had the effect of making things more confused.

So that's why a colloquy was indispensable in this case because of

all the questions that were existing, because of the dispute as to whether or not there was

damage in whose vehicle it was to. Your time is up, counsel.

Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.

Good morning. May it please the court. As soon as it begins on behalf of the

State of New Hampshire, I'd be happy to take questions at any time.

When I ask you this, how is an unrepresented litigant

supposed to know what a waiver of an offer of proof is?

I don't know. I represented, I watched a lot of people pleading

court and the days I was a public defender and the court always

uses the word wave offer of proof and I don't remember

defendants ever asking a question about it. I mean

I get that it was a compound question. It wasn't a great question.

But right after that happened, the court asked the defendant if he had any questions.

The state didn't make an offer of proof. Asked the defendant if

he had any questions and he said no. And I

got to get to the part of preservation. The defendant says he

deserved a constitutional argument. I totally disagree.

In his motion to vacate his conviction, he said

my plea wasn't knowing voluntary intelligence, C-case. Never mentioned

a constitutional provision at all. Not federal, not state,

not otherwise. And the defendant says

that it was a must appear crime. So rule 11A3

applies, but that is not true. Under rule 11A3, it has to be a

must appear offense. For a misdemeanor of

violation, a must appear, excuse me, it has to be

a misdemeanor. It must appear misdemeanor

and there must be a possibility of jail time at that

time or upon a subsequent conviction. At the time the defendant

pled here, the crime had already been

reduced to a violation level offense that carried

absolutely no possibility of jail time at that time or upon

a subsequent conviction. Now the defendant argues about

habitual offender consequences, but he also says you can draw the line

at you don't need a plea colloquy for a speeding ticket. Well, quite frankly

you get 12 speeding tickets, you can be deemed habitual offender

if you've gotten them within a certain amount of time. So habitual offender

consequences can't be the line. The federal constitution

has drawn the line at jail time of six months or more.

You only get a formal plea colloquy

and those constitutional rights if there's a possibility of

significant jail time. Do I understand correctly the state did not make an argument

below that no Boykin rights attached, right?

The only arguments the state made below was that the motion

was unfounded and that he got this plea letter.

Right, frankly, I've got to admit that's the only arguments the state

actually made. So the trial court never got a chance to consider

the question that is before us as to whether or not the

constitutional rights attach in this type of situation, right?

They never had any specific discussions about this. The defendant says

the defendant was, that he was, the court told him he had these rights.

The court I don't believe ever said you're entitled to a knowing intelligent and voluntary

plea. What the court did was interrupted him and said have you listened to my plea

colloquy? And then the court made a statement toward the end of the hearing

on the motion to vacate where the court said you know I don't have to do

these kind of plea colloquies in these cases. I can actually do

a general advisement of everyone in the courtroom. Which sounds more like

you're not entitled to this level of protection, you're entitled

to a lesser level of protection. But none of these arguments were ever

fleshed out in the trial court. I will give you that. What if we were

to agree with the defendant though that this issue is somehow

preserved? Where does that leave us? If it's preserved I think

you can find that there was a sufficient plea colloquy in this case.

Now I give you an arsenal, you talked about someone

reading the complaint to a defendant. Now I've got to admit in my arsenal I was asking

you to infer that the defendant had been provided with a complaint

at some point in time. In this case we know the defendant got a

complaint. It was served in hand, there's a complaint in the record

and that plea offer letter was in fact admitted as an exhibit

at the hearing. But I'm bothered as I believe my colleagues

are by the possibility that we might be deciding an important

constitutional issue. That is

do these protections apply to violations on the strength

of no briefing when there would be implications

one way or the other for a whole lot of people? Well quite frankly I did

brief the issue of whether the constitutional protections apply. State did

but the defendant didn't. The defendant could have. The defendant

is the person who's asking us to do something that he didn't brief. Yes

and he could have filed a reply brief and he failed to do so. So he had

an opportunity to brief the issue. And I don't think it's really a question

because even your own, the court's own rules

state that those procedural protections, the constitutional protections

only apply if there is a possibility of jail time

now or upon a subsequent conviction. But if the constitutional

right attaches our rule falls to the constitution, right?

It does. If they're both, quite frankly

your rule is more protective than the constitutional provisions

because the U.S. Supreme Court and other courts have held that those

rights only apply if you're actually being incarcerated.

But we haven't addressed this particular issue as to whether

or not the rights attach, for example, under the New Hampshire Constitution

under this situation, right? No, but your commentary

at the end, the court's commentary at the end of rule 11

suggests it only applies. The constitutional rights only

apply if there's a possibility of jail time. And that might be

the answer ultimately from this court but we haven't specifically addressed

that. You have not addressed it and quite frankly until the opinion in Arsenault

came out I had never considered whether those constitutional protections

applied in other circumstances. And in Arsenault we

identified the fact that we weren't deciding that issue. Yes, and so the

issue was out there. And so although the state didn't

actually address it below, the state did say he got a plea offer

letter, which seems to suggest that that was enough

that would have advised him. And quite frankly this whole issue

he never argued in the trial court that he didn't understand the

elements of, that he didn't know the elements of the offense.

He argued that he didn't, that he didn't

understand there had to be an accident. But it's entirely clear from the plea

publicly that he did in fact understand that there had to be an accident. The court said

there was an accident, therefore you should plead

no lo. But would you agree that it's not clear that he knew there had to be

damage to the other person's vehicle as opposed to his vehicle?

I disagree. What the court said to him is

the reason you should plead no lo is because there was an accident and

there was damage because the court asked if there was damage

and based on the wording of it she says

you should plead no lo because you can later contest that you caused the damage

or said that you're not agreeing

you did, you're not agreeing to say

I did $35,000 worth of damage to

your car. When she says your car she uses the word I and then

your so it's clear that the court is talking about damage to the other

person's car. And quite frankly under the statute it's

you have an obligation, it's called conduct after an accident.

If you're charged with conduct after an accident I don't know

how you could possibly not understand that there had to be an

accident. And the complaint he got alleged damage to the other

vehicle. So I

totally disagree. I think if you read the transcript in context it's absolutely clear

that he understood. And it's also absolutely clear from the hearing

the later hearing that there was in fact damage to the other woman's

car. What's the evidence in the record of that?

The state made an offer of proof at the hearing and said

that the police report that the woman had reported that there was damage to the

trailer hitch on her van. That the police report said

there was damage to the trailer hitch on her van. That a bolo was

issued for the defendant's car because he had left the scene without providing

the information. And that

the police then arrested him as he was pulling, stopped him

as he was pulling into his home. So there is evidence in the subsequent

hearing that there was in fact damage to her car.

And I believe if you read everything together it's clear the defendant

understood what he was being charged with. His main issue when he went back

to take his plea back was that he now lost his CDL license for

being convicted. Which is not a basis to overturn

his plea. But that was his main issue and then the other issues were

thrown in. But that was his, the defense

himself said that that was the main issue. That his CDL license had been

revoked. And he didn't know that but that is a collateral consequence that this court

has said he did not have to be advised of. Can you clarify for me in the record

is it clear that he was apprised and knowledgeable of the elements

that the state would have to prove?

There was a discussion of accident and damage.

The court asked, you know, you should plead no lo you were in an accident.

Then the court said, oh no, the court said

asked him what he was pleading.

He said guilty. The court said was there damage?

The state answered yes. Then the court said to the defendant

you should plead no lo because you were in an accident

and then there was this discussion of damage.

And the fact that he could later contest that he was at fault for the accident

or that he, he was at

fault for the damage. In other words liability for the

damage. Whether she was at, the other person was at fault or he was at fault.

Does the term accident necessarily mean damage to both vehicles?

The term accident is defined in the

conduct after an accident statute and in the statute that defines

accident. It just requires damage to one of the vehicles.

So it could have been damage to his vehicle and contact with her vehicle.

Yes, it could but it's clear from the context of the plea discussions that the

court and the court was discussing damage to the

other vehicle. She says you're not saying I accept

response, I damaged your car to the tune of $35,000.

Your car, who's your?

She said that he would not be saying, like I wouldn't be saying

I not agreeing I caused $35,000

damage to your car. That was quite a trailer hitch.

No, the court was exaggerating with the $35,000

but it's clear from the record that there was in fact damage to the woman's car.

So if you read it in context it's clear that the defendant understood

and when he said but it just seemed

so minimal he was talking about the damage to the woman's

van, which is the only damage alleged in the complaint.

If there are no further questions. Thank you. Submitted.

Okay, submitted. The court will take a brief recess.

Thank you.
