This is case 2016-0621 in the matter of Gregory Husband and Ellen Husband.

May it please the court?

I'm Attorney Charles Russell of Concord.

I represent the appellant Greg Husband.

This case goes to the integrity of the judicial system with the false affidavits.

I cite the Casanova case in my brief.

The court, after granting requests that 4-6-11-13 indicated that found there were undisclosed

business interest assets and income and accounts in this case.

And yet the court went on to find this action was patently unreasonable and awarded attorney's fees.

We feel they used the wrong standard and the finding is contrary to the.

Can you clarify whether your client reported or did not report the retirement account on his financial affidavit?

I believe that has been raised.

I can't answer that at this point.

The affidavit would speak for itself.

However, it's the issue before the court is the failure to disclose of the appellant respondent of multiple things in the court.

Right. Her eBay activity.

Well, yeah, accounts, other bank accounts, and everything else.

And so basically the court in finding it was patently unreasonable.

The finding of award of attorney's fees was contrary to those findings.

That the court does a statute that says if somebody files a false affidavit you have a civil action.

So the attorney's fees was inconsistent.

The second point is there was no duty the court after making the findings held.

They couldn't reopen the case because my client had not conducted discovery.

There's no duty to conduct discovery.

I went through this in my motion to reconsider and end the brief that appears in pages 19 to 26.

The appendix, the shaft master case, Rodenberg, Larry, some of the out of state cases, the Billings Lee case.

And then that has been further amplified when they came forward with the court rules in mid-2005.

That time frame where the family court rules were put in and the system changed over.

And there's family court rules 216, 125A, mandatory disclosure.

But shaft master said there is no duty for a litigant in a marital case to go dig out what in fact the other side of the system.

Isn't your fundamental problem here that the court says that he finds that the petitioner was aware that the respondent conducted trading activities on eBay?

Well, both shaft master and the Billings Lee case indicate, shaft master in the mid-90s,

indicators there's no duty to conduct discovery, page 467.

But what if he was aware, though?

What if he knew?

Well, at this point, if there's false affidavits and you know somebody's lying,

is it your duty to go ask them again and expect them to tell the truth the second time when you catch them in the law?

Here didn't they have the evidence in the joint accounts?

There weren't hidden accounts.

It's just the deposits weren't identified to your client's satisfaction.

There were hidden accounts, Your Honor.

The PayPal account was never disclosed.

I conjecture, I don't, sorry.

PayPal accounts don't hold assets.

They're a transaction.

It's a bank account that can be drawn upon, Your Honor.

That's my understanding.

Okay.

It's a bank account and we could have gotten records from what the PayPal accounts

should have been disclosed.

It was an ongoing business.

It certainly wasn't a hobby whether we're going to play semantics.

It was generating income.

The IRS certainly wanted to tax some accounts when it came in and certainly it was a joint asset that should have been considered maritably.

But to the extent, I conjecture, Your Honor, I don't know what my wife's credit card balances are and

I would suggest quite a few spouses don't know everything about their other spouse.

The duty is to disclose.

The duty is not to catch someone in a lie and then go back and ask them to tell the truth the second time.

That's basically what's going on.

And then right at the very end on the 20B at page 9 and 10 of the decree,

it says the parties agree, acknowledge during the pendency of the action each party has fully disclosed it.

Every kind, every asset, each party has relied upon it.

So in addition to checking, I've made full disclosure, not disclosing everything on the assets.

And then with rules that basically answer all sorts of questions,

they appear in the reply brief page, I'm sorry, the pages.

But you have questions.

What if I don't know what the value is?

What if I don't have the record, file an affidavit on availability?

This is a college graduate that's not making the disclosure and they're going to say, she did the best she could.

Well, the rules are there and the rules need to be followed.

Things weren't disclosed.

It's kind of victimizing the victim, it is.

You knew better she was lying to you.

Shame on you for not doing anything.

I don't believe that's how the judicial system works.

It's like throwing sand in the eyes of a judge or the other side when you don't make those disclosures.

And it goes to the whole integrity of the system.

What about the trial court's observation that essentially these numbers are pretty small in the context of this whole settlement?

Well, we don't know if they are.

And I recall Professor Vile saying a peppercorn of consideration is enough for consideration for a contract.

I would suggest the numbers are not there.

The fact is they were not disclosed and we don't know what those numbers are.

They weren't disclosed and you can't divide.

Well, but the court says the total activities for the year were approximately $400 to $500 a month.

So don't we know that?

Isn't that a fine name?

I'm not sure that's true or not, Your Honor.

If they're not disclosing records for us to verify that, when somebody doesn't disclose things, I'm from Missouri.

Show me, prove it.

Give me those records.

But the records were in front of the court at this time, weren't they?

I believe that is testimony from the respondent.

Those records weren't there.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Patrick Sheehan representing the appellee, Ellen Hurst.

Mr. Sheehan, can you address that last point?

What was before the court in terms of the numbers and support for the trial court's finding?

The court had all the information available because this trial occurred three years after the divorce.

The hearing that has been appealed and there was considerable discovery of all the activity in the years prior to the divorce and after the divorce.

So all the information was available to the court.

And the reality is, in order to overturn a greed upon divorce agreement,

you have to show, if you're going to allege fraud or misrepresentation, you have to show that there was a material misrepresentation.

And in all the hyperbole, in the briefs, and in the oral argument,

there has been nothing material that they have ever proven that my client failed to disclose.

The PayPal account on the date of the temporary hearing had $90 in it, and on the date of the final degree had zero in it.

And that information was available to them and presented to the court.

And do I read this correctly that both parties had access to the bank account statements where the flow of the money was reflected?

Absolutely, it was a joint account up until the date of somewhere between the temporary hearing and the final hearing.

They did segregate their accounts.

But all the activity during the marriage that they allege she participated in as quoted business,

that was all part of a joint account where any money coming in or going out was readily seen and

disclosed pursuant to rule 1.25a prior to the temporary hearing.

So both parties had access to that information?

Absolutely.

And another point I would like to make to respond to one of the allegations that has been made is there's an allegation that there's

some inconsistency in the court's order because of request for finding a fact.

The request for finding a fact 4 through 6 simply stated that the respondent failed to disclose any business

interest as an asset on her September 5, 2012 sworn financial affidavit.

The court didn't make a finding that she had a business.

The request that was made of the court, which is granted, is that she did not disclose a business.

So when opposing counsel says the court found that she didn't disclose her business,

the court never made a finding that she actually had a quote business.

The allegation at the temporary hearing was that this was a hobby.

And if you look down in the other request for finding as a fact.

Give me a number, please.

Number nine, they asked the court to make a finding that the response activities and

buying and selling items on eBay do not qualify as a hobby under IRS regulations.

That request was denied.

So the court never actually made a finding that there was any business here.

So when the court made a finding that she didn't list a business,

the court wasn't making a finding that she did anything fraudulent in her disclosures to the court.

Did the parties file joint tax return?

Absolutely.

Was that part of the record?

Absolutely, and they never filed any of this as business income.

There's never been any amended tax returns since this information came to light.

All of this information was ready available and known to Mr.

Husband during the course of the divorce.

And in fact, he brought in witnesses at this hearing to

testify that everybody saw these boxes of items that she had purchased laying around the house everywhere.

So he's not even disputing the fact that he knew all about it as of the date of the hearing.

Was there a missing retirement account?

There was a missing retirement account on one of the financial affidavits.

His or hers?

It was on his, I think it might have been the one that was at the temporary hearing.

And there were also guns that were he owned that weren't listed on his financial affidavit.

And he testified at the hearing that he didn't include them because he didn't consider them to be a financial thing.

The reality is that people submit financial affidavits all the time.

Often they are not perfect.

People don't list, when people get divorced they have all kinds of junk at the house.

They don't itemize every piece of property that they have.

The requirement is to disclose anything that's material and that was done here.

And if somebody-

And there was one disclosure on your clients, one of her affidavits that mentioned an eBay sale.

Absolutely, at the temporary hearing there was an allegation made that she was earning income from eBay.

So they knew about it because they made the allegation in their offer of proof.

And his lawyer referred to it as a hobby.

My client's lawyer, Attorney Ronald Wise, got up and said, yes, we've listed on the financial affidavit.

And it's on the financial affidavit that they've included in their appendix.

I made $500 last month on eBay.

Six months later, at the date of the final decree, she didn't list in income because she hadn't earned any in the last six months.

Mr. Sheehan, was the fee award quantified?

Was there an amount?

We have an order that says the fees are awarded.

Were those quantified?

You know, yes, they were, and I don't have that number.

I don't know that I have that number.

That was never objected to.

There was never any number objected to, they didn't find objection to the reasonableness of the fees, just the fact that they were awarded.

Thank you, council.

Okay, submitted.
