This is case 2016 0668, Public Service Company of New Hampshire, versus Town of Bow.

Mr. Fitzgerald.

Thank you.

Good morning, Justices.

My name is Paul Fitzgerald from the Westgate Law Firm in Laconia, and I represent the

appellant the town of Bow before you today.

While I do have several points I'd like to make, I will take your questions at any time throughout

the argument period.

The first major point that I'd like to bring to your attention as outlined in our brief

and other pleadings is the fact that if the decision of the lower court stands in

this particular matter, it will be almost a watershed moment in terms of tax abatement

of cases involving utilities in the state of New Hampshire, because the concept of net

book, which was utilized by the expert and the company in this particular matter to advance

their case at the trial court level, has been disregarded by this court and held in

this.

But we've never said, we have never said that there's something that you can't

use it.

We've always, it's always been as a factual matter.

In other words, we've always said that the trial court or the BTLA or whatever didn't

end up selecting that methodology, and we said they didn't have to, but we've never

said that there would be something wrong with them doing that.

That's correct, Justice Linn.

I agree with you there.

But if you look at the cases that are cited in our brief, and we can review them

if the court would like, if you look at those particular cases, this court and BTLA and the

lower courts have over and over and over found the other methodologies used by other opponents

to PSNH and the town of Bow in the past to be of a higher quality of evidence, to be

more acceptable in terms of reaching the fair result.

Well, wasn't that most of those, I mean, particularly like, for example, the recent

cases that we had, wasn't that mostly basically the court, we said the trial, the fact finder

made a credibility determination that he thought that this was, these witnesses and their opinions

were more credible than the other sides, and we said, you know, there was evidence in

the record to support that.

But in making that analysis, the lower courts also found on several occasions that part

of the reason that the decision was made with regard to which expert was going to be chosen

to be given a greater weight was the fact that net book did not hold up as well as the

other methods of valuation in these particular cases, meaning utility cases.

Well, not, not holding up as well isn't the same thing as saying should be forever

barred, right?

That's correct.

And I'm not suggesting that it would be barred in each and every case.

And as the, I think both parties in this case quoted, I think, down below and in their

briefs, it's a judgment call.

And that judgment call, as we say in our brief, falls to the trial judge in most cases.

But in this particular case, we believe that the evidence that was put before the trial

court and is now available to you for review weighs heavily in favor of Mr.

Sian-Susi's review and conclusions that discount the net book value concept as opposed to Mr.

Kelly's model, which depended rather heavily upon it, Justice.

But we're supposed to give deference to the fact finder's conclusions about which

expert to select, right?

That's correct.

So how do we get behind that?

I'm sorry?

How do we get behind that?

I think that you get behind that a couple of different ways.

And some of them I'll address in a few moments if this time left, but the main

factor, or not the main factor, but one of the telling factors here is if you

review the transcript, which is detailed, and the trial went on for, I

believe, five and a half days, and you compare the expert reports presented

by Mr. Sian-Susi and Mr. Kelly, I think that the differentiation and

the quality of the information presented weighs heavily in favor of Mr.

Sian-Susi.

And when the trial judge does, as he did in this particular case, and I

don't describe any motive to this, but in this particular case, he found in

favor of Mr. Kelly and against Mr. Sian-Susi on each and every point over

the course of a five and a half day trial and going through reports that

are in literally thousands of pages that are at this point available to

you.

When that occurs, I think it gives pause as to exactly why those

conclusions were reached and how they came into being, and whether

it's rational simply to say, or even if it's a common sense approach, to

say that in each and every instance, on each and every fact that was

contested almost, and certainly on each and every conclusion that had

value in reaching the ultimate conclusion in this particular case by

Justice McNair, he found in favor of Mr. Kelly.

But isn't, I mean, I guess I'm not clear, what, I mean, what are you

saying we should do?

We should say that if a fact finder finds all the facts going one way

and none going the other, that somehow we should be, you know, sort of

extra vigilant of that or suspicious of that in some way?

I mean, not in isolation, Justice Lin, but if you find that that's

the case, and that's one of the first things that gave me pause that I

read through Justice McNair is rather link the order in this

particular case, which one would expect in a case of this

nature, but you take that particular fact and then you

look at what he had in front of him to analyze and review, I

think you come to the conclusion that it was, it's

simply inescapable that it lacks common sense, as I said, and

given the material, if one goes, takes the time to actually go

through the San Susy reports, the qualifications of the man

is commented on favorably by prior courts, as cited in our

brief, one simply cannot come to the conclusion, at least I

don't believe you can come to the conclusion that he

could have been wrong each and every time.

So in other words, you, isn't it the standard we would

have to say that no, in order to reflip Justice McNamara, wouldn't

we have to say that no rational fact finder could come to the

conclusions that he came to based on the evidence.

And that, that seems to me to be pretty hard here given, given

the record and given Judge Matt what seems to be a pretty

reasoned decision by Judge McNamara.

It's a high bar, but we believe that the town meets it

in this particular case, Judge, but I don't disagree with

your analysis, that that's the appropriate law that has to be

applied in this case.

And if one of those facts, if you could point to one of those

facts that should have flipped the other way, then is

Judge McNamara having to sit as sort of the third or the

super appraiser to make adjustments?

I mean, how does he deal with that?

I think in this particular case, he needs to, if the case

was remanded for further proceedings, that what Justice

McNamara would have to do is he would have to look at the

San Susie evidence with fresh eyes.

He would have to look again and review Mr. Kelly's

evidence, obviously, but there would be some direction from

this court at that point that perhaps the initial review

and conclusion was incorrect and required a review of it.

10 of 30 points that you think would fall on the

other side, what's the net effect of that, I guess?

When you talk about every single point was found in favor of

Mr. Kelly, so let's say take five of those away, then what?

What's the, is the judge to adopt the full report or does he

make adjustments?

I think that if that kind of a review were to occur, what

I referred to as the fresh eyes, if you will, if that

type of a review were to occur, then yeah, there would be,

yes, there would be an adjustment of the final conclusion

in terms of the values, because different factors would have

gone into the final conclusion of Judge McNamara or whoever

makes the final determination at this point.

So I do believe that there would be a different outcome

on that, if that answers your question.

As indicated, the issue of net value has been

previously litigated, it has not found favor at this level or

otherwise, and we believe that that also is a reason for it to

be discounted here.

It was used collectively by Mr. Kelly, as we point out in

our brief, he used it in some of the property, but not on

the other, found it very favorable to the company in

terms of the T and D property, transmission and

distribution property, but not so much in terms of the

actual Meramex station itself.

In concluding the argument with regard to net book, one of the

things that's important to keep in mind as you go forward or as

we go forward is that basically if net book is used, it does,

despite the company's argument, it allows property to

escape taxation either partially or in whole.

But it does in theory, but it wasn't, in fact, it asked

the trial whether here that was the case.

If one reads through, if one compares the conclusions of

Kelly and San Susie in connection with the

transmission and distribution property, Justice Bassett, then

I believe that that is the case.

It is the case that nothing is zero.

I'm sorry?

It is the case that nothing is reduced to a value of zero,

none of the T and D.

No, but the fact of the matter is it doesn't have to be

reduced to value to result in unfair taxation.

It doesn't have to be reduced to zero to result in

unfair taxation.

If it's significantly discounted whatsoever, then it

results in unfair taxation, but you're correct that in

theory it could go all the way down to zero.

It's not our contention that that occurred in this

particular case, but the use of net book and the

favorable acceptance of it by Justice McNamara did

indeed have a result in terms of the overall values applied

to the totality of the public service property.

In regard to the T and D property, one of the

arguments you make is that in fact there have been

sales in excess of net book value in one of the ones

that you identify as the ever sourced purchase of

Connecticut Valley Electric Company.

And the response is no, that's not right if you read

the order.

That's not what they did.

What's your response to that?

If I understand your, I'm not sure I understand your

question.

Well your question, in terms of the T and D property,

you say well in fact it often transfers above

net book value and you offer as an example this,

I think 2012 transaction.

Right.

And ever source comes back and says no, you're

misreading that.

That's not what happened.

What's your response?

Well I think the response and obviously that's one

point out of many and they read these reports that

are extensive.

The response is simply that if you look at the

San Susy report, he takes all of that into

consideration, still reaches that conclusion and in

fact also discuss that during the trial testimony

himself, if I remember correctly, that he went

over that sale and found it to be valid in spite

of Mr. Kelly's opinions to the contrary.

I see that the short time light is already on

so I'm going to move on very quickly.

Well Mr. Fischel, let me ask you a question

that concerns me about Judge McNamara's order

in several areas.

He appears to refer to data from post 2013.

He talks about temporary spikes that were not

seen after 2013.

In a couple of instances, the exception of the winter

of 2013-14 in terms of the combustion turbines

and that troubles me because you're supposed to be

looking at evaluation from the perspective of

2012 or 13.

So what happens after that doesn't really enter

into it.

Am I right?

That's one of the points that we make in our brief

is that a reading of particularly the early sections

of the McNamara opinion leads one to the conclusion

that he did take into account things such as market

factors that occurred after the dates evaluation

that was supposed to be used here.

We believe that that is an error that weighs in

favor of the town at this point and requires

both review and correction.

Let me ask you also another question about

the combustion turbines.

You and your opponents seem to have very different views

about how those are used and how efficient they are.

And you keep arguing in your brief that they're

not inefficient and they can be used

and they have an independent value

but they obviously disagree on the trial court did too.

That was one of the points that I wanted to make sure

I covered here and I think I probably

went down to seconds at this point

but the CTs are combustion turbines.

They're basically jet engines.

There are two of them.

They're used at peaking periods.

They're used in times of emergency

and as the trial testimony and the expert reports show

they have been used in recent years

including the years leading up to the valuation years.

The company receives revenue for them

in terms of capacity payments.

The company receives revenue from them when they run

and despite the fact that they are old

they are operable.

They do run.

They've run recently and they have contributed

to alleviating load during peak periods

particularly during the winter months

to value them at zero as Mr. Kelly does

in the exhibit C that was attached

to Judge McNamara's opinion.

If I remember right, yes I think

that's the right exhibit.

To value them at zero simply defies common sense.

I mean he has zero on that chart

which I have in front of me but isn't it really

the case that he's just wrapping

that value into the overall value of the plant?

He's not saying they're not worth anything.

He's just saying I think the better way

to value them is to look at the whole plant.

But if you also review the testimony of Mr. Kelly

which I'm sure you have a will

that he testifies basically that as you said

they're old, they're decrepit, they're about worn out.

Mr. San Susie finds very differently

and the fact that they have value in making money

again weighs in favor of the San Susie conclusion

as opposed to the Kelly conclusion.

Thank you.

Your time is up.

Oh, thank you justices.

Ms. Nelson.

Thank you.

Morning members of the court.

I'm Meg Nelson from Salloway and Hollis

and with my partner Derek Lick

I represent Ever Source.

Mr. Fitzgerald said it was a judgment call.

You've said in many cases dealing with tax appeals

that ultimately, particularly with respect

to utility property which we all recognize is complex,

judgment is the touchstone.

And we submit that Judge McNamara

properly exercise that judgment

and that you should accord the deference

that you have said on many times

you accord to the fact finder.

Did Judge McNamara consider post tax year events?

He, I wanna particularly address the issue

Judge Bassett raised regarding the data submitted

about the performance of the combustion turbines in 2013

and at the end of the winter of 2013 going into 2014.

That issue was specifically raised by the town

and we decided in the interest of addressing that issue

to everybody's satisfaction

to present some additional evidence on that

which the town did not object to.

In fact, they wanted it admitted.

What that evidence showed was that for that limited period

that winter, the combustion turbines ran slightly more

than they had normally been operating.

They normally operate 30 to 35 hours a year

because they are used as Mr. Fitzgerald said.

This was the winter of 13 and 14?

In the winter of 13, they ran for 87 hours out of the year.

So in our view, nothing in that data

changed the fundamental characteristics

of the combustion turbines which led Mr. Kelly

to conclude that they should be valued

as Judge Bassett indicated,

simply as part of Merrimack Station

with no independent value.

So other than that, it's ironic

that Attorney Fitzgerald raised the issue

of looking at data after the fact

because one of the major disputes

between the two experts on the valuation

of Merrimack Station was that Mr. San Susie

wanted to take into account what they call

forward capacity auctions that had occurred after the fact

and our expert, I think, properly took the position

that he should rely on data about those auctions

that was actually known by the marketplace

as of 2012 and 2013 and that was one of the many reasons

that there was a significant difference in value

between Mr. Kelly's appraisal

and Mr. San Susie's appraisal

and as you know, having looked

at all of the voluminous record in this case,

the trial court decided that Mr. Kelly's analysis

of all the valuation issues was far more credible

and persuasive.

Can you clarify, is there a revenue stream

attributable to the combustion turbines?

There is, isn't there?

Yes, and there was no dispute about that.

Mr. Kelly acknowledged and Judge McNamara

acknowledged in his order

that the combustion turbines were receiving

what they call capacity payments in 2012 and 2013.

Mr. Kelly was of the view

and we would submit the trial court

could properly accept that testimony

that no probable purchaser would expect

those capacity payments to continue into the future

given the age and condition.

They were there during the tax year

and they produced an income stream, correct?

That is correct and taking into account

that income stream, Mr. Kelly came to the conclusion

that the CTs, as they're called,

should be valued as part of the station,

which is how they've always been treated

for the last 50 years

that they've been sitting out there in Bow.

And I would note that the trial court

also had in this record the fact

that the PUC's own valuation consultants

who were advising them on the value

of PSNACI's generation,

the Liberty and LACAPRA reports,

which are in this record,

also came to the same conclusion

that there was no independent value for the CTs.

Was there any testimony

as to whether they could be sold separately,

whether they've been regarded

as part of the plan or not in the past

going forward in this new deregulated environment?

Could those CTs be sold separately?

There was testimony on that

and Mr. Kelly testified that in his view,

based on his 50 years of appraisal experience,

the CTs, such as the ones at Merrimack,

were usually always sold as part of the plant

that they were associated with.

Mr. Sinsusi took a different view of that,

but that's one of the competing views

that Judge McNamara had to review

and decide based on the record

which analysis he found more persuasive

and he accepted Mr. Kelly's view on that.

The enormous value of the scrubber turned out

to be not so enormous at the end of the day.

Was there a primary reason or a panoply of reasons?

Well, the reason, first off,

the scrubber costs what the scrubber cost.

It cost $422 million, so that didn't change.

What changed was a seismic market shift

between the time that the company decided

that it would comply with the legislative mandate

to install the scrubber rather than closing the plant,

a decision which it had made based on

an analysis of the market evidence back in 2009

when it made that decision,

but following that, there were major changes

in the energy market.

What the PUC's consultant, the Liberty Group,

described as a seismic market shift

because of the rise of fracking technology

which led to substantially more natural gas resources

becoming available and fundamentally altering

the marketplace.

So I had the opportunity to review the entire record yet,

but I'm guessing that a few years ago,

the scrubber played a bigger part

in the valuation of the bow station

and therefore the town could get more taxes from it.

That's not correct, Your Honor,

because the scrubber is pollution control equipment,

and so it is tax exempt under RSA 7212.

Completely exempt?

It's completely exempt, so what the scrubber does

is it allows the station to operate

so that the other portions of the,

the taxable portion of the property

can have some value and can be assessed.

I mean, what the town is arguing

is not that it should be,

the pollution control equipment should be valued,

but how odd that they would spend $433 million

investing in a plant that's worth $5 million?

And as Mr. Fitzgerald well knows,

that money, and as I just indicated,

and there was extensive testimony about this

at the trial from both Mr. Kelly

and from Mr. Smigula,

who was the company's vice president of Generation,

that decision to invest in the scrubber

has to be put in the context of the time

in which it was made,

and the events that led to the fundamental changes

in the energy market, the seismic market shift

occurred there after.

So it was a reasonable decision when made,

but one that they regret.

I won't speak to their regret,

but I will say it was a reasonable decision

when it was made.

And absent that decision, the plant would be closed

and we wouldn't be sitting here

because the legislature had said

the scrubber had to be installed.

Let me ask you a,

I asked a question earlier about the folk,

or the taking into account of the information

after 2012 and 13,

largely focusing on combustion turbines,

but Judge McNamara has a statement here

about the Merrimack Station as a whole.

He says there was a result of market changes in 2009,

the station began to run as an intermediate unit needed,

running only one needed

because of lack of competitiveness.

Its capacity factor declined to 30% for 2013

and has declined further since then.

And that's what that troubles me, that observation.

There was evidence in the record

that was submitted without objection from the town

with respect to that,

but I will assure you, Your Honor,

that our focus in presenting our case

was on the facts that would have been known

as of 2012 and 2013 to all the marketplace participants.

That was our focus.

Well, can I just ask,

can I just follow up on that question?

I mean, I guess the thing I'm not,

I mean, I certainly understand

that you're looking for the value,

if the tax year is a particular year,

you're looking for the value of that year.

But if an expert, for example,

opines that, you know, as of that time,

my opinion is that the plant has a certain value

for this reason and this reason and this reason,

one of which is, you know,

it appears that going forward,

the market, so to speak,

for this type of plant is not likely to be good.

I guess I'm not clear why it would be inappropriate

for the court to consider evidence

of what actually happened after that,

not to show what the value was later,

but to show that the opinion was correct

and had some validity on the early date.

I think you're correct, Justice Lin,

and I think that it's not uncommon in tax appeals

for people to try to make sure

that there wasn't a temporary change in the marketplace

that really should impact the determination of value

as of the tax year's under appeal.

So this evidence, I think,

kind of goes to that kind of issue.

I mean, for example, I suppose,

if let's suppose that the situation were this,

the expert says, you know,

this plant really has very little value going forward

and suppose that the evidence was that in some,

you know, in a relatively recent subsequent year,

the market changed and there was really the value went up.

I mean, I assume it would be proper cross-examination

of that expert to say, well, wait a minute,

you said this is not likely to have much value.

What happened in 2014 or 2015?

Well, I think that, I think you still have to be focused

on what people would know in 2012 and 2013,

and this goes to the issue I was discussing about capacity.

Later, that you have to, you know, we're trying to,

we have to assume a sale.

That's what you've told us to do.

So as of the tax appeal dates,

you have to be looking at what data

the marketplace participants would have known.

So, you know, I think that that was certainly

the focus of what Judge McNamara did

and that is what Mr. Kelly did

and I believe he was proper in keeping the focus

on that level.

Just keeping on that point, let me ask a specific question

on page nine, Judge McNamara writes,

on the other hand,

San Sushi used 2012 through 2015 FCM auction prices.

Well, why should he use 2014 and 15 prices?

That we would say, and we did say,

or more to the point Mr. Kelly said,

that was not appropriate, 2012, yes.

But it was not appropriate to use 14 and 15

because that was information

that the marketplace would not have been aware of.

And there's an extensive discussion of this

in Mr. Kelly's rebuttal testimony,

which appears in our appendix at page 726,

I think is where it starts.

And I would encourage you,

I know you have a very voluminous record here

to review, to take a look at that,

that he believes along with other issues

associated with Mr. San Sushi's capacity analysis,

he believes overstated the results.

My warning light is on,

I just want to turn very briefly

to the issue Mr. Fitzgerald raised

about the valuation of the transmission

and distribution system.

We do not submit, we do not believe

this would be a watershed moment,

but rather as Judge Lennon and Justice Delanus

pointed out, you have long said,

there can be many approaches

to valuing utility property,

net book value being one of them.

And this court sat and heard extensive testimony

on the valuation of the very limited transmission

and distribution assets in the town of Bow.

And he came to the conclusion

that based on all the evidence he was presented with,

that net book value,

which represents the earnings potential

of this particular property,

was the best measure of its market value.

So we do not see it as being in any way.

Well, isn't it right that net book value

should be accorded different weight

depending on whether we're talking

about regulated property or unregulated property.

And so the transmission lines are really different

than selling the power plant,

which is not subject to those same limitations any longer.

That's correct.

Justice Bassett, the generating plant

is going to be sold into the deregulated

competitive merchant marketplace

while the transmission and distribution system

is going to remain subject to both federal

and state regulation, which constrains its earnings.

And our expert considered whether or not

there would be any circumstance that was market-based

that would justify paying a price

in excess of net book value.

He couldn't find any.

For the transmission.

For the transmission and distribution property.

And Justice McNamara was careful to note.

He clearly reviewed and was aware of your prior jurisprudence.

He noted that net book value for rate-making purposes

is not always synonymous with market value.

But he found credible and persuasive Mr. Kelly's

analysis that said there was no market-based reason

for someone to pay more than net book value for these assets

in bow.

And we would submit that finding it.

When you say these assets in bow, transmission lines.

But it was a different analysis for the plant.

It's a different analysis completely

than you have to undertake for Merrimack Station.

I think Justice McNamara properly

analyzed the valuation of those two assets separately,

given their different markets, and came

to a reasonable conclusion, which we would ask you to affirm.

Can I just ask you, did the value that Judge McNamara

ultimately attributed to the transmission facilities

was that the net book value?

It was.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

He submitted.

Counselor.
