This is case 2016-02-09, State of New Hampshire versus Walton-Valentin.

May it please the court, my name is Wade Harwood and I represent Walton-Valentin.

I would ask to reserve one minute for rebuttal.

There are two topics I want to address with the court today.

The first is the trial court's error in admitting 404B evidence without requiring clear proof.

The second topic area is the trial court's refusal to dismiss the attempted murder and

criminal threatening charges prior to the start of trial.

Even though the state lacked a good faith basis to believe it had admissible evidence.

Now, as to your first argument, didn't the situation morph over time

that initially the trial court did a 404B analysis?

But after it heard the victim testify, it said, now wait a minute,

I'm going to do a relevance analysis and not a 404B analysis.

I don't believe so, your honor.

What happened is two things.

First of all, the state never put forward any other basis other than 404B for

how this was admissible.

They actually argued it was admissible initially in their motion, in lemonade.

In paragraph 24 of their 404B motion, they argued that it wasn't admissible to her state of mind as 404B.

But you know what, here's the thing I guess I'm having some difficulty with.

When you say, wasn't there in fact 404B evidence that was admitted?

In other words, the witness, the victim here didn't say none of these prior things happened.

She in fact admitted that much of what had been said, of what the state was saying happened on earlier occasions happened.

She just minimized it.

She said, well, this happened, but I don't quite remember, my car was keyed.

I don't know if he did it or not, that kind of thing.

I would disagree that she said substantial portions of it.

She really only said small portions.

Let's start, let's go through that.

She said there were four, the state said they were going to introduce evidence of four prior events.

She admitted that four prior events happened, right?

I don't believe so.

I think the state actually had, I believe, six prior events.

One of them saying that Mr.

Valentin said he would make her cry blood.

That she flat out said that never happened.

There was another time where there-

It wasn't a cry blood part of another, that was something that she said.

At one time she had said he said during some other incident that she testified about, in fact, happened.

I don't believe so.

I would not characterize it as simply a dispute as to how much occurred.

She really did not say that the 404B incidents, the prior incidents that occurred,

actually rose to a level where they would be admissible under 404B.

Well, let me follow up on that.

What, I mean, I can understand that they might have been more probative

if it had been, let's say, that she hadn't minimized.

But the fact that she was saying some of these things,

some of the prior abuse happened, maybe not as bad, so to speak,

as she had originally told the police, isn't that still relevant?

I don't believe so because I don't believe it actually makes out incidents of prior abuse, Your Honor.

Because it's clear proof?

Because the clear proof is lacking?

Because it simply didn't rise to the level of showing that it impacted her, showing that it was actually abusive.

What we have here are essentially fairly innocuous prior incidents.

Based on your position that she minimized later on.

In other words, if she had, let's say, at the trial, her testimony was exactly the same as it had been.

That would be clear proof, but the fact that she changed it somewhat to your client's advantage

meant that the proof was no longer clear?

I think that is accurate.

I think where we're going, the Chief and I, is that the witnesses on the stand,

the jury is entitled to assess her credibility, especially to the extent of minimization.

And if they disbelieved her strongly enough, it could turn into clear proof in the minds of the jury.

Do you follow me?

I don't believe that when there's no substantive evidence presented that something occurred.

Disbelieving her could actually become clear proof.

The disbelief of a denial is not affirmative evidence.

But is it not true that what happened is, before the trial, the trial court ruled that these incidents

could come in under 404b on the issue of your client's intent?

He ruled that it could come in for two purposes.

One was Mr. Vallentine's intent.

The other was Ms. Rodriguez's state of mind.

That's actually in his ruling on pages eight and nine of his letter.

So he initially said it could come in for both those purposes.

Then she testifies, and the court, at least as to some of the incidents, says,

I don't think this ought to be treated under 404b.

I think it ought to be treated as evidence relevant to the alleged victim's credibility.

I disagree with that, Your Honor.

And I have two points to make regarding that question.

The first is if you look at the transcript of what the court actually said, starting on page 180,

he frames it as clarifying his thinking as to the clear proof requirement,

which indicates we are still under the framework of 404b.

He indicates his thinking is that there only needs to be clear proof

that whatever act may have occurred was committed by Mr. Vallentine,

not that there was actually clear proof of any specific act.

And then he goes on at the end of his section there at the beginning of page 181

and again reiterates that's my thinking on the clear proof.

So, but doesn't he say, and I'm looking at 180, he said line 17, 18, 19,

the court doesn't need clear proof of those prior acts in order to admit the evidence.

Rather, it's the ordinary weighing of prejudice and probative and relevance

that applies to the ordinary 401, 403 context.

So for these reasons, I don't think the state has to prove clear proof,

clear and convincing evidence that the prior acts actually occurred

so long as there's some relevance to the prior conduct.

And it's the defendant who's responsible for that prior conduct.

So that's where I'm getting my conclusion that the trial court shifted courses

and moved from 404b to 401 and 403.

Two things there.

One, I just disagree with that interpretation of what the court said.

Okay, okay.

And I agree with you that there's some ambiguity here.

It's a little fuzzy.

Sure.

The second point I would make is that we are talking about prior acts.

It would not be admissible under anything other than 404b.

So had he repudiated that, it would not be actually admissible.

But that's not true at all, is it?

I mean, in other words, the couldn't the witness have been asked,

even if the witness had said, deny that any of these prior acts had happened.

Couldn't the witness have been asked by the prosecutor?

Isn't it true, ma'am, that you said to the police officer

that on this day this happened, that he threatened you,

that he keyed your car, all those things?

And she could have said no to that.

But that's still the question of whether she had been asked that

would be relevant on the issue of her credibility.

It couldn't come in substantively.

But I don't believe it would because the jury would not have heard

any testimony about that prior act.

But so to ask her that on cross examination,

isn't it true that you told Officer Gomez such and such?

She would either, if she said yes, then it would be, again,

it wouldn't be admissible substantively,

but it would be admissible on her credibility.

And if she said no, then presumably Officer Gomez gets called

and is asked, did she tell you this?

I agree.

The issue, Your Honor, is there you're talking about

Officer Gomez being involved in this actual incident.

Here we're talking about events that happened weeks and months prior to it.

No, we're not talking about Officer Gomez being involved in those incidents at all.

We're asking, Officer Gomez would be asked, did she tell you that this happened?

And she did not tell him that.

That is my point.

She told other officers during other incidents on other day.

Oh, that's fine.

So they call those other officers then.

I don't call Gomez.

They call the other officers, whoever she said it to.

I don't think that her simply taking the stand and talking about what happened

on one day allows the state to simply ask about any other police report.

And I suppose part of your argument is, I read in the transcript that the court said,

well, the state kind of missed the boat because they could have had

the other officers come.

That's correct.

They didn't and it's too late.

So I have a memory of those statements in the transcript.

But I don't, but I'm wondering whether that fully supports your argument.

I mean, the court observed, well, you're stuck with what you're stuck with.

To the state, said to the state, it's unfortunate that you didn't have the other officers,

but I think this comes in through examination on credibility.

The jury can look at the witness as she's answering the questions.

That is what the court said.

Again, I still believe under a four of four B framework, and I believe that was correct.

So we just, you disagree with at least what my initial reaction was to reading the transcript

and maybe on a closer examination, you may be right.

The second point I did want to bring up is that once the court ruled that the prior statements

were not admissible as it cited utterances, the state lacked any good faith basis to believe

it had admissible evidence as to either attempted murder or criminal threatening.

Nonetheless, the state went forward with those charges.

Why did it have a good faith basis in the fact that she made those statements to the police

earlier?

Because she had actually in a trial deposition stated that that was not her memory of

things, and she did not make any subsequent statements to the prosecution, to the state,

that would provide them a good faith basis to believe that her testimony would be different

at the trial than it was during the trial deposition.

So if we follow that logic, if a witness testifies in the grand jury, the defendant assaulted me,

and the state now obtains an indictment, and then the defense goes out and deposes

that witness or gets a statement and affidavit from that witness under oath saying,

I lied, I wasn't attacked by the defendant, and if I am called as a witness to the witness

stand, I'm going to say I wasn't attacked.

The state can't go forward.

I think in that circumstance, the state would need to have some further conversation

with the witness to ascertain what the witness could reasonably be expected to state on the

stand.

Here, it's not just a statement she made to defense counsel or an investigator or anything

like that.

We're talking about actual testimony in the courtroom, in front of the trial judge,

in front of all the parties, where she actually knew that this could be her testimony admitted

in a trial, potentially.

It was videotaped.

It was a trial deposition.

So I think that raises the bar.

I think when she has given testimony that the state needs some reason to believe that she would—

Why would it matter whether it's testimony or an affidavit?

I mean, she gives an affidavit under oath.

I lied when I testified in the grand jury.

I think that the state does need to have a further conversation with her to ascertain

what her testimony would be to have a good faith basis to believe that she would testify

to the trial.

I guess the thing—the other thing I'm not sure I understand is what is the—put

aside the sort of ethical obligation for a minute.

But what is the harm?

Let's assume there's only one charge and the witness says—the witness testified in

the grand jury.

The defendant assaulted me.

Now she gives an affidavit later.

It says, I lied and I'm going to testify that I lied.

So now we go to trial and she says, I lied.

She can't—she cannot be convicted.

I mean, the defendant cannot be convicted.

Isn't that right?

That is correct.

And in a case where there was only one charge, there would not be any harm.

My light is on.

You can finish your answer.

Finish without taking my rebuttal time.

Thank you.

The issue here is that there were multiple charges, Your Honor.

And we're talking about the most serious allegations.

We're talking about actually an attempted murder charge.

It's very inflammatory allegation.

I think the cases I cited Asfeld and Howe make very clear that simply having

additional charges can be a violation of due process.

If it impacts how a jury is going to view the remaining charges,

I think that's also clear from State v. Courier here in New Hampshire.

Thank you.

May it please the Court, Elizabeth Leahy, on behalf of the State of New Hampshire.

I'd like to start with the 404b issue and going to Justice Conroy's point that

potentially the record is ambiguous here in terms of what analysis the Court was done.

The State reads it as initially this was considered in a 404b context.

However, because the purpose of using that testimony to prove the defendant's state of mind

was not a permitted use for this anymore, given the changes in the defendants

or the victim's testimony at trial, it was a much more narrow use.

And so the State reads the record as moving away from 404b into 401 and 403 only

as we've laid out in our brief.

But getting to the 404b analysis, assuming that the Court finds that is what the Court did,

there is clear proof that the defendant committed the acts of prior abuse against

the victim here.

And the victim's sworn testimony firmly establishes that the defendant engaged

in a clear pattern of abuse directed toward the victim for a prolonged period of time.

She testified that he was quote always following her,

that she appeared at, he appeared at, for example, a weight loss class to speak to her

when he knew she didn't want to speak with him.

She went so far as to get a restraining order against him, which in fact corroborates her

testimony to the extent that a Court found that this event did happen and that the defendant

was the perpetrator in that account.

And then the defendant appeared in the victim's friend's bedroom one night

and there was a knife found that wasn't there previously.

And the crux of the defendant's argument on appeal is that the testimony alone isn't enough.

And the case that I pointed to in my brief is Haley.

And in that case, there was prior, there was testimony of prior uncharged abuse

that was actually made out of Court in a deposition.

And the Court found that that was sufficient to establish clear proof.

And as I pointed here-

In the Court's eyes, it was not the jury's eyes.

I mean, was the issue of clear proof a threshold determination that the Court felt it had to make?

You understand my question?

I think so.

Yes.

That the Court was-

I think it was an issue that the Court considered as to whether there's clear proof that the defendant

committed these prior uncharged acts.

Why do we care about clear proof if we're no longer under 4-4-B?

Am I missing something?

Correct.

I was addressing Justice Convoy's earlier point.

In case you disagree with him.

In case you disagree with the State's reading that if the Court did do the 4-4-B analysis,

then there was sufficient evidence.

I'm sorry, but under Rule 104-B, wouldn't it, as I understand that rule, when evidence is

conditionally relevant and the condition being is there clear proof, the Court is required to

admit it if there's sufficient proof so that the jury could find that in fact it happened.

You've got the witness on the stand saying that some incidents happened.

I can't imagine how the Court could have said a jury couldn't find that that evidence is true.

Correct.

And this isn't an instance.

I think what the threshold inquiry on clear proof is, is that there's not a question

in the victim's mind in this case that it's the defendant who committed the act.

So it's not somebody came out at me out of an alley and I think it was the defendant,

but I'm not sure.

Here, while she may have wavered slightly on the details, the incidental details,

she consistently testified throughout that this event happened and it was the defendant.

And so at that point the threshold inquiry is met and then the Court, to the extent it did

4-4-B, went into the relevance inquiry and then weighing a prejudicial improvement.

Well, under 4-4-B, the last part of the analysis is essentially the 4-3 analysis.

Correct.

And I'd like to go quickly to the relevance inquiry that the Court conducted.

And the defendant makes two arguments, one of which is that there's no evidence in this case

that the prior abuse impacted the victim.

And as a preliminary matter, we contend that that issue was not preserved at the trial Court level.

There were a number of arguments made about why the evidence was not relevant,

but there was never argument as to the fact that it didn't impact the victim at all.

Would it have made a difference?

No, because in this case there is evidence that it impacted her.

She consistently testified that his conduct frightened her, that she was scared.

She went so far as to get a restraining order.

So even if that issue is preserved on appeal, we think there's sufficient evidence

to support the requirement if it impacted her.

Can we just switch to another issue which has me at least concerned?

Was it error for the Court to admit the victim's statements to 911 under the rule concerning

statements for medical diagnosis and treatment?

You know, I have some real questions about that.

Correct.

Yeah, so I can address that.

So I think we have to take the statements to 911 in two buckets.

There was the initial statement that he took her there under threat of a gun.

And then there were the secondary statements that the defendant hit the victim on the head with the gun.

And so if you look back at the original pleading,

the original motion in lemonade related to 8034,

which was confiled contemporaneously with the excited utterance motion.

The excited utterance motion dealt with the taking under threat of a gun.

The 8034 analysis did not.

And so the court only looked, the state had only looked to offer the second bucket,

which has hit me on the head with the gun under 8034.

And that was how the court ruled on it.

So this is an issue that I didn't raise in my brief, but noticed when I was reviewing in preparation for this,

is that when the 911 records were played at trial,

the statement, I think it's the seventh statement, which was taken under threat of a gun was played.

But that was never contemplated to be admitted under 8034.

And so to the extent the defendant didn't object to that,

it seems like it may have been inadvertent.

There was no objection.

There was no motion to strike.

So I think there's a preservation inquiry or question there

because there was never an objection to that piece of evidence coming in under 8034.

And that was not argued.

I mean, there wasn't an argument before the trial court about that.

No, the 8034 analysis was limited to the second bucket of statement,

which is hit me over the head with a gun, which I think is for me.

In the statement about taken to the park view in under threat of a gun,

I mean, that goes to the kidnapping charge anyway.

That's not part of the... That was an all-prost, yes.

And so to the extent that...

So I think my first argument would be that the argument raised on appeal is not preserved

because there was no objection to that coming in or any motion to strike.

But as a secondary matter, I don't think there was any unfair prejudice

to the defendant for the reason that Justice Bassett just said,

is the kidnapping charge had been no-prost at that point.

And then the defendant or the victim continually disclaimed that statement throughout trial.

So while they did hear it as 9-1-1,

she said that that didn't actually happen based on her communication with Carmen.

So to the extent it is before the court, we were...

They played the 9-1-1 tape with these statements,

and then she in front of the jury said, no, I didn't make them?

With regard to the threat of under a gun,

with regard to the statements of he hit me over the head with an object,

that was something that the defendant stipulated to prior to trial.

The question was whether it was a gun or some other object.

And so she claimed to not have a recollection of what the object was at trial,

but then the subsequent statements to the EMT and to the nurse

that it was, in fact, a gun were admitted subsequently.

Can I just ask on that question?

There seemed to be a sort of a debate going back and forth on the issue of

whether this was a gun or not.

It wasn't used as a gun, right?

She was hit, physically hit.

So whether it's a gun or a rock or something in the glass in the hotel room or whatever,

what difference does it make?

I think the issue at trial was that if it was a gun, it was a deadly weapon.

And if it was not a gun, perhaps it was not a deadly weapon.

But it's only a deadly weapon if it's used as a gun.

Right, exactly.

Correct.

So that was my understanding of the issue as framed at trial.

Going to quickly the argument raised by the defendant that this prosecutor

did not have a good faith basis for continuing with the attempted murder

and criminal threatening charge in light of the pretrial deposition testimony.

I'd like to kind of pull back and draw the court's attention to the fact that

is that the prosecutor's theme in this case was that this victim was an additionally a victim

of domestic abuse and that she was minimizing her testimony.

So the additional basis that the prosecutor had would be,

well, the jury ought to decide whether she's minimizing or not.

And in addition, we've got an expert who talks about what happens to people

who are ill treated in this way.

And that's enough to not dismiss the indictment.

Court has no further questions.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Do you need your time, counsel?

I want to just briefly address the preservation argument that the state just made.

There was actually a contemporaneous objection to any of the 9-1-1 tapes

being played that was on page 227 of the trial transcript.

But on what basis?

It was on the previously argued basis.

And there were two times where things were previously argued, Your Honor.

One was actually at the motion hearing.

Another was on the beginning of the trial transcript on pages 18 to 20.

And that is where I believe the issue is actually preserved.

So then the contemporaneous objection referring to the prior arguments incorporated that.

There was also an objection that goes into the reasons on page 165

of the supplement to day two of the trial transcript.

Can I just ask you, in regard to the second 9-1-1 statement,

he struck me with a gun and then took off.

If we were to decide that it was error to admit it under 8034,

isn't it, what's the prejudice given the other testimony that came in and isn't accumulative?

Isn't there a lot of other testimony from her to the,

her statements to the ER nurse and to Officer Gomez that are essentially the same?

To the extent that that is the only one that the court keeps out,

I would agree. I think all three need to be kept out

for my position to carry the day. Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you. Case submitted.
