This is case 2016-0657, Anthony Venti versus town of Newport.

I'll let me begin by apologizing to everybody here for the unusually long recess.

We didn't mean to make you wait so long, and we hope you'll forgive us.

Thank you. Good morning. May it please the Honorable Court.

My name is Peter Decato. I represent Mr. Venti.

Mr. Venti, as you may know from the briefs, was injured on a tennis court in the town of Newport.

The tennis court is owned by the town of Newport.

It's located on school property.

So I wanted to take a look at the tennis court.

I don't play tennis, but I know it's played on a court.

And I know that tennis is not played on land, raw land.

I have watched tennis.

I know it's played on different kinds of courts.

Clay courts, hard courts, grass courts, carpet courts.

This is a hard court surface.

So I know there are different surfaces, and that makes up the court.

A lot of our argument, our concern is about definitions.

So one of the definitions, I think, that's of interest is what a facility is.

We think a facility is a place where activities occur.

We think tennis is an activity that occurs at a place, therefore I would think that

tennis is played at a facility.

What about the Dolbert case?

I'm sorry?

What about the Dolbert Laconia case?

Doesn't that undermine your argument?

Well, if it undermines it, I would say, nevertheless, I believe that a tennis court,

which has a wire fence, is enclosed by a wire fence, is a facility.

I don't know what else it could possibly be.

Even if that, you're saying that it's a facility for purposes of, what is it, 507B2?

Yes.

Right, so but let's assume that's true.

Let's assume we agree with you that it's a facility and therefore that that

statue would make the, if you just looked at that statue, arguably the defendant would be liable.

But isn't, I mean, don't you run into the problem that that's a general statue

that talks about when, when a municipality may be held liable, and you have a more specific

statute that deals with recreational activity that's not where there's no compensation collected?

And doesn't our case law say when you have that situation, the more specific statute controls?

Well, the one that's more specific, it seems to me, is talking about land or outdoor recreational activities.

And although these tennis courts are outdoors, tennis is also played indoors.

And tennis is unlike any of the other activities.

For example, in RSA 21234, it doesn't seem to me tennis is anything like hiking, ice and

rock climbing or bouldering.

I'm not even sure I know what bouldering is or some of the other things that they say there in RSA 21234.

What I see is that tennis is more like skateboarding, rollerblading, stunt bike or roller ski, and

I can say that with some confidence, because at this very site, there's a skateboard apparatus

right next to the tennis court on the same surface.

So let's say we agree with you about that.

What facts do you allege amount to gross negligence?

RSA 507B11 says that skateboarding are all activities that occur at a facility.

That's why I wanted to stop by saying I think it's a facility.

If the skateboarding occurs on a facility, notwithstanding the case that you mentioned,

I would think that the tennis, which is on the same surface, is a facility.

And the RSA is 507B11 and it allows a person who is injured at that skateboard facility

who pays no charge, 507B11, in this case a municipality which without charge permits any person to use

a facility operated by the municipality for the purpose of skateboarding shall not be

liable for personal injury in the absence of gross and wanton negligence.

That's my point.

As I understand this case, the injured person tripped on an obvious crack and fell and

was injured.

What do you say was gross negligence in those circumstances?

Well I'm not sure about the obvious crack.

I know there was a crack and I certainly know they're obvious today.

I don't know what the state of the surface was when he fell.

Well let's say there was a crack that he could see and was aware of.

So what we said was gross negligence was the statements by the town that they had no

intentions of maintaining the tennis facility.

So this is a sin of omission.

They have said publicly that they're not going to put any money into these tennis courts

because they're saving their money to build a new tennis court across the street.

There were no signs, warning of any hazardous condition at the time.

So the public is invited at no charge to go on to a facility that's not being maintained.

And I think I would try to look up the definition of gross negligence.

I know it's more than mere negligence.

But if you don't take care of a place and you know that's a place where

people can get hurt and there is a crack in the surface and the crack is

what caused Mr. Venti to fall and break his hip.

I think the case can be made that the negligence of the town in stating publicly

that they had no intentions of maintaining the facility.

They should have either shut it down or they should have put a sign up.

And those statements were made when and in relationship to this injury?

I can't tell you exactly if it wasn't long after.

They were made after.

Is this the town recreation advisory report that you're referring to?

Right.

And that was after the fact?

True, but there was no evidence of maintenance before.

We never got there.

Of course, we lost on summary judgment.

We never got into discovery.

What was obvious and in the public domain is that the town was saying

they weren't maintaining it.

I don't know what we would be able to determine if we were to engage

in discovery.

We brought suit and I think my opponent, I think, filed a motion.

There were motions almost the week after we filed.

So there's never really been any discovery.

Your opponent makes the point that below the town argued about

discretionary function immunity and the trial court didn't rule on that basis.

But he argues that that's an alternative basis to uphold the trial

court's ruling.

And I tend to agree with that.

Why isn't he right in that regard?

Well, maybe just as a matter of policy here, if there's a statute,

I think we have a constitutional argument.

I think we're entitled to some relief here on equal protection grounds.

If the person that's using the rollerblading can maintain a suit

for gross negligence, we think we should be able to maintain

a similar suit, particularly where the rollerblading is on the same surface.

The discretionary.

Well, that sort of assumes, doesn't it,

that you would be able to maintain a suit.

If this was a rollerblading park instead of the tennis court,

and apparently part of it is for rollerblading,

and suppose that the town didn't maintain the rollerblading park,

and there were cracks in the surface,

and somebody, a wheel got caught in it or something,

would that be enough to say to be gross and wanton negligence?

Well, in my opinion, and that's all it is, is an opinion.

If we got more into discovery, the question

was here whether we should have lost on summary judgment.

The only thing that we had was what

was in the public domain about gross negligence.

And I admit that I think the publications

may have been after the fact.

But you have a town that's basically saying,

we have these tennis courts, and we're

not going to maintain them at all.

But doesn't that merely reflect a budgetary weighing

of how the town should spend its money,

and should there be second guessing of that?

Well, I have no doubt that it's a budgetary concern.

But if you put that tennis court out there

and you invite the public to come,

whether they're going to play for nothing or not,

and you know that your citizens are going to use it,

I'll flip it around.

Doesn't the town understand that citizens

are going to play tennis there?

If this was a private facility and this happened

and there was no maintenance, and they flat out

said they weren't going to maintain it,

I think we would say that's gross negligence by omission.

But the towns get to have a tennis court,

invite people to come, and they get preferred treatment.

I don't think they should have that preferred treatment.

And I'm very troubled by the fact that roller-blading is

different.

And to answer your question, I think

it comes down to whether or not you

think we should lose on summary judgment this early

without any discovery, even though we were able to find

the town.

Well, when you say there wasn't any discovery,

but before summary judgment, there can be discoveries.

So why wasn't there any discovery?

It moved quickly.

As I said, I think it was within my opponent

tell you exactly when maybe the record reflects it.

I mean, I think there were motions

that we were dealing with almost immediately,

and there was no attempt at discovery other than what

was in the public domain.

So you didn't file some sort of objection or motion

to say, wait a minute, summary judgment

isn't appropriate at this point

because we need to do discovery?

I did not.

Honestly, I felt that what I was

seeing in the public domain was sufficient evidence of omission

that we shouldn't lose on summary judgment.

But it would be pretty extreme, don't you agree,

for us to say, which you would be saying,

that doing nothing equals gross negligence.

That's kind of stretching the doctrines.

I think doing nothing can be gross negligence

if you have a facility that's open to the public to use

and you admit that you're going to do nothing

or that you're going to do nothing.

I'm not even sure the public knew

they were going to do nothing.

But you have this lure to play tennis at a facility,

and you have a reasonable expectation, I think,

that you're going to be playing on a surface that

isn't going to hurt you.

So there are a lot of public tennis courts

throughout New Hampshire, and I bet a lot of them

have cracks.

So essentially, what you're saying

is if they've got cracks, somebody

could have spent more money to fill in the cracks.

So that is gross negligence.

I'm saying if the cracks are of a type where your foot can

get caught in them and cause a broken hip,

so it depends on the crack.

I can understand, I don't know what they call them,

structural cracks or some cracks.

But I don't think those are the cracks that

cause a person to get their foot lodged in there

and cause a broken hip.

What did the trial court have before?

Were there photographs in the summary judgment

record of the particular crack at the particular time

frame that's relevant here?

All they had were affidavits.

The court invited us.

At first, they denied summary judgment,

and they said we could come back.

At that point, we prepared an affidavit

with the information from the town

about their level of maintenance, which was non-existent.

And we showed that to the judge.

That's when we lost on summary judgment.

How did you get that information from the town

if there hadn't been any discovery?

We went to the town, and we noticed

that it was in a pamphlet, I believe it was.

And I think it may have been on the internet,

but it was available by just inquiry.

I don't know if the court has any other questions.

That's essentially what we're arguing.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you.

Good morning.

I'd be flag day.

My name is Corey Bellabar.

I represent the town of Newport.

As a procedural consideration, this case

was dismissed on motion to dismiss initially.

The court gave plaintiff an opportunity

to file an amended complaint.

Plaintiff filed that amended complaint.

I filed an additional motion to dismiss,

and the trial court granted the second motion to dismiss.

Presumably on the theory that there were no facts alleged

that were sufficient to support, if true, gross negligence

claim.

That was certainly part of it explicitly

for the first motion to dismiss,

not so much for the second.

There were multiple arguments that came into play.

If I may, I'm going to just touch on a few issues,

but I'm happy to take questions at any point.

Number one, both Justice Lin and Justice Bassett,

I believe, are correct that Dole-Bear totally

takes care of the tennis as a structure and not

raw land.

The Dole-Bear case, which I argued here two years ago,

was explicitly based on the fact

that there was a structure on land,

and it wasn't the use of raw land.

The court rejected that argument by the plaintiff.

That's the playground case.

That's the playground case.

And that was preceded by Cohn,

which was the water case and which Dole-Bear

relies upon, and the decision was, well,

water isn't land, but you've got to use the state's land

to get to the water, and that's why the court,

I don't know that it's an extension,

but certainly Dole-Bear was consistent with Cohn.

So that eliminates the argument

that this is a structure on land,

and Dole-Bear is very clearly dispositive on it.

What if it were platform tennis?

I'm sorry?

What if it were platform tennis?

I don't think it'd be any difference.

It's a recreational facility.

It's on land.

You have to use it as a piece of the land.

The word land isn't intended to be restricted to raw land,

and I think that's the import.

Are we under 212 now, or is that the 12?

Under either, I think you get to the same result.

The statutes obviously are written differently,

but they're clearly written with the same purpose in mind.

I presume I quoted the purpose in the brief.

It's been well established by this court

that we want to encourage the recreational use of land.

It's just, it's a policy the state of New Hampshire

actually I think there's recreational immunity

statute in every state in the nation.

So that's number one.

Number two, after the fact minutes

from the recreational board really

come to nothing in this case, and I think

that was the point, Justice Bassett.

They do not establish anything before,

and when you look at them and you read them,

they're at amended appendix pages 36 and 37.

The board never says we've got a terrible problem out there.

We have to fix it.

What the board says is we've got a court that

costs a lot to maintain.

We're thinking about building a new one.

We also think we need green space in this one location,

and we're thinking about moving courts across the street.

That's what the Recreational Commission discussed,

and it doesn't give any entree into, oh my god,

this is a terrible problem.

We have to fix it.

And it gets right to the heart of discretionary function

immunity, which is if it's an economic consideration,

economic, social, political, then it's

quintessential discretionary function immunity.

Because we do not want juries.

If we were to agree with you about that,

what is the effect of the fact that the trial court

didn't address it?

And we don't do it for the first time here?

I've cited a case in the record

that this court has often, I don't know if it's often,

but they have approved decisions

below based on alternative grounds.

And the plaintiff runs into a bit of a catch-22.

On the one hand, he's pushing, ignoring this because

of economics is gross negligence, which it's not.

But even if it is, then you sit there

and you say, well, we don't want a jury telling the town

it should have spent more money.

They can make their voice heard

politically when the town election comes around

if they want to double their taxes.

But we don't have juries overlook, oversee these type

of decisions as a matter of.

And do I understand correctly that you did make

the discretionary function immunity argument below?

It's just that's not the route that the trial court took.

I did make that below.

That was included in the second motion to dismiss,

not the first, because the second motion to dismiss

is the one that brought up the Newport Recreational

Advisory Committee minutes.

What if a town or community decided

that it couldn't afford to replace missing manhole covers

and did not, could they have sued?

Obviously, that's not our case.

But it still falls under discretionary function.

And I don't think the townspeople

would allow manhole covers to be missing.

We're a long way from that.

We're talking about pedestrian,

pardon the use of the word,

we're talking about average everyday cracks.

You can go to downtown Concord or probably

around this facility and find the equivalent.

The fact is, we simply don't get there.

We don't get to gross negligence.

I pointed out in the brief,

there's not a precipice over the side.

There aren't razor blades laid out on the court,

which you might trip over.

There's nothing to bring it to that level.

But plus, and Justice Lynn said this,

it's gross and wanton conduct.

It's not just gross negligence.

So what is the state of the record

that was before the trial court

in terms of the actual physical condition of the court

and does it matter?

It, A, it doesn't matter.

We only have the allegations of fact

that the court had multiple cracks in it

and that he says he tripped over one of these cracks.

That's the entire state of it.

My position tends to be that after,

discovery's not appropriate before motion dismisses,

decided only after that gets into the fairly considerations

of not dragging a government entity through trial

or through discovery, I think.

But as Justice Lynn noted,

it's the conjunctive use of gross negligence

and wanton conduct.

This court, as I point out in the brief,

Johnson versus Fernald has decided that DUI

is not grounds for a wanton action.

I hardly think under those circumstances

we could say that a crack in a tennis court,

which is open and obvious,

would be grounds for finding of wanton conduct.

So on that basis,

you would not even reach the question

of discretionary function

because there's not been allegations of it.

It sounds like you'd be making the same argument,

whether it's a crack with no elevation change

that you can just see or it's a four foot,

I mean a four inch elevation change.

Would you be making the same argument either way?

Well, I can't say because that's not been alleged.

A four inch differential has not been alleged.

At some point obviously,

and maybe this gets to my precipice argument,

there's some point at which it may be gross negligence.

Whether that would be wanton,

where it's open and obvious

and people voluntarily play tennis,

I doubt it would approach wanton if that were the case.

But here we have a plain allegation

of cracks in the court

that are clearly obvious

because the plaintiff himself wouldn't miss them.

To be grossly negligent,

they would have to be so bad

that the plaintiff couldn't possibly miss them.

That gets to another point.

I just want to address very quickly,

I always have a problem pronouncing this,

a jizdom generis.

We have that problem too.

I want to switch the way those syllables come out

and it's just, it's terrible.

The plaintiff includes that in their brief

and 212.34 is that type of statute.

507.B11 is not that type of statute.

507.B11 has no general language

to which to attach the doctrine,

whereas 212.34 talks about outdoor recreational activity,

including but not limited to.

And then you go to 507.B11

and it just lists these four things.

And the four things all have to do with wheel devices,

skateboards, stunt bikes, I think roller blades,

and I believe the last one is roller skis.

So there's a A, a difference if the legislature wants

to look at those things differently

under a middle-tier scrutiny test,

but B, there is no catch-all

such as there is available in 212.34,

so the plaintiff can't rely on a jizdom generis for that.

Other than that, I would submit based on the brief.

Thank you very much.

Thank you, case submitted.

Counseling.
