This is case 2016-0350, Robert Carr et al. v. Town of New London.

Mr. Mayor.

May it please the Court, my name is Barton Mayer and I represent the town of New London.

The legislature enacted RSA 7621 to create a uniform system for

proration with respect to structures destroyed by fire after April 1.

Because towns were dealing with this problem in contrary ways under the abatement statute.

Then what does subsection six mean?

Subsection six means that the fact that you may have a fire at your house doesn't

initiate the fact that you may be unable to pay your tax for alternative reasons or

because it's disproportionately assessed. I don't think that-

But why would that have, I mean, if that is so completely different,

that why would the legislature have thought it necessary to include that?

I mean, it seems to me it's sort of like apples and oranges.

We create this procedure for a fire and then we have some need to say,

well, in completely in other circumstances, or at least if they were going to do that,

why wouldn't they have said to the extent that RSA 7216 allows abatement for other reasons?

We don't intend this to restrict it.

Well, I think that's one way to articulate it, but I believe that a careful reading of that

language says it does not deprive the assessing officials of the authority to grant abatements

under the statute. And consequently, even if a 7621 event occurs and is properly prorated,

the property tax is properly prorated, that the assessing officials understand that they still

can consider the abatement for disproportionality or inability to pay, that this doesn't deprive

the authority to do this. What do you say about your opponent's argument that if I understand

one of his arguments, it is that this, the 7621 created a sort of new procedure in that

unlike under 16, where you pay the tax and then seek an abatement,

under 21, you don't have to pay, you can just seek the abatement.

That argument is simply the whims of fate, because I could have a fire on December 1,

and I've already paid my taxes in July and in the autumn, and I've paid my tax.

Now I'm seeking the... Well, okay, but I mean, sure, but there would be some

circumstances in which this would... You could avoid paying the tax at all. And I guess the thing

I'm... What I'm... The analogy I'm drawing is, I understand it for many years, and it may still

be the case. With regard to the IRS, you had two choices. If you thought you were owed money

by the IRS, you could not pay the tax and go to the tax court and try to get it straightened

out, or if you wanted to go to the federal district court, you had to pay the tax first,

and then you could sue in the district court to get the money, to get a refund.

And so, I mean, in some sense, there is at least some analogy, or at least there used to be.

I don't know if that's still the procedure or not, but there's an analogy.

And then I think I'm getting a little too metaphorical now, and a little loss.

This is the metaphorical day.

But, you know, the question has to be in one's mind, and I think you're suggesting it,

which is, why the heck would you do $76.21? And the argument may be, well, it's an expedited

procedure. The problem is, is the legislature was aware under $76.16, towns were dealing

with this question in a contrary way. And they intended to create the...

The trial court found, I mean, it doesn't that very fact hurt you that they had been dealing,

some towns had been dealing with it in that way, and this statute says we did not, we intend to

expand, not contract what we're allowing. First, nowhere in the language of $76.21

doesn't even suggest that. There's nothing that modifies $76.16. We also know that the

legislation began, the bill began as defining good cause for abatement under RSA 76.16.

And that approach was abandoned, and a new and entirely separate system was created.

Furthermore, what happens here is just the question you're asking. What is happening here?

The plaintiff's abatement application simply recreates the problem the legislature was

attempting to resolve when it adopted $76.21. Otherwise, you have 230 different

interpretations of good cause for abatement and mistake.

But we all know, don't we, that when the legislature occasionally sets out to fix

something, it just breaks it more. I would say that in this case that wouldn't be the

fact, maybe in other cases it may be, but I won't wax political on that.

Mr. Mayor, let me ask you this. Your argument is that $76.21 is the exclusive remedy for

somebody whose house burns down in the middle of the year. Is that right?

Correct.

Okay. I'll admit I'm a little skeptical of your position, but my skepticism is heightened by

part five, which says that if somebody else has already come in for a proration

and has consumed more than one half of the percent of the total taxes in the community,

then it's not available. Right? Doesn't it say that?

Right. Absolutely.

If the New London Inn had burned down on April 2nd and, okay, half of a percent of the town of

London's tax base or tax revenue is gone, then there is no remedy under this, right?

Right.

And you're saying, tough. That's it.

Well, now we get to the heart of the issue. The court stated in Barksdale in over 150 years

since RSA 7616 was enacted, there were only two causes for abatement, disproportionality

and inability to pay. Now, if I just may complete this, because this is the central feature,

RSA 762, which codified the common law, sets the assessment date as April 1,

and in Briggs Petition, the court was presented with this exact case.

Fire burns down a structure, person seeking abatement, but the court does not grant the

abatement, although the opportunity was there, does not grant the abatement because of a fire

and that the structure is no longer there. The April 1 date was still fixed. Rather,

the abatement was granted because of the inability to pay, which is not an issue in this case.

So this court actually had a case of fire destruction and went and said,

we're not paying attention to that. So the other good cause language wasn't in the statute then?

I believe the good cause language was there since for 150 years as the Supreme Court

stated in Barksdale. Well, maybe Judge McNamara's onto something.

He may be. I mean, ultimately, this court is called upon to engage in statutory construction.

So your position is that New London apparently had a practice of giving relief to people under

these circumstances, and many other towns did, and they were doing so in violation of the law.

I would argue yes, and I would also argue that the problem extends itself,

and that is that that means that, unless this court holds otherwise, but that means that in

Sutton, right next door, they might say, no, we never granted an abatement for this reason,

so we're not going to now. It's a uniform statute of uniform application throughout the state,

and the only exception to 762, the assessment date, the legislature chose 7621.

It did not incorporate 7616. Your position then is that putting a fire situation aside,

take another situation where there's a terrible hurricane, big trees come down, and totally

destroy a house. Right. If that happens on April 2, that taxpayer has no basis for an abatement

other than inability to pay. That would be the case up till now. Yes, that would be the rule,

and that's the statute. That's how it's always operated. In fact, we see the counterpart to

that in the fact that towns cannot assess property after one when there's an additional

improvement. You're also begging this question, the next question that will come to you, which is

I voluntarily removed a barn that was in dilapidated shape. Shouldn't I get an abatement for that?

The valuation of property is fixed on April 1. The assessment was not challenged. So the taxpayer

will get to make that argument the next tax year. Absolutely. The next tax year the improvement

isn't there. It is not without a remedy in those circumstances. You say the next tax year

it will get another shot. Yeah, unless of course the answer will be that's not quite accurate because

someone may rebuild in that tax year, and so the event would not have

quote occurred for purposes of abatement and assessment in New Hampshire. But I think the

critical element here is if good cause for abatement is a fire occurring after April 1

or natural disaster, then there was no need for RSA 7621. The abatement application comes in.

Except for speed, right? Except for a prompt resolution, 60 days.

Again, that's the whims of fate. And I say that for a second reason. Not only could you have a

fire on February 15, but on March 1 when I filed my abatement application, just for whatever reason,

the board of selectmen may look at it and say, oh, dear, we didn't mean that this house was worth

$2 million. It was worth $200. There was a zero attached. And the abatement would occur

rapidly when that error is disclosed. So I'm not necessarily prepared to say that this statute

simply creates an expedited process and certainly not prepared to say it creates an expedited

process for abatement. And it's curious that given the nature of this event, which is not

unique, we had the Olin case that we presented to the court from the BTLA, it's curious that

the issue never reached this court. And it's likely because of RSA 7622. And one would also

have to ask, why did the legislature put an exception in for 7621 but not 7616?

What is happening here today is you are being asked, as simple as this is, to please

incorporate another exception in RSA 7622. Not only that, but where there were these

contrary dealings with the abatement process in the varying communities.

But I guess the problem I'm having is if the legislature, if towns were doing what

you say they shouldn't be doing, and apparently it was certainly not exclusive,

they weren't uniformly doing it, but a number of towns were doing it. And the legislature wanted

this to be the exclusive remedy. Why wouldn't they have said this is the exclusive remedy and not,

you know, not add any reference to 16? I think that actually the legislature said that.

In this statement of intent, it specifically says that the statute uncouples proration

from the tax administration process. But how could they say this is an exclusive remedy and then

have a paragraph that says, but if somebody else has already used that, you can't do it.

To violate all sorts of principles of fairness and proportional taxation.

There's something in my mind that tells me there is another provision in the statute

that deals with that. In another way, I think during a recession, the legislature actually

created a provision that dealt with multiple abatements and how much the town could be

exposed to and set up a remedy for that. So that's really a conflagration throughout the

community that they're trying to confront and deal with it. There's just no, you can't

operate a community. Well, maybe someone should have challenged that. Well, and it may be an

equal protection argument, which fortunately we don't have here, because there's no dispute that

the value of the property at $688,000 for the house was correct. Then no one sought an abatement,

no one challenged it. So it was properly assessed and lawful. And the question presented for

you today apparently is, does RSA 76 section 16 provide that events occurring after April

1 may be the grounds for an abatement? Well, maybe good cause is getting turned down under

7621 section 5, because somebody else has already used up the money. Well, perhaps that's a little

beyond the case here and the fact pattern here. In fact, the interesting thing to me is that

I don't think the legislature intended to create a cause, which is kind of a subtle

implication of the question, which is, well, I was denied RSA 7621 proration, therefore

good cause has been created by the legislature denying the... But does it matter here that

apparently there's an agreement that had the application for proration been made,

it would have been granted? That's right. No doubt about it. But I don't find that

unusual or offensive, because what I'm saying is simple. An abatement is different than

proration. The legislature said an abatement is different from proration. There has been...

The good cause shown has been the standard for a century. And April 1 has been the fixed date.

We've never had this problem before and nothing in the statute modifies good cause shown. In

fact, if one turns to paragraph 6, it states nothing in this statute deprives the assessing

authority of the ability to grant an abatement for good cause shown. The language in that

statute is the same as in 7616, not in lieu of. Thank you. Thank you very much.

Please, the court. My name is Jay Hodus. I'm with the firm of Hage Hodus.

And I am representing Robert Carr and his children in this matter.

My client suffered a fire loss, which is obvious. They filed for a tax abatement pursuant to RSA

7616, which they had a statutory right to do so. The town decided not to hear that abatement request.

They foreclosed it. They said, you didn't file under section 21, so you're out of luck. They

never got to the merits of my client's application. They never decided if my client

had good cause. They never reviewed the application. They did this because their

assessor told them that with the adoption of section 21, you no longer could consider this

as good cause. So they never got to it. So that was per se error. And it was based on the advice

of their assessor. Then without judging the merits of my client's application, I filed a

motion for reconsider with the town saying, you're wrong. You're not looking at the

statute correctly. And I explained it all to them. Again, they denied my client's

application. Is there a dispute about your client's

quote ability to pay? Ability to pay no. Okay. So we're faced with a situation where

the burning of the house did not create a situation where the taxpayer could not afford

the tax. That's correct. My client pays about $38,000 of taxes to the town of London.

We asked for a partial abatement equaling 9,000 for the loss of the house. And the town

acted oppressively. In every other case the town has ever gotten in which a house has burned

down. And it's on their records. They produced the records. I didn't. They have

granted the abatement when a fire strikes. But that was before the statute.

That is correct. Is that issue? That's right. And the assessor took to

position that because of the new statute, they no longer had the discretion to do that.

And that was incorrect. I'm sorry. Can I just ask you, in the earlier cases that you're just

talking about, the abatement that the town granted were those generally, again, pro-rated

abatements? Exactly. And that's what I asked for a pro-rated abatement. I followed what New

London had done over the years. I didn't ask for 100% abatement. I said the number of days

the house was unusable. It burned to the ground. It was ash. Treat us the same as you've treated

all your other citizens. And they said, no, we can't do it anymore. We don't have the

discretion. As I understand it, the fire was on July 1, 2014. Correct. When was the abatement

application filed? January, because you can't file an abatement until close of the tax year.

It says you can't file an abatement until the issue, the notice of taxes issued.

The notice of tax happens to be the second tax bill in New Hampshire. So you usually don't get

your second tax bill until December. You can file in January through March. So I filed immediately.

I filed January something way before the March deadline. So as soon as I possibly could,

lawfully file for my clients, I did. And then, of course, we didn't get the decision.

The Superior Court reviewed this. They applied the rules of statutory construction.

That's what we're talking about. How to construe these two statutes together.

And things like, we do not add words the legislature chose not to include. Well,

that's what they're trying to do. The town's trying to do that.

That would be the word exclusive? The preemption argument?

I'm not sure.

Are you saying that they are adding words and those words would be that this is the

exclusive remedy period under 21?

Well, yes. But what they're saying is section six says you can still apply for abatement

if it's for poverty or disproportionality. Well, it doesn't say that at all.

But that's their argument. Or they're saying that because in the statement of intent,

it talked about if you don't qualify under 21, you can still apply.

It doesn't say that in a statute. The legislature didn't put that language in there.

They said nothing in this section prevents a good cause of abatement.

Is there anything in the legislative history that indicates that the legislature

intended what they were doing to be a restriction?

In other words, to make it more difficult than it had been before to get an abatement or a pro-racial?

No, absolutely the opposite. Because in the beginning of the statement of intent, they say

we recognize that a fire law should be treated as an act where a person can get an abatement.

And some towns are doing it. Some towns are not.

And then it goes on to say we're not trying to make it harder.

So the court concluded that there's two alternative remedies here. Nothing wrong with that.

One is a proration of the assessment, which can happen immediately.

One is the abatement procedure, which is hard. You have to wait the time.

You have to pay the taxes. You have to file the paperwork.

If you're not approved, you have to appeal to Superior Court.

And I was hoping I would never have to go to Superior Court.

I was hoping that once a lawyer got involved, we would resolve this matter.

Because it was obvious that they were making a mistake.

Their assessor had concluded something that it shouldn't have been concluded.

And they weren't following their own procedures in the town.

They were treating my client oppressively and different

than any other citizen they'd ever had before them.

And that was wrong. And the legislature didn't say to do that.

The legislator was seeking to give them more relief.

Tax abatement statutes are supposed to be remedial in nature.

Supposed to aim for fairness, justice.

The town of New Line has done nothing equitable here. Nothing just.

Nothing fair. And they can't argue that.

Your client, do I understand correctly, lost his house to fire.

And the tax bill remains the same to this day?

No. I don't know about what is today.

But for that year.

But there was no relief for that year.

That year there was no relief whatsoever.

So what theoretically could happen is your client wouldn't get relief for the tax year at

issue. If your client rebuilt, then as a practical matter,

it wouldn't have a basis to seek an abatement the following year.

Well, yes, if they rebuilt, correct.

If they rebuilt, right.

If they didn't rebuild, then the town would have to reflect the fact that no structure exists.

Right. It would have to do an inventory as of April 1 and reset the value.

But we are talking about the year of the fire and the destruction only.

And that's the only thing my client was seeking.

That nine months of an abatement, really.

Let me just comment on a couple other points.

The town in its brief states that my client was given notice

of the fact that he should have filed under section 21.

Well, you know what they did?

They sent an email to the maintenance man.

The person was cleaning up the fire debris,

who was responsible for mowing the lawn and snow plowing.

And they said to that person, here's an application.

It has to be filed timely.

You can't send notice to a gardener or a snow plower and consider that due process.

They had my client's address.

They've sent him the tax bills.

Why didn't they send that to my client to say file?

What would be the legal result then?

What if they had sent undisputable notice to the taxpayer?

Would that have initiated your argument?

I don't think it would have,

but it probably would have prompted my client to file an application.

Truth of the matter is no one knows about this statute.

It was adopted in 2013.

So your client, you say, was unaware?

My client was unaware.

But they're alleging that my client was given notice.

That's the only reason I'm making that point.

Okay.

They also say they changed their policy.

That's not true either.

I was the only person to file an application for a fire damaged property.

And when I did my discovery with them,

I asked have you ever had an application under section 21?

The answer is no.

So they can't say they changed their policy.

They've never had a request for a fire abatement either after my client.

There's no policy change.

There's no ordinance adopted in the town.

There's no policy statement by the selectmen.

So they're making these statements in their brief and in their court

that are not accurate.

And I want the court to know that.

Let me also comment on why doesn't this court have hundreds of cases

dealing with fire damage?

It's a practical matter.

If someone in my town loses their house to a fire

and they go before my board of selectmen and ask for an abatement

and the selectmen give it to them, no one can appeal that.

I don't have standing to appeal as another taxpayer, a neighbor,

a person who lives in the town.

It has to be a person aggrieved by the tax or the abatement.

I'm not aggrieved by it.

So that case would never reach here.

So in hundreds of towns where abatements are granted because of fire loss,

it would never get appealed.

And on the converse, if you're in a town where the selectmen deny it,

is that taxpayer going to appeal it?

It's expensive to appeal it.

You have to go to Superior Courier, you have to hire a lawyer.

The practicalities of it is that you would spend more on the appeal

than it's worth.

So there's not a wealth of case law on this issue.

But fire loss or loss due to hurricane, natural disaster,

has been treated as good cause in many towns throughout the state

and it's never been determined not to be.

And good cause, as we know, is not defined.

Let me ask you a practical question.

And I don't know the answer to this.

Let's say there were two applications.

One was under the fire law statute and one was for an abatement.

Do the dollars come out the same?

In other words, what's at stake here if we agree with you?

The dollars are the same.

So shouldn't the dollars just have been paid

and forget the fight about which statute controls?

I couldn't agree more.

And I asked the town on three different occasions to do that.

And I feel that they've acted unfairly to my client.

We talk, you could talk about equal protection.

They've treated him differently to every other citizen.

And I would ask that my client be compensated

for their attorney's fees in this matter

because they should not have to go through this

when a municipality takes away a rights of a citizen.

I understand the equities of this,

but we do have a new statute.

And so when you say your client's been treated differently

than everybody else,

we have everybody else before the statute.

And then we have only your client after the statute

because your discovery disclosed

that there is no other person in your client's position.

That is fire loss after the statute, right?

That is correct.

But the statute on its face,

and again, let's use plain and ordinary language,

is nothing in this provision prevents a person

from applying for an abatement under RSA 7616.

And 7616 says that a person agreed by a tax assessment

has a right to appeal.

It's not the town that appeals, it's the person.

So they were not taking away the person's right.

So what is your position

if a house is destroyed in a hurricane,

big trees fall on it, it's totally destroyed?

Do you say that tax payer,

under the abatement statute, the for cause section,

should be entitled to an abatement?

Hurricane happening after April 1.

Yes, it's a good cause.

I would advise that person that came to my office

to file immediately under 21

because it's easier and it's more,

you get your remedy.

But 21 only deals with fire, right?

No, I think it says natural disaster.

Oh, I'm sorry, okay.

So I would advise a client to file immediately under 21

and why go through the headache of an abatement.

And under section five,

you could file and be entitled to it,

but if the credit's already gone, then what do you do?

You go get it, try it for an abatement.

I think the court, the superior court did get a good job.

I'm obviously here to support their decision.

They went through the statutes.

They went through the concepts, legislative intent.

They in fact went into legislative.

I don't think you have to.

I think we could have just viewed this

just on the plain and ordinary meeting of the language.

But the court went further and still found for my clients.

Your client, your opponent is arguing that if we do,

as you say, we are opening the floodgates

with regard to the meaning of good cause.

Contrary to our case law, that's his argument.

I disagree with that.

I think our case law, the majority of cases

are disproportionality,

but the statute doesn't talk about disproportionality.

It talks about good cause and poverty,

and there's really two cases on it.

And again, the practical matters,

you're not going to get these cases

if the select man granted abatement for a natural disaster.

No one's going to appeal it.

They can't.

No citizen can appeal that.

And if they don't get it,

they're probably not going to appeal to the Supreme Court,

like I had to do in this case,

because it costs so much more than it's worth.

My client has paid three times the abatement they're seeking

in this case.

Thank you.

Case submitted.
