This is case 2016-0530, state of New Hampshire versus Daniel Elaine.

May it please the court. Christine lists on behalf of Daniel Elaine.

The logical progression of the state's position in this case is that it is either okay to deny

pre-trial credit when the state chooses to pursue a motion to impose rather than a trial

on criminal conduct, or that it is okay to guess and speculate about what future convictions

that defendant might have toward which credit can be applied. And neither of those positions

are consistent with accrediting statutes. The trial court here in part reasoned that

Mr. Elaine was not held on this charge or held on this matter. And the state argues

that the exclusivity of the bail order.

But isn't that true, isn't that really correct in the sense that the crime that the defendant

was, that he ultimately received the sentence on, I grant you the facts that triggered the

sentence being imposed were this new conduct. I don't dispute that. But isn't the problem

that you have is that the punishment really was for the original crime. He was sentenced

on the original crime as opposed to this. In other words, he might have had his probation

violated, or I'm sorry, the suspended sentence imposed, even if he didn't commit a new crime.

He might have done something else that would have been a violation of the suspension.

Do you point to that? One, there was no other allegation in this case in which the

motion was imposed.

Oh, no, no, I understand. But all I'm saying is it's not, I mean, I understand

that in this case it was that conduct. But my point is simply that it didn't, it wouldn't

have had to be that conduct. It could have been something that wasn't even a crime that

would have resulted in the imposition of the suspended sentence.

Absolutely. And we can see that I don't believe he would be entitled to pretrial

credit under this argument if the reason for the imposition of the sentence was

his failure to do treatment or some other violation. But because the sentence imposed

was the result of the criminal episode for which he was held, he's entitled to

credit.

Is it your position that the statute requires it, or does the judge have

discretion in this area?

So the trial court certainly has discretion to allocate. The statute requires

that it be awarded, however, in a way that doesn't discriminate. And so in this

case, in this circumstance where he asked, where the defendant requested it on the

motion to impose, I think it is a mandatory application.

Well, the statute, when you say the statute requires that it doesn't

discriminate, the statute doesn't say anything about discrimination, right? I

mean, it's our case and you want to sort of extend our case law to this

circumstance. I think we had, I don't think we've decided yet, but we have

another case that was argued a couple of weeks ago in which the same sort of

thing is argued.

Essentially, yes. And I apologize, I misspoke, that the crediting

statutes are interpreted in a way that cannot discriminate against an

defendant. And I think the big picture, and what the court did in Forest and

what the big picture is, that is, what would happen if the defendant had

posted bail? That's the way to illustrate what the appropriate

allocation is. And a lot of times the rhetoric of double dipping and he's

not held on this charge does line up with a proper allocation. And I think

that rhetoric is fairly common in trial court practice. However, there

are situations where it doesn't. In this case illustrates that point

that there may be a situation where the state chooses to file a motion to

impose. And again, they...

But let me ask you this. I mean, how far can we carry this? Suppose that

a person is arrested for a serious crime and they're held in jail for

six months pre-trial because they can't make bail. And then they're

acquitted. Does that mean that they have six months, they have six

months out there? I've got six months of a freebie. If I commit

another offense in order to make sure that we're not sort of

discriminating against the indigents, I got six months that I can just

rack up.

Two things to respond to that. One, no, I don't believe that you can

bank time for another offense because that offense wouldn't be the

criminal episode for which you would be sentenced. And so I think

that they're wholly unrelated and this argument doesn't apply. There

are certainly situations where a defendant may be held and then for

whatever reason a motion to suppress, a competency proceeding, a

jury verdict, they don't then have a conviction. But in that case,

we don't have an opportunity to apply pre-trial credit. In a case

where we do have an opportunity to apply pre-trial credit to a

sentence related to that criminal episode, we must apply it as it

is here.

Did the judge articulate a reason why? He didn't allocate it the

way you wish?

He did, Your Honor. He held that, I believe it's a marginal

note on the order that says he was not held on this charge

and he will receive credit on the future convictions. And

obviously, I submit that that speculation about what he would be

convicted of in the future is not an appropriate consideration for

the allocation on this case and that he is entitled to it on

this case. Any double dipping concern would be the next

sentencing hearings' determination and they would have

then not a speculation about what the credit was applied to

but an actual certainty. Thank you.

Good morning, Your Honors. May it please the court Elizabeth

Woodcock for the State of New Hampshire? I'll take questions at

any time.

Well, why shouldn't the judge have discretion to allocate the

good time credit here?

Well, I think that the statute says that this is pre-trial

detention. I mean, it's until the court actually holds the

hearing on the motion to impose, he's being held

pre-trial on these charges. Once the hearing is held, then

you move on to the next. For a probation violation, correct?

Why was he held?

He was being held initially because he had committed a lot

of burglaries and he'd confessed to the burglaries and he was

charged. And then as the charges were moving along and I

think that it's fairly clear that the status is bringing

additional charges as they're determining whether or not they

can bring them, eventually the state files a motion to impose

the suspended sentence which had been imposed a few years

earlier.

Isn't the statute silent on whether the pre-trial credit

could be afforded here?

Well, I think that 651.3 really talks about if you're

being held pre-trial and that's where the credit is

assigned.

You're saying we'd have to read the statute to exclude

the pre-hearing on a motion to impose.

Well, if that were the only charge, if that were the only

situation, then of course I think that then the credit goes

towards whatever the sentence is. But in this particular

instance, he's being held pre-trial. I think that

Justice Lin's comment about how you could be, you could

have the sentence, the suspended sentence imposed for

something other than a charge. But because there are

charges pending here, he's being held pre-trial.

What would you say? Suppose that the state, at the same

time that the defendant was arrested on the burglaries,

the state had filed a motion at that point to impose the

suspended sentence.

The court said, fine, I'll deal with that later on, when

I deal with what's going to happen with the criminal case.

But I'm not going to hold an expedited hearing on that.

Then would your opponent have a better argument?

Yes, I think Mr. Allen would.

I think that he would have a better argument because there

had been some action taken towards trying to impose

the suspended sentence.

And I'd point out, Justice Lin, that although the state is

the actor that actually moved to impose the suspended

sentence, the defendant could have asked for a

hearing on it at any time. And I think that if you try to

move the system along towards that, then you're

saying, I don't want to be given credit towards

these outstanding charges. I want the court to move

on this issue of the suspended sentence.

What do you say about the disparate impact based

upon his inability or one's inability to post bail?

Well, I think that because he had a suspended sentence

hanging over him, if he had posted bail, then I suppose

that what the court would have done is move on the

suspended sentence. But I do not think that it is

disparate impact to say that you get pretrial credit

for charges that are hanging out there, or you get

credit towards your suspended sentence, but not both.

But one who could afford the bail here doesn't have this

issue?

Well, the person who can afford the bail hearing then

gets the suspended sentence imposed and the credit goes

towards that. But it's not as if there's no credit

being given anywhere. The credit is going towards

what the pending issue is. And, you know, certainly

I don't think that the system is a perfect system in

any sense of the word because statutes can't be

perfect. But in this instance, I think that the court

did the right thing in giving the credit towards

the pending charges.

Would it have had discretion to do otherwise?

Well, that's a good question. And I think that if

they had brought it to the court's attention at

the time that the sentence was imposed, perhaps

that issue would be squarely before the court. But

they didn't.

No one suggested that?

No. What happened was that the hearing on this, if

I'm remembering correctly, the hearing on the

suspended sentence was held, the suspended sentence

was imposed, and then the defendant said, oh, well,

now, wait a minute, about, I think it was 12 days

later, said, wait a minute, I want credit

towards this. And I think that that makes it an

even more difficult case. I see my red light is

on. If the court has no further questions, I would

ask that the case be submitted.

Thank you, counsel. Case is submitted.
