This is case 2016-0667, appeal of Patrick A. Rowland.

Please the court, my name is Brad Wilder, and I represent Patrick Rowland in this case.

By way of brief background, Mr. Rowland pleaded guilty to a DWI first

offense in the Lublin District Court on May 10th, 2016.

Pursuant to that sentencing order, Mr. Rowland's driver's license was suspended for two years.

Mr. Rowland is not eligible for reinstatement of his driver's license sooner than April 11th, 2018.

On July 27th, 2016, which was a year and nine months in advance of his license restoration eligibility,

the Department of Safety Bureau of Hearings issued a notice of hearing.

As set forth in the notice of hearing, the scope of the hearing was to review Mr. Rowland's driving record and

determine if he will be required to install and maintain an ignition interlock device or

enhanced technology ignition device for a period of not less than 12 months,

no more than two years, as a condition of license restoration.

Mr. Rowland attended a hearing on August 24th, 2016,

which was a year and eight months in advance of its eligibility for license restoration.

During the hearing, Mr. Rowland presented a copy of his DWI court order and a letter from his counselor.

On October 5th, 2016, a report of a hearing examiner, and

referred to it as Report 1 in my brief, because there were two that were issued by the hearing examiner, was issued in the matter.

As set forth in Report 1, Mr. Rowland is being required to provide documentation from

an approved interlock service provider that he has installed an ignition interlock device

in his primary motor vehicle as a condition of license restoration.

This condition is effective for a period of 12 months from the date of restoration.

Mr. Rowland is requesting that the court reverse and vacate the decision by the hearing examiner.

So can I just ask you council, one of the things that you seem to say is that the hearings examiner held this hearing too early.

Correct.

And so my question is, am I understanding correctly from the statutory scheme that the court

at the time of that it imposed the criminal sentence could have, didn't have to,

but could have imposed a requirement of the interlock device?

Under the statutory provision that Mr. Rowland was sentenced to a DUI first, the court could have certainly required.

Right, so I guess my question is this.

I mean, if that's true, doesn't that suggest that if the court can impose it

on day one of the sentence, saying I'm, you know, I'm suspending your license for two years,

and I'm also requiring that you have, that you get this interlock device for, let's say, a year.

And the court can do that on day one.

So, you know, it's projecting two years into the future.

Why can't the hearings examiner do it on day, whatever it is, day 180 or something?

Justice Lidd, we have apples and oranges here.

We have a criminal process where the district court judge is allowed to issue sentences pursuant to the statute.

And then we also have an administrative process by the Department of Safety.

Right, but the administrative process doesn't prohibit this.

You're asking us to sort of read into this, that it was, that the administrative

hearings officer shouldn't have done this because it's, he doesn't have enough information.

And I guess what I'm saying is if the statute, if the statutory scheme would allow a court

to impose the interlock requirement two years in advance where it would have even,

presumably even less information, why should we interpret the administrative procedure not to allow that?

First and foremost, at the sentencing in Mr. Rowland's case, certainly a lot of information comes to light at that stage.

Prior history, what he has been doing, perhaps since being arrested for, in charge of the DUI.

So at that stage, there is a lot of information that can be made known to the judge and

that then factors into the equation as to whether the judge feels the necessity to impose a condition for an interlock device.

With respect to this case, however, this is the civil side of the equation.

And under the civil side of the equation, the commissioner of safety, pursuant to RSA 265-A36A,

says the commissioner of safety may require an administrative hearing prior to the restoration of the license.

That provision also goes on to say upon a finding that the safety of the person or

other uses of the highway would be enhanced thereby, may order the person as a condition of restoration.

So what the statute talks about is the time of restoration.

And at that point, will he be a danger to himself or to the public?

But let's go back to the criminal sentence.

If the judge imposes your license is suspended for two years, and when you get it back,

you have to have this interlock device, that is the time of restoration also, isn't it?

The interlock, I mean, there's no sense in requiring somebody who's not supposed to be driving to have an interlock device, right?

The first part of this is that in the underlying criminal case, Mr.

Rowland was not required and was not a part of the sentence to install an interlock device.

Although the judge could have done it, as he can, he has a discretion in many cases.

And there are cases, DUI cases, where actually the court is required.

That's not Mr. Rowland's case.

But then what we do, Your Honor, if we look at specifically New Hampshire Administrative Rule SAF-C205.01,

it says a license may be restored only after the individual has complied with the administrative requirements contained in the disposition of their hearing.

Restoration shall not occur until evidence is on file documenting full compliance with all the requirements outlined in the hearing.

So what-

Let's say we agree with you that this was too soon.

Where in the continuum of time is not too soon?

Is not too soon when Mr. Rowland request restoration of his license?

And why that must be the touching point is there are many factors that could come into play as to eligibility for

a licensed restoration or even the decision to pursue restoration.

Let's assume, for example, that a individual whose license has been suspended decides not to apply for restoration for five years.

Perhaps they've moved to another state, perhaps they don't need their license.

In that situation, before that person is going to be eligible for licensed restoration,

he has to jump through the hoops with either the court and or the Department of Safety.

So at that juncture, the Department of Safety is going to know the time when the applicant for

licensed restoration wants his or her license back.

It seems to me that there's some logic to your argument, but shouldn't you be making that argument to the legislature,

rather than to us, given what the statute says?

Justice Bassett, I don't believe so, and here's why.

I think if this court were to review the statute, vesting in the commissioner the ability to hold the hearing,

as well as the administrative rule SAF-C205.01,

I think the logical extension by reading both of those is that

the appropriate time for the commissioner to hold that hearing is upon a request by an applicant for licensed restoration.

Now, it occurs to me, in some respects, this is-

Did Mr. Rollin ask for this hearing to be deferred?

He did not.

Could he have?

I don't know the answer to that question, Your Honor, but what I am concerned about in having a hearing so far in advance

is what it does is preclude Mr. Rollin from challenging that decision

if circumstances should change to his betterment.

Well, isn't the answer to Justice Hans Barconi's question that he certainly could have requested that the hearing be-

They might have denied it, but he certainly could have made that request and he didn't do it.

Well, Your Honor, what we don't have here is the record.

We don't have the transcript of those proceedings.

And I think to the extent that that transcript were here, there was some discussion about the appropriateness of the hearing.

Are you saying that we don't have a transcript of the proceedings because it wasn't recorded or because you didn't request it?

Because I didn't request it for this court.

So that's also your problem, isn't it?

Except it's not, Your Honor, because as we're looking at the record in this case,

I submit to you that the record might be helpful to the state, but the record in this case, as submitted to this court,

rests on three issues.

Number one, the due process.

Number two, the rightness.

And number two, number three, that there were insufficient findings of fact rendered by the hearing's examiner,

sufficient to satisfy the burden of the transaction.

Well, let me ask you about that last point on sufficiency.

Given the undisputed facts in this case related to two DUIs and

the deferential standard of review that we have, how can it not be sufficient to support the commissioner's decision?

As far as the findings of fact, Your Honor?

Well, yeah, to support the decision that was made.

If we look at the decision that was rendered in this case, there are only three findings of fact.

The first relates to the conviction in the Lubbock District Court.

The second relates to the sentence that was imposed by the Lubbock District Court.

I would submit that because Mr. Rowan pleaded and was found guilty of a DUI first,

but those two findings of fact are going to be sufficient for the commissioner of safety to impose or

require an interlock device and essentially what it does is make mandatory upon

a conviction of a DUI first, at least in the eyes of the commissioner, the installation of an interlock device.

Didn't the hearing's officer analyze the other DWI in finding number three?

In finding number three says the respondent's driver's record reflects a prior DUI conviction on 4710.

The corresponding ALS was for two years and represents a prior refusal to submit to a chemical test after an earlier DUI arrest.

So certainly he knew, based upon the record that he's reviewing, is there was at one point in 2010 a prior DUI.

Again, however, the important part of this case is merely because there are two DUIs on my client's record,

which are six years apart, is that sufficient to require or

to enable the commissioner to require the installation of an interlock device.

And again, it's going to be for this court to decide whether those findings of fact are sufficient.

But I would suggest to you that if in this case those findings of fact are going to be sufficient,

and essentially if anybody ever has a prior DUI on their record.

But counsel, isn't the problem here that it's not, we don't review as such the findings that are put down on the record.

I mean, I shouldn't say we don't review them.

We do review, but isn't our test was the evidence that was before the commissioner sufficient to support what he did?

And you haven't given us a transcript.

So for example, I'm not saying this happened, but it very well could be the case.

Your client might have gone before the hearings officer and said, you know, I've got this terrible drinking problem.

I just don't think I'm ever going to be able to get over it.

We don't know that that didn't happen, because you didn't give us a transcript.

That's correct.

And the reason, if we look at the record that you have in this case,

your, the burden, the standard in this case is whether or not you should set aside or vacate for

orders of law unless you feel satisfied by a clear proponents of the evidence before you that such order is unjust or unreasonable.

And what I'm submitting to you is that we have an unjust and an unreasonable decision in this case based upon the fact, two at three issues.

No, your time is up, counsel.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Good morning.

May it please the court?

My name is Matthew Broadhead.

I'm from the Attorney General's office here today representing the Department of Safety.

If you have any questions, I'd be happy to take them at any time.

Doesn't counsel have a point that arguably this hearing was a bit premature?

Well, to Justice Hans Marconi and Justice Lynn's point, there is on the hearing notice,

which is in the record at page two, point number seven at the bottom.

It says, continuances may be granted only for good cause and must be requested in writing and received five days prior to the hearing.

There is no such request in the record.

And in terms of the timing, the standard that's set forth in the statute says simply that the hearing must occur prior to restoration.

And that makes sense in light of the agency's regulations because before having reinstatement, you need to first have the conditions for reinstatement.

You need to know those before requesting reinstatement and there needs to be proof on record with the Department of Safety that you've complied with that hearing.

But at such a hearing, if it were held, say, within two or three months of restoration time,

perhaps the person seeking restoration could produce considerable evidence to demonstrate that he no longer poses a risk to the public.

And if that two to three months was put into the statute, certainly we'd be arguing that that would be the process.

But in this case, it's determined the appropriateness of the hearing was given to the discretion of the commissioner.

And in this particular case, on a case by case basis, the commissioner reviewed the evidence and

determined that there were prior DUI convictions, evidence of prior relapse in treatment.

And therefore, even if we were to concede on oral argument that he would remain sober for

a two-year period prior to restoration, the prior relapse in treatment would be justifiable in ordering the ignition mirror on the place.

I don't know whether you know this or not, but can you give us some information about what is entailed in getting one of these interlock devices in terms of

how much of a hassle is it, so to speak, to get one? And more importantly, how much of a cost is it?

Because one of the things I'm thinking is if it is particularly expensive to do that, it might be that it would be to the benefit of somebody who's

subject to that to have notice earlier rather than later that it's going to be imposed.

There is a cost. I wouldn't characterize it as significant. I believe it's approximately $100.

Oh, okay. It's really not. I was thinking that maybe it was significant more than that.

There is maintenance fee or maintenance requirement and upkeep. There are regulations to that effect.

It does benefit. It's our position that it does benefit the person who is subject to these restrictions to have it in advance so that they may

be able to save up to incur it if cost is a prohibition. Also, if cost was an issue, it could be raised at the hearing and could be addressed at the hearing

as part of the condition for restoration. These are all factors that the commissioner would look at in determining whether the interlock device is

appropriate. Is there any process, say, a year goes by now after this hearing peels over? Is there any process for Mr. Rowland to come back and say,

hey, I'd like you to look at my record now. I've got another 12 months. I've got new factors for you to consider.

That's an interesting question, Your Honor. I believe there may be under RSA 21P13, which is the general hearing statute, which provides that if there is not a hearing that's

specifically required by statute that there is a general relief request that can be had. Certainly, the department wouldn't want to relitigate issues that have already been decided.

And just back to Justice Delaney's point, sobriety is not a cure for alcoholism. It's a state of mind and it's mutable. It can change. People relapse. It's well understood.

And the requirement of the interlock device is not only to prove sobriety prior to engaging and driving, which serves an important public interest. It's here to prove that you can drive sober.

That you can actively be participating as a user of the highway in a sober capacity. And the legislative history is clear that it also serves an educational purpose for those people who are ordered to have the interlock device.

If you get a license with this condition on it, is it noted on your license?

I don't know the answer to that, Your Honor. It is certainly visible in a car. You can certainly see it and I just don't know the answer to that.

And looking to the undisputed evidence here, it is uncontested that Mr. Rowland has an addiction to alcohol.

That's confirmed by the two reports that were submitted by his treating physician.

Can I ask you a question about the request for re-hearing?

At least in my reading, there was some suggestion in the briefs, and I'm not sure, frankly, whose brief it was, but that when the hearing's officer relied on, I guess, another, in addition to the two that he had relied on in the original order, he relied on another one in the reconsideration order, which is one of the grounds that your opponent says is improper.

But my question is, there was some suggestion in the briefs, I think, that that other DWI conviction was somehow contained in records that were submitted by your opponent, or not here, not counsel, but by the person who had been convicted.

I'm not sure which DWI you're referring to, but I can just kind of clarify, hopefully, by going through what is and is it not.

I think I was referring to the 1998 conviction.

Okay, so the 1998 conviction, we will concede, was not referenced in the original order, and it does appear based on the re-hearing order that it was considered.

That it wasn't, that for whatever reason, it was not viewable in the report that was printed out for that hearing.

But the other convictions, the 2004.

My real question is, how did the hearing's officer become aware of the 1998 conviction?

I thought there was at least some suggestion in the briefs that that was because when the motion for reconsideration was filed, there were some documents submitted with it that included that.

There was not that I'm aware of, Your Honor.

What I believe the hearing...

The reference was to, yeah, imaged documents, and it's unclear to us what that means.

I believe that is a reference to their document management system.

So the hearing's officer basically decided to do a little extra investigation, so to speak.

It says, quote, upon further review of the respondent's driving history, the respondent was convicted of a DUI

in Keene District Court on 72798.

This did not show upon the printed driver's record, but was found when the respondent's image documents were examined.

So I take that to mean that there was a digital record of it, but it wasn't contained in the printed record.

And if I understand correctly, you can see that the hearing's officer really shouldn't have done that, or at least not without giving notice to...

Absolutely, Your Honor.

We would concede that that would be inappropriate to consider new evidence on review.

But even in light of that, we argued that it's a harmless error because he did not enhance the penalty.

So that brings the total number of DUI convictions to four.

And he only considered, excuse me, DUI offenses to four, three convictions.

But let me ask you this, I mean, should we...

He didn't enhance it.

I agree with that.

But should we be concerned at all that he apparently felt it was necessary to sort of justify the decision on re-hearing to refer to that?

And so, you know, should we...

If you concede that he shouldn't have done that, is that...

You know, can we infer from that that, well, if he hadn't done that,

maybe he would have found your opponent's arguments more persuasive and would have done something different?

Harmless error is outcome-based under the court's cited decisions in our brief.

And so, if there was no outcome that changed, if the result of the findings did not change,

or the result of the order did not change, and the sentence did not change,

we would argue that that is the very definition of harmless error.

If there are no further questions here, I'll submit my case.

Thank you.

Okay, submitted. The court will take a brief recess.
