This is case 2016-0382, state of New Hampshire versus Ryan Brooks.

May it please the court Christine list on behalf of Ryan Brooks.

I intend to make two points, one on the violation of the statute and one on the proper remedy.

It is not enough that Detective Wallace testified that he did not use the recording to prepare his notes or prepare for grand jury.

Because that testimony leaves a lot of questions open.

It doesn't tell us whether he listened to the recording prior to grand jury.

Isn't that a defect in the record?

Isn't that a defect in the record? Shouldn't we have that information?

I think your honor at this point is the state's burden to demonstrate that that was the state's burden to elicit.

Much like on a motion to suppress where it's the state's burden of the proponent of the evidence,

that they didn't ask enough to put that in.

Certainly the court could have asked those questions or the state could have asked those questions,

but that burden hasn't been met here with that information.

You cite a case, I can't remember it off the top of my head, but it's an immunity case.

I think it might have been the U.S. Supreme Court you cited basically said that if somebody's been granted immunity

and then they're prosecuted, the state has the burden of showing maybe beyond a reasonable doubt.

But anyway, at least by some burden that the evidence that is admitted was not derived from the immunity.

But isn't that a Fifth Amendment issue?

That seems to me quite a bit different than the situation here.

I mean, the mere fact that here the officer participated in the conversation.

So he sort of knew what was said to him by the defendant.

Let's assume he listened to the conversation.

I think he said he'd listened to it at some point.

He listened to the recording.

Okay, so that refreshed his memory to some extent.

Does that just mean that's the end of it, that it all has to be suppressed?

I think his conversation at that point, unless he can demonstrate that it is wholly independent of his review of the recording,

to give meaning to that statute that precludes the use of it at grand jury that it does need to be prohibited from use of the grand jury.

And I think with regard to the immunity case, I think it's much more, I think McMillan, while it doesn't control,

gives us the example here where I believe the officer in that case participated in the online chat that was unlawfully recorded.

But then had never gone back and reviewed it.

Right, but you know what, here's what I guess what I'm saying is this.

Let's assume I think the record stand at this point is the officer said,

at some point I did listen to it, but I didn't rely on the recording in my testimony.

Isn't that evidence that the court could have found as a factual matter, I believe what the officer said,

and therefore I say it is notain?

If my memory is different that he said he didn't use it.

That he didn't use it to prepare his notes and didn't use it to prepare for the grand jury.

And I think that there's...

Well, I can't think...

Okay, but couldn't the court infer from that that there was no taint that he testified based on what he remembered the defendant saying?

I think that it doesn't rise to the state meeting its burden to demonstrate that the testimony that he did give at grand jury

was wholly independent of his review.

It doesn't tell us whether if he was asked questions at grand jury,

if he went back to his memory of his review of the recording or back to his memory of his notes.

But didn't he...

He reviewed the recording in preparation for the motion hearing, not for the grand jury.

The motion hearing was September, grand jury testimony was June,

and I think his testimony was he listened to it in preparation for the motion hearing, not before.

I think that the testimony at the motion to quash is that he did not use it,

and then there was not a specific question posed to him whether he listened to it prior to grand jury.

At a subsequent hearing he did testify that he listened to it both to prepare for grand jury and for the motion to quash.

So we know he listened to it prior,

and I'd submit that the state has not meant its burden to demonstrate that his testimony was independent.

And what more was necessary, your point?

My point is there are lots of things the state could have asked that would have clarified this

and that were his notes different.

I mean the bulk was he was going off his notes.

Were his notes different from the recording?

Was he asked any questions?

Was the answer he gave to the grand jury in his notes

versus something he remembered from listening to the recording?

So just because he didn't use it in his mind,

we don't have enough information to find that it was the state's medicine.

I know your light is on, but I don't want to deprive you of your remedy argument.

Thank you.

Just briefly, I think that the proper remedy in this case is to quash the indictment.

As the court did in Vander Hayden where there was a violation of a Supreme Court rule,

that indictment was quashed in that case post-conviction.

And essentially the conviction does not cure the issue at the grand jury room

where we have an express statutory prohibition against use of evidence of this

in a process that requires heightened vigilance to protect the sanctity that we afford to that process.

Where only one side is represented and it is rarely subject to review.

If there are no further questions.

Thank you, Councillor.

Good morning, Your Honours.

Excuse me.

Stephen Fuller representing the state in this case.

To answer Justice Lynn's question, the lower court did find, as a matter of fact,

that the detective did not use the recording to prepare for his grand jury testimony.

Was the detective asked?

He was asked during the hearing, did you use the recording actually in the grand jury?

He says no.

Then he was asked, did you use the recording to refresh your recollection

in order to prepare for the grand jury?

The answer is no, I did not.

So the next question is, did you listen to it before you went to the grand jury room?

He was asked that question.

He said that between April and the date of the hearing, which I think was December,

he said I might have listened to it, but not more than once.

And that was the dates you're talking about were after the grand jury?

I think the grand jury date kind of is in the middle of that range.

Oh, it's in the middle, okay.

Yeah.

We don't know exactly what he listened to.

Okay.

Right, just somewhere between April and December.

But taking this testimony as credible that the hearing judge found

that he did not use the recording to prepare his testimony for the grand jury.

And that was, as far as the hearing judge was concerned, the end of the matter

because if there's no use of the recording and there's no derived use of the recording,

then 570A6 does not apply.

Did anyone else appear at the grand jury for the state?

That I don't know.

The state, I want to go to the second.

Is the state's position that a la sort of the Kalandra line of cases

that the suppression remedy shouldn't be imposed in the grand jury context?

Well, I think it depends on sort of the procedural posture of the case

because the remedy here is a post-trial remedy where we already have a verdict.

And it's important to note that here we have a verdict after a trial

in which the evidence was not used.

So the trial is clean, the trial isn't tainted.

This is very different from the Hubble case that I think you mentioned earlier

where the documents that were obtained through an immunity grant

because it was a Fifth Amendment issue,

without those documents the government really wouldn't be able to go forward with its case.

I guess I'm not clear.

I mean, are you saying that in other words, if there had been a...

I'm not sure how this would arise,

but if there had been a motion to suppress filed

before there was an indictment or something,

in other words, that if the case had not proceeded through a verdict,

then it would have been appropriate to grant the motion to suppress.

Before that, that would have been okay.

Well, the state's harmlessness error relies on the fact that we have a clean jury verdict,

a jury verdict beyond a reasonable doubt,

which of course is a much higher standard than the probable cause that the grand jury has to find.

If there's no verdict, then there's no harmlessness.

But I suppose what your opponent would say is there shouldn't have been an indictment,

then there shouldn't have been any verdict.

In other words, if the grand jury proceeding was tainted,

then there shouldn't have been any verdict.

I think that puts too much of a cost on society,

because here we already have a finding beyond a reasonable doubt,

regardless of whether the grand jury found probable cause.

But if we were to draw an analogy to what the federal courts have done,

isn't there a difference?

I mean, if this was not a recording,

then Colander would control, it seems to me,

and the defendant would be out of luck.

But there is a statutory exclusion remedy here,

and at least the federal courts have said that that's different,

that that does apply in the grand jury context.

Well, it applies in a constitutional context.

I mean, if there was a violation...

No, no, no, there's a federal case, there's a U.S. Supreme Court case.

I would say the 2318 USA 2315,

whatever the federal exclusionary rule is for a wiretap,

there's a statutory exclusionary rule for federal wiretaps,

which says you can't use it in any grand jury trial or other, very broad.

And I think the Supreme Court has said,

even though for other evidence there might...

You know, the Colander doctrine would prevent exclusion

and a suppression kind of remedy before the grand jury,

it doesn't apply to wiretap evidence.

I still think that the cost of society argument

that the U.S. Supreme Court has said in other contexts

means that if the evidence should have been suppressed,

but the grand jury would have found probable cause

and a jury has already found beyond a reasonable doubt,

that the point of reversal,

because reversal means re-indictment and retrial,

re-indictment on clean evidence, retrial on clean evidence,

it seems that the reversal is just not warranted

in a case where the evidence was clean at trial.

Under the hindsight is 2020 proposition.

I suppose that is endemic to an appellate court.

I mean, I think the problem you have, you know,

you make a decent sort of practical argument.

I think the problem though is we have this statute

and maybe that's an argument to make to the legislature,

but I'm not sure that it's one to make to us,

that we can do anything about.

Well, perhaps, but I mean,

I think I have to rely on my primary argument,

which is the finding of fact in this case

is that the grand jury was not tainted

by any, by the recording or any derived evidence.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you.

Case submitted.
