This is case 2016-0088, State of New Hampshire v. Wilfrid Bergeron.

Counsel, before you start the meat of your argument, would you help us with some clarification?

We have looked at the images in question, but it's not entirely clear to us, based on the designation on the disk, which images you folks are fighting about.

Can you help us narrow that down?

I can, Your Honor. I did have some difficulty accessing the images myself.

I went to the county attorney's office and he kind of walked me through that.

And so I'm not positive exactly what you saw when you pulled it up.

Well, we're not either.

There were numbers, but they don't seem to match the numbers in the briefs.

So we're trying to figure out the numbering system.

I guess I don't know how else they would have been labeled. Can you give me an example?

I'm sorry.

Here's another possibility. We're going to start your time again.

Perhaps, after the argument, we can arrange to have the laptop on which the disk currently sits made available to the two of you together.

And you could identify on the index and the laptop which are the numbers that we are concerned about. Would that work for the state?

Well, we'll do this because I'm going to leave here to arrange for it.

We will be still on the bench with the next cases while you are back in the conference room figuring out which of the images are the ones at issue.

Is that okay with you?

Yes.

Absolutely.

Sound all right to everybody?

Excuse me. I'll be right back.

I'm in.

I'm in.

Great.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

So when you're done, go over to the clerk's office.

My law clerk will meet you there and escort you to the conference room so you can help us out with this.

Shall we start again?

Thank you.

May it please the court.

Christine List on behalf of Wilfred Bergeron, I have requested to reserve one minute of my time.

I intend to focus on the first issue, the generalness of the warrant.

The warrant requirement exists to preclude, to prevent the police from conducting that exploratory general rummaging through one's property.

And the property that we're talking about here is a user account.

And what that includes is extensive financial records, location data including IP and AIN addresses.

Could you just clarify something?

Yes.

What happened was the warrant was issued, served upon AOL at its headquarters.

AOL then packaged up in some way every single email image on the defendant's account.

AOL didn't do any judgment about them.

Am I right on that?

That is my understanding, but my understanding is they also gave them much more than just emails.

Okay.

That it was anything.

But in any event, AOL packaged up everything that they could identify belonging to the defendant.

That is my understanding.

Yep.

And then it got transferred to New Hampshire law enforcement and they went through the packaged

stuff and identified which items they felt were relevant to the warrant and the claims that

were going to be made.

Yes.

However, there is no return sheet about what they identified within that.

The only search warrant return sheet that exists is them collecting the disk that has

that package on it.

So what they collected and where they collected it from, the state has not shown where that information

came from.

Well, somebody had to identify out of the 8,000 emails, the 500 that were relevant.

Yes.

Who did that?

My understanding is that it was the New Hampshire Police Department, that it was not Virginia or

AOL.

Okay.

Was it done electronically?

I don't know.

That is not in the record.

You know, can I just clarify one thing?

Are you saying that the warrant itself was overbroad in what it called for to be seized?

Or are you saying that AOL actually provided in response to the warrant information that was not called for by the warrant?

Or is it some combination of those?

I think it's some combination.

I think that this warrant, the state relies on this warrant to authorize a search of that

package, of that world of information.

I don't, I certainly don't argue, and I believe my reply brief addressed this, that AOL must

do the search or that the police department is not permitted to obtain that package.

When we're talking about internet service provided information, there has to be a mechanism, and

I agree with that, I agree with the state with that, for the state to obtain a large amount

of data.

Right.

But you know what, can I just add?

Yes.

Your claim is the second part of the two that I just get.

In other words, the search warrant called for A, B, C, D, and E, and the AOL, in addition to that, also gave F and G.

If, to the extent that your claim is that, how is the state responsible for that?

I'm sorry if I was confusing.

That's not my claim.

That's not your claim.

That's not my claim.

I do agree that this warrant authorized AOL to provide that information to the state.

My argument is what the state's action was subsequent to that, once they obtained that.

All right.

So let me just ask you, this is the thing I have some difficulty with it.

Suppose, and that's trying to analogize this to a sort of traditional search warrant.

Suppose that the police have a warrant to search a house for a stolen diamond ring.

As I understand it, they are entitled to go and search anywhere in the house, open all the drawers, go through the kitchen cabinet, anywhere in the house where a diamond ring could be located.

Whereas, for example, if let's suppose that they were searching for a rifle, presumably they couldn't go and open a jewelry box because you couldn't put a rifle in the jewelry box.

But, so if that, I guess that's the thing I'm having some trouble with.

If they can search for all the things listed in the warrant, isn't the analogy that sure they have to look at, sure they have to open these things just as they would open the kitchen cabinet to see if the ring was in there.

And that would be analogous if this warrant limited what they were permitted to seize.

If it said diamond ring.

If it said diamond ring or it said rifle.

So one of the ways that a valid-

But what it did say is evidence of violation of New Hampshire RSA blah, blah, blah, right?

I disagree with that reading of the warrant.

Okay.

I don't agree that the warrant limited them to seize evidence of child pornography or distribution of child pornography.

That it allowed them, once they obtained the disc, they had complete discretion of what they seized from within that email, that user account, as evidenced by, there are other-

I'm confused.

Okay.

Because I looked at the warrant and the affidavit and I thought that the operative language was, we are looking for items that would violate New Hampshire's law.

I have two responses to that.

One is that the affidavit was not incorporated into the search warrant itself.

I understand that's your argument.

It went with it, but you say it wasn't specifically incorporated.

For example, it didn't list in the items to be seized section as described in the affidavit or evidence or instrumentalities of child pornography or distribution of child pornography.

There is no limitation.

The warrant does say this warrant is issued in relation to offense and it lists the possession of child pornography statute.

So you're arguing that that particular language is insufficient?

Yes.

Because it says, I'm reading it, this search warrant is issued in relation to an offense substantially described as follows.

New Hampshire code, RSA 649A3, possession of child sexual abuse images.

You say that that sentence is insufficient to identify the subject of the warrant.

I submit that that sentence is insufficient to limit the officer's ability to seize items.

That it does not give the officers direction about what they are entitled to seize because it is not included in the section that tells them what they are authorized to seize.

So yes, that it is insufficient to properly limit the officer's discretion.

Isn't, but isn't the, in words you, are you saying that the only thing the officers should have been able to seize was, were images?

I'm saying that the, the magistrate didn't limit it at all.

I think that the.

But aren't those other, I mean, aren't all of the things that are listed that the officers can seize, aren't those either fruits or instrumentalities,

or more importantly, evidence of violations of the statute.

For example, information about the fact that this account was used, let's say frequently, would be evidence of control of the account by the defendant.

If the, if this account, for example, had only been used, you know, twice over the period of a year,

maybe the defendant would have an argument, you know, it wasn't, I didn't really have control of this.

But the fact that he, if, if evidence showed that he used it quite a bit, that would, that would limit, limit that.

So, I mean, that would, you know, undermine that defense.

So isn't that evidence of the crime?

Two responses to that.

One, I, I think there are a number of places that are listed in this that, that don't go to show that.

When you're talking about ANI information or IP address information, detailed billing history.

The second response is that the defendant registered this user account when he was, there was no question.

Sure, but isn't billing history, for example, isn't billing history that, you know, the bills were sent to, to the address that we know is his,

and in fact, he paid the bills.

They have credit, you know, on this, this date, this bill was paid.

I mean, wouldn't that be evidence, again, that he had control of this account?

It may be, and that would have been up to the magistrate to determine, and if this had warrant had said, you know, limited the items,

then we could have assessed whether or not those items fit in, that there was probable cause to support the items

that the, the magistrate listed could be, could be seized, or locations they could look in.

But because there was no description of what they could seize.

Well, what, what items do you, of the items that are limited, listed on, in your brief, in item three,

the things or persons to be searched for are described as follows.

What ones in there do you say there was no probable cause to believe would contain evidence of the crime?

I think that the location information specifically, it allows for all, so IP addresses and AI and ANI information,

it allows for the search of all photos, files, and data, and not all photos, files, and data are, are supported, are going to be evidence.

And so they didn't limit.

But you would, wouldn't you logically then require AOL to make the judgment?

No.

As to whether those images are relevant to the crime described in the warrant?

No, I am not.

So I, I think that the difficulty in analogizing this to a typical search warrant is that we're dealing with a unique area.

We are dealing with an area of, of electronically stored information, and not just electronically stored information,

but information provided by an internet service provider.

But all of those bits and bytes are the diamond rings, aren't they?

So I think that it's an important distinction between a hard drive and information provided from an internet service provider that I'd like to address.

When officers are allowed to search an entire hard drive, it's because a defendant can mislabel and hide information,

and that they may not be appropriately labeled.

When you get information from an internet service provider, those folders, those rooms that they can look in, are accurately labeled.

The defendant has not had the ability to manipulate that.

When you assess the, the proper search of a hard drive, you could say you looked in Excel sheets, but you were looking for images, so that was improper.

Do we know, do we know what the police actually did in terms of ESI?

Did they use electronic filters, or did they print stuff out and just...

We don't.

...paw through 8,000 emails, or did they...

It seems to me it makes a difference in terms of the intrusiveness and whether or not you set up some logarithm and some filters and push a button,

and then the information comes out so you don't physically read or sort through all that information.

And that perhaps would make a difference?

I don't think the state proved that the search was limited in that way.

Well, they probably did do that.

Before you go, you've all got me confused about this language that Justice Conboy read.

I don't see it in the warrant.

I see it in the affidavit.

Are you saying...

It is...

It's in the warrant.

It's on a 10...

I'm sorry, appendix page 10, under...

Just above the...

Oh, I see it.

...assertation of probable...

Statement of probable cause.

Thank you.

Can I have one other question?

If you...

I'm sorry.

If you had...

Let's assume we agree with you that the warrant is overbroad.

What...

Isn't...

Isn't there case law?

And I didn't...

I don't think you've addressed this.

But isn't there case law from around the country that says if the warrant is overbroad,

the remedy is you suppress what was recovered that's overbroad.

But to the extent that, for example, I assume in the heartland of this warrant, even if the languages

were overbroad, in the heartland of the warrant was images.

So, maybe we would say, okay, this warrant was overbroad.

We will suppress other things.

But what's...

I don't think...

Is there authority that says you suppress everything if the warrant is overbroad?

I think the important distinction is that when you're talking about a warrant that's general

because it maybe lists items that there wasn't probable cause to seize, there is certainly authority to strike that language.

And if it was seized under the, you know, particular language of an item to be seized, that that is proper.

The important distinction here is that when you're talking about a general warrant because the locations searched,

the amount of information, the amount of property that the police searched is so private and so overbroad

that it falls into that whole purpose of the warrant requirement of avoiding that rummaging through property,

I do think that that is different.

That I have...

I did not locate case law where the court said that if the location was overbroad, you could strike that or the amount of...

You started to make a reference to, well, what if it was Excel spreadsheets?

That wouldn't fall under...

At least if we assume that this search warrant sentence authorizes a search of the whole computer.

But a defendant dealing with child pornography could make an Excel spreadsheet listing the names of the images or whatever.

The defendant would have possibly email references.

So I don't understand what parts of the computer memory you say should not have been included in this.

I think the important two things.

I didn't get to finish my point, so I apologize that I left that out there.

My point was that certainly they would be allowed to look in Excel spreadsheets because the defendant would have that ability.

But these are not files that the defendant could manipulate.

So this is not a hard drive.

This is a disk that is...

I see my light is on.

You may finish answering.

That the internet service provider provided so that the defendant doesn't have the ability to hide files

or doesn't have the ability to create payment histories that actually include child porn images.

I guess the best analogy is that the rooms are properly labeled when the information is coming from an internet service provider.

Ms. Lester, I know your light's on, but there's one question I wanted to ask, which is you've presented this challenge under both the Fourth Amendment and Part 1, Article 19.

Is it your position that Part 1, Article 19 extends greater protection or is it coextensive with the Fourth Amendment?

Certainly in circumstances that Part 1, Article 19 provides greater protection.

I believe that in this case they align and my analysis aligns for both.

But if there are circumstances, I guess I'm not going to say that it's never going to provide more protection.

Right, but in this case, are you arguing that your client has a greater protection under Part 1, Article 19, or not?

And if so, what's the basis for that argument?

I don't believe I am.

I believe that my argument aligns with the Fourth Amendment as well.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Good morning, Your Honors.

Elizabeth Woodcock for the State of New Hampshire.

Just one clarification and one comment.

The first is that the person who went through the documents that were provided was Investigator Mark Putney.

He went through all 8,000 emails and culled out 500 as relevant emails and images?

I think that if I understand the record correctly, there were 8,000 emails.

He found 51 that related to distributing child pornography and then 21 provided the basis for the charges that were brought.

Where am I getting 500?

I'm getting it from someplace.

I didn't make it up.

I'm sure you didn't make it up.

My notes say 51 from the record.

Okay, maybe I miswrote it.

I have the same note.

Oh, you do?

I may have mistyped it, but the investigator went through it, and while it's not part clear on the record from what happens,

what they typically do is they have to have a particular computer because they can't download these images onto an ordinary computer

because then that becomes-

We know.

The computer becomes infected, as the court well knows.

And I think that that's probably what happened here.

So the images at issue, the five images at issue, are among the, what looked to me, though I didn't count them,

21 identified specific images on the computer that you folks are going to take a look at when you're done.

I think that's correct, yes.

The other thing that I think is worth kind of pointing out is that while AOL responded to the search warrant and provided all of this information,

the assumption that somehow these documents are sort of self-identifying is really not the way that the internet and email works.

I mean, we've all had that experience where you start out with an email saying,

can I get together with you on Saturday morning for a cup of coffee?

And by the end of that email exchange, it's gone back and forth and back and forth,

and all of a sudden you're learning that, oh, you know, I've just had a new grandchild.

And that has nothing to do with getting together on Saturday morning for a cup of coffee.

The emails sort of morph.

That's true here. If you look at some of the...

Aren't most of them on the dark net anyway, or are we dealing with the dark net here at all?

I'm not certain, but even if you look at the identifications of the images here,

one of them says, has the identification of EGIL, E-G-I-L.

Well, that has no meaning to anybody at AOL.

It might have to the investigator who was doing the examination of these different files,

because as they get more familiar with the different images that get traded back and forth,

certain images have names that probably pop up.

So all AOL did was to identify electronic information in any form identified with the defendant's account.

They didn't do anything other than that, correct?

That's correct.

Okay.

And I'm not sure how you could expect AOL to do anything different,

because then you'd have them trying to make a judgment call as to whether this was relevant or that was relevant,

or whether these things constituted evidence of trafficking and child pornography.

Can you shed any light on the process that was used here in New Hampshire?

Was it printing out all these emails and going through them?

Was there an electronic filter applied?

There's nothing on the record that tells us that, Your Honor.

It would surprise me if they were in the business of doing very much more than simply looking at the images.

I suppose they have certain printers that are associated with these particular computers that they have to use that are restricted in their use.

Well, as you probably know, I mean, in civil litigation there are firms that you hire to deal with massive volumes of electronic data,

and they slice and dice it a million different ways so that no one's sorting through 300,000 emails physically,

but it produces some that meet all these filters.

Was there a process like that?

Well, the process in New Hampshire is that you have specific investigators who are trained in dealing with child pornography.

And, as I said, they get the disk. In certain cases they'll do a search warrant.

The disk is part of the search warrant that they've taken from the defendant's house.

They load it into a restricted machine, and then they begin to go through the information to determine if any of those things fall within the area of concern to the investigator.

What happens here if they're going through the emails and they find a string of emails about importing drugs into New Hampshire?

Well, that would not be covered by the search warrant.

That would be sort of like looking for a firearm in a jewel box. The warrant is specific to the crime charged.

And if you found evidence of other crimes, I think you'd have to stop and then go back to the court and ask for a different warrant.

Under the plain view doctrine?

Well, I don't know that it would be plain view. I think that because your focus is limited, Justice Hicks,

so I'm not sure that you could just say to yourself, oh, wow, I didn't get him.

I mean, it's not like trying to get Al Capone on tax evasion.

But I think you're exposing yourself to suppression at that point, but can you tell us why this isn't an impermissible general warrant?

It's not impermissible because it does specify exactly what crime is being sought,

and the information that is sought could be related to possession and distribution of child pornography.

The question really is whether they had probable cause.

They did have probable cause because they'd seen the images on his computer when they took it from him.

Do you agree with your opponent that we shouldn't be looking at the affidavit when we're examining the validity of the warrant?

That's what I understand her position to be.

I think that the warrant itself is sufficient because it cites the statute.

That sentence that I read, that is what you are relying upon?

In part. I don't think that the court needs to disregard the affidavit in support of the warrant,

because that would have informed the magistrates finding that there was probable cause to issue it.

But the issue is whether an affidavit can cure an impermissible general warrant.

If the warrant is an impermissible general warrant, then I think that it is a stretch, but that's not the case here.

This warrant specified the information that it was seeking, and it also referred the magistrate to the crime that was being investigated,

and I think that that is sufficient.

The affidavit went with the requested warrant.

In other words, the warrant was prepared by people in what state are we talking about? Virginia?

It was...

Who prepared the warrant?

I think that it was prepared here in New Hampshire, and that it was given to law enforcement in Virginia

to give to a magistrate in Virginia, because the search was taking place.

And the Virginia magistrate had the affidavit as well?

Correct.

Okay.

But as I understand the argument, at least as narrowed on page 10 of the defendant's brief,

they're basically saying, okay, we get it about the warrant that went to Virginia, and AOL, what they produced was fine.

It's just that once the disk got back here in New Hampshire, another warrant was needed in order to narrow the search.

It wasn't what was done that was wrong, it was what wasn't done that was wrong.

I'm not sure that I find that, that I can really follow that argument particularly well, Justice Bassett.

And the reason is that you get the disk back from AOL, and then you would go back and essentially submit the same affidavit

and the same warrant to a judge here in New Hampshire to look at the disk that has already been provided,

because then you can't look at the disk, so you're not going to provide any additional probable cause.

The idea is that it comes to New Hampshire and then suddenly you need a second warrant that is asserting essentially the same information.

It would be sort of like, I mean, it would seem to me it would be sort of like saying if you get a search warrant for a house,

the police can go out and sort of surround the house and make sure it's secure and then they have to get another warrant to actually go in.

I'm not quite, what other information would you have?

I think that's, I think that that's a fair analogy.

I just, I don't, I don't know what else they could add other than we now have the disk.

Are you, is the state comfortable? I, I'm thinking maybe in a broader way than I should, but is the state comfortable with our approach being a traditional approach based upon the law that has developed thus far,

bricks and mortar, so to speak, or do we need to think more metaphorically because we're dealing with digital material?

I find it very hard to think metaphorically in the law.

I think that generally a bricks and mortar approach is, is better because there, there is a certain concreteness to this.

I, I was thinking last night as I was looking at a couple of chairs in my house,

there's a, there's a, many years ago in the 19th century in Gardner, Massachusetts,

Gardner was a chair capital of the world.

It made a lot of chairs and you've seen them, you probably have them in your houses, old wooden chairs with cane seats.

It made the chairs behind you.

Oh, there you go. There you go.

Um, those chairs, if, and I've lived in a number of different places in the country, those chairs traveled all over the United States.

They were made in, in Gardner, Massachusetts. You find them in Palo Alto, California, Washington DC, all over the place.

And that's partly because the chairs moved with whoever was moving.

In a certain sense, I think that, uh, email is sort of like that or, or, or electronic accounts are sort of like that.

The location of the, the place where the chairs were made is Gardner.

Wait, wait a minute. I thought you said you couldn't think metaphorically about the wall.

I, I, well, I'm sorry. I, it's a concrete metaphor.

Yeah.

It's, it's, it's well seated, Your Honor.

Can we switch, can, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh.

I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I, I, I take it back.

Can we switch to the other issue just for a moment?

Although we were struggling trying to figure out our brief look at some of the images this morning,

one of the images I think that we saw this morning, in fact, is subject, is one of the five,

subject to the defendant's challenge.

And I think it's the image where there are two young people, boy and girl, facing each other with tennis rackets.

Correct.

And their argument is, that is pure nudity, and it is not pornography.

Could you help us understand your position, at least with regard to that image,

because it may help us when we analyze the other images.

Well, I think that there are two responses.

The first is that this, the court is in a kind of unique position with child pornography cases, I think.

Generally speaking, you, you take the evidence, if it's a drug deal or something like that,

you take the evidence and you say to yourself, does that support the jury's verdict?

And, and in a certain sense, that's what your assignment is here.

You're looking to see if the jury reached the appropriate verdict, whether the evidence was sufficient for it.

So, the second thing is, and I think that if you look at the, the United States Supreme Court case that I cited,

and I'm looking for the name of it, New York v. Ferber, you don't just look at it as if,

well, does that interest me as a person looking at this?

Does that arouse any, any prurient interest?

You step back and you say, you give it a, a different kind of look to see, could this be of interest to someone?

Help us, how different? How different? How do we do that?

Well, I think that you look at, at the surrounding evidence.

You have to take a look at the photograph.

You also take a look at what this, what, what attracted this individual in a certain sense.

Because the jury is not just saying to themselves, well, do I find that appealing?

Well, no. I mean, I look at it and, and, and I think, well, it's not exactly something that I would have hanging on my wall in my house.

But, I think you also have to ask yourselves what the attraction was.

Because your interests are not going to be the same as those of the defendant who was charged in this case.

Was there anything on the, other than the, is this another case where, where the evidence of what, of what you say constitutes the statutory violation, is the image itself?

Or is there other, in other words, for example, is there, you know, in order to get to that image on the, electronically, is there some kind of sort of advertisement that says something suggesting,

suggesting that what you're going to see is a sexually, you know, attractive or sexually interesting photo?

The, the, the actual image that's described there, I think is called Four Balls, which wouldn't suggest anything particular, one way or the other.

So, I don't think that there is that sort of advertisement that says, here, look at this.

Um, you can look at the information that was provided in the search warrant about the defendant's interests, some of which I, I quoted in my brief.

And I think that that can inform the way that you view the pictures.

Uh, just a very quick question.

What if we look at, there are five images and one video at, at issue.

What if we conclude that four of them, we believe, constitute a violation of the statute, but one doesn't?

What do we do?

What do we do with the case?

I think, in fairness, you have to remand it for resentencing.

I think, I think that the court is operating off what it found, um, was, was pornography.

And if this court says, no, this doesn't constitute child pornography, I think it has to go back to the court.

Thank you.

I don't think that you can have evidence that is not properly charged as a crime being used to sentence a person.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Do you need to reserve time, counsel?

Absolutely.

Um, if I could address the issue of what can be considered when determining whether, um, these images constitute, um, child pornography.

I think that if you're talking about circumstantial evidence of age, um, that the surrounding information can be a factor that is considered.

But when you have direct evidence of the image itself, mere nudity in a photograph does not become child pornography in the hands of someone with a prurient interest.

It, it, it is on its face, so I, I disagree that other circumstances surrounding this, such as perhaps the content of the emails or other things listed in the affidavit, um, can be considered when, when addressing whether these images depict lewd, a lewd exhibition.

And then do I understand correctly your argument that it, your problem isn't with what was done in terms of the information that AOL provided, but you think there should have been another step and another warrant required.

Yes.

Is that right?

Yes, it is.

And I think there's two ways that, that it can be accomplished.

Um, I do think we have to think a little metaphorically about, or differently, if, if I could finish the question, about electronically stored information, particularly online, um, information.

Either the warrant could list, make it clear that once the police obtained that they were permitted for a second search and what they were permitted to seize during that second search.

Or a second warrant could be required.

And the reason the second warrant adds something is because the magistrate is not just looking, is this information that I have probable cause, all of this located at AOL.

They make a second determination about where within that user account, um, there is probable cause to believe there is evidence and with a specific list of items they're authorizing to seize, will also limit where within.

I guess I'm confused then. If A, if A, they get the search warrant, AOL gives a disk. If they can't look at the disk, how can they say anything to the magistrate more than what they said originally?

I certainly don't think there's an additional affidavit. I think that it just, that the magistrate's job is to make it clear and avoid discretion from the officers in the, it can certainly be accomplished in one warrant.

Um, the feds do it under federal criminal procedure 41A where they just have three sections instead of two. Um, that allows the police to seize the storage medium and then allows a second search of the storage medium.

So I don't, I don't think that there would be additional information in the affidavit, but that the direction the magistrate gives would be clear.

So would, would the magistrate have to look at what's on the disk then to authorize the police to search it?

I think that potentially, um, look at the files or at least have some information from AOL.

This warrant, this warrant could have listed just another sentence that said,

and then permit search of user account for X, Y, and Z.

And I would submit that that would have then been a valid warrant.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Now, counsel, would you please go to the clerk's office and.
