This is case 2016-0569 in the matter of liquidation of the home insurance company.

The record should reflect the fact that Justice Bassett is disqualified from this case.

May it please the court.

My name is Eric Smith, appearing for the insurance commissioner, the liquidator of the home insurance company.

I have a question to preserve two minutes for rebuttal.

Mr. Smith, my first question, is this case going to run afoul of the rule against perpetuities?

Do you honor any, unfortunately, property, cash, or insurance company liquidations?

Take a great deal of time.

Proceed.

The issue this morning is whether the agreement authorizes the deduction of the legal

expenses of the California Insurance Guarantee Association, SIGA, in defending

against the Western Trust's Snyder Action.

The liquidator submits the answer is yes.

Paragraph 91 provides the deduction of SIGA's expenses and deserves the purpose

of the agreement to bring finality to the Western Trust obligations of the

home estate and to protect the creditors of the home estate against adverse effect

from the trust to the suburbs.

Where does the contractual authority to deviate from the statute arise?

Your Honor, we do not believe we are deviating from the statute.

The trial court did, right?

The trial court did make that observation in the context of its standing discussion,

but yes, it did.

And the reason we jumped to that issue, the priority statute, the priority

statute provides, obviously, successive priorities, administrative expenses,

policy claims, federal government, wage claims, et cetera.

And it does that because the legislature is effectively setting social values.

You have the fact of an insolvency, which means that not everybody can be paid.

And the legislature has determined who gets paid and uses successive priorities.

If one priority class doesn't get paid in full, the next priority class gets nothing.

That, we submit, is what the no subclasses provision of the priority

statute is about.

It is essentially saying that the liquidator cannot favor someone by giving

them 23 cents in the dollar and not somebody else in the same kind of claim,

21 cents in the dollar.

And it also, of course, prevents applicants or creditors from asking for

that kind of special treatment.

The issue here with respect to what the agreement does is it relates to the

amount of the claim on which a distribution will be made.

And the determination of the amounts are determined under a different

statutory provision, which is R2C45, which provides that it authorizes the

liquidator to compound, compromise, or in any other manner, negotiate the amount

for which claims will be recommended.

And what we did here in the context of the essentially unique context of

the Western Trust claim, where post-settlement they wish to continue to

pursue a guarantee association, was to essentially provide a hydraulic mechanism.

And so essentially the amount to which the distribution can change based upon

post-settlement results of the guarantee association.

If I understand what you're saying, you're saying is basically when we made

this agreement, your opponent agreed that if they decided to do something

that was going to cause SIGA to incur expenses, and thereby reducing the

amount of class 2 claims that are of money that's available for class 2 claims,

that the action that they took that caused SIGA to incur those expenses

would be basically charged against them, as opposed to against the whole

class 2, the whole of class 2.

Yes, that's exactly right, Your Honor.

We have a situation where, because of the New Hampshire Insurance Guarantee

Association Act, which provides that the New Hampshire Guarantee Association

or a similar organization in another state has a claim, makes a payment,

that flows through and becomes a claim in the homeless state.

Similarly, provides that if the Guarantee Association incurs an

expense in handling claims, that flows through.

Because if it wasn't for that term in the agreement, then if SIGA incurred expenses

at the, because of what your opponent did in filing claims in California or

whatever, then that would deplete the class 1.

I mean, that would deplete and cause more expenses to be incurred that would

fall under class 1.

And if there wasn't this provision, then anybody in class 2

would have to sort of proportionally, would proportionally share in those,

in a reduction of what they would get.

Yes, the payment of class 1 expenses depletes the assets of the estate.

Is it, is this meant to be a disincentive against pursuing such claims?

Well, I think it would operate as one, obviously has not operated as one,

because what happened here is, essentially, unlike other claimants who,

when they enter into a settlement agreement, essentially finalized the liability,

finalized the relationship between the policyholder and the company.

So that nothing else will happen that will adjust that policyholder's share

of the liabilities of the estate.

Here, they insisted on pursuing SIGA.

That exposes the estate to increase potentially duplicative payments,

as the Spirit Court did note.

The estate can't be censored.

More than happy to let them go about their business that way, obviously.

Well, you're right.

In an ideal world, of course, we would have had a settlement agreement

that would not have allowed this sort of thing at all.

That's what we try to achieve.

In this case, couldn't do that.

And so it could pro quo.

They got the right to continue to pursue SIGA,

and the liquidator obtained the deductions to try to protect the other

creditors of the estate.

And the Spirit Court, the rationale of the Spirit Court

was essentially two-fold under the contract.

The first was the Spirit Court felt that the Snyder case was not a claim

under the policies against any insurance guarantee association.

We submit that was an error, because the policies are the essence

of what you need to claim against SIGA is about SIGA.

Am I correct in understanding?

I mean, I understand your partner makes this argument

that there's a difference between the DJ action

and actually filing a claim, but am I correct in understanding?

I assume, I don't have the same question for your partner.

I assume I'm right on this, that a decision in the DJ action

would have raised you to counter a collateral stop-all effect

in a later filing a claim in the SIGA, in under SIGA.

Is that correct?

Certainly, if any issues that were litigated and determined

would have such an effect.

In other words, if somebody files a declaratory judgment

action that says, even if it's not asking for write me a check,

so to speak, if you file a declaratory judgment action

saying we are entitled to some coverage

under, because of these policies, to collect from SIGA

and the declaratory judgment court says, yes, you're right,

then when you file a claim, if you later file a claim,

the SIGA can't say, wait a minute, we want to

relitigate the issue of whether you're entitled

to collect, whether you're actually entitled to recover some.

I would certainly assume that to be the case, Your Honor.

And I think what happens here is the declaratory judgment

action, of course, is the usual way to determine

the dispute between over policies.

And effectively what the Western Trust position here does

is have a situation where you have the declaratory judgment

action that can include questions of coverage

under the policies, questions of the interpretation

of the SIGA statute, the termination of a particular

amount that would be due, and so that you'd have

an end result if they were to prevail,

and then it results in declaratory judgments

that SIGA owes the Western Trust X number of dollars.

Their position is, all of that litigation

is not a claim at all.

The only thing that's a claim is the subsequent letter

to SIGA saying, please pay us X number of dollars

in accordance with the declaratory judgments.

And we think that's an artificial distinction.

Of course, the word claim that's to be interpreted here

is a word in the contract.

It's a contract term.

And the question is, what does that contract term mean?

The ordinary claim meaning of a word claim

encompasses insertions of right.

It's not limited to claim for payment of a particular dollar

amount.

An assertion of right, as in a declaratory judgment,

is a claim.

And people would usually describe a declaratory judgment

as a claim under a policy.

The best evidence of what the parties here understood it

to mean is that use of the word claim elsewhere

in the contract.

Desert litigation in California,

which is the pre-subtle litigation that was dismissed

without prejudice as a result of the settlement.

That litigation was described in the California Intermediate

Court of Appeals decision as involving a claim for payment,

a declaratory relief cause of action against SIGA.

In the contract, in the seventh whereas clause,

and in paragraphs 4 and 10, the parties referred to

the Western Trust's claims against SIGA

in the Zurich litigation.

So if they're talking about that declaratory judgment

action as a claim, so here the Snyder action is a claim.

And the final point I'd make on this is that this common

sense understanding of what a claim is is confirmed

in Recital G of the escrow agreement,

where it's at page 99 in the record,

where the parties recite that the trust is pursuing

claims under the policies against SIGA in the Snyder

action.

The second rationale of the Superior Court

concerned the term expenses.

And there we submit this paragraph because the first

sentence of paragraph 9b defines the problem,

the fact that if they were to prevail against SIGA,

any recovery and any expenses would then come flowing

through the home estate.

And it's then the second and third sentence

provide the remedy for that problem.

The court disregarded the sense of that paragraph

as a whole when it decided to interpret the

reference to policies as to class 2 defense expenses

as opposed to the defenses of SIGA in defending

against the claim, which is what the first sentence

is expressly about.

The court made that leap based upon a similarity

phrase between the language and the priority

statutes first to policy-related claims.

And there's then goes on to define these claims

within the coverage of the policies

and the language of the contract,

which was policies-related expenses.

In the contract, it's a capitalized plural term,

which is defined terms specifically referring

to the home policies issued to the MacArthur companies.

It's not a generic reference that would be

a reference to the priority statute.

And it's in there because it clarifies the fact

that the claims for which that deduction could be made

are claims based on home policies

because SIGA, as a guarantee association,

could be liable or it could be associated with a claim

by the Western Trust under policies

issued by other insolvent insurance companies.

The trust says that's unnecessary,

this wasn't a minimalist drafting exercise

as any reading of the contract indicates

the policy where policies appear elsewhere

in the paragraph and there they're all be supplusions.

In some of the parties it meant to refer

to class 2 amounts, they would have said so.

There would have been no reason

to have this whole structure in paragraph 9B

of distinguishing between recoveries and expenses.

I've already touched upon the priority statute argument,

so it's really those three points

which we would make and if the Court is in

no further questions.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Good morning, Your Honours.

Leah Houghton for the trustees

of the Western Discussed Settlement Trust.

Mr. Smith began by talking about

what the liquidators purpose was

in negotiating this provision.

I think it's important to get some context

as to what was important to the trustees.

The trust exists for the sole purpose

of compensating those who have asbestos-related injuries

caused by the Western companies.

Why does this matter?

When the trustees were negotiating

the claim resolution with the home liquidator,

they were doing so as fiduciaries of the trust's claimants.

And the reason that it was so important

to the trustees to preserve recoveries

or the right to seek recoveries

against guarantee associations

was because they want to maximize

the funds available to pay their claimants.

And the expectation is that the home estate

is not going to marshal sufficient assets

to pay all class II creditors like that of the trust.

Why shouldn't they carry the freight

of that proper exercise

of their fiduciary responsibility?

They're the cost of that exercise.

The cost, but I would submit that it's divorced

from the New Hampshire Insurers Rehabilitation

and Liquidation Act in this way.

Mr. Smith talks about how the purpose

is to prevent a difference in distribution amounts

to claimants within the same class.

It's more broadly to prevent uneven treatment.

But that's what the statute's for,

but why isn't your client perfectly capable

of cutting their own deal?

They can cut their own deal

as to the value assigned their claim,

but the priority scheme, both import to C44 and 46,

that's mandatory.

That's not within the authority

of the liquidator or any private litigant

with the liquidator to veer from.

And what's happened here

is that there's an effective subclass

and the liquidator raises in his papers below and here

that this was some sort of unique circumstance.

And that the release provision

in the Western Trust Settlement Agreement

was somehow different than the release provision

found in typical settlement agreements

and he civets the champion release provision.

But what the trust is seeking

in the declaratory judgment action

in Alameda County in California

is to recover from SEGA the allowed amount

by the New Hampshire Superior Court.

Initially, it was envisioned

that perhaps they would seek amount in excess of that,

but that is no longer the case.

And any holder of a Class II claim,

even if their settlement includes a release of the policies,

doesn't prevent them from seeking

the amount of the allowed claim

from the Appropriate Insurance Guarantee Association

that they do so.

They'll be...

Well, how do we, I mean, you say that,

but your opponent seems to say

that that's not, that we don't really know that.

I mean, how do we, you know,

where is it in the record that that's true?

How do we know that that's true?

But it's also not in the record that it's not.

And so he's making, he's suggesting

that a policy release forecloses

a creditor of the home estate

from turning to its insurance guarantee association

and saying, we want you to pay this allowed claim.

And there's nothing to...

That is in fact what the Western Trust

is doing in California.

And I can...

But well, if that's...

But I mean, I guess if that was...

If, I mean, if that would have been allowed anyway,

then why have this provisioned in the contract?

If you could have done that anyway,

why put this in the contract?

Because when the contract was being negotiated,

it was being considered by the trust

that they were going to seek amounts

in excess of the allowed claim.

And in that circumstance,

there would be difficulty

when you're considering the Guarantee Association

statute in what it allows.

So the release prevents the trust from seeking

amounts in excess of the allowed claim,

but it most certainly doesn't prevent

the trust from seeking from SEGA,

the amount of the allowed claim itself.

And the SEGA statute makes that claim.

There's a specially recent legislative history

which says that that's why SEGA is there.

We pay upfront in full,

and then we can sit in the liquidation estate

and wait to receive whatever sense

on the dollar are available.

And so to suggest that that's something

that's not available to other claimants

simply because there's a policies released

actually frustrates the very purpose

of these insurance guarantees.

Can I ask you another question?

We're going back to the terms of the paragraph 9B1.

So it says in the second sentence

what you say is a controlling sin.

Claimants agree that any judgments,

settlements, or other recoveries by claimants.

So let's assume you in SEGA,

in your litigation in California,

you go to SEGA and you say,

listen, we the trust were required to

expend, I'm making the number up,

$100,000 in defending against

some underlying plaintiff's claims.

And SEGA says, you're right.

We agree.

You will incur $100,000.

Does SEGA write a check for $100,000 to you?

To your client for that?

They could, but there's also provisions

that allow or that require an insurance

guarantee association to provide a defense.

So I don't think that that,

I don't think it's right to say

that it would always be termed a recovery.

Well, it seems to me, but I mean,

it seems, isn't that sort of,

what wouldn't that generally be?

They were either going to provide a recovery

in terms of writing a check,

or they were going to provide a recovery

in terms of providing equivalent services.

And if that's true, this is where I,

this is the thing I have a difficulty

with your interpretation of the agreement.

If that's true, then that is a recovery

within the first clause of the second sentence.

And which in the second clause

then goes on to say,

and the insurance guarantee association's

policy related expenses.

You want us to say really that the example

I just, that I just gave is,

is that that's what they meant

by policy related expenses,

but it seems to me that a much more

sensible instruction construction of that

is that it's exactly what your opponent was saying.

It's not, the distinction is the situation

where the guarantee, where SIGA

is going to have to pay either in money

or equivalent services to you

to provide a defense, or to pay a judgment

or whatever on the one hand,

and the policies related expenses

incurred by the guarantee association

for their own defense costs.

That seems to me to be the natural reading

of that second sentence.

Respectfully isn't when you consider

what arguments the liquidator presents

to explain what policy's related means.

First, he says below, and in his opening brief here,

that that was inserted because SIGA

has obligations to pay amounts

under other insolvent insurers' policies.

If SIGA were to pay amounts, say,

under a mission policy issued to the Western trust,

there would be absolutely no circumstance

in which SIGA would submit that.

Well, but is it really unreasonable

to think that maybe that's true,

just like maybe in the other thing

that you said before, that there's nothing

to stop you from providing?

Maybe that's true, but why is it really unreasonable

to expect that when you're making an agreement,

you would put in language that would be,

would sort of make something really explicit?

No, because respectfully, it's nonsensical.

There would be absolutely, it's not maybe is it true,

it's absolutely the truth,

that there would be no occasion where SIGA

or any other guarantee association

would come into the home estate

and say we paid these amounts

under a mission policy,

but we're asking the home estate...

Well, but suppose there would be, for example,

could there be a situation where, for example,

an attorney was hired, let's say,

to provide a defense, and there was some,

and I agree that this might be somewhat unusual,

but a situation where the two,

the, particularly because it's with SIGA,

that one attorney was able to represent both interests?

And would that be, you know,

and then there was some question of allocation

so that this would prevent,

this would ensure that it was only for the home policies?

You're positing a scenario where there is a,

there's some sort of litigation

that involves both a home policy and...

And some other, and perhaps some other policy,

some other type of, some other insurance company's policy.

Even still, if there was,

if there was a, there were amounts

that pertained to the other policy,

I would fully expect that Mr. Smith

representing his client would not entertain the thought

that that was going to come out of the assets

of the home estate.

It's not statutorily allowed.

And the only other argument that Mr. Smith presents now

in his reply is that it was there,

okay, we acknowledge that it wasn't necessary

in order to make the point he makes below

and in his opening brief,

but it was necessary to prevent overhead

from coming out, from becoming a deduction.

Overhead is a claims handling expense.

It's a class one expense that's,

that comes, that's reimbursed at 100%.

And if the argument the liquidator is making

is that, which is structural in nature,

the first sentence identifies a problem,

the second sentence solves it.

What he's basically saying is that

the claims handling expenses identified

in the first sentence are the policies

related expenses that are then stated

in the second sentence.

But he is saying that overhead,

which is in fact a claims handling expense,

is not a policies related expense.

So he hasn't offered any interpretation

that explains what policies related means.

And what that leaves is exactly what

the trust is asserting,

which is policies related expenses

refers to the priorities statute,

which speaks of policy related claims.

And what those are are,

or what those include are defense costs

incurred in the defense of the insured,

not claims handling expenses

that are incurred by the guarantee association.

And if I can turn to this issue.

So, you know, can I just ask you then,

if that, if, if your position is correct,

then what are, and so

you have in the first clause of the second sentence,

judgments, settlements, or other recoveries.

What are other recoveries then?

It seems like it's a generic term to me.

I mean, it would have been if,

if what was intended by other

recoveries were defense costs,

that is such a known,

you know, a known expense

that it would be articulated

and not just left us to other recoveries.

So you don't know what it means?

I think it's judgments.

It's a broad term, I guess,

to capture any sort of recovery.

But if I could turn to the second argument

that Mr. Smith raises here, the claim.

He mentions the Zurich litigation.

And in particular, the use of the term claim

in the settlement agreement

to refer to the trust claim

against SEGA in the Zurich litigation.

It doesn't say claim under the policies

when it's referring to what was the trust claim

in the Zurich litigation against SEGA.

It simply says claim.

Paragraph 9b1 says claim under the policies.

In his papers, the liquidator states

that the effective date language

must have had to have delineated

between costs incurred by SEGA and the Zurich litigation,

which was going to be dismissed

without prejudice under the agreement,

and costs that may be incurred

if there's some sort of subsequent litigation

that the trust brings against SEGA.

It was the liquidator that insisted

upon the dismissal of the Zurich litigation,

which the trust agreed to do.

Which the trust agreed to do without prejudice.

If 9b1 provides that any expenses incurred

in any claim, not a claim under the policies,

but declaratory judgment action,

that the trust brings against SEGA

or are going to come off the top,

the liquidator would not have been concerned

with whether or not the Zurich litigation proceeded

because there would have already been built in protection.

The significance there is that 9b1

doesn't speak just generically of a claim.

It speaks of a claim under the policies.

And if the Zurich litigation wasn't a claim

under the policies, neither is the current Alameda action

a claim under the policies

because they're both declaratory judgment action.

But wait, what happens?

Let's just say you're trying,

in the declaratory judgment action,

you're trying to get a declaration

that you're entitled to get that the terms,

both under the terms of the SEGA statute

and the policies in question here,

there's coverage for some of the trust's claims.

Isn't that right?

We are seeking a determination

that SEGA has a statutory obligation

to pay the allowed claim in homes.

So let's assume you win.

You, SEGA says, yep, or a court in California says,

SEGA's not saying it, yes.

You win, right?

Now, isn't basically the next thing that's left

is you say, write me a check.

You go in and you file a new action that says,

write me a check for the amount that you said before

we're entitled to get.

But I think that that next step is significant,

even though the suggestion is that it shouldn't be onerous

and that the declaratory judgment action,

even if it resolves favorably for the trust,

is not gonna result in some sort of money judgment,

something that we can enforce.

If we are still going to have to submit a claim.

Well, but same question I had for your opponent.

If you won in a court on the declaratory judgment

action, could SEGA come back in

and re-litigate that in your claim case?

They could certainly breach.

And if they breach their statutory obligation,

including because they ignore some sort of

deck relief that we receive,

then there is going to be a subsequent litigation.

Well, sure, I mean, if somebody can,

sure, if somebody breaches a contract that,

but that's not, that's not,

that's me like saying somebody defy the court order.

Sure, that can be some remedy for that.

But by the same token, if the circumstances are such

that the trust does not get a favorable ruling,

no claims ever going to be submitted.

A claim in the sense of here is a claim

that we believe you have a statutory obligation to pay.

And even in the context of the current

declaratory judgment action and what the trust

is now seeking in it, the allowed claim,

not some amount in excess, not the Jones and the Smith

claim that aren't encompassed by the allowed claim.

There's a very real circumstance

that there is never going to be an occasion

for the Alameda County Court to open up a home policy

and consider whether there's coverage for a claim.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Do you need your reserve time, Ms. Christneth?

Let me just make one brief one.

This is the question of the release

under the home policies.

In your very case, the release home

for all obligations of the prison claim and the policies.

If home is released for all obligations under the policies,

then the guarantee association,

which could only be obligated for a home obligation

under the policies, is not obligated.

They would release the policies in exchange

for the recommended amount.

So basically you're saying that what your opponent is saying

about they could file claims at CIGA for the,

as long as it didn't exceed what the agreement was here,

is not accurate because it would have been,

CIGA would say, sorry, you released any claim

against home, get out of here.

That's correct, we fully expect CIGA to do that.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted, the court will take a brief recess.

All right.
