This is case number 2016-0118, state of New Hampshire versus Felix Ruiz.

Attorney Hausman, in order to set the context for the students and other guests who are here this morning, would you mind giving us a brief review of the facts?

Certainly. May it please the court, Stephanie Hausman, on behalf of Felix Ruiz.

When police encountered Mr. Ruiz at a DMV office, they were there because he was with a companion who was suspected of trying to obtain a New Hampshire license fraudulently.

In the course of their investigation of that issue, there was some indication that Mr. Ruiz was involved.

However, the charges relating to that scheme were ultimately dismissed, and Mr. Ruiz was only convicted of receiving stolen property for a passport that was found by the police through the course of this investigation in his car.

I have two points on the Miranda issue, and then I want to discuss the sufficiency of the evidence.

First, the post-Miranda statement was extracted by reference to the inadmissible statement, and was therefore also inadmissible.

Can I just ask you, Ms. Hausman, the U.S. Supreme Court case that involved the two, you know, the first no Miranda warnings then, was the defendant in that case actually arrested before the first statement?

I mean, in other words, was the person told you're under arrest?

I think so. I think the police had gone to her house and arrested her and brought her to the station.

If that's true, that is a fairly significant difference than this case. Is it not that at least here the police did not tell the person you are under arrest and then begin to question?

It wasn't a fact that was highlighted by any of the decisions in the Sebert case. So it is a difference, but I don't know that it's a significant difference.

We have a test articulated in Fleetwood.

Yes.

How does this fact scenario run afoul of Fleetwood?

All of the Fleetwood factors support suppressing the post-Miranda statement.

Didn't they also support suppression in Fleetwood?

No. The court in Fleetwood did not suppress the post-Miranda statement, and the differences between Fleetwood in this case are in Fleetwood.

It was a very similar situation in which there had been a lengthy interview beforehand.

Once the defendant started making incriminating statements, she or he were given Miranda warnings.

In Fleetwood, the police gave Miranda warnings and then left the defendant alone, asked her to write out her statement, came back, advised her of her Miranda rights again,

kept offering her breaks, a chance to have a cigarette, a glass of water, and kept reviewing Miranda rights as the interview progressed.

And here, couldn't the police have assumed that because the defendant was being so cooperative and didn't ask for any such thing, they weren't in jeopardy of making a legal mistake?

Well, I think it's hard when, I mean, I think the courts recognize that encounters with police have some inherent pressure, and so that the defendant didn't ask for a break isn't significant.

What the police should do is offer a break and see if the defendant needs a break.

And a significant issue in this case that's different from Fleetwood is that the police specifically referred to the inadmissible statement and used it as a lever to extract the post-Miranda statement.

Doesn't that, in some sense, cut both ways?

In other words, is if the defendant, as I understand it, after he's given Miranda warnings, if the defendant had admitted what he had said earlier, then your argument will be, well, look, the cat was out of the bag, so to speak.

Of course he admitted it.

He had said it before.

But here, the fact that initially he lies about it, doesn't that suggest that he was not really, you know, he didn't think the cat was out of the bag.

He sort of felt free to tell the police something completely different than what he had said originally?

I think it might mean that he really heard the Miranda warnings and realized the jeopardy that he was in.

And so his initial post-Miranda statement, so the incriminating statement that he had made, was that he had falsely signed a lease agreement as the landlord.

And so he's given Miranda warnings, and then the police say, can you write out what you just told us?

And so Mr. Ruiz writes out a statement in which he says that the co-defendant has signed as the landlord.

So he's trying to actually understand the jeopardy that he's in after giving the Miranda warnings, and the officer says, no, no, no, that's not what you said before.

Can you write it on the back?

So what you're saying is the Miranda warnings told him that the appropriate thing to do was to lie?

The Miranda warnings advised him of the jeopardy that he was in and that his statements could be used against him.

And so at that point Mr. Ruiz makes a different statement, and the police use that pre-Miranda inadmissible statement to extract the incriminating post-Miranda statement.

Well, you keep using the term extract, but it doesn't seem to me as if this was really a coercive act by the police.

Well, Mr. Ruiz is, when left to give the statement that he wanted to give to the police, the statement that he gave was the co-defendant signed the lease as the landlord.

And the trooper wouldn't accept that and said, that isn't what you said before. You told us before that you signed, so I want you to clarify that.

Do you agree that it's a totality of the circumstances test?

It is a totality of the circumstances test.

And isn't the problem for your client that he's just too nice a guy?

Under the totality of the circumstances, particularly looking at the Fleetwood factors and also looking at this concern that is almost universally expressed by courts,

that the use of an inadmissible statement to prompt the post-Miranda incriminating statement, all of those factors together and considering this court's precedent in Fleetwood

and the United States Supreme Courts, plurality concurring and dissenting opinions in Siebert, the court should find that the post-Miranda incriminating statement should have been supervised.

Ms. Hasman, you're basing your argument both on the Fifth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution and on Part 1, Article 15 of the New Hampshire Constitution.

Is there anything in either the different language of Article 15 or the history of Article 15 that would lend support for your argument?

This court has consistently held that Article 15 is more protective than the Fifth Amendment.

So this court has found that the state has to prove a valid Miranda waiver beyond a reasonable doubt, where under the Fifth Amendment it's only by a preponderance of the evidence.

So would you be making the same argument if only a federal constitutional question had been raised?

I think under Siebert we would be making the same argument, but the argument is even stronger given the Article 15.

This court's jurisprudence on that and the Fleetwood decision.

Can you address the state's argument about preservation of the Siebert argument?

The state argues that the defendant didn't raise Siebert until the post-trial motion to reconsider.

This issue was fairly before the court. There had been a pretrial motion to suppress.

The court issued its order in which it suppressed the pre-Miranda statement.

And so really only raising this Fleetwood-Siebert issue, that order came out the day before trial started.

So on the first day of trial defense counsel again renewed the motion, said I intend to file a written motion within the 10 days and the court said that's fine.

The defense counsel then objected each and every time various pieces of evidence was admitted at trial and then filed a written motion.

That defense counsel didn't raise the case name of Siebert before the motion to reconsider is of no moment.

The issue was fairly before the court.

But they did the lawyer argue Fleetwood?

Yes, yes. That was the case most relied on an abashant on the morning of the first day of trial.

So if we were to decide the case under New Hampshire constitutional law, the failure to mention Siebert would be of no moment?

Yes, that is correct.

Would you move on to your sufficiency argument?

Yes. I just want to make one more point.

The state has not argued that the admission of the post-Miranda incriminating statement was harmless.

Turning to the sufficiency issue, there was insufficient evidence that the passport was stolen, that Mr. Ruiz knew or believed that it probably had been stolen,

that the passport had an owner other than Mr. Ruiz and that Mr. Ruiz had a purpose to deprive that person of the passport.

Can I just ask you, you make a great deal, you say several times in your brief that there's no evidence that it's illegal for somebody other than the rightful owner to possess a passport.

That may be entirely true. But I'm not quite sure. I mean, it is not illegal if I own a gun, it's not illegal for you to possess the gun.

Yes.

But if you and I have no connection with each other.

Yes.

And all of a sudden you end up with the gun.

I mean that actually will probably even be better with a gun because it's not specific.

Here you're talking about you end up with somebody else's passport.

What would be the possible reason, legitimate reason that you would have somebody else's passport that you don't know?

Well, the trial court's rationale hinged on this hypothesis that it was inherently illegal to possess somebody else's passport.

And from that hypothesis, the trial court inferred that Mr. Ruiz should have known it was illegal for him to possess it.

But does it matter, isn't the question is not so much, if the question is sufficiency, it's not so much what the trial court's theory was.

It's whether the evidence would allow a rational jury to conclude.

Yes.

Right, so what?

Yes.

So the passport here had expired almost 10 years prior and therefore it was of no utility to the person to whom it was issued.

The state offered no evidence about Ms. Riley or about any other person who had a possessory interest in it.

And because of that lack of evidence, it was a reasonable conclusion consistent with innocence that the passport had been abandoned.

And that Mr. Ruiz had come to possess it in a manner similar to what he had told the police.

Similar to what he had told the police, which was...

That it had been abandoned and that he was...

And he just happened to find it and somebody told him that he could clean out an apartment and that you could keep whatever's in there.

And he just happened to find it and decided, this is something I'll hang on to.

He told the police that the landlord had hired him to clean out the apartment of Ms. Riley,

that she had passed away, that she had no family members, and that whatever was left in the apartment if he found anything...

And would the jury...

I mean, I assume because the state has not argued, as you say, the state has not made a harmless error argument on anything, as I understand.

Wouldn't the jury be able to consider all of the other evidence suggesting that your client was involved in the sort of procuring fraudulent identity kind of things to say,

well, wait a minute.

You know, this is...

We're being asked to believe that this is what happened.

We have all this other evidence, including what happened at the motor vehicle department, with the license suggesting that this person was really in the business of facilitating the procurement of fraudulent documents.

That's really the only sensible explanation for his possession of the passport.

I think that explains his motivation to possess the passport, that if he is involved in identity fraud, then he has a reason to want to possess the passport.

But that does not provide sufficient evidence, in a circumstantial case, that he knew or believed the passport had probably been stolen,

and that he had a purpose to deprive someone who had the real possessory interest in it of the passport.

What would you say then would be the state's strongest evidence that he knew or should have known that this was a stolen passport?

I just want to clarify that should have known language is not sufficient.

He needs to have known or believed that it probably was stolen, so the state has to prove that beyond a reasonable doubt.

But if it is, as you say, ten years expired, no connection to the person, what was the state relying upon to persuade the jury?

I think the state also relied on, so the trial court articulated its reasoning that he should know it's illegal because it's somebody else's passport.

I think the prosecutor below sort of agreed that that was the strongest evidence.

Just because it was, had been somebody else's at some time.

Yes.

What significance, if any, should we attribute to the fact that Trooper DuPont went to the car to look for the purse,

and then picked up documents that he did not disclose when he came back and spoke with the defendant?

So are you asking about the sort of Miranda issue and what should have been suppressed after?

Yes.

Thank you.

Is it a relevant fact to your argument?

Yes.

So to go back to the Miranda issue, Mr. Ruiz argues again on appeal that because the post-Miranda incriminating statement should have been suppressed,

all of the other evidence that the police obtained, that was the first domino in a chain,

and all of the other evidence was obtained as a result of the Miranda violation.

The state made no argument below that the evidence that flowed from the Miranda violation was sufficiently attenuated to allow admission,

and the trial court didn't make a ruling on whether that evidence was attenuated from the Miranda violation

if this court finds that the post-Miranda incriminating statement shouldn't have been admitted.

Back to sufficiency.

I'm curious, did the state offer any evidence of concerning the owner of the passport, the real owner?

No.

There was no evidence about that person or anyone who might have had a possessory interest in the passport.

Thank you.

Turning back to Justice Bassett's question, just to finish the loop there,

this court should reject the state's argument made for the first time on appeal that the evidence is attenuated from a Miranda violation,

or in the alternative the court should remand for the trial court to make a ruling on that issue.

If there are no further questions.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Attorney McGinnis.

Good morning, may it please the court.

Susan McGinnis for the state of New Hampshire, I'd be happy to take questions at any time.

What's your strongest evidence in favor of the evidence in the trial being sufficient?

Well, first of all, the jury doesn't have to believe even uncontroverted testimony or uncontroverted evidence.

The defendant gave a statement saying that he had been cleaning out this apartment

and that the person had told him that he could keep the passport,

but there was no absolutely no explanation of why he would want another person's passport that was expired.

Other than the jury knew the defendant had a bunch of other documents with other people's information on them.

But that doesn't prove intent to deprive another of his or her property.

Well, it does in the sense that the jury could conclude that he's lying about how he got this passport

and lying about how he has it and that he's admitted he...

And from lying, you can conclude all of the elements of the offense with which he was charged?

Absolutely. Because he has IDs from more than one person, he has admitted that he is part of a...

You have to consider all of the evidence in the sufficiency.

I understand he's in the business, but that doesn't make it stolen.

He's in the business and he has...

The issue is whether any rational trier of fact could conclude that he had knew or had reason to believe that it was stolen,

knew or believed it was stolen, and that he intended to deprive the owner of it.

When you have a bunch of people's IDs and you admit you run background checks to get information

so other people can create false ID documents, the only reasonable conclusion the jury could have reached here

is that he has this passport, it's been stolen from someone,

and that he has reason to believe it's been stolen,

and that he is using it for the purpose of providing information for false documents.

Well, wouldn't an equally plausible explanation be...

I don't know where my passports are that were valid ten years ago.

I probably threw them in the trash, so why couldn't it have been taken from the trash?

The person has no more interest in it, so it's not that he possesses it,

it's that it has to belong to the other person, to the exclusion of their possessory interest,

and they may have not any more.

If it were a valid passport, I'd get your argument better.

It is a valid passport, it is an actual passport, it is just expired, it's an old passport.

So it can't be used as a passport?

It can no longer be used as a passport,

and actually when your passports expire, you're required to return them and they cancel them, so...

They punch them.

They punch them again.

Has this one been punched?

I don't not believe so.

I have not seen the actual passport.

I have only seen photographs of it.

Well, would you agree that if it got fished out of the trash that there would be no viable case here?

Maybe not, but that's not the facts here.

The question is again, whether the jury could reasonably conclude resolving all credibility determinations

in favor of the state, and viewing all evidence and inferences in the most favorable to the state,

whether any rational jury could conclude that he had either stolen the passport

or had reason to believe it was stolen.

Was it the passport itself or the information contained in the passport?

Well, he had the actual passport, and the reasonable conclusion is he has it

because he's getting information from it.

And again, the jury was aware that there were a bunch of other things he had that did not belong to him.

Isn't there a problem here that maybe this is the wrong charge?

As Justice Bassett points out, one of the things, I mean, it's not enough that he had this passport with fraudulent intent.

I mean, if that was the crime, you probably, you know, you may very well have that the proof would have been sufficient.

But what about it being stolen?

That's the crime you're charging with, that it was stolen.

And what if this is just, you know, I threw my old passport out

and somebody who wanted to do something bad with it picked it up.

But that doesn't mean that the passport's stolen, does it?

Not necessarily, but the jury could conclude that it was.

I mean, based on everything they knew, he had other people's lease agreements.

He had documents that had been prepared by other people.

He had a whole bag full of other people's information.

Now the judge didn't allow them to admit to pull all those things out of the bag,

but the jury could have concluded from what they saw and heard that there were other people's information in there.

Did the jury know that if it's true, the owner of this passport was dead?

They didn't have any way of knowing that.

The state never presented any evidence of who this person was or whether they were actually alive or dead.

I know it's an improper question, but why not?

It had to be so easy.

I do not know. I really don't know.

Do we know the identity of the, I mean, who's name, you know, is the person whose name is on the passport somebody that lives in, you know, Hawaii or something?

Or is it somebody around here?

I don't have it. It's attached to the briefs.

I don't, that's not something that's in my mind right now.

But they know, I mean the person's on there and she was born in 1928.

It's a black woman. She was born in 1928.

I don't know that your passport has your current address on it.

Now he says he was cleaning out an apartment in Massachusetts in the Boston area.

That's what the defendant said.

But the jury had no reason to believe the defendant because he had told multiple lies.

Right, but the disbelief of a denial is not affirmative evidence.

In other words, what, and so what's the evidence that the passport is stolen?

Again, it's all circumstantial evidence and because he had a bunch of different people's IDs and was in the business of providing information to other people he worked with who created false documents.

Can we shift to the Fleetwood factors?

We can.

Okay, it strikes me that none of those factors are satisfied in this case.

Fleetwood is really different from this case because in Fleetwood, she was a suspect when they were talking to her.

They immediately confronted her with incriminating information without reading her Miranda first and then once she made, and didn't make any admissions and then they present her with this note they found on her table.

This is a dead male child, a baby.

And they then shoved this note in her face and says, you wrote Kill Boy on this piece of paper and they still haven't given her Miranda at that point.

And they actually are interrogating her and extract a confession and then read her Miranda and then take a break between Miranda and questioning her.

There was no break here.

There were lots of breaks.

First of all, the defendant was not even a suspect.

For the first two and a half hours they were with him, he was not even a suspect.

You're not suggesting that was just polite idle chat that they were having?

They really didn't.

There was one officer talking to him, did not believe he was a suspect, thought he might be an innocent dupe who had just agreed to help the other person get his license and didn't even suspect him of a crime until the defendant said he signed the lease.

They didn't confront him with anything and in fact, as soon as they started questioning him, the defendant asked what was wrong with the documents and they still, this trooper thought he might be an incident.

During that two and a half hours, the trooper was out of the room several times consulting with the other trooper.

This was not a continuous questioning.

Was he advised though that his prior admission could not be used against him?

No, he wasn't and that is not under the Missouri versus Sebert opinion.

The reason they said that makes sense in the context of Sebert because in Sebert the woman was actually under arrest.

She was interrogated.

They physically hurt her.

They squeezed her arm and extracted a confession from her through coercion.

And the officers, when you arrest someone, you know they're in custody and you're supposed to give Miranda.

The officers decided not to give her Miranda.

It was a deliberate strategy to not give her Miranda until she confessed.

Well, here, the officer left Mr. Ruiz in the room, but Mr. Ruiz didn't leave the room.

No.

Well, he may have for bathroom breaks.

The officer couldn't actually remember.

So the officer, this was an interview of someone they did not think was a suspect.

So are the Sebert and the Fleetwood factors different and is this issue of preservation of Sebert?

Is that important?

It is important because it makes the, they're asking to extend the exclusionary rule whenever someone,

they're what they're basically asking the court to find that is whenever someone's Miranda rights are violated,

there's a presumption that the waiver in following statements are unconstitutional and inadmissible.

The Sebert rule that the plurality opinion made made sense because when officers deliberately violate someone's Miranda rights,

it makes sense to presume that the following statements are invalid and to make the state overcome that presumption.

In this case, the officer did not consider the defendant a suspect, was not interrogating him.

There was absolutely no coercion and he did exactly what he was supposed to do.

As soon as the defendant said something that might implicate him in a crime, he stopped and read him Miranda rights.

Can I go back to the issue of the sufficiency issue?

Yes.

Is it, as I think about this, is it correct that for the crime of receiving stolen property, the property actually has to be stolen?

And I guess what I'm thinking of is, suppose we have a sting operation.

I'm working undercover and I, you know, I set up a scenario that I've got all this stolen property and I want you to unload some of it for me.

And in fact, it's all police property.

It's not stolen at all.

But you, you know, you knowing all, you believing that it's stolen, go ahead and enter into the arrangement.

Have you committed the crime of receiving stolen property?

I don't know if you actually have to prove that the property is stolen.

Quite frankly, that is not clear from the case law.

What's clear is you have to have property that you know is stolen or have reason to believe is stolen.

But I don't know that it's clear from the case law that it actually has to be stolen.

But even if it does, the jury could have rationally concluded that it was stolen.

That it was stolen right along with the rest of the items that he had no reason to have it.

He had no legitimate use for it.

And it is an actual passport.

This isn't actually one of those items like the fake driver's license or the fake birth certificate.

But these other items, what was the proof that those were stolen?

There was no proof that they were stolen.

So we don't know whether these other items for sure are garbage or discarded or randomly picked up somewhere, right?

There's no way of knowing.

And that's the problem in these kind of cases.

And I know I didn't make a harmless error argument, but the ID fraud cases were dismissed.

So the only possible relevance of the rest of this evidence is circumstantial evidence that the items were stolen.

But again, I would like to give...

But someone who collects documents, historic documents, documents that clearly belong to someone else, celebrity, whatever,

is there an inference there that those are stolen?

I don't think so because those things are things that are generally sold.

I mean, I know Justice Bassett said he just tosses his old passports in the garbage.

I don't think that most people just toss their old ID documents in the garbage, particularly not in this day and age.

And it's hard to believe that someone who was hired to clean out an apartment,

it seems pretty incredible that the landlord would say whatever you find in there you can keep.

So you would say, in other words, you would say, I suppose,

if you have where you have all these, a bunch of other documents that are in somebody else's name

other than the person that's possessing them, that, well, I suppose, you know, theoretically,

I suppose it's possible that this person just went around to a bunch of garbage cans or whatever

and found the old passports and the old driver's license and the old...

That's theoretically possible.

A jury might say much more likely that these were stolen items.

Yes, that's what I'm saying. The most reasonable conclusion they could have reached

is this the passport had been stolen from somewhere.

Why isn't it just as likely that the landlord was motivated simply by not wanting to clean it up?

Well, if the only thing he had was a passport, I might credit that,

but he also has admitted that he and his friends have provided Mr. Guzman

with a Social Security card that has obviously been altered.

It's an actual Social Security card that has been altered.

A birth certificate from someone else that has been altered.

But no evidence that either of those were stolen.

No.

These are simply tools of the trade, aren't they?

Yes, but it would seem pretty unlikely that you would find a Social Security card

from one person, a birth certificate from another person,

a passport from another person, a driver's license from still a different person,

a lease agreement from another person.

That would be a huge coincidence that you would find all of these documents.

Can I just ask in the record, was there any information about whether you can get a driver's license

with an expired passport?

There was no evidence.

Because that seems to be the linchpin of the argument.

I don't know why else would you have it, except you'd use it to fraudulently obtain a driver's license.

I don't know.

The state argued there's no legitimate reason for him to have it.

It's a passport of an older black woman.

He's a younger Hispanic male.

He can't be keeping it for his own use.

He has to be planning to either give it to his friends, to make false documents,

to sell to someone else.

He's admitted he's part of this ID fraud ring.

And that admission came when?

The admission that he's part of the...

Okay, so the only admission he made...

I'm sorry, my red light's on if I can answer the question.

You may.

The only admissions he made before they gave him Miranda is that he had signed the lease

and given it to Mr. Guzman.

Then they give him Miranda.

Then he writes the written statement, which again only is about the lease itself.

And then while they're waiting for over the next couple of hours,

they're waiting for his girlfriend to arrive to pay his bail money.

And sometime during that time they're having general conversations with him.

And then he starts telling him he's not the big fish.

He works with other people.

So this is quite a while after.

And when they're no longer really interrogating him,

they're just waiting for his girlfriend.

They've moved to a different room.

He's been had contact with his girlfriend.

He's had, you know, there have been breaks.

He's had contact with family and friends.

He's eaten.

He's had drinks.

And no repeat of the Miranda warnings.

They repeated them again before they questioned him about the passport

and the other documents they found during the consent search.

And in between that time they had also gotten consent to search the vehicle.

Thank you.

There's nothing further?

Okay, submitted.

The court will take a brief recess.
