This is case 2016-0018, State of New Hampshire versus Raymond Carbone.

Ms. Flinchbaugh.

May it please the court. My name is Catherine Flinchbaugh, and I represent Raymond Carbone.

I would like to focus on the second issue, and I have three main points.

One, the state created a misleading impression when it strongly insinuated during the cross-examination of Carbone

that the group had to leave the party because of the complainant's drunkenness.

My second point is that this is significant because the state created the impression that the complainant's drunkenness was so extreme

that even at a party where guests were drinking hard alcohol, her condition fell so far outside the norm as to require her departure.

And third.

Why does that matter?

Why does that matter?

Yep.

It matters because the level of her drunkenness was obviously hotly contested during the course of this trial.

And being so drunk at a party where alcohol is being provided and encouraged and consumed to be sort of beyond the pale of a party like that

would rise to the level of someone who's significantly drunk. So that's why it's significant in this case.

Okay.

It strikes me it's a leap from there to the sofa four or five hours later.

Well, there would not have been four or five hours between when she was asked to leave and the sofa.

Okay.

I do agree though that it's significant that she had slept for several hours.

The exact number of hours is unclear, but she had slept a number of hours before they actually left.

In regard to the impression that you say the create the state created my review of the record indicates that when the defendant was asked about the reason for the departure,

he said, and was it because the victim was intoxicated?

He said that wasn't necessarily the reason we had to leave early.

But yes, we left because the victim was sleeping and we were told to leave the party.

That doesn't seem to me to really open the door as you assert.

Well, my argument in terms of what opened the door was the state's repeated questioning, trying to get the defendant to agree that it was her drunkenness that caused them.

So it's the questions, not the answers that you're objecting to.

Yeah, my argument is that the that the prosecutor's questioning was what created the misleading.

Not the answers given by the defendant.

I mean, I think the answers are problematic because they made him look evasive in front of the jury because he could not fully answer those questions.

Well, that's, I mean, I understand that's your other point that that they're before the trial that you instructed your client based on free trial rulings,

not to get into this issue of of his of the victim allegedly flirting with with another man at the party.

Is that right?

That is what the record reflects.

That the defense attorney at trial instructed the defendant that the the the complainants flirtations with the hosts.

So I mean, in some in some sense, it sounds like what part of what you're saying is that having having sort of obtained that victory, the state.

It was to start now asking questions that where the state might understand that a that a full response to the question would be no,

she was asked to leave because she was flirting with somebody that the state.

I mean, it sort of seems in some sense unfair.

The state understands that a full answer will be something that has been excluded.

And so one would think the state might, you know, not get not want to get particularly close to the line of that.

But here it sort of did.

That's exactly my point.

So the state set this pretrial rooting to ruling to exclude this evidence and then question the defendant in a way that the state knew that the defendant could not fully respond.

And so the defendant honored that courts pretrial ruling and responded did not totally sign on to what the prosecutor was insinuating, but couldn't fully answer the question.

But you know what?

Here's the thing.

I mean, I tend to think that there's you have a valid point on that.

But the issue of the harm, I mean, couldn't, you know, it does seem like even it.

Could it could easily be true that she was flirting with somebody and that was and also was very intoxicated.

And so what, you know, I guess I do have some trouble with the harm part.

I believe the record reflects that the reason that they were asked to leave the party was because of her flirtatious behavior.

In terms of your point, I don't believe it was at least my review of the record did not indicate to me that there were multiple reasons why they were asked to leave.

Necessarily it was because she had been flirting that had offended people and she was asked to leave as a result.

In terms of the harm, though, I do think that emphasizing this point in terms of her drunkenness as compared to the other partygoers is significant because this is a party where people were certainly drinking.

So for her to be, you know, so drunk to be asked to leave, I do think that that's significant.

I believe my lights on.

Thank you.

Thank you, counsel.

Tony Gill.

Good morning, may it please the court.

Sean Gill for the state of New Hampshire.

I would disagree with the assertion that the record shows that the defendant was asked to leave the party because the victim had been flirting.

I don't see that in the record anywhere.

There was a motion to eliminate before trial by the state to not go into these whole allegations of flirtation.

There had been a previous trial and in the first trial, apparently two of the state's witnesses, the defendant's wife and his daughter, who are not exactly aligned with the state, were trying to testify to the effect that some nameless individuals who are not present

to testify, trial had suggested she had been flirting with other people.

To avoid that, Specter, the state filed a motion in Lemony and there was a motion hearing before trial and the trial court basically said there's two problems with this.

One, it's all hearsay.

You've got nameless, unidentified people who supposedly had told you this.

And the second is it's not relevant at all.

If you have someone who observed this, that's a different story.

But you know what?

But I guess isn't, here's the problem.

When you understand that, I don't mean you, but the prosecutor understands that the response to that question might be, I mean a truthful response from the defendant might be she was asked to leave because she was flirting.

Whether he knows that from first hand knowledge or not, that would be his answer if he was asked that question.

And the prosecutor sort of knows that.

It does strike me that to then, now having obtained a ruling, nobody will talk about the prior flirtation, to now go down the road of asking questions.

You know, why wasn't she asked to leave for this reason when you kind of understand that the witness would say no, it was another reason, but he can't really say that.

It does seem a little unfair.

I would say only a couple of things in response to that.

First was the motion in Lemony, the focus was on the defendant's wife, his daughter, for the reasons that I've expressed earlier in the court.

So we're not going to get into that.

Then the defense came back and said, oh, but the victim may testify.

She asked people the following day about her behavior at the party.

And that's where the judge said, well, unless, is she going to testify about that?

The state said no.

And they said unless she opens that door, we're not getting into any of this.

Well, the fairer way to handle it, though, is I think Judge Lynn is alluding to is to have stricken from the case any discussion of why they left.

It's really irrelevant.

That may be true, Your Honor.

And I don't know that.

I mean, the prosecutor asked questions, isn't it, because of her drunkenness, which I would say I think was a fair exploration of the defendant's testimony on direct.

Because when you read his statement about what this man said as she was passed out in a chair, it kind of suggested that that's what the defendant was being told.

And she asked him that question and he denies it.

And then they approach the bench and the judge says, you know, maybe you are starting to go down a road that might be unfair depending on how far you go.

You haven't gotten that far.

Don't go any farther.

The judge has wide latitude and broad discretion in these areas to determine the scope of the cross examination and whether the door has been opened to something that's previously been closed.

And the trial judge here specifically said, I find you haven't opened the door.

It hasn't gone that far.

Don't go any farther.

And it was dropped.

If the question is, you know, whether she was drunk, I think the record is full of evidence that she was extremely intoxicated.

So as we all know, it was a practical matter from being in these trials that unless the defendant was a skilled actor, he's going to have difficulty abiding by the court's ruling and answering that question without showing a great deal of discomfort.

And it looks to me like the prosecutor took advantage of that in this case.

Well, I don't think so, Your Honor.

And I don't think, you know, the suggestion that the state strongly insinuated he was hiding something or being evasive there.

The question was asked.

I think it's a legitimate, fair question to ask based on his testimony on direct to explore what it was that this man said to him.

He denied that that was the reason the gentleman gave and it was dropped.

And then his testimony is we had to pick her up and carry her to the venues.

Don't we have a case?

I think it's called Blackmore or Blackwell?

Blackmore.

Blackmore where, you know, the defendant filed a state.

No, I'm sorry.

The defendant filed a motion in Lemony saying we want to be able to cross-examine the victim about some witness.

It wasn't the victim.

We want to be able to cross-examine some witness about the witness's bias against the defendant.

But we don't want the witness to be able to say what the reason for the bias was.

And I think we said, this was before I was on this court, but I think we said no.

If the defendant, you know, if that is going to be gone into, then the witness ought to be able to explain the reason.

It sort of seems like we're at least close to that here.

You know, the question is, weren't you asked to leave because you were drunk?

Because she was drunk.

Presumably the answer would have been no, it was because she was flirting with somebody.

But I can't say that.

My light is off, but if I could just briefly respond.

Even if the answer was she was asked to leave because she was flirting, I think what the judge said before trial was, so what?

If she flirted with someone before she had been passed out for hours in the chair and had to be carried to the van,

that does not give him license to have sex with her when she's passed out on his couch.

So it doesn't matter to get in there.

If it's a question of, are we getting close or are we not getting close?

I definitely sense from the court's questions that you feel it's getting close.

But the trial judge has the discretion to make that call who's managing the case and the trial to see whether they've gone too far or not.

And in this case, the trial judge determined that she wasn't.

And I think the question then becomes, did she abuse her discretion?

Can I just ask the clarification of the record?

I take it that the person who threw the party who did the asking didn't testify.

The person who threw the party, no, did not testify.

All right, and it seems to me everything else is why did this person get thrown out of the party as speculation anyway,

unless you got the person who did the asking.

And in a ruling on the motion, the trial judge said, if you've got someone who's seen something, bring them in.

But if you're going to repeat hearsay, we're not going there.

Thank you.

Case submitted. Good to see you both.
