This is case 2016-0583 WHS Homes, Inc. versus traditional living, Inc. at all.

The record should reflect the fact that Justice Bassett is disqualified from this case.

Mr. Chapman.

Good morning, may it please the court.

I'm William Chapman with the law firm of Orrin Reno.

With me at council table is Ned Woodington with Woodington Associates.

Together we represent WHS Homes.

The appellant in this case, and Mr. Silverstein, principal of WHS Homes, is in the courtroom today.

I'd like to reserve one minute for a closing, and I would take questions at any time.

And if the court will permit me, I'd like to use WHS and TLI to designate the parties as we did in our brief.

Can I just, can I then ask you?

And I would suggest, Mr. Chapman, that you concentrate on your more important arguments because there's not going to be enough time to talk about everything.

Thank you, Your Honor. I will try to do that.

Can I just ask one very preliminary question? Can you just tell who drafted the APA?

The record is unclear. We put that in our opening brief. I was not involved in the trial. I don't know why it was unclear, but that's what the record is.

I want to take heed of the Chief Justice's comment and focus really on two things. The summary judgment denial and then the ruling after trial that the extrinsic evidence conclusively proves that the parties intended for WHS to pay the account payables.

Let me take up the summary judgment first.

You have before you the APA, the asset purchase agreement.

And the issue before you is section 1.2, which are the assumed liabilities.

And as we make-

Mr. Chapman, I'm sure it was after the briefs were filed in this case, but we had a relatively recent decision in a case called O'Malley in which we noted-

We said we haven't decided the issue, but we noted that there is a substantial question.

And most of the case law around the country says that there is no appeal from a denial of summary judgment after a trial on the merits, because the record of the summary judgment is replaced basically by the trial on the merits.

I'm not familiar with that. We believe we were entitled to summary judgment. That's an interlocutory ruling if I'm-

Right.

I'm not mistaken. And therefore, when the trial court said that there would be a trial, we had a trial.

Right. And so, I mean, but that's kind of the whole point of the case law basically says, look, if the trial court denied some re-judgment-

Let's assume they were wrong in denying some re-judgment, but now you've had a trial.

If the court reached the right result after the trial, so what if they made a mistake on summary judgment?

So let me flip what I wanted to discuss. Let me flip the trial and go to the trial.

The trial court ruled after hearing the extrinsic evidence, as I indicated, that it proves conclusively that the parties intended for WHS to pay the trade payables first.

Now, what extrinsic evidence is the trial going to hear, trial court going to hear, that most conclusively proves what the parties meant by the agreement, by the section of the agreement in dispute.

That's 1.2. And as I'm sure the court knows, the whole issue is, you know, there are three categories of liabilities under section 1.2.

And they are not in any way prioritized by the wording.

There is, in fact, no reference in any of the three categories to trade creditors.

The trade payables would not have been on the balance sheet, is that correct?

The trade payables would have been and were on the balance sheet.

Excuse me, doesn't the letter of intent signed by your client answer the question because it mentions $1.7 million worth of accounts payable?

Yes, it does. And it does in this way, Your Honor.

The letter of intent decided in, or executed, Honor about December 21st, 2010.

Paragraph 3 of that letter of intent.

And I cleared with opposing counsel that I could give you a copy of the letter of intent because we didn't put it in the brief with the court's permission.

And I had intended to take this up talking about the motion for summary judgment.

So this is a draft of the letter of intent.

And I believe the court is aware that we filed a motion to correct the record in our opening brief.

But this letter of intent, the draft, was provided by TLI in opposing summary judgment.

The difference between this draft and the final version signed by both parties is the final version has paragraph 15,

which makes it clear that the letter of intent is not binding and provides a basis for negotiation.

But the reason why the letter of intent is important is because in paragraph 3 it specifically mentions the reference to accounts payable of approximately $1,700,000.

So that's part of the negotiations back in December.

There is no purchase price, ultimate purchase price set forth in the letter of intent.

If you read paragraph 2, it says the purchase price is going to include a payout.

But the purchase price was never agreed upon.

And the conclusion to draw from that is further negotiations had to take place and did take place.

And they are reflected in the asset purchase agreement.

Section 1.4 of the asset purchase or 1.3 is the total consideration.

It carries forward the seven-year payout.

It carries forward the $430,000 promissory note.

And then it references section 1.2 on assumed liabilities.

The difference between the letter of intent paragraph 3 and paragraph or section 1.2 of the APA is there's no reference to accounts payable.

And 1.7 rather being the approximate value of the accounts payable becomes the cap,

which is the final leg of the purchase price.

So you've got WHS saying it will assume liabilities up to 1.7.

Then if conditions are met, it will have to pay the seven-year earn-out plus the promissory note.

So the whole question before the trial is, well, what did the parties mean in section 1.2?

Our position is based on the Sonny P. Difference case,

based on the Barron's case that we cite in pages 13 of our brief,

that what the trial court should have focused on is the language used by the parties

and its reasonable meaning in the context of the negotiation.

It seems to me that one of your strongest arguments would be if trade payables were to be paid first

and they were approximately $1.7 million, why would there have been any need in the APA to mention the other two categories of liabilities?

That was it.

And the total liabilities, as the court probably appreciates, were almost twice the cap.

So it's fair to ask if Mr. Schweizer wanted to make sure as a condition of the deal

that the account vent or the trade vendors were going to get paid,

he would have had every reason consistent, if that were the condition,

to make that very clear in section 1.2 or somewhere.

Presumably both parties would have the incentive to keep it clear or make it clear.

What is wrong with the court's holding basically on page 15 that, well, this is dicta,

but that the parties did not agree to leave TLI to pay all of the $1.7 million in trade payables

and that in the next paragraph WHS has paid only a million,

Schweizer has paid half a million that should have been paid by your client

and therefore you have $310 remaining on the $1.7 liabilities cap.

What's wrong with that finding?

It ignores the testimony of the parties.

Read the January 15th order.

Nowhere does the court say when Mr. Schweizer was on the witness stand,

he was asked about the meaning of section 1.2.

We put that in pages 24 and 25 of our brief.

And that is the fundamental error that the trial court made in its ruling.

If you go to page 24 of our brief, you will see that Mr. Whittington,

this is the first day of trial, he understood, you know,

what was important to get before the trial court right away.

And he asked him about section 1.2.

And here's the question and I'm quoting,

but you understand that if all three, meaning all three categories of assumed liabilities,

were not covered, meaning by the $1.7 million cap,

it was up to Bill, Mr. Silverstein,

to decide which of the categories he could apply the cap to, right?

But what do you say about your opponent's argument that in the second category

of sort of other liabilities there for contract, I guess,

an assumed contract, that whether something related to an assumed contract

is a liability or an asset can really be an ambiguous question.

In other words, if a customer deposited, let's say, $5,000

towards the purchase of one of these log homes,

is that, I mean, in some sense, sure, that's a liability

in the sense that if you don't build the home, you've got to presumably pay a refund.

But if you do build the home, I mean, don't you have $5,000

that you can then use towards building the home?

And isn't that $5,000 an asset?

The answer to that question is the $5,000, had it been cashed in the bank

that went to WHS homes the day after the transaction closed

would have been an asset, but all the deposits based on the record,

the trial record, had been consumed by TLI in order to carry on the business.

But I mean, isn't that...

Okay, so then let's take another example.

Suppose the $5,000 in the deposit, TLI uses that

to buy logs or nails or whatever, and they now have that in their inventory.

Isn't that the conversion of the $5,000 into an asset?

Well, yeah, it is an asset to that effect.

But the real answer, I think, to your question, Justice Lynn,

is TLI made the ambiguity argument before the trial court,

lost before the trial court, has not filed a cross appeal.

So the issue is not before this court.

Going back to Mr. Schweizer's testimony,

when he was asked this question that appears on page 24

and wasn't it up to Bill to decide, his answer was yes.

It wasn't yes, but or yes with some other equivocation.

It was plain and simple yes.

Now, if he misspoke an experience counsel like Mr. Schweizer had at trial,

certainly would have come back to that when he called Mr. Schweizer.

Mr. Schweizer testified the fourth and last day of trial never once was the question,

how did you understand section 1.2?

That was not as.

So the only testimony is Schweizer's testimony that he understood it

precisely like Mr. Silverstein understood it,

and that's laid out on page 24 and 25 of our brief.

And Mr. Silverstein goes on to explain why he didn't want

prioritization to be in section 1.2.

He's got to assume three different classes of liabilities.

He's got a business based on the marketing material that was put together

that he responded to that indicates the business is in difficult economic straits.

And Mr. Silverstein has got to be able to assume liabilities

in the way most likely to make the business succeed.

And as he explains on page 25, the most important part of the assumed liabilities

were the customer contracts that had to be performed.

Because if he didn't perform them, the name WHS Holmes would have been worth nothing,

less than nothing.

Thank you.

Good morning, may it please the court.

My name is Jeffrey Witt.

I represent Todd Schweizer in traditional living.

For 30 years, Todd Schweizer ran and operated traditional living.

He decided to sell it, and at the time, there were three functioning plants

in Oregon, Montana, and New Hampshire.

There were two valuable trademarks.

There were a dealer network.

It had a reputation as being one of, if not in the best company in the industry.

Within 30 days of the closing, Bill Silverstein vagged this company at $5 million.

This was not a casual off-the-cuff comment to a friend.

This was what he put down when applying for $750,000 loan at a federally-

Can you skip forward to what difference that makes in light of the plain language of the agreement?

Yes.

The difference is, the suggestion is that this deal went from a $2.2 million benefit to Todd Schweizer

to a $1.7 million loss during a period where there were no discussions, no negotiations, no anything.

But why, here's the thing I have real trouble with, Mr. Fitt.

If the agreements clearly could have said, as your opponent points out,

it could have said in this order or something about priorities.

But more importantly, if the trade payables were at the amount of basically the cap,

why put anything, why was it necessary, and if they had to be paid first,

why was it necessary to put anything in there about these other liabilities?

Whatever you want to say about this document, the asset purchase agreement, it was not clear.

It was the whole issue of having three categories.

How do you prioritize among the three?

Todd Schweizer went from a gain to a loss.

For him, it's a $4 million swing.

Just for clarification, does that swing include the payout, the 7% over time?

It does not, but that is, we're not holding our breath about getting the 7%.

I mean, no amount's been paid so far, and I think it's realistic to say that no amount will be coming.

So that doesn't include that.

Would you address Mr. Chapman's point about the testimony of your principal?

Okay, yes.

He accurately read the question and the answer.

And Todd Schweizer misspoke, but he testified for several hours,

and the judge had an opportunity to judge credibility.

And what the judge essentially said was, I believe you, Mr. Schweizer,

the deal that you had was that 1.7 million was going to be prioritized.

That is, that WHS would pay the vendors before turning to the other categories.

That was the deal.

But if it's not, I mean, the problem I have is if that's, he says that I,

let's assume your client said I understood that to be the deal.

But if the language of the written document doesn't support that,

and he seems to, at least in this part of his testimony that you say he admitted,

he seems to acknowledge that that's true.

What language in the document?

Help me understand.

What language in the document says that Bill Silverstein gets to decide what the priority is?

Why not Todd Schweizer?

There's no language.

The judge got it right.

Judge McNamara got it right.

There is silence.

No, but exactly.

If you say that you can, you have to pay off 1.7 million dollars,

and you can do it by paying A, B, or C, and you don't say anything else,

doesn't that mean that he can pay it off as long as he pays 1.7?

It doesn't matter which way he does it.

He doesn't pay, I mean, look, he doesn't pay anything.

You understand, he doesn't, these other items, he doesn't pay anything, right?

You understand, there's no amount being paid.

He is assuming a liability, but he's paying the other.

The only thing he has to come out of pocket for is the amount to pay the vendors.

That's the only thing he has to come out of pocket for.

If you look at, you understand?

Well, nobody, but I mean, here's what I'm concerned about.

Let's focus on the assumed contracts, right?

Suppose somebody has made a $50,000, I'll go back to my earlier example,

$5,000 deposit, right?

And what's happened here, and either, I assume you would agree,

that either the purchaser of the assets under the agreement

either has to satisfy that contract or has to refund the money, right?

That's true.

Suppose the $5,000 that should have either been held in a bank account

or used to buy something to further building the log home was not.

I'm glad you asked that.

The position of Silverstein during this entire case was, I assume about a million five

in the deposits, both the design and construction deposits.

He claims that the work in process of a roughly 183,000,

the raw materials of actually about another 472,

that these items don't get credited.

That Todd Schweizer doesn't get credit for the work in process,

and he's claiming that there's 300,000 in deposits on accounts

that are outside the statute of limitations.

He's saying that doesn't make any difference.

I still get credit for those full deposits.

That doesn't make any sense.

You just alluded to something that I still don't understand.

Are you saying that there's a distinction in the documents

between assumed liabilities, which could be paid whenever,

versus out-of-pocket payments to trade vendors

that have to be paid very soon, right?

Yes, I'm saying, look, under this deal,

there's a million seven to vendors that had to be paid.

And the judge, after considering, he says first, it's unclear there

because of the silence, how this is going to be treated.

The extrinsic evidence is overwhelming that the parties agreed,

and I'm going to come back to what Mr. Silverstein did in just a moment.

The parties agreed that that would be paid first.

Now, the amounts about the construction deposits

and the deferred design deposits,

those would sensibly play themselves out as the work got done.

But after the contract was signed and after the closing,

what does Mr. Silverstein do?

He does two things.

One is he calls the vendors, he calls these people

and says to them, I'm going to be paying you.

I will pay you.

It's my obligation.

He says that.

And then he directs his chief financial officer, Teresa Prutra,

and this is reflected in Exhibit 34,

keep track of the $1.7 million obligation,

how much has been paid because my obligation is only up to $1.7 million.

And as the judge said, there is no reason, zero reason,

that he would have his chief financial officer keep track

of the amount paid against the $1.7 million

unless it was WH's obligation to pay that first.

It would make no sense.

Could I?

Yes.

$1.2B, which discusses the assumed contracts,

but it excludes obligations for pre-closing default

or breach by the seller.

Right.

For which seller remains responsible.

So Justice Lin's question about the deposit

and then the house isn't built.

Doesn't that solve at least the category

or at least help us with the category of customer contracts?

Well, I'm not sure that it does.

And the amounts that had to be refunded in this whole mess

turned out to be about $14,000,

and that would be the amount that Todd Schreiser would have to pay.

So in the grand scheme of things, that's...

So can I just ask maybe to sort of follow up on that?

Was there any evidence during the trial suggesting that...

let's take the deposit, the deposit, customer deposit,

suggesting that when a customer made a deposit of $5,000,

whatever it might have been,

that there was not an equivalent value in the company

that the company's value didn't increase by $5,000

either in the sense of we got $5,000 more in the bank

or we've bought some equipment or whatever.

Well, that's why I mentioned that you have work in process,

you have inventory, raw materials,

you've got $472,000 in raw materials that's reflected,

except Mr. Silverstein's position is

Mr. Schreiser doesn't get a credit for that.

I mean, according to them,

all Silverstein had to do is to say

there's a million five in customer deposits,

I assume responsibility for that,

and there's no offset to that.

Isn't this really a deliverable,

the customer contract number $1.27 million,

isn't that really an obligation to deliver

a home for which the company will get paid?

Yes, I agree with that.

Let me return, I'm not sure I answered the question well

about Todd Schreiser's testimony.

It's not the first time that you've had a case

where somebody misspoke at the trial, it happens.

But Todd Schreiser testified for four or five hours,

he explained what the deal was,

and the judge had ample opportunity

to consider credibility here.

And what the judge was saying was,

the deal that these parties entered into,

the deal was that WHS and Bill Silverstein

would pay the vendors up to $1.07 million

and pay that first.

And the reason I began with the comment

about the value was,

there's a $4 million swing

between the two values, the two positions.

There were no discussions.

Bill Silverstein says, I sent a red-lined agreement

which was not introduced in evidence

and the judge said, I don't credit that testimony.

So based upon the judge's assessment of credibility

and the full record,

the judge said $1.7 million had to be paid

by WHS before turning to the other payables.

So you're saying, I think,

that if we don't interpret it the way you are saying

that what we would be doing in effect is giving,

allowing the word liabilities to be used

in terms of these other assumed contracts

in a way that is just sort of not consistent

with the way it would be used in the world.

In other words, that I have that treating

what should really be an asset as a liability.

Right. And it's not consistent

with the way the parties acted.

Just take a look at how they acted in this situation.

And we spent some time in our papers explaining

just how WHS acted.

I mean, they call up the vendors and say, I'm going to pay it.

They track the amount against the $1.7 million.

They wouldn't have done that,

but for the fact that that was the deal.

And they didn't change their mind

until about six months down the road.

I mean, for about the first six months,

they're saying we got an obligation to pay the $1.7 million.

Take a look at exhibit 34 and then they changed their mind.

It may be the smallest point,

the employee vacation time.

Yes.

Asset or liability?

That's a liability.

I mean, they had to be paid.

That's a liability.

Okay.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Mr. Chapman, do you need your reserved minute?

I would like to.

Okay.

To say that this is a $2.2 million deal

for Mr. Schweizer under his view of the APA,

ignores the closing balance sheet,

which I talked about at the outset.

The liabilities were in excess of 3.5.

Mr. Silverstein was going to be responsible for 1.7.

That left at least 1.7 on Mr. Schweizer's plate.

To say that he misspoke,

if you look at the record,

I mean, this testimony comes within about the first 30 pages

of the transcript on the first day of trial.

Now, he testified a long while on the fourth day of trial,

but this is not some witness who's been over the coal,

you know, for hours and hours and hours,

and you're all experienced attorneys.

If you're a witness misspoke,

that would be the very first thing you would probably go to.

I hate to jump in on your minute,

but the customer contracts being deliverables.

Won't your client get paid for that liability

by the customers when the home is built?

That is correct, but my client,

first of all, had to assume the responsibility

for raising the money or putting the money into the business

so that he could perform,

so that he could pay the accrued vacation

and have people and so that he could do the other things.

The other thing I want to point out is Mr. Witt said,

well, what language in the agreement

gives Mr. Silverstein the choice?

I think the question is,

if Mr. Schweizer wanted language in the agreement

to have the trade vendors paid first,

he had in-house counsel

that would have put that in the agreement.

That wasn't part of the deal.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Okay, submitted.
