Good morning, Your Honours. Daniel Khrislov for...

Excuse me.

I'm sorry.

This is case 2016-0243 in the matter of Nicholas Kelly and Astrid Fernandez Prabhu.

Thank you. Thank you, Your Honours. Daniel Khrislov for Astrid Fernandez Prabhu.

This case clearly deals with two forms of modification of the parenting orders involved

in this case. The two types being that of the parenting schedule and also of decision making.

The initial issue raised in our brief is the issue of whether or not the modification of

the parenting plan to provide a substantial increase in the amount of time allocated to

Mr. Kelly was proper under the statute I'm sorry 461A11 as interpreted by this court in much

more versus Jay Cox. And we argue that it is not appropriate that the judges, pardon me,

the master's ruling which was affirmed by the judge, that the disagreement by the parties

gave him essentially the right to modify the plan, the schedule in the best interest

of the child is not supported by the statute because there was not approximately equal time

which is what's required under subsection D of that statute.

Mr. Khrislov, Mr. Kelly raises the issue of waiver and argues that your client waived

its right to make her right to make this statutory argument. What's your response

to that?

Well, my response to that is that he does that on the basis of having not objected

to a September, well, he has a September 25, 2015 order issued that appointed the GAL.

The language he cites in that order states that the judge may find it appropriate to

modify on the basis of best interest of the child. That's not a ruling that could

be objected to. That's just simply a statement of what he's going to consider.

But you did object after you got the court's order?

Yes, there was.

The motion for reconsideration.

The motion for reconsideration clearly states it.

You brought to the trial court's attention your position that the court aired in doing

what it did.

Exactly.

So it went to much more.

Right, right. And he's arguing it wasn't timely to raise it in the motion to reconsideration

but there was no prior order that they could have objected to that indicated what the grounds

that the master was going to recommend a modification of the order on.

So they're simply, I think that's sort of a groundless argument.

Well, you know, can I just ask you, your position basically is that just because in

response to one party's motion for change, another party also moves for a change, that

should not be interpreted to mean that the second party agrees that the agreement isn't

working.

That would be correct.

Well, but doesn't that, I mean, doesn't that, if we do that, doesn't that sort of

at least encourage the idea that, you know, it's a good thing to have a sort of tit for

tat, you move for reconsideration, I'm going to move for reconsider, I mean, I'm sorry,

you move to change the parenting plan.

I'm not going to just say, no, it's doing fine.

I'm going to say I want it to be even more favorable to me.

Well, except that I think that you have two totally different grounds for why they're

asking for it to be modified, and two different, entirely different scopes in terms of the modification.

Her request was for a very minor modification.

Essentially, it would have amounted to change of two nights a month.

Why would that make a difference?

The statute doesn't seem to address those situations.

Well, the statute says if it doesn't change the proportion of time, then it's a best

end.

It's a minimal change.

That would come under F.

But the business about the agreement is an interpretation about the statute.

Yes.

So you're arguing that what the statute says is if the parties agree to a modification,

in other words, to the terms of a particular modification, then it's okay for the court

to address it.

Your opponent seems to argue that if the parties agree that a modification needs to be made,

that satisfies the statute.

Right.

That's where you differ.

Right.

Where we differ is, I think they're saying, if we agree to disagree, then the judge

gets to decide.

Right.

Right.

And I think that makes a hash out of the statute for a couple of reasons.

One is obvious.

A modification is singular.

And if you take their interpretation, it renders the word A superfluous, which is, no, no,

in interpreting a statute.

You could just say the parties agree to modification or the parties agree to modification by

the court.

But it says A modification, which indicates just linguistically that's a singular.

Your position is that if we interpret it.

That's one of my positions.

Yes.

If we interpret the statute as argued by your opponent, essentially we're tossing the whole

statute out.

You're tossing out the difference between A and D, that's for sure.

Because D really does deal with what happens when there's an agreement that they disagree.

And that only applies when it's equal amounts of time or substantially equal.

I should be pretty precise on that.

Substantially equal amounts of time.

This clearly is not a case where there were substantially equal amounts of time.

And you'll notice they don't argue that in the brief.

Which I take as an admission that D doesn't apply.

But their rendering of Section A would just make it the same as D, but it would cover

everything.

So it would be an exception that clearly swallowed the rule on D. And I think it's just obviously

contrary to the way the statute's laid out.

Because what you're saying is the whole point of this statute is to avoid the ping-pong match

of people in court every three months looking for modifications.

Exactly.

That is the point.

That this was supposed to provide stability.

Once these decisions are made, there's a heavy burden placed on the party that wants to

change it.

Now, if it doesn't substantially change the burden, I mean it doesn't change the

distribution of time between the two parties, which my client's request didn't, then there's

an exception for that.

But he's going from a relatively small amount of time with the child to approximately half.

And that's a very substantial change.

Change in the decision-making authority, that, I take it, you regard as a major change.

I do regard that as a major change.

I think the statute does treat those differently.

And it's obvious in the wordings of the statute that this isn't just a scheduling

issue.

The argument that I make in there is, because there's stuff about the burden of

proof on being in a presumption for equal decision-making, but that states that in the

making of an order, it does not refer to the modification of an order, which I would argue

that the legislature was definitely treating differently in terms of the time.

And I don't think that language is accidental.

It seems to fit with the pattern of what the legislature had in mind.

I think there has to be, just logically, there has to be some weight given to the fact that

he had previously agreed to let her have sole decision-making.

And now he's changed his mind about that.

There should have been a burden placed on him to argue why that change was going

to benefit the child, and why it was necessary, and how it resolved it, and what were the costs

of it.

Now, there's definitely, in the opinion, there's definitely some discussion of what

the costs are, but it doesn't explain how modifying it is addressing what is helping

the child in any way.

So there's no balancing going on in there in terms of whether or not changing the

decision-making authority does...

What was the evidence at the hearing?

Did it talk about whether the parties could, in fact, make joint decisions?

Was there evidence of cooperation, or was the evidence to the contrary?

I think the evidence is clearly to the contrary, and I think the judge's opinions, I mean,

pardon me, the court's opinions definitely indicate that, that he didn't think they

were going to be able to cooperate properly.

And he doesn't address how changing this decision-making situation is not going to make that situation

worse.

So I think it's from the standpoint of...

The judge, it's been a while since I've read the briefs.

Did the judge make a finding about the father's untrustworthiness and alcohol abuse and

that kind of thing?

Did the court address that?

He mentions that he, in the record, he seems to be indicating that he doesn't think it's

all that relevant, which I think is odd in and of itself.

And he does mention that, he sees...

He mentioned specifically in the order that he thinks it's perfectly reasonable that

she wouldn't be able to trust him.

So to me, it just strikes me as a very hard, that's a very hard finding to reconcile with

an idea that they should be engaged in joint decision-making and that this change would

benefit the child.

I think logically, it can't really hold together.

But didn't the court also find, though, that your client was not willing to or was

not forthcoming on encouraging the relationship between the father and the child?

Yeah, there is that finding and I'm not sure he doesn't...

I think if you're going to do that, there has to be some balancing of what does this

mean if you're going to do that?

How is that going to address that?

And he doesn't talk about it at all in any of the orders.

There's no discussion in there as to how this fixes that problem or deals with

that problem.

The court made no finding about under C that the child's present environment was

detrimental to child's mental health and whatnot.

No, and it is in the brief that way.

Their brief, they put it in that way, but simply put, that's an enhanced burden

of proof.

Well, what is your response to their argument that the trial court's order can be

sustained under C, even though that's not what the trial court used?

Yeah, C has an enhanced burden of proof with the requirement of findings.

And it's clear and convincing evidence.

So, is that the language?

It's either clear and compelling or clear and convincing.

It's clear and convincing.

Clear and convincing, yes.

Mr. Kelly's arguing that we can do that off the record as a matter of law.

That's a trial de novo, I think, isn't it?

I would consider that a trial de novo, that you're essentially looking over

the cold record and then trying to determine that.

But also, I don't think the examinations were carried on that way.

I don't think they were arguing that.

And I think you have to have a specific finding, and this is where I

think you really wouldn't have anything in the record that would support that,

as to how the change would outweigh, how the benefits of this change

would outweigh the detriment of making the change.

And there's no weighing of those factors at all.

I don't think the court can provide that, except at a trial level,

where that sort of thing work in the court.

Well, I mean, was there a request for specific findings on these things?

I mean, normally, our rules are that we assume that the court made

the necessary subsidiary findings to support its decision.

So, I mean, if that's true, isn't the real question for us,

could the court, on the record before it, could the court have made those findings?

Could the court have made the findings that it didn't make?

Based upon the evidence before.

Based upon the evidence.

I don't believe that was requested.

I don't believe that was an argument that was made.

I don't think that there was anything considered about balancing

the factors like C would require.

He relies on, father relies on a previous order that warned the parties

that if they didn't clean their acts up, they could be harming the child.

Right.

But then did the parties focus at the hearing on the harm to the child

because the mother had more time than the father

or what was going on in the two households?

Was that the thrust of the hearing?

I think the thrust of the hearing was whether or not he should have

increased time for foster a relationship.

I think that was it.

But was there a focus on that the child was being harmed by the father

not having increased time and not having joint decision making?

Yeah.

There was our argument that increasing the time would harm him, certainly.

But I don't think...

Increasing his time would harm the child was something that my client side argued.

I think that's exactly the opposite from what's required by C.

I think the answer is the record wouldn't...

If you guys want to, sorry, your honors want to go over the record

and hold a hearing on whether or not C was appropriate.

But I think it's a very bizarre argument.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you, Mayor. Please, the court.

My name is Andrew Peel.

I represent the father Nicholas Kelly.

Just want to start by answering some questions that Justice Bassett

asked about the waiver.

The September 25, 2015 order was not the only time

that the court had indicated to the parties

that it was going to modify the parenting plans based upon best interests.

The Guardian had lightems, proposed parenting plan,

did a substantial modification of the parenting times.

There was no objection raised by Mother's Council

as to how the Guardian presented his plan.

And I was pulled up short by Master Dalper

when I was cross-examining the mother.

And I can't do it as pithy as Judge Dalper did,

but he indicated, counsel, this is not a negotiating session.

If the parties don't agree to the modification,

I will do it based upon best interests.

Again, no objection from Mom saying,

Judge, that's not the standard by which you apply.

The only time that Mom raised the issue

that the judge applied the wrong standard

was in the motion to reconsider.

So you're saying that it, in general,

became the law of the case at that point?

It became the law of the case, but more importantly, Your Honor,

you folks have, honors have said,

we don't encourage political against to comb the record.

And we don't, we want these issues brought forth at the.

Well, let's assume for the sake of argument

that the standards required by the legislature

were not applied in this case.

Do you say, well, it doesn't matter

that the standards weren't applied

because mother didn't clearly raise an objection

during the hearing.

I wonder about that.

I mean, don't we have an obligation

to make sure that the standards in fact are applied?

You have the obligation to correct errors of law,

but those errors have to be presented

to the trial court in the first instance.

This is not a situation like subject matter jurisdiction,

where if you can raise it at any time,

this is a question that did the trial court

make the right ruling under 461A11?

Well, there's no question here that the argument

that's being made to us now was made to the trial court.

It just was made in the motion to reconsider

which you say is too late, right?

Yes, I cite two cases in my brief.

The Mountain Valley Mall Associates case

and the Bracen case.

In both cases, after a lengthy trial,

a lengthy hearing, in the Bracen case

was an issue of bias at the initial fact finding level

on Mountain Valley Mall.

It was a question of whether the judge

made the appropriate factual findings.

In both cases, it was raised in the motion to reconsider.

In both cases, the trial court said denied on appeal,

the Supreme Court said we have pulled the denial

of the motion to reconsider

because the issue was presented way too late.

Also, consider the case of Brown versus John Hancock.

Motions to reconsider do not raise new arguments.

They shouldn't raise new arguments.

This argument of judge you're interpreting

the statute incorrectly was never raised

despite three separate opportunities at trial

and in September of 2015 for the mom to raise that argument.

If this is correct, what mom is essentially asking

is do over, new guardian at Lightham report,

new trial, reset to zero.

At some point, in other words,

am I understanding correctly that what you're saying

is that the way this case was presented

and the hearing held before the trial court was,

the court has to decide what's in the best interest

of the child and it was only after the trial is over

that your opponent said, well, wait a minute,

there's some statutory interpretation here

that sort of changes the way you confused.

Absolutely, that's exactly what happened.

Well, but isn't under F, if the trial court had come out

with a, what could be characterized as a minimal

or no change in the allocation of time,

then it could have proceeded

on the best interest of the child, right?

And under A and here's, this is where I get

into the English language argument.

The trial court operated on the two premises.

The parties disagree, the parties agree

that the current plan doesn't work.

They may have their reasons as to how they wanna change it,

but they're both agreeing upon one thing.

They don't like the current plan, it is not working,

they wanna change it.

And you say that satisfies A?

Absolutely, your honor.

And here, the parties agree to a modification.

That seems like a pretty torture reading to say they,

father says I want the kid 100% of the time,

mother says I want the kid 100% of the time.

You're saying by doing that,

they've agreed to a modification.

No, mom and dad both say that we have a parent in plan.

We have a final plan in place.

We both agree that it needs to be changed

in some way, shape, or form.

That's not what A says.

A modification, A change, A is an indefinite article.

If the language was, the parties had to agree

to both to change the plan and to the precise type

of change, the legislature, I submit,

would have used a definite article.

The parties agree to the change.

But doesn't that run contrary to what is presumably

the legislative purpose here?

And that is to provide stability in families

so that we don't have a situation

where every several months someone's unhappy

and they're back in court.

And they're back in court.

Not necessarily, your honor.

Because the court has to make the predicate finding

that there is an agreement either by facts or by conduct.

That's what you folks did in the LaRue case.

Was there an agreement to change?

Was there an agreement that something,

that this plan is not working?

But also consider this, your honor.

If A only applies if there's an agreement to change

and a precise type of an agreement,

we're gonna go from every other Wednesday

to every other Thursday, or three days,

three weekends to four weekends.

That allows the parties flexibility

to make an agreement that they can live with.

But how do we reconcile then RSA 461A11 Roman II,

which says that for all other modifications,

the standard burden of proof is as stated in those modifications.

But for a modification under section A,

there is the best interest standard.

If both parties agree, this is the change we want.

We know what's in the best interest of our children.

And this is what we think is in that child's best interest.

We present to you court an agreed-upon final parenting plan.

Does the court then still have to go

through the full-blown 461A5 analysis of best interest?

Well, but you know, it couldn't that be,

I mean, isn't one, if A is interpreted to mean

the parties have to both agree to the exact modification.

Couldn't the language in two be interpreted simply to mean,

well, wait a minute.

If the mother and father both agree

that this is the way the custody of their child

should be resolved, the court has no real,

I mean, I suppose it could be a troxel issue

if the court tried to get into the middle of that

and say, well, despite the fact that you both agreed

that the child should be with the father

every other weekend, I think that's improper.

And therefore, I as a judge, I'm gonna say no.

How, in a practical sense, Your Honor,

if two parties come to court with an agreement

that says this is what we want,

how the parenting plan we want to restructure,

and this is why we think it's in the child's best interest,

where is the court, does the court have the ability

to say I still want to hear testimony on a best interest?

Because in that's the case, you still have a trial.

But I guess what I'm saying is that the fact that

where the parties agree, the court would have,

to a specific change, the court would have little

and maybe arguably at least constitutionally

wouldn't have any role, that could explain why

it's accepted from section two.

That could very well be, Your Honor.

But also consider this, the statute 461A11,

was an expansion of modification of final parenting plans.

Because before, the only way you could modify

was under a parole case.

You could only modify if you show substantial harm.

Now the legislature has given us a whole menu of options

and the recent amendment even expands it further.

I would submit that if mother's argument is followed,

then you have a situation where, what if you have

a parties with two that both agree that the current plan,

they don't like, they want to change it.

But they can't agree how to change it.

Both of them have two very deeply held.

You're reading the not working requirement under D,

you're reading that into A.

I don't think so, Your Honor,

because if they both agree to change the plan,

then the court says, all right,

I gotta make a best interest analysis as to how that changed.

Why?

Under A, there is no language that says,

if the parties agree that a modification is necessary,

the court will consider best interest.

That's how you are arguing to us, A should read,

but those aren't the words of A.

It's not the words of A,

but it's the words of 461, A11, Roman II.

Court applies a best interest standard test under B.

B through F, it omits A.

Because A defaults to the best interest.

B through F have their own modification standards.

For example, a change under C requires clear

and convincing evidence of substantial harm.

D requires substantially equal parenting times.

B requires one party engaging in behavior

that damages the parenting.

Isn't, I mean, isn't the problem I have

with your argument on A,

is that you seem to be saying that if I say to my wife,

I want the house painted red

and she says I want the house painted blue,

we've agreed that the house is gonna be painted.

I'm not sure that you could-

Isn't that what you were saying?

You both don't like the present color,

you just don't agree-

But why have we agreed to?

You've agreed that you don't like

what the house has painted now.

But let me, I see I have only a few minutes left.

Let me talk briefly about the saving,

the Sherri Land v. Snuffer analysis.

Does the court make the right finding under C?

Absolutely, absolutely.

Two prior orders indicate that the parties

are engaging in constant antagonism

over the current parenting plan.

It's gonna lead to a neurotic, upset, anxious child.

You're relying on a prior order

that I take as essentially warning the parties

that they better change their conduct

or it could result in damage to the child.

But let's look also at the-

I don't understand how you jump from that prior finding

to an argument that C is satisfied here.

But you also look at the testimony

that was elicited at trial.

I'll give you some examples.

But was the issue of C ever the analytical framework

for that trial?

The trial?

Nobody mentioned it in the trial court

doesn't mention it, right?

The final order from Mass of Dalper

did not cite section C.

But the question is,

was there sufficient evidence to satisfy section C?

But we don't know that he made a finding

that that was the basis for the modification

because he didn't tell us.

He did not say that I find under the current parenting

plan, there could be harm to that child.

The question is, would there be enough evidence

at the original trial for that to be satisfied?

Where the standard, where the burden of proof

is different under that one.

How do we, how can we say?

I mean, I see it strikes me that there,

where you have a different burden of proof,

it's not enough for us to just be able to say,

well, the evidence could have supported that

because maybe the trial court didn't think

that was the case.

Maybe the trial court would have said, okay,

I find, I would rule this way

by a preponderance of the evidence,

but not if I had to find by clear and convincing.

And we just, there's no way we can know that.

There's no way you can,

you can know based upon what was elicited at trial.

If you can determine that the evidence

was so overwhelming, I mean,

you do that for harmless error in criminal cases.

Where you find that, yes,

a trial court may have made a mistake

in admitting this witness, this testimony,

but the evidence was so overwhelming on others.

So what do you point to the overwhelming evidence

that the child's present environment,

which is more time with the mother,

is detrimental to the child's physical,

mental, emotional health?

We start with the premise that under the current plan,

there was constant tension,

arguments, requests for modification.

We go with the guardians findings

and there's an appendix at 50.

New plan has to be created to reduce the tension

between the parties.

New plan has to be explicit as possible.

Prior communications, attention filled

because the parties under the old plan

don't have a solid framework to-

But tense relationships between the parents

doesn't automatically translate to an environment

that is, in fact, causing damage to the child.

The situation-

Well, most divorce people-

Right.

There's tense relationships.

That's why they're divorcing.

I'm seeing my red lights up.

I'm not trying to be facetious here, honor.

But I think Judge Dauper made it very clear

that if this current plan continued

on the trajectory that it was headed,

there was a significant problem.

And regarding that item, testimony at trial

indicated that there was a significant problem

under this current plan.

I think that testimony gives you the ability to say,

even if we disagree with trial courts

reading of section A, there was sufficient evidence

in the section C to satisfy the burden.

I would stand on my brief as to the appropriateness

of the modification.

I think Attorney Krizlov is asking you simply

to retry the case.

For all those reasons, I would ask that the trial

court's decision be affirmed.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you very much, your honor.

The court will take a brief recess.
