Good morning. Thank you, Paul.

This is case 2016-0585 in the matter of Phillip Weizick and Lisa Haywood Weizick.

Thank you. Good morning, Your Honors.

If it may please the court, my name is Stephen Girdwood.

I am counsel for the appellant in this case, Phillip Weizick.

And we're here today on an appeal from an alimony decision

that was issued in the family division.

This is a post-divorce petition for alimony, which was filed by the appellee.

The lower court ruled in the appellee's favor and awarded three years of alimony.

First year at 1,500 a month, second year at 1250 a month,

and third year at $1,000 per month.

The order was granted in July 2016.

There was a motion to reconsider that was filed, and this appeal has since ensued

as that motion to reconsider was denied.

We're here to argue primarily, we're going to rely on our briefs,

obviously, for the full argument, but in the time we have this morning,

I wanted to point out three specific errors that we feel were made at the lower court level.

And all of these particular errors go to appellee's reasonable need for alimony.

So that's really what we're focusing on, is the appellee's reasonable need for alimony.

The first error that we'd like to point out for the court has to do with a failure to

recognize that a significant portion of the appellee's expenses in this

particular case were voluntary college expenses that

a significant portion of which were incurred post-divorce for the appellee's adult children.

And I would, for the sake of accuracy, point out that these are adult children,

not of the party's marriage.

So we've got a significant amount of expenses that were claimed that went

towards the reasonable need of appellee.

Was there evidence that this, as I understand it, this was an eight-year marriage.

So it's not a short-term marriage, it's not particularly long-term, but

I guess I would characterize it as a moderate-term marriage.

Was there evidence at the hearing as to what the party's expectations were during

the marriage about whether they would bear responsibility,

whether they intended to provide for their kids,

each of their respective kids' college education?

I'm assuming that you're asking about the alimony hearing itself,

as opposed to the final divorce hearing that did occur.

Well, I'd either want, I guess, I'd either want.

Yeah, there was significant discussion throughout the case about whether or

not college expenses should be considered in a particular way,

as far as the final divorce, when both parties have adult children and

both parties had contributed towards their children's college expenses

throughout the course, both of the marriage and post-divorce.

So if that's true then, I mean, why is it, it seems to me it's

a little bit different question on alimony, just because a party,

just because in the child support statute, there's a require,

you know, there's a provision that says you don't have to contribute to the,

to child support after a, after a, or

college expenses as part of sort of a child support obligation.

If the evidence was that the parties had,

each of them had expected to provide some college expense,

funding to their, to their respective children, then why can't the court can

take that into account in deciding what, whether there's a need for alimony?

From our position, Your Honor, there is a distinction

when you're talking about college expenses as they relate to determining

the marital estate at the time of the divorce and post-divorce.

And what is reasonable for

one party in terms of expectations going forward post-divorce.

We think there's a distinction there, and, and this is a case where there are

significant expenses that, that were taken on and

encouraged post-divorce, where the parties at that point aren't communicating

with each other, they're not a couple anymore, you know,

there is not the same kind of expectation that you might have during

the course of a marriage.

These are expenses that, that were arisen, and, and we point out in our

brief the, the numbers related to those particular expenses.

But we see a distinction in the fact that this is now post-divorce,

and we're talking about those kinds of expenses, and

don't feel that they should be allocated towards a decision.

Is he, is, is your client paying college expenses or

was he paying college expenses for his children?

He had paid college expenses for his children as well.

And, and was some of that, you know, in the post-divorce period?

I, I honestly, that was not part of the alimony hearing, and I, I don't know.

I would have to go back and, and look at the financial.

I mean, I guess if he was paying, you know, whether,

particularly if he was paying it after the, after the divorce, but

even if he was paying it before the divorce, doesn't that sort of support

the, a, a view that the court could have, could have found that these,

that, you know, that this is what the parties expected to do.

And so that it's not, this is not, you know, on her part,

this is not an unreasonable expenditure on her part.

I, I think we respectfully disagree with that.

Again, we find a distinction.

But your red light is on, and you said you had three points.

We've.

We did.

Can you just highlight them?

I can, I can, Your Honor.

The, the next point that is critical to the arguments that we've made,

again, it's in the brief.

We feel that there was some collusion between an appraiser.

There was some bad behavior on the part of the appellee in terms of

getting herself a, a, a refinance.

We think the court aired in, when it stated that she had to refinance,

it was quite clear to us in, in the original divorce decree that,

that if she couldn't refinance, it would go, the house would be sold.

She incurred additional housing expenses post-divorce.

And she did so with bad behavior, including with an appraiser,

to get a higher value.

She has testimony is going to specify in the brief.

Is that number two or number three?

That's two and three.

Two is that, that the, the, the order did not require refinance.

And three is that the, the bad behavior, essentially,

on the part of, of appellee should not saddle my client with additional expenses.

Thank you, Councillor.

Thank you.

Chair Ennis, I'm Emily Davis and with me at council table is Tim Follos.

He's a second year law student at Vermont Law School and my intern this, this semester.

I just want to address the last point first.

The issue of claiming there was collusion and bad behavior.

We find that really offensive because the testimony at the hearing,

which this goes back to the divorce trial, was that my client had asked

the appraiser to come in at a certain value.

It was exactly the same value that Mr.

Wizick had included, had listed as insisted was the value of the house at the divorce trial.

And there was no evidence whatsoever that the appraiser had changed his valuation only that he was asked to do so.

Not change it, but to come in at a value.

So the value that the house came in at was exactly what Mr.

Wizick had argued it was and what the court found it was at the trial.

Was there any, I'm sorry, go ahead.

I was going to say, but the choice whether to refinance or sell was your clients, right?

Well, she was ordered to refinance and only, and this is really customary in most divorce cases,

that she was ordered to discharge him on the original mortgage and refinance.

She had to do that to pay him off the equity and then she increased that.

But at the hearing on Alamone, she testified that she had been unable to find housing

for less money than what she was paying.

And this had been her home for ten years at that point.

Nor was there any finding that her overall expenses were unreasonable.

More to the point, Your Honor Justice Lynn, I want to address the issue about the college costs.

First of all, her college, the cost she was paying for education loans were largely her own forgetting her PhD.

There were some costs she was paying for her children.

Those were the same costs she had been paying at the time of the original divorce trial.

She had paid down some debt and incurred other debt, but, Ned, it was about the same.

Second of all, Mr. Wizick was paying at the time of the trial and at the time of the Alamone.

And this is supported in both all the financial affidavits, which were all part of the record,

that he was paying his children's college loans, none of those loans for himself.

One more to the point, and I think compellingly, is that when we got the original divorce order,

which I believe that was appealed to this court, and one of the arguments we made at that time

was based on the court's inclusion of this college debt netted out from the party's

respective assets when the trial judge balanced the assets.

So the trial judge looked at the party's assets, deducted their respective education

loans, inclusive of their children's college loans, and used that as the net amount.

Since Mr. Wizick at the time had greater debt owed for his children's education loans,

we argued at that time that Ms. Hayward was in effect being compelled to pay for that.

Can I ask you, can I just come back to this appraisal thing?

Was the appraiser called as a witness at the Alamone hearing?

No.

So I mean, if I understood correctly from the record,

what happened here is the appraiser comes, your client says to the appraiser, something

like, can you, you know, I hope you're going to be able to get whatever the value.

I hope you're going to be able to get me, you know, say it's worth 270.

And he, in fact, comes back and says it is.

I guess I have real difficulty concluding that that alone amounts to collusion.

I mean, we're, you know.

That would be like me asking your honor to please rule in my favor, and you rule in my favor.

And Mr. Wizick concludes that there's collusion between us.

It seems hard, it seems like a stretch to me.

Nailed the state of the evidence.

That's exactly what happened.

There was no evidence.

And not only that, the amount, the 270, it wasn't 270.

But it's a, if possible.

Presently, your opponent could have called the appraiser to the witness stand and said,

you know, did you, you violated your, you know, your responsibilities or ethical duties

by coming up with this appraisal.

It has no value.

Not only that, but the amount was exactly the same amount Mr.

Wizick had claimed it was at the time of the divorce trial.

But isn't there a policy leaning toward finality in divorce decrees so

that the parties can separate and move on and establish their independent financial lives?

Yes, your honor.

But at the time of the divorce hearing, Ms. Wizick was, Ms. Hayward was not in need of alimony.

So then would you, if you're representing the obligor, does the obligor then have to sort

of wait five years before making any financial plans for his or her own benefit in case

those independent decisions he or she makes then provide a platform for the other party

who makes his or her own decisions to come back and sort of reevaluate?

Well, there's two parts to that.

One is the actual facts of this case are that Mr.

Wizick's standard of living increased dramatically after the divorce.

He bought a new home with his children.

He bought a golf membership.

He was taking lavish vacations.

He increased his savings substantially.

And in fact, the record-

So had he not done any of that or in fact, his lifestyle low and increased all his expenses,

he would have been better off?

No, I don't believe so, your honor.

But the fact-

Your red light is on council, but you said you had two points.

I do want to make the point that the law, whatever may be that policy issue, your honor,

the law permits either party to come back within five years for exactly this purpose.

And the court found that it was rehabilitative and that she needed the money and that she

was, her needs were reasonable.

And the shortfall between what she was earning and her reasonable needs, and this is all worn

out in the record, in the appendix, was not met by the amount of alimony.

And even if you took out all of the education loans, she still would have had a shortfall.

Thank you, council.

So just paying her core expenses, she needed that money.

Thank you, your honor.

You're welcome.

Okay, submitted.
