This is case 2016-0478 and 2017-0063 in the matter of Vivian Silva and Robert Silva.

Mr. O'Rourke, I'm Attorney Edward Richards. I'm here on behalf of the Appellant of Vivian Silva.

I'd like to, if possible, reserve one minute for a rebuttal of my five minutes, unless the court sees otherwise.

Go ahead.

Okay.

There are three issues that have raised on this appeal.

The first issue deals with 529 funds, and it's a two-part issue.

The first is that Mr. Silva withdrew during the temporary period of the divorce case, half of the children's 529 funds.

There was a motion for contempt filed.

The court made no ruling, even when the issue was brought up and asked for clarification as to his conduct.

The court also did not include-

No ruling whatsoever.

No ruling.

No ruling at all.

Okay, go ahead.

There wasn't there a discussion about the use of the funds, and I mean, there was testimony and discussion about-

He testified that he had to use the funds to meet his living expenses during the temporary period, but he didn't go to the court or to his wife and ask permission to do so.

RSA 45816A section three says the court has two options with regard to 529 funds.

Can preserve those funds for the original educational purpose, or it can treat them as a marital asset, and they can be then added to the marital estate.

The court did not add to Mr. Silva's share of the marital estate, the $14,000 that he took out, and it also preserved the remaining funds, not releasing them to Ms. Silva.

Could it be a similar error if the court, during the temporary period, the parties spent down a bank account, not a 529 account?

Does the court have to include those spent funds in its final decree?

The spent funds during the temporary period usually deal with accounts that are assigned to the respective parties in my experience under a temporary order.

So I think the court kind of provides tasks at approval to do that.

So, for example, if the tax bill comes up on a real estate, it needs to be paid.

This is a specific account for kids' education, and there were two options the court didn't do either.

It kind of had a blended mix of what it did.

The more important issues with regard to the financial consequences to my client deal with the valuation of the marital estate.

Under 45816A, Roman numeral 2B,

there's a certain test of the party's relative positions going forward.

That should impact the court's decision with regard to the property division.

And not all property divisions should be equal, they should be equitable.

And the court, we believe, did not do that if you looked at the financial affidavits of both parties.

The fact that my client had not worked and been home with children since 2012, a period of four years.

Should not go back to her prior level of earnings or even the career.

The court should have given her more than 50% of the marital estate.

But further, the court overvalued the marital estate relying upon the Harvey decision.

A brief history is that my client's parents are elderly and

wanted to live with their daughter and she did not have facilities adequate to do that.

So they spent some money to upgrade a residence so that they could live there.

But couldn't the court have found that, as your opponent argues, that this was not really a marital obligation

that your client had really no, I'm sorry,

your opponent really had no obligation to pay the money back?

Well, the facts here are a little bit different.

First is there was an agreement at the time of trial that this was not a loan which then under Harvey kind of gets

morphed into a gift if you don't have supporting documentation.

Parties for both sides agree that this was an investment.

The return for the investment was the obligation to provide housing.

To answer your question directly, they had already started to do that.

Eight months prior to the divorce even being filed, and about 15 months prior to the divorce being heard,

they had already started to provide housing for the in-laws.

When you take the gain in value associated with those funds invested,

which were 150 grand, but the appraiser said it added $122,000 to the value of this property.

When the court didn't take that out as an obligation, it meant Mr. Silver got half of those funds when you divide up the marital state.

He got another $61,000, and he now has no obligation to his former in-laws to provide housing.

Can I move on to the last issue?

Because the yellow light has come on.

We need these issues kind of sorted out, I think, all of us down on the trial bar.

This one deals with the decision with regard to deviation from the child support guidelines.

If you look at the statute 458C5, specifically one H2C,

there's a kind of a gatekeeper requirement that says if you have shared or equal parenting,

you don't necessarily jump to the conclusion that you deviate child support.

You need to make sure that the lower earning parent has the ability to provide a similar or

approximately similar style of living for the kids.

When looking at, and the exhibits are all in the packages that we provided, when looking at these records,

you'll see that Vivian was shot about $2,000 a month from the ability to do that before child support was added.

That was based upon her earnings.

Rent that she was forced to charge her parents and $500 a month paid in alimony.

So this court found that alimony was necessary and that Mr.

Silva had the ability to pay it and made an alimony order.

So there must have been a need over and above what she had available to order alimony.

At the same time, the court refused to look at Ms. Silva's expenses,

which are necessary to make the assessment under section H2C that she has enough money to maintain a lifestyle.

Her husband, ex-husband's income at that time was approximately $2,200 more than he needed for

living expenses after paying his taxes and other expenses, so he had the ability to pay full child support.

The court said this shared parenting he's entitled to a deviation, which I disagree with under the statute.

And I'm not going to look at anything but page one of the financial affidavit.

So she refused, I'm sorry.

So the court refused to look at the third page of the financial affidavit, which spells out the expenses.

Okay, and demonstrated that there was an inability to meet these expenses.

Thank you.

Good morning and may it please the court.

Israel Piedra for the appellee, Robert Silva.

Let's start with the first issue quickly.

First, as I said in my brief, this is actually an unusual situation where there wasn't an anti-hepothication order issued by the court.

This was filed on an ex parte basis by the petitioner and for some reason the usual order was not issued by the clerk's office.

But in any case, I don't really think that's relevant because the court made a finding that the funds withdrawn by Mr.

Silva were for a reasonable purpose, for reasonable living expenses.

Well, isn't that, I mean, is your client going to get charged and maybe even a penalty imposed by the IRS?

If you have a 529 account, can you take the money out for reasonable living expenses?

Or is the IRS going to say baloney?

You're going to, you know, that's the violation of the 529.

To be honest, I have no idea, Your Honor.

I haven't researched that.

My suspicion is that you can't, I mean, if that were the case, it would be awfully easy.

The 529 wouldn't mean very much.

That may be true.

I'm not sure what impact that would have on the equitable distribution of the property yet.

I'm not sure.

If there were a penalty, that would be your client's responsibility.

Presumably, that if he removed the funds, I don't know if there's an exception for the circumstances that occurred.

I don't know.

But I mean, if he, I mean, I guess the thing I'm having some difficulty with is suppose that, you know, he took some other asset of

the marriage.

I mean, suppose that somehow he could, you know, get a second mortgage on the house by, you know, just by himself doing this.

I think that might be an unusual situation.

But suppose he could.

Could he just do that and say, look, I need it for the living expenses and so it's okay.

If the court finds that it was reasonable, it's a court's discretion whether to find the actor in contempt of its own order, assuming that there was an order.

Here, the court found that they were reasonable.

So I think that kind of, as long as the record supports that, it was just.

But let's assume we agree on that.

Then shouldn't the court at least have said that the other half of that should not, should go to your opponent as opposed to, as I understand it now, what happened is he takes 14,000 out of the account.

He gets that.

Then the rest is just, is in the marital estate and so it's divided.

So he gets half of the rest.

That's not actually what happened.

What the court decided was that under 458, 16A, the rest of the funds were going to be preserved for their original purpose, aka for the daughter.

So they weren't counted as part of the marital estate at all?

They were not.

So, and I think that was in the court's discretion to do under the statute.

It says it may do one of these things.

It's not required to do either of them.

You made some argument, I think, that the division was not exactly accurate, that, I mean, not exactly 50-50, that your client got a little bit less.

I mean, does that make up for the 14,000?

I don't think that, I mentioned that because in the balance of equities, that's something that the court mentioned that the court was granting slightly less to my client.

Our position is that once those funds were permissively withdrawn, they're no longer part of the marital estate.

Just like I said in the brief, the same way, if you withdraw money from your bank account to buy groceries, that's not deducted from your share of the marital estate during the equitable distribution phase.

And part of your client's living expenses that he paid with that withdrawal were marital expenses, if you will, joint expenses at that point in time because it was during the temporary phase?

I believe so.

I'm not sure that they were specifically accounted for what exactly.

I think there was some testimony to that effect, but the court didn't make any specific findings, besides that there were four living expenses.

So moving on to the second option, I mean, to the second point, made by the appellant about the funds contributed by Ms. Silva's parents.

Basically, the question here and the argument made was, this was a contract whereby Ms. Silva's parents contributed funds for the renovations on the house, and in return, they got to live there for the rest of their lives.

Essentially, the question is whether there's a contract, investment, whatever you want to call it.

And the court made a finding a fact, just like any finding a fact where there's a question whether a contract was formed.

And the court said, there's no evidence of any documentation of this.

It wasn't listed on Ms. Silva's financial affidavit as a debt.

There was no disclosures made to any mortgage companies or lean holders on the property, like would have been required if there was another encumbrance on the property.

And so based on those facts and the offers of proof and testimony, there was no contract.

And that's a finding of fact, as far as we're concerned, within the court's discretion to make.

That's a conclusion of law, isn't it?

Well, that's a conclusion of law, but the finding of whether there was a contract itself.

I think it's a question of fact.

Did the court address the fact that the property was burdened by a life of state?

Two life of states?

The court found that it wasn't, because there was no contract forming the life of states.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you.

Mr. Riches, do you need your minute?

On the issue of the valuation of the property, there was a rebuttable presumption

under Harvey to the court reaching that conclusion that it was a loan that

was supported by documentation ends up being a gift.

We weren't allowed to put Ms. Gerard on, although we wanted, that's Vivian's mother,

to testify the purpose of the funds, the intent of the funds.

Court refused to allow any of that testimony to come in.

Did the court consider the burden of the life of states?

The court knew that somebody, and Vivian had been, by agreement,

allocated the property in a partial settlement of the marital state.

They knew that the parents continued to live there, and knew that the parents had actually sued Vivian and

Robert for the funds that they had advanced when there was a denial of some agreement for

the obligation as we proceeded through the court procedure.

Could I ask you on the child support?

Sure.

Was there any discussion of the difference between the variable expenses and

fixed expenses of the costs of child rearing under H2A and B?

So there was no differentiation between whether there was a reduction in fixed costs?

So the only, the gatekeeper requirement is C, there was no evidence submitted as to A or B.

Okay, thank you.

I just had one other thing, if I could just, I'll be ten seconds.

20 seconds.

Okay, 20 seconds.

These are cases that we in the trenches don't, these are issues, particularly the last two that we in the trenches don't have answers to.

For example, child support calculation done by the judge used an offsetting child support formula.

And then the judge used a second adjustment and divided it in half.

Child support guidelines law deals with anticipated sheer parenting.

And unless you get past the gatekeeper requirement, we don't know what to do or

what to expect from the courts for direction on how to then deviate.

A lot of people submit these cross worksheets, and this is the first time I've ever seen one where there was a second adjustment done.

But it ended up with the child support being what,

below what Mr. Silver had offered to pay when he just was trying to impute $54,000 years of income to my client, which she had never made.

Thank you for your patience.

Thank you, case submitted.
