This is case 2016-0563 in the matter of Teresa Maria Miller Waller and Jimmy Neil Waller.

On behalf of the court, I would like to apologize for the confusion yesterday.

And I'm glad we were able to correct the problem quickly.

Just so the record is clear, justices Hickson and Bassett for some reason are all disqualified from this case.

And Judge Smuckler, who is a senior Superior Court Justice, has been specially assigned to it, pursuant to statute.

Attorney Conner.

Thank you, Your Honor. May it please the court.

I'm Dorian Conner from Primer Piper at Goldstein and Kramer, and I represent Mr. Waller.

I will take questions at any time.

This case is about the court's equitable power to modify alimony, quote, as justice may require, unquote, irrespective of the party's agreement.

The lower court aired when it concluded that Mr. Waller was not entitled to discovery and not entitled to present any evidence regarding his former spouse's financial need following remarriage because of the terms of the party's stipulation,

which included a provision that alimony would continue 10 years after marriage.

This court noted first in Norberg back in 1993 that the party's stipulations do not divest the court of its equitable power in the area of alimony.

This court also addressed that very same issue last year, not last year, in 2007 in the case of Kirby versus Siminoe.

In both of those cases, this court noted that if the party's stipulation controlled, it in essence divests the court of its equitable power and that alimony is always modifiable.

And in this case, the court simply didn't go to that step, both with regard to discovery and with regard to testimony.

The court on the day of trial, well actually several days before trial, denied a motion to compel, directed at Mrs. Waller's financial need and the effect of her remarriage.

And then on the day of trial stated, the only thing I'm going to hear is whether there's been a change of circumstances with regard to the ability to pay.

Never looked at the other side of the ledger as to whether there was a financial need.

And in this case, the fact showed that since the time of the divorce, there's been a $32,000 differential in Mrs. Waller's favor.

Mr. Waller's income has gone down, her income has gone up.

She earns $107,000 a year when you take into account the $12,000 a year she gets from Mr. Waller's pension.

Counsel, I'm sorry to interrupt your five minutes, but I do have one question when you were talking about the stipulation.

Sure.

What is your position as to the effect of the stipulation in the proceedings? What effect should it have in your view?

It should have no effect because the court retains the power, regardless of the stipulation, to modify alimony as justice requires.

And in this case, justice requires termination of alimony when we're talking about someone who has remarried and someone who earns on her own $107,000 a year.

That is not a situation where alimony should be awarded.

Can the judge consider the stipulation?

The court can look at a stipulation as one of many factors, but it is not controlled by the stipulation.

And a second question, was there, I'm confused about whether there was to be another hearing day or not?

The court at the conclusion of the hearing indicated that there would be and then decided as a matter of law he didn't need another day.

Was that decision made and telegraphed or transmitted to the parties?

No, it was decided simply that they got the final decision as opposed to a second hearing day.

The second thing that I want to make sure I get to, since we only have five minutes, concerns what the scope should have been at this hearing.

Pursuant to the court's decision in Eaton, which stems back to 1939, this court said as a matter of law remarriage is a substantial change in circumstances.

And it is such a change that it immediately warrants the suspension of the payment of alimony pending a hearing at which the obligee, Mrs. Waller, bears the burden of proof to show that there are some extraordinary circumstances that warrant the continued payment of alimony.

That didn't happen in this case. She didn't even take the stand.

Even if we agreed with you, though, your client is in arrears and would have to pay that.

Well, hopefully not, because pursuant to this court's decision in Williams, you found that the only alimony that vests is the alimony up to the date of remarriage.

After that point, it is discretionary with the court whether or not to require any payment.

You're asking us to do that retroactively after he has been in violation of a court order for some period of time.

Well, the question I believe is whether or not the trial court was wrong when it refused to stay alimony.

This court, in my mind, appropriately granted the motion to stay, suspend alimony in accordance with Wallace.

And that's what the trial court should have done as well based upon the evidence of the remarriage.

So therefore, it would be our position that no arrears is owed.

With regard to the contempt the attorney's fees Mr. Waller has indeed paid though, so we have no tomorrow problem with respect to this case.

My light is on. I just want to say in conclusion it is our position that not only should the trial court decision be reversed,

but that this court should enter a ruling that alimony should be terminated because there are no extraordinary circumstances that would justify alimony,

both with remarriage and $107,000 coming into the house.

In the alternative, we would ask that it be reversed in a remand at which Mrs. Waller would bear the burden of proof under Williams and Eaton.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Mr. Eggleton.

Good afternoon and may it please the court.

My name is Jeremy Eggleton with ORT and Reno on behalf of Ms. Miller-Waller.

The court should affirm the decision of the trial court because it was within the trial court's discretion.

The trial court considered all the evidence in the case including the stipulation and that stipulation dictated what should happen in the event of remarriage.

I'm happy to take questions at any point.

With respect to the assertion that the Eaton case requires the immediate suspension of alimony payments upon remarriage,

I have to take issue with that.

What the court said in Williams very clearly is that if the obligor wants to cease payments as a consequence of a motion to amend or a motion to modify some alimony order,

then the obligor assumes the risk that the court won't find in its favor and that could result in a contempt ruling.

And in fact, that's exactly what happened in this case.

With respect to the argument that the Eaton case suggests that as a matter of law, the fact of remarriage constitutes an immediate change in circumstances.

What Eaton said is that there can be special circumstances which justify the continuation of an alimony payment even after remarriage

and it's specifically pointed to the possibility that the parties might have foreseen the marriage in advance of entering into the stipulation.

And that is exactly what happened in this case.

So the proper case for reference is Laflum in which this court actually reversed a trial court decision ordering a reduction in alimony

because the trial court overlooked the fact that the parties had entered into a stipulation regarding what should happen,

excuse me, entered into a stipulation that anticipated that the obligor was going to retire at some point.

And what's interesting in comparison between Laflum in this case is that the stipulation or the anticipated event,

that is the obligor's retirement in that case, was implied.

It was assumed and implied that someone who is on the verge of retirement would be contemplating retirement

when they entered into an agreement to pay alimony for a 15 or 20-year period.

And so the court reversed that decision based upon that stipulation.

In this case, there's no implication at all.

The black letter of this stipulation anticipates remarriage and says exactly what should happen in remarriage.

The stipulation also anticipated in your analysis no remarriage in which case there would be alimony for life.

Yes, that's correct.

And again, the stipulation was a fact taken into consideration by the trial court in this case.

And that's what the Eaton test requires the court to do.

The argument that the trial court's treatment of the stipulation was somehow or an error of law is incorrect.

The trial court looked at his income and expenses.

The trial court had in evidence her income and expenses in both 2009 and 2016.

And based upon all of those facts and the stipulation, the trial court determined there wasn't a substantial change in circumstances.

Is remarriage in and of itself enough?

Because the court didn't have the effect of this remarriage, meaning whether the husband was an a plus to the ex-wife's financial situation or a detriment.

I mean, it's just the sheer fact of remarriage enough.

The sheer fact of remarriage may be enough for someone to come to court and request a modification.

But the sheer fact of remarriage isn't enough alone for the court to grant modification absent other circumstances.

So the court could look at the finances resulting from a remarriage in an ordinary circumstance when there was no stipulation.

We're not contesting that in any way.

But in this case, the court looked at that in light of the fact that there was a stipulation.

My question really has to do with the same thing I asked Ms. Connor, the effect of the stipulation.

You seem to be saying that it trumps a whole bunch.

I mean, hypothetically, let's say your client, the husband of your client, became disabled in year nine of the marriage and she lost her job.

And she went to court to look for an extension of alimony.

Are you saying that the stipulation would trump that request too?

Because the stipulation is one fact amongst the totality of facts that the court has to consider under the circumstances, I guess my answer is no.

A court could certainly look at that fact, that singular fact of a disabled obligor who can no longer make those payments even if he wanted to.

No, no, the obligee, your client, her husband becomes disabled.

Oh, I see.

Yeah.

Then I guess, let's put it this way, Judge, if there is a substantial change in circumstances arising from a situation like that, that is definitely a fact that the court can take into consideration just as they did the stipulation.

In sum, the court should affirm the trial court's order and dismiss the case.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Court is adjourned.
