This is case 2016, 0639, Brian Langevin at all versus Traffco Insurance Company.

The record should reflect the fact that Justice Hicks is disqualified from this case, Mr. Branch.

May it please the court?

I would like to reserve a couple minutes for a rebuttal.

Actually, I'll reserve a minute.

You know, it may not always be evident, but when I come here, I do try to review everything and bring something new to the equation.

And when I was reviewing Attorney O'Connor's brief here, Attorney O'Connor's, excuse me.

She notes that in 2007, the New Hampshire legislature talked about addressing a common practice,

which was when you were recovering compensation for your medical bill expense

and your health insurance from the responsible tort freezer and from your own auto company.

And that is, in fact, what used to happen.

If a person came in who was well insured, they'd submit their medical bills to the health insurance companies

and they would come back marked paid.

You then gave that to your med pay carrier and they would issue a check.

That is what they were trying to avoid.

This is not that.

This is not a duplicate payment.

Well, but it really is a duplicate payment if you stop and think about that.

Because when you recover from the third party tort freezer, part of that recovery is the medical expenses that you've incurred.

Hang on, just follow me through.

So now you've got this little pot of money, some of which represents what the medical bills were.

And since Blue Cross, Blue Shield has already paid the medical bills, they get to take that money from you.

But since they've already paid your medical bills, what that means is you're now in the neutral position.

You have gotten a recovery for all of your loss, minus the cost of the medical bills,

which have been paid for you by somebody else.

And now you want to go against the med pay carrier to get that money back.

And if we say that's okay, then you've gotten the double recovery.

Well, you have to say it's okay because you're bringing into the calculation here something the legislature didn't.

You're talking about a payment from a liability insurance carrier.

They specifically in the statute made a distinction about that.

They said we're just trying to stop double payment when the two sources being considered are medical payments coverage and health insurance.

Nowhere do they say liability insurance is implicated in this.

And if you look at 264.16, they specifically indicate, and I think paragraph three thereof, or excuse me, paragraph two thereof,

that what they're talking about, they say we're talking about health insurance coverage, which they cite the chapter to.

And we're talking about med pay coverage, which they announce in this statute.

Nowhere do they talk about a third party recovery.

But I guess what I'm really saying is, under your scenario, both the health care provider has paid and the med pay payer would pay.

The health care provider hasn't paid the medical bills?

Bear in mind that if you walk through this process, you will see that the health insurance, the med pay provider has paid copays and they've paid deductibles.

And the health insurance has paid the balance thereof.

Now if there's no further party going forward, nothing happens further and we stop there, then we're at the neutral position that you articulate.

But when you go out and you're seeking full, fair and adequate compensation through a third party claim that's triggered by a liability policy on the hands of the tort freezer,

that is a payment, a source of payment, that they specifically precluded consideration of under the med pay statute because they said we want to stop double payment when it comes from these two sources.

And you don't have that.

And at the end of the day what happens is Mr. Langevin, when he recovers allegedly full, fair and adequate compensation for his losses, now must send a check back to the health insurance company.

What have they paid in that instance?

Nothing.

They have been repaid the full amount that they paid to defer the imposition of those charges on them.

Excuse me, if the health insurance company doesn't have a lien unless they've paid, right?

Correct.

So once they're repaid, what have they paid?

Once the health insurance company is repaid.

Yes.

What have they paid?

They've paid nothing and you are fully recovered.

Because of a source of money that's not contemplated by the statute as being taken into account, you're undercutting the collateral source rule completely in that way.

Wait a minute.

When you say we're undercutting the collateral source rule, isn't the collateral source rule, isn't the theory behind the collateral source rule that as between an innocent person and the tort freezer ought to bear the liability?

Yes.

In the scenario we've all been talking about, the tort freezer does bear the liability.

He's going to pay the full amount.

Nobody's going to recover against him.

No, but the person who is receiving the amount, the full fare and adequate compensation, now has to write a check for health insurance coverage, which he now has to repay.

So they have paid nothing even though they are receiving a premium in the form of a health insurance payment that my client has to make every week out of his paycheck.

Mr. Branch, can you just clarify for me the amounted issue here is $1861, right?

Yes.

And that's a lien asserted by Aetna.

Yes.

Right?

So isn't this a fight between insurance companies?

I mean, Aetna is asserting a lien and Travco is fighting that lien.

No, Travco is not fighting that lien.

They're saying it's not a recoverable medical expense under the policy.

Right.

So they're not going to pay Aetna for that lien.

But the person who has to pay the lien is of course Mr. Langevin, which deducts from the compensation for his medical bills.

And since he's paying a premium to a health insurance carrier and to a liability insurance carrier and also paying a med pay premium,

he ought to be able to recover in that circumstance at least the full value of the med pay and health insurance here.

He must have, he has to repay the health insurance.

So it seems.

But isn't part of the, isn't part of what goes into all of this and what motivated the legislature with regard to this is,

sure, your client has paid a premium.

There's no question about that.

Right.

But presumably the legislature was thinking that if we don't allow this sort of,

if we don't allow tort feasors to recover sort of more than they've actually been injured,

insurance rates will be less than they would be if we did allow it.

I do not know how you can read into that what the legislature said.

I urge you to look at 264, 16, Roman numeral four.

It says the insurance shall have the exclusive right to submit a claim for medical expenses under either medical payment coverage or health insurance policy.

Provided, however, an insurance shall not be entitled to duplicate payment from medical payments coverage and a health insurance policy for the same expense.

It says nothing about a third party tort feasors payment as being something that's put into the mix that we're going to offset against.

It says nothing and they could have because they're very clear about what liability insurance is,

what health insurance is, and what med pay coverage is.

But here's, I guess, another question I have there.

Why?

I mean, let's assume that the statute that you're right, the statute doesn't prohibit this.

Let's assume we agreed with that.

Okay.

Why should we say it's okay?

It amounts to an injured person recovering more than their damages.

Well, you're saying it's, you're not as I think I understand from your view based on the last case.

You're not here to say, you're supposed to say what the legislature said.

Here the legislature took the time to say we want to avoid double payment between two sources and only two sources.

Med pay and health insurance.

A payment from a third party tort feasor through a liability policy is nowhere in the metric.

You're just making public policy from the bench in that circumstance saying we don't like it.

Now, we don't feel good about the fact that a person who pays two insurance premiums actually gets to getting the benefit of them.

And I don't know how you can say there's been a payment if you have to reimburse the payment.

That doesn't feel like a payment to me.

Could the client have just submitted it all to the med pay?

Yes.

The $1,800.

Did you have to submit it to the health insurer?

Let me just call attention to one other thing in Attorney Connor's brief.

In 1936, last paragraph, automobile insurers shall not pay health care providers directly.

They have to reimburse the insured.

So you've got to go into your health care provider and say, look, I promise you I'll pay you later.

I'll get back to you.

But you've got to just let me submit this bill to my med pay and we'll talk later.

You can't submit it to my health insurance.

That's right in the bulletin of October 23, 2009 from Roger Savigny.

So how can the insured really say, even though the legislature tells them they have the exclusive right?

How can they really say, well, no, no, Bill, just give me the bill.

I'll take care of you later and I'll get the med pay money mailed to me.

No, that doesn't happen.

And they're not willing to do it.

So when we say we chose to do it this way, the Langovins chose because if you don't do it this way,

you can seek your health care elsewhere.

It puts it in a tremendously bad choice here.

But let me just make sure I'm understanding something.

If you went to, if you went, if your injured client went to the doctor and said, you know, I need this treatment

and I'm not going to submit this to my health insurance carrier.

Are you saying that the doctor would just say, sorry, we don't treat you?

There are many providers who don't.

Dr. Kermi is right across the street from me.

You write the check to him.

He doesn't submit the health insurance.

This is an emergency.

You've been injured in the accident.

You go to the hospital.

You say I have blue cross, blue shield, but I don't want to submit the claim to blue cross, blue shield.

Is the hospital going to say, sorry, you know, we're not treating you?

Apps and federal statutes that require treatment.

They're certainly going to say, well, listen, if you want to get treatment here,

we're going to bill your health insurance provider.

Yes, as a practical matter, if you want to sit there and say,

well, technically then they don't have to do that because you have the exclusive right

to coordinate as you want.

Well, you may have that right, but the other people who are conferring that right

are the people who are sending the bills.

And they're going to say, give us your health insurance card or take a walk.

Mr. Branch, do I understand correctly that the bills were in the amount of $6,820?

Yes.

And that because of Aetna's deals with various providers.

Yes.

It's down to $1,861.

So absent going through Aetna the amount at issue that Travco would be exposed for would be $6,800.

Yes.

Is that right?

Yes, this reduces the exposure for everybody when you go this route,

which is why it's the sensible thing to do because the health insurance company

has contracts in place which allow them to pay less than the face amount of the bill,

whereas the MedPay providers don't.

So when you look at how this all pans out, $6,800 in bills which MedPay could have been compelled to pay

becomes $1,800 balance that they pay instead.

There's no disservice to the insurance companies and there's certainly no double recovery

to Mr. Langevin who has yet to receive a check in this matter.

All he did was write a check.

And am I right that the recovery that your client had from the tort fees there was subject to

presumably some contingent fee arrangement and the recovery whether it was for medical expenses

or for pain and suffering or whatever would all have been subject to the percentage

in the contingent fee agreement?

Yes.

The only place I'd quibble there is it was a reasonable contingency fee agreement.

Yes.

No doubt.

The contingency fee agreement resulted in a general settlement that was discharged to everything

including lost wages and pain and suffering and loss of consortium and the whole nine yards.

So in essence the recovery of the medical fees would also have been subject to a reduction

because the lawyers would have to be paid for recovering that money too?

I may have missed that question.

There was some lump sum settlement presumably with the tort fees there and the whole thing

which would have included also compensation for medical expenses would have been subject

to attorneys fees.

Yes.

Is that right?

Yes.

Yes.

Thank you.

Thank you.

May it please the court?

I'm Doreen Conner and I represent Travco Insurance Company and I will take questions at

any time.

I recognize that it seems to be the principal business of insurance companies to make things

as confusing as they can possibly be most of the time and I have to confess I'm confused.

Why should Mr. Langevin have to pay your client anything on account of his medical

bills?

Mr. Langevin is not being required to pay his med pay carrier anything.

The issue here is whether his med pay carrier must pay his health insurance lien.

As I understand Attorney Branch's argument to you today he is upset that his client

has a contractual obligation to repay Aetna.

That's between his client and his health insurer.

Travco is not a health insurer.

Travco is an auto insurer.

It provides very limited health insurance in the context of med pay because it is required

to do so by the New Hampshire legislature.

It's not in the business of providing health insurance and the required mandated coverage

under the statute states in several occasions that it's a really limited amount of health

care coverage and it's only for what's not covered by his health insurance unless

he elects to just go that route.

He did not elect.

He made the decision.

So if he had submitted the $6,820 bills to Travco they would have had to pay them?

Yes and if he had not submitted them to Aetna because in this particular instance he had

a lot of med pay coverage.

Most folks do not have a lot of med pay coverage and that's why the legislature

gave the consumer, the insurer, the option to choose how they have their medical payments

paid.

And if they had submitted it, if he had submitted it to Travco in the first instance and Travco

had paid it, unlike the health insurance carrier, if I'm understanding the way the

scheme works, Travco would not have had a lien against the torch fees.

Correct.

It has no right of recovery pursuant to the statute and that's why it's supposed

to be a secondary payer in most instances and you're not supposed to be able to double

dip as the training branch wants to do.

You can sort of see your opponent's argument that if there is some imbalance there, in

other words if the legislature really wanted to stop double recoveries completely they could

have given people like Travco a lien just like they gave the health insurance carrier

then there would be no benefit to going one way or the other because whoever paid the money

would still get it back.

Here if he had submitted the claim to Travco first he would have been able to get that

and get a recovery because of the collateral source rule and get a recovery from the

torch fees that included the medical expenses even though they had been paid by Travco.

That is correct.

He chose not to do that.

He elected instead to submit his bills in the first instance to Atena.

Perhaps he was concerned that his treatment was going to exceed his limits.

Typically MedPay is there as a supplement for what's not covered, your co-pay is your

deductibles that sort of thing.

It's totally within the insurance control under the statutory framework issued by the

legislature as in terms of how you submit claims.

But he argues that the statute contains the language or both so they could submit them

to both.

With all due respect I believe that's a misreading of section 4.

What section 4 of the MedPay statute says in the first instance is that the insured

has the exclusive right to choose when submitting their medical expenses to either or both.

Then it says provided however an insured shall not be entitled to duplicate payment from medical

payments coverage and a health insurance policy for the same medical expense.

In other words in this case Mr. Langvin did submit portions of the same bill to both carriers.

The lion share was covered by the health insurance company.

The co-pays, the deductibles which weren't covered by the health insurer were picked

up by his MedPay carrier.

But what he cannot do is then take the covered health care payment and also submit them

to his MedPay carrier because the statute specifically prohibits that.

Remember this is mandated coverage by the legislature.

But your argument isn't it that you would have us add reference to the liability

carrier to you can't get double recovery from the MedPay carrier and the health insurance

carrier and the liability carrier.

Isn't that the way you're asking us to interpret it?

I'm not asking you to add any language to this provision.

What I'm asking the court to do is what Judge Brown did and apply the statute as drafted

because subsection 4 the MedPay statute clearly states that an insured shall not be entitled

to duplicate payment for medical payments coverage and health insurance policy for the

same medical expense.

And that is precisely what he is asking here when he's asking his MedPay carrier to pay

his health insurance lien.

So it is attorney branch that is requesting that you on public policy grounds override

what the legislature chose to do.

And if that is a public policy argument it should be handled by the legislature

after hearings about what the cost of this will be.

Because again if MedPay carriers are now going to have to pick up all expenses including health

care liens chances are it's going to have an effect on premiums that it doesn't currently

have because the coverage is more limited.

And I suppose if I take it you're saying that the public if we're considering his

argument that public policy ought to allow this one of the things we should have to

consider is if we don't allow this are we somehow depriving a person of some recovery

for injuries they've sustained and that was my point before that in fact it would permit

not doing this would in effect permit a double recovery.

That is exactly correct and in this instance I put in all of the prior insurance department

regulations that I could find so you could see that the insurance department and the

legislature has gone back and forth about how to handle this whether to make MedPay primary

or secondary whether or not to give health insurers a right of recovery they have finally

settled on this version of the statute and it's within the insured's control.

It is not as attorney branch suggests a hobsy in choice.

The insured gets to elect how they use their MedPay or not.

So isn't it why isn't it a windfall to your client because they would have had to pay $7,800

and but for a choice that the insured thought he had they would have had to pay that.

It's not a windfall to my client because Travco is not in the business of providing

health insurance at all.

It has extended health insurance pursuant to this statute under the understanding

that it is only going to provide coverage for a medical expense that has not already been paid.

That's what the statute requires.

That's what the policy says.

The policy tracks the statute.

But I thought he could have submitted to Travco period just not bothered with his health insurer.

Right and hasn't that been built into the premium scheme by Travco?

In this case we didn't have those hearings but certainly.

But in most instances that is not what insurers do.

In most instances as attorney branch indicated insured submit to their health insurer except for copays and deductibles.

And looking at this globally if those that medical care can be provided for $1,800 instead of $6,800

that's saving somebody $5,000 right and isn't that a laudable goal?

It is but it's a laudable goal regardless of whether the insured is then entitled to shift his contractual health care obligation to his auto carrier.

I mean he has the benefit of that as well.

He is being obligated to pay his health insurer back less money because his health insurer

cut a good deal because health insurers like auto insurers are in the business of dealing with health insurance.

The auto insurance companies have a very small piece of this and pursuant to the

stand shoot it was designed for copays and deductibles not for duplicate payments.

So the recovery I mean presumably the recovery that Mr.

Branch's client got from the tort seezer included as part of the medical expenses the $6,800 for medical expenses not the $1,800.

That is precisely correct.

The majority of all of the Superior Courts have ruled that the defense bar cannot submit that reduced amount.

The face amount of the value of the billing services is what gets introduced to the jury.

Thank you.

There are no further questions we would ask that this court affirm.

Do you need your minute Mr. Branch?

Yes.

In terms of the public policy discussion that you had with Attorney Connor Justice Linn.

Please note that the version that's in the books specifically doesn't mention tort

fees or payments in its double payment concerns.

It says we're concerned only about double payments as between two sources.

It's very clear paragraph four.

They specifically state we're not caring about, well they don't specifically state we're not caring about tort fees or payments.

They make it clear what their concern is which is not tort fees or payments.

Secondly as to the issue of premium coverage it is somewhat ironic to hear that somehow this formulation is

not going to add premium pressure to the insurance carriers when in fact by going forward in the method that was done,

the overall amount of the medical bills was reduced that have to be paid.

Travco comes out paying less than they would have had Mr. Langeman submitted directly.

And he doesn't have that choice really if you look at page 36 of our brief and what Mr. Savigni said.

Or you'd have to convince health providers to take your word for it on payment.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

The court is in recess.
