This is case 2016-0219, appeal of Assets Recovery Center, LLC,

DBA, Assets Recovery Center of Florida at all.

Council?

Good morning, Michelle Kenney, Pierce Atwood LLP on behalf of the Appellants,

Assets Recovery Center of Florida, John Olson, and Daniel Kruzman.

State agencies can act only insofar as they are authorized by statute to act.

And in accordance with the rules.

I just ask you at the outset, suppose we disagree with you on the issue of

raised judicata.

In other words, suppose we think you are barred by raised judicata.

Is that the end of it, or are there other issues that we still have to,

that would not be precluded by raised judicata?

That would be the end of a lot of it, but not everything.

So what's left?

What's left is the Graham-Leach-Bliley issue, whether the department has the

authority to enforce Graham-Leach-Bliley.

Would you be kind enough to raise your voice a little bit?

Oh, sure.

Thank you.

But couldn't, I mean, isn't that something that you could have raised in

response to the original report?

The Graham-Leach-Bliley issue was not part of the report of

examination, actually.

That was, that appeared, that charge appeared, that was not an observation

made by the department in the report of examination, but it appeared in the

order to cease and desist.

Your opponent tells us that the federal law was incorporated in our state

law.

Is she incorrect?

Yes.

Okay.

So, when your turn comes, we'll need to hear from you about that.

But you know what?

If I understand correctly, your argument is based on the

fact that the federal statute says it can be enforced by the insurance

department.

They use the term insurance.

But you know, I mean, okay, they use the term insurance, but does it, I mean,

it seems to me that it's pretty, it would be pretty unusual if the, if what

they meant by that, if they didn't just, hadn't just used that as a sort

of generic term.

I mean, what would be, if they were willing to

have the act enforced by a state insurance department, what would be the

possible reason that if a state decided to have separate insurance and

banking departments that Congress would not want it to be insured by, enforced

by the banking department?

I mean, is there anything in the legislative history or something that

says, well, insurance departments have some special reason why we're going

to let them enforce it, but if it's a banking department or if it's called

the Department of Chocolate Cake or whatever, then, then they can't do it.

Well, frankly, we did not get into the legislative history of why Congress

chose to have the Federal Trade Commission, state insurance authorities, and

federal, because it's plain language.

What would be the possible reason that Congress could have thought, you

know, well, if they label their enforcement, you know, their agency that

enforces these kinds of things at the state level, if they label it an

insurance agency, insurance department, then it's great.

They can go right ahead.

But if they call it the banking department or the securities department

or the, you know, financial regulation department, then, oh no, can't do it.

It seems kind of crazy.

That's the decision that Congress made.

Well, unless what they were thinking is that perhaps most of the places around

the country where, that most of the states around the country where this

was enforced, they tend to call it, they tend to have an insurance

department that has very broad authority, and so they just, you know,

they use that as kind of a generic.

Your state, whatever the state agency is, will call it an insurance

department.

Our research strongly suggests that that is not the case.

So then you've looked, that's what I'm asking, I mean, you've got some

legislative history that says it's got to be, it's got to be an insurance

department because that has some special bonafide.

No, we did not look in the legislative history to see what Congress

was thinking when it said state insurance agencies.

What we did is look to see what state agencies do across the nation,

and what we found is that only in those few instances where states

have a merged, a joint banking and insurance department, are, those

are the agencies that have banking, bank regulation functions that,

under that umbrella, they are enforcing.

And what did they call, so I think you said, for example,

New York has it in one department, and what do they call that department?

I believe it has both banking and insurance in the title, and this may

be addressed in our brief off the top of my head, I can't remember.

But I mean, if it's so, so, if the, I mean, if it's referred,

if the department is called the banking and insurance department,

does that mean that since it's not called the insurance department,

New York doesn't have any authority either?

Well, I'm not so sure that we would get hung up on what an agency calls

itself rather than what it is.

Well, no, but that's exactly my point.

I mean, presumably the, presumably Congress gave the state's authority

to enforce these kind of things.

They intended that it be enforced by whatever the state agency that

enforces these kind of things is.

And that, that's my whole point.

If they, if we call it, you know, the Department of Banking as opposed

to the Department of Insurance, why should that make a difference?

Well, it should make a difference because Congress said state insurance

agencies, and in this case, our insurance department does,

in fact, enforce Graham-Leach-Bliley.

It's under, under New Hampshire legislation.

Except not against, not against your client.

Well, it certainly, it certainly could have.

There could have been, there was nothing preventing the insurance,

the appropriate, the designated state agency from taking a referral

from the banking department.

There was nothing that prevented the banking department in turn

from contacting the appropriate federal regulators to say,

we think that there's a Graham-Leach-Bliley violation here,

the little notice that tells the four customers that issue

in that, that were serviced in this case.

Does it really seem like a reasonable or logical that what

Congress would intend is that where these, we have these two

separate departments at the state level that enforce separate things

that what Congress really intended was for the banking department,

despite the fact that it has, you know, it has the expertise

in this area to say for this one little thing,

you'll, you'll have to refer it over to the insurance department?

That does not strike me at, at all as unreasonable.

Federal legislation very typically designates the governmental agencies

that are to enforce federal legislation.

And I don't think it's unreasonable for Congress to want to have this sort

of, to control the scope of enforcement.

If I remember, if I remember your opponent's brief correctly,

she's maintaining that there is either statutory or regulatory authority

to enforce federal law, which of course this is.

Why isn't that sufficient?

Or is she wrong about that?

Well, the reason why I think that's wrong is that when,

when federal legislation, I mean, these are separate,

there's, there are federalism issues here.

A state can't just decide that by the, the dint of one sentence

in a statute that all applicable federal laws shall apply.

Why not? Why not?

Because that's because only Congress can say how and who shall

enforce its legislation.

It's not, it's, it, I see that as a federalism issue.

And Congress creates legislation, you know, our department

of environmental services can't decide that it's going

to enforce Graham-Leach-Bliley.

We're not talking about the DEF.

I know we're not, but, but then why then,

what permits the banking department to enforce a federal law

that says only the insurance department shall do it?

It didn't say only.

Any more so than, than the Department

of Environmental Services?

It didn't say only though, right?

Well, it does, you're correct.

It does not say only.

You're correct.

But it does say that it shall be enforced by,

and then, particularly-

Is there a question of standing here with regard

to that issue?

In other words, what?

You know, in other words, if you, if, if, if,

instead of you being here, the federal government

was here saying, wait a minute, New Hampshire,

you can't do this because we, you know,

it's, you're not the insurance department.

I could, I mean, clearly, they might have standing,

but what, what's the harm that you suffer if it's,

you know, if it's the, assuming there's a violation,

what's the harm that you suffer if it's, you know,

the right hand of the state government

that does this or the left hand?

Well, the harm is that the state is not,

unbridled in its enforcement activity.

Parties who are regulated by state agencies

have a right to, to be, to sort of be on notice

about who's gonna regulate them

and how it's gonna be done.

And that's the harm here.

Aside from the federal law,

what is your argument concerning

unregistered activity by your client?

The trial court said that you engaged

in unregistered activity

and the evidence supported that

and everything flows from that.

There are, there are two main issues

around the unregistered loan activity.

It's correct that during 2010

when, when asset recoveries registration had laps

that it continued for a period of time

during that year to service loans with respect to-

Four at issue, are at issue.

Four, for, for customers.

Number, number.

So is, so, but for the fact that

it was the banking department

and not the insurance department,

would your position be, well, it's true,

it wasn't registered?

Or do you have a counter argument?

Okay, I think, so the,

I think the registration issue is,

is separate from the Graham-Leach-Bliley

is the federal law.

Right, that's why I asked the question.

Justice Conboy's trying to get it.

Okay, so, so what is your position

with regard to the trial courts

or the merits order rather

by the presiding officer

that your client engaged in unregistered activity

thereby warranting all the,

the action taken against it,

including the fines?

Okay.

We, we agree.

There was unregistered loan activity.

We do not agree that the onslaught of charges here

flow from that unregistered activity.

And there are a couple of problems with,

with the charges that sort of emanate

from what we agree was unregistered activity.

You said it was just basically an overreaction.

More than, more than that.

One, we take issue with the,

there are two charges.

One was a failure to, to renew the registration.

And with respect to that,

we argue that the department is actually required

by statute to promulgate a renewal form pursuant to rule.

Doesn't that argument fall flat in this sense?

Let's assume that, let's assume that we agree

that there was, that the department had to,

you know, to, to use the form,

it had to promulgate some kind of regulation.

How does that excuse your client from registering?

I mean, you, if, if you were, you know,

if you were here saying, look,

we didn't fill out that form,

but we sent in a letter to the department saying,

we wanted to, you know, we want to renew our registration.

We, here's our place of business and our address.

And we have, you know, this is,

this is our agent for service and process in New Hampshire.

And here's our, here's how the description

of our activity and the department said,

we're not accepting that.

Well, maybe you'd have an argument,

but if I, as I understand it, you didn't do anything.

You didn't, you didn't make any attempt to register.

And so the whole form thing seems like,

you know, kind of a red herring.

Well, there was a late registration, agreed.

That's, that's, it came late in, in the year.

But if we're going to take seriously the notion,

the principle that state agencies are constrained

in their actions by what the statutes say,

then we have to find that the banking department

cannot hold people, cannot penalize people

for not sending back a form that was not promulgated

by a rule.

Well, it wasn't, but it wasn't, but that's my point.

There wasn't the violation, not that you,

not that you didn't use the right form,

but that you didn't register.

Well, the violation is tied to,

the violation is of the statute that,

that says the department that the registrant

shall return the form that's promulgated by the department.

When they registered late, did they use a form

promulgated by the department?

Well, the, the department has not promulgated any rules

to enforce an entire chapter that regulates an industry.

But, but, but at some point it made,

your client made an attempt to register

and then we drew it.

Am I correct on that?

Or no.

That, that, that's correct.

There was, there was, and it actually wasn't much

of an issue in this case, whether they used the form

that's available on the website.

I'm not talking about that, but am I,

was it withdrawn yet?

It was fuzzy from the briefs.

They made an effort late to register,

but then they pulled that back.

I believe that's correct.

And what happened is that a already registered

New Hampshire registered a loan servicer

took over the servicing of those four loans.

I see, okay.

Aside from the form argument,

and the lack of promulgation of rules,

what about the statutory obligation

to essentially cooperate in making

all the requested document production?

Cause that didn't happen, right?

It certainly didn't happen timely.

Well, I, I just, very much disagree with that.

One is-

So am I misunderstanding what went on here?

I understood that there were numerous requests,

extensions of deadlines,

with regard to the request for the documents

to cooperate with the examination.

There were numerous requests at the outset.

Information was furnished within the first three weeks.

After that, there were, there were communications,

there were extensions that were agreed upon.

This is all in the record.

But our point is that really goes to whether

the department has the authority to be commanding

that out-of-state registrants must send documents, papers,

and within any time frame.

So when the document requests were made,

was the, was there a response?

Wait a minute.

We, we think we don't have any obligation

to comply with your document request.

I didn't have the impression that that happened.

So this is an after-the-fact characterization

of the failure to provide the documents.

Well, this is a legal defense that was raised

at, I think, the appropriate time

when, in order to cease and desist, was,

was received by-

Well, unless, unless we agree with your opponent

that the, that you, the appropriate time to raise that

would have been in response to the report.

I, I, that's correct.

If this court finds that a claim-proclusion doctrine

applies to the lion's share of the charges here,

as a result of a confidential report of examination

that, that, that my clients were not permitted

to share with anyone and that my clients

were given no notice that they were required

to raise legal defenses to the observations

and comments of a, of a department examiner.

You're no longer answering Justice Lynn's question

and your time is up.

So thank you very much.

Thank you.

We will give all of your arguments

careful consideration.

Thank you.

May it please the court.

Good morning.

I am Assistant Attorney General Jeanine Giorgenti

appearing today on behalf of the New Hampshire

Banking Department.

I'm happy to take questions at any port-

So here's my first question.

What, one of the things that your opponent makes

that a lot of hoopla about, so to speak,

is that the report is confidential

and that the hearing would be a closed hearing?

I guess my question is, what's your,

I mean, who is that for the benefit of?

If, it, it would be my assumption

that that's for the benefit of the registrant.

So that, I mean, could the regi,

if the registrant wanted to waive that

and say, listen, I don't,

you want to make this public?

Fine, we'll have a public, public hearing.

Could the, could he, could the asset recovery do that?

Or would the department have the ability to say no?

You can't, you know, this is gonna remain closed.

I believe that the commissioner has the ability

to waive that upon request

if the appellants had wanted to do so

and they could do that in conjunction with the commissioner.

But the hearing is closed for the benefit of the appellants

so that this information is not made public

before final findings are made

so that the customers that the appellants serve

are not troubled and worried by what's going on

before a final decision is made.

It's also confidential in that the state

would not release it pursuant to the right to no law

and that's again to protect the appellants

and the customers that they serve.

So I think the larger, greater point

is that this is closed and confidential to the public

but not to the parties here, sir.

But how is it, how is it an adjudication

for collateral estoppel or raise judicata purposes?

It's an adjudication because the appellants were given

an are given notice and an opportunity to be heard

at this hearing before the commissioner.

But the hearing didn't take place?

No, because the appellants did not request one

and thereby waived their right to that hearing.

Does the statute speak to that

or do the regulations speak to that?

Yes, the statute speaks to that,

that if you do not avail yourself of this opportunity

to be heard before the commissioner,

that the commissioner will adopt the uncontested report

and then the matter would proceed as it did here

to the cease and desist order where the fines are levied.

The, your opponent argues throughout.

This was a total overreaction that the department

the department had a policy of imposing the max,

the maximum fines and whatnot,

essentially telling us that they were singled out

for very harsh treatment for violations

that were relatively minor.

What is your position?

My position is that the presiding officer

did levy the appropriate fines in this matter.

They were the maximum.

They were the maximum and his statement

in the record below is that if ever there was a case

that called for the maximum fines, this is the one.

And why was that?

Because this was not a minimal amount

of unregistered activity.

I'm trying to, I want to be accurate.

Appellants conducted unregistered loan activity

for 17 months with four New Hampshire consumers.

During that time, they collected over $23,000.

This amount included late charges.

And during all this time, were document requests

outstanding?

Yes.

During this time, the department was engaged

in a dialogue with the appellants.

We need these documents.

We're giving you extensions of time

to get those documents.

The record is right with email exchanges

and phone calls about we need this.

We need to get us this and you haven't done it.

If you want more time, here's more time.

But at the close of the examination,

they still had not provided the requested information.

They still engaged in the unregistered loan activity.

So the hearing officer was arguably at least annoyed

at the lack of cooperation from asset management.

Yes.

Okay, and was that annoyance sufficient

on the basis of $23,000 worth of potential harm

to impose the maximum penalties?

Yes, he found the unregistered activity to be egregious,

particularly because of the $23,000 collected,

only 1,500 of it went to the principle of the loan.

But you know, how does that have some tie

to whether they were registered or not?

In other words, is there some,

is there some claim that if they had been registered,

they would have collected less in late fees or whatever?

It seems like that,

I'm not quite sure I see the connection.

I think the connection to the presiding officer

was that in addition to doing unregistered activity,

what they may have been doing was improper

and I think he factored that into his decision.

Well may have been, I mean that's different

than having evidence that it was improper.

Correct, the record in the hearing below

only speaks to his comment about the possibility

of these loans being improper.

The other question I have for you that I,

this is one area of the safe position

that I'm particularly troubled by

is the multiple violations part.

In other words, it seems to me your opponent

has a pretty strong argument

that the statute should not be construed

the way you've construed it.

Because suppose that under your construction,

if a registrant was not registered for one day,

they renewed late one day and they were,

you know this wasn't your opponent,

but it was Bank of America

and they had 30,000 customers or something in New Hampshire,

they'd be liable for the penalty times 30,000.

That just seems like it's hard to imagine

that that's what the legislature had in mind.

Yes, but I think it cuts both ways

because what if a person in that scenario

was to choose not to register

and service those $30,000 people

in the state of New Hampshire

and you only get one fine,

you only get 2,500.

But the legislature could change that.

I mean, your opponent says in it

that the case that you rely on,

what an appeal director or something is different

because the statute was worded differently.

In other words, if the statute said here

that you shall not make a loan while not registered,

then I could see that that might suggest

that every loan is a separate violation.

But here it simply says you shall not conduct business

or basically you shall not conduct business

unless you're registered.

And so, for example, if you could do this,

if you can say, well,

we're gonna multiply the fine by four loans,

why couldn't you say we're gonna multiply it

by each payment?

So in other words, they collected payments every month.

So it's not really times four,

it's times four times 12 months.

Or every day, I suppose.

I think it's the alpha director's case

that you're referring to.

And I think that case is important for us

because it says that there may be many ways

to figure out how to calculate the fine.

And just because the court doesn't agree with the one way

and might have chosen another,

as long as the one chosen was reasonable

and not an abuse of authority.

And authorized by the statute.

Yes, and I believe that the statute here

does authorize multiple fines.

The entity that was out of compliance

was asset recovery.

But fines were also levied against Mr. Koosmans

and Mr. Olsen.

And is there statutory authority

to levy fines against the principles?

Yes, I believe that the statute

does allow for the department

to give a violation to the entity

and to the owners and operators thereof.

They are all regulated by the department

and subject to its authority.

And that is why the fines were levied

to the corporation and to its 250% owners.

And I would also like to add

that if we were to hold the other way

that this would be only one violation,

it wouldn't be a deterrent.

It would cost them two grand

to operate unlicensed is your argument.

So if we limited it to the entity

and we limited it to the violation

of operating without registration,

it would be a pretty small cost of business.

That's what your argument is.

Two grand will do it.

What's the significance of the absence

of a written note backing up the $5 million loan

by Mr. or $6 million loan by Mr. Coosman?

I'm not sure that there was a violation.

I don't think that they were fined

for that lack of a note.

So it has no significance?

I don't believe so.

Does the banking department take issue

with the characterization or the argument

that it always seeks the maximum fine

and is that reasonable or unreasonable?

Yes, we do not agree with that position at all

or that we do not agree that that

is how the banking department operates.

The cease and disease order in its introduction

merely states that the appellants could be fined

a maximum of 2,500.

But didn't the hearings officer make a finding

or something that that was the department's position

that they always requested the maximum?

He said that is based on the information

that he had before him, that that is how he saw it,

but we do not agree with that.

Well, how do we get behind me?

Are you saying that that was, is there evidence

to show that that was clearly erroneous or something?

There is the Miriam DeFosces' statement

in the certified record below

of what she actually said in response to that question.

And when I read her response, it merely says

what we all do as lawyers, there's the maximum,

we start there, we negotiate down,

that's the point of the cease and desist order,

is that the presiding officer gets those facts

and he weighs them and measures them

and he decides the appropriate fine.

So is it your position that, if we were to accept

the finding that they always went for the max,

that that's still a reasonable approach for the department?

It's just a notification of this

is the greatest penalty you can face in this matter.

In other words, you'd say it would be somewhat analogous

to if a prosecutor's office had a policy

that says, we're always gonna charge the top charge

that we can in the indictment

and then we'll, maybe we'll agree later on

to some lesser charge, but we're gonna go for the top charge.

Yeah, like when you do an arrest

and you make the complaint,

it tells you what your max charges are.

And that's how I read the statement in the record

of the examiner.

And this might all have turned out quite differently

had asset recovery requested a hearing

with the commissioner and made its arguments.

Yes, correct.

They had that opportunity

and they did not avail themselves of that opportunity.

And I see that my light is on

and I would just like to add

that this was not something that came out of the blue.

When the appellants first got the cease and desist order,

they went to the presiding officer and said,

wait a minute, we never got this report.

What are you talking about?

We didn't have our right to be heard.

And then when the hearing on the merits comes to be,

they totally abandoned that argument and say,

wait a minute, you don't even have the authority

to ask us for these things in the first place.

And that's why the presiding officer responded

in the way they did.

Ultimately, they agreed that they got it.

They got the report.

Yes, they did.

They paid for the report.

There's a return receipt in the mail

that they did receive the report.

And there's a finding by the presiding officer

that their mailing department lost the report.

And even if you don't agree that Race Judicata

was the appropriate doctrine to apply in this scenario,

I submit to the court that it was a harmless error

because this hearing officer let the appellants

make all of their arguments.

He heard them all.

He heard all the arguments you heard today

and he heard all the arguments you read in our briefs.

And he still found them to be without merit.

It took him over two years to make his decision.

Your opponent is unhappy to say the least about that.

Is that relevant?

I don't think it's relevant because it's

my understanding that the state and assets recovery

agreed to waive the time.

I don't think that the state anticipated

it would have taken that long, but they did

agree to waive the time.

And I don't believe this was something

that was contested below.

Can I go back when you say that your harmless error thing

on the Race Judicata?

I understand you're saying that the hearing's officer actually

allowed your opponent to present their arguments and all,

but didn't he and his ruling reject, sort of say in effect,

I don't have to decide this issue

because it's barred by Race Judicata.

So I mean, he did rely on Race Judicata

as the basis of many of his decisions, didn't he?

He did, but then he also still stated

at the end that even if he were to address those arguments,

he found them to be without merit

and still would have issued the maximum fine.

So what do we do if we think that Race Judicata doesn't

apply here?

Could we and should we decide those issues

or do we need to remand it?

Yes, I think that you could decide those issues.

I think that the record is full enough

and contains all of the information

that you would need to decide those issues on the merits.

And I don't think that it would need to be remanded.

He actually said, and maybe my notes are wrong,

but he actually said in his merits order

that these matters were not barred by Race Judicata.

Yes, I believe that he said that the Gram-Leach-Bliley Act

was not barred by Race Judicata.

The surety bond issue was not barred by Race Judicata.

And everything related to unregistered activity

wasn't barred.

That's what you said, right?

Correct.

So do we take that or do we?

I'm understanding from your argument

that even though he said that,

what he actually did in treating these issues

was apply Race Judicata.

What is your position on how we ought to approach this?

Well, I think that the court should, I'm sorry.

I see that my light is on.

You can finish answering the question.

I think that the court should uphold the presiding

officer's application of Race Judicata.

And even if you don't feel that that

is proper, the appellants did still

waive their right to that hearing.

And I think that because of that waiver,

they were precluded from making those arguments.

OK.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted, the court will take a brief.

Thank you.
