This is case 2016-0594, appeal of Raymond Cover.

Welcome back, Mr. O'Connor.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Good morning, may it please the Court.

My name is Jared O'Connor.

I'm with the firm of Shaheen and Gordon, and it's my pleasure to be here representing Mr. Cover today.

In my limited time available, I think I'd like to focus in on what I think is the most important single issue in the appeal, which is the following.

It is the primary legal issue that I think frankly is better suited for disposition by the full court rather than 3JX, because I think it raises a novel legal issue, and that is this.

Even if you assume that the board was correct to find the way it did in terms of all the factual record, the problem going forward is that the board advocated its responsibility to determine whether my client was legally entitled to reinstatement.

What I mean by that is that when this case was remanded to the board, all we knew is that if he is terminated for cause, then that cuts off his right to reinstatement.

We know that from the case of appeal of Marti, which was decided just last year.

So this is a new area of law for the court.

So we know termination for cause cuts off the right to reinstatement.

What the board did was expressly decline to do an inquiry into whether or not the conduct in this case rose to that level.

We know that by looking at the way they concluded their opinion.

If you look at their order on our motion for re-hearing, they conclude it, this is at page 3 of the appendix to the brief.

They say, quote, whether the employer dismissed the claimant for disciplinary or non-disciplinary reasons is not an issue to be decided by the CAB.

That issue belongs before the Department of Employment Security.

And that's the problem for two reasons.

First of all, for them simply not to decide it, I think, as I say, it's their responsibility under section 25A of the Workers' Com Statute to decide whether my client's entitled to reinstatement.

That was who he asserted, it's the board's job to do that.

But the further problem is that by deferring to the Department of Employment Security, we know by statute the claimant is not permitted to rely on a decision of the unemployment board.

If you look at statute section, it's RSA 282A180, cited in my brief.

And they say that as a matter of law it is prohibited, it says you shall not be admissible in evidence, any findings of the Department of Employment Security.

And so even if my client were at this late date somehow able to get a hearing in front of that department and get a determination that his firing was not for cause,

he can't just import those findings to the CAB.

So the board should have engaged in an inquiry in this case to find out whether or not the conduct rose to the level of a termination for cause.

And on that point, I'd say, again, the board is at sea here because we don't know what the standards are for whether or not a claimant is fired for cause,

because it's never been determined by this court in the Workers' Com context.

But we do have a set of well-developed case law under the employment statute.

And I submit that the same standards should apply. They're both remedial statutes.

And the kind of conduct that would not allow a claimant to receive unemployment benefits if you're fired for cause.

What that means is misconduct, deliberate violation of the employer's policy.

And that is not what happened here. The board never found that.

They've never made a factual determination that he deliberately failed to, in this case, deliver his workers' compensation paperwork.

I mean, that's what happened here. He went out of work.

It worked that was in the possession of the comp carrier, correct?

Well, that's my second argument, my fallback argument. And that's true, yes.

The board did find, as a factual matter, he had to get the workers' comp forms to the employer by June 14th.

The factual record is that he did not.

And why did the board make that finding?

Why did they make a finding that he did not?

Why were they looking at it? In relation to what?

If they were looking at the fore cause termination issue.

Well, at the time, the employer was making the alternative argument that he's been terminated, therefore, we don't have to bring him back to work.

At that time, this was back in 2015, there had been no case law from this court on that point.

And then in the meantime, the appeal of Marty case was decided, which established the uncontroversial proposition that if you're fired for cause, you don't get reinstatement.

But that's all we know in the comp context.

And so, again, I submit it's appropriate to look at Lakeview and these other cases that are in the unemployment context to help the board determine whether something rises to the level of a fore cause termination.

And I'd submit, just based on this record alone, I frankly don't even think a remand is necessary at this point.

I think you can look at what the board found, which is that he didn't get it there on time.

That's still not an administrative, it's only an administrative termination.

This has broader implications, not just for my client.

I mean, it's not at all unusual for claimants who are out on workers comp to be out for an extended period of time.

And the employer puts them out on FMLA leave simultaneously.

The 12 weeks run.

The employer doesn't know if this person's ever coming back.

They issue an administrative termination, which they are perfectly within their rights to do.

And then the claimant continues to recover and lo and behold, a year later, they're able to come back to work.

So they want to assert the right to reinstatement.

Under this board's logic, he's not entitled to it.

So if there are no further questions.

Thank you.

Mr. Johnson.

Thank you.

May it please the court.

David Johnson for the New Hampshire Political Commission.

I want to address Attorney O'Connor's first argument that he raised here, which is the last argument he raises in his brief.

The board, he correctly notes, did not make an expressed determination that there was misconduct by the claimant.

The claimant suggests that that was error and invites the court to require a showing of misconduct before termination can be deemed for cause similar to what applies in the unemployment context.

However, there was nothing in the decisions appeal of Marti or appeal of cover to indicate that a deliberate act or misconduct is required for termination to be considered for cause in the worker's compensation context.

And if the showing of misconduct is required to meet the for cause element of the inquiry, an employer could be precluded from denying reinstatement to someone who has been legitimately discharged for poor performance or some other reason that doesn't necessarily involve misconduct.

And this court gave no indication in the board no reason to believe that that is what it is intended.

That is why the board-

Poor performance would be cause, wouldn't it?

It would, but it's not necessarily misconduct.

That is the distinction between what the Department of Employment Security looks at and what the compensation of board in this particular case was talking about when it said,

we're not making a decision as to whether or not this was for disciplinary reasons or non-disciplinary reasons.

A non-disciplinary reason may have been due to poor performance or, as we might argue in this case, his failure to comply with the workplace policy.

So what the board did was reassert-

Excuse me, where does the employee then have that determination made?

I'm sorry.

Whether he provided the paperwork in time or to the carrier instead of the employer, where's his forum?

The forum was in this particular case at the compensation appeals board.

And that was appropriate according to what this court said in appeal of cover when it directed the-

But it didn't make the determination.

No, the board did in fact make the determination both in the 2014 decision and the 2016 decision that he was terminated for cause due to his failure to turn in the required paperwork

by the established deadline, which he was aware of.

And the board specifically said that.

This was not a misunderstanding or mistake as alleged by the claimant himself.

The board found that he knew that he needed to turn the documentation into the HR department at the liquor commission.

So when we get into the question of whether the insurance carrier can serve as an agent for purposes of constructive notice,

what we're talking about is the liquor commission did not actually receive the documentation by the deadline.

Documentation was received by the workers' compensation carrier.

However, and the claimant relies on the case of hollering in which the court held that in that particular instance,

the statutory definition of employee or would include the liability or workers' compensation carrier.

However, hollering in no way broadened the scope or the definition of employer to insurance carriers

for the purposes of ensuring enforcement of an employer's policies, procedures, and directives.

At the end of the day though, isn't this a very benign omission on the part of Mr. Cover?

Benign or not, it was a policy directive to Mr. Cover to turn in the required paperwork,

and it was consistent with the commission's established policies,

whether or not a person was out for a compensation matter or an unrelated matter.

So it was a standard blanket policy, did not fall under the umbrella of comp alone.

It was applicable to anyone who was absent from work for a period of three days or more without any notice from a medical doctor.

So appeal of hollering does not apply in this case, and we would submit that the board correctly made his decision.

Thank you, counsel.

Case submitted.
