This is case 2016-0379, George Blaisdell et al. v. City of Rochester et al.

Is Mr. Blaisdell here? Do you know, counsel, whether he's going to be here?

I do not.

Do we know, Claire? Okay.

The record will reflect that Mr. Blaisdell, the underlying plaintiff in this matter, and Apple Lee, is not present,

although he was certainly given permission to argue for five minutes.

The court will rely upon the arguments in his brief.

Counsel, you may proceed.

Good morning.

The basic idea behind judicial estoppel is to prevent a party from pulling, essentially, a switcheroo.

At one point, they say X to gain an advantage, and then at the next point, they say negative X to gain a disadvantage.

If the court rules favorably on a position, the party is required to stick with it throughout a litigation.

In the present case, we're not talking about a single instance of litigation.

We're talking about two different cases.

But can it still apply, even if it's two different cases?

I haven't argued that one way or the other, but I would say it could.

Blaisdell 1 was about enforcing the International Property Maintenance Code.

In that case, the plaintiff was held liable because he met the definition of a liable party under the IMPC.

But he was also alleged to be an owner in that procedure.

He was alleged to be an owner under the definition in the IMPC.

In our current case, it's a quiet title action.

In this matter, it's about resolving actual ownership of 13 Magic Avenue in Rochester, meaning the right to immediate and exclusive possession of the property.

That issue is never litigated in Blaisdell 1.

In Blaisdell 1, the city took the position that the plaintiff was liable under the IMPC and that his late father was the record title owner.

Now, that position as to his late father was incorrect, but it had no bearing whatsoever on whether the plaintiff, Mr. Blaisdell, would be held responsible under the IMPC definition of owner, occupant, or person in control of the property.

The city's current position is that the plaintiff was never the record title owner of 13 Magic Avenue, and that is not inconsistent with anything that happened in Blaisdell 1.

So you're saying there has to be a perfect match?

The issues have to be the same.

They would have to be exactly the same across the two litigations, with the two points in the litigation.

So nothing that happened in Blaisdell 1 is inconsistent.

What are you saying that the trial court did wrong?

What the trial court did wrong is conflating the ideas of, well, there's several things, but conflating the idea of ownership in Blaisdell 1 with what ownership means in the current case.

In the current case, we're talking about quiet title action.

We're talking about actual record or title ownership, right to exclusive possession of that property.

In Blaisdell 1, the city distinguished between title ownership, which we said was vested in Albert Blaisdell, the plaintiff's father,

and then we said George Blaisdell was an owner, occupant, or otherwise in control in terms of IMP, the Internet of Property Maintenance Code.

And in Blaisdell 1, the title, the trial court distinguished between the two in its final order.

In Blaisdell 1, do we have the pleadings from Blaisdell 1 here?

You don't have all of them, no.

All right.

So you're making a representation to us about the term ownership and how it was used in those pleadings.

Correct.

In the appendix to this case, there is the city's original complaint in that matter,

which we distinguish between title ownership and then the idea of a person, a liable party under the International Property Maintenance Code.

So the complaint from Blaisdell 1 is here?

Correct.

It's in there.

And then the order, the trial court order from Blaisdell 1 is also in there,

where you see that the trial court does make that distinction between title ownership

and then responsibility under the International Property Maintenance Code.

And the International Code is cited in both the original pleading and in the court order?

Correct.

Counsel, can I, I wonder if I could just ask you a couple of questions about the tone of your brief?

Yes.

I'm just quoting from page 13 of your brief.

Yes.

The trial court, through incompetence, deliberate ignorance, or animus, chose to ignore this very important distinction.

Yes.

Can you please tell me the evidence of the deliberate ignorance or animus that you suggest the trial court engage in?

And I'm glad you asked that question because as the Supreme Court, you have general supervisory capacity over the lower courts in this state.

And this particular decision made no sense logically, either legal logic or actual logic.

And in all the filings in this case, we pointed out to the trial court below how this decision could not be, could not be reached.

It couldn't, collateral, excuse me, judicial estoppel could not be used to reach the ultimate conclusion they made in this case.

And we wanted to prevent the fact, even being here today.

And in our motion to reconsider, we pointed all this out and explained it to the court.

And it was simply ignored.

Without explanation.

And one point I would like to go along these lines is, the only reason the city is here today, in a quiet title action,

is because we received the interest in this property from these folks we've called the Wallace descendants.

They quiet titled this to us.

I guess what I want to go back to is, what?

But, you know, the trial court, to be candid with you, I tend to think you're probably right

that the trial court got it wrong.

Yeah.

But incompetence, deliberate ignorance, or animus?

Yes.

And what would be the motive of the judge for, what animus do you suggest?

Again, Your Honor, that's why we're here, because...

No, no, no, what animus?

Tell me the animus that you think that, is there some evidence that he had some, you

know, something against the city of Rochester?

Throughout this litigation, correct, it's more than getting it wrong, it's ignoring the law.

And we're basically throwing ourselves on the mercy of the court saying, what is happening right now?

Why is this, why are these decisions so long and so out?

So you don't think that, I take it from your responses to my questions,

you don't think that your brief was over the top at all in terms of...

No, I don't. I don't believe so.

All right.

All right. And I'm out of time, is...

Do you have any other points to make?

Just this one final point is, the judicial stopple element not only could not be used to cut off the city's rights to the property,

because we received them from these Wallace descendants, the court never explains how the plaintiff

would then receive the title to the property using judicial stopple, because he himself,

excuse me, the plaintiff, has never established their claim.

He would have to establish a superior claim vis-a-vis the Wallace descendants.

One final question.

Did you get Judge Lynn's point?

Yes.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you.
