This is case 2016-0584, a state-of-the-art partner at all versus Lindsey Thompson.

And it's just pure happenstance that you're all here on the same morning.

Counsel.

Good morning. May it please the Court, my name is Jason Dennis and I represent the plaintiffs in this case.

It's a preliminary matter. I have reserved three minutes for a butthole and I have notified the monitor.

In this case, the Superior Court acting upon the defendant's motion

dismisses both the breach of contract claim and the unjust enrichment claim pending before the trial court.

I'll address the breach of contract claim first, and with regards to that claim, I would say that it really hinges upon 19 words in the agreement.

To quote, Lynn Mortner shall pay Ted Mortner the sum of $250,000 within 30 days of the date of the decree.

In this case, as recognized by the trial court, it is uncontested that the parties executed a contract that exists both as a literal and legal fact.

But you know what, isn't it really, I mean, it strikes me that the trial court was correct.

In this regard, suppose that they, you say that this was an enforceable contract regardless of the divorce, but if the parties had not divorced, and then one had died.

In other words, let's assume they executed this contract and one said, you know, the wife's going to transfer $250,000 and this stock,

or limited partnership interest to the other party.

Okay, so let's assume that we say that's an enforceable contract between two adults, and even though they're married, they can make a contract with each other.

Okay, fine.

So they make the contract and they don't get divorced, and then the husband dies.

Aren't there laws that would say that the husband, that the wife would be able to get that $250,000 from the husband's estate, or at least some portion of it?

Aren't there laws that say that, you know, she couldn't sort of cut out, or he couldn't sort of cut out the spouse, at least not entirely?

So that it seems to me, I mean, if that's true, it seems to me that the divorce is really a very fundamental part of this agreement.

I think I can answer that question two separate ways.

First, in this case, to the issue of uncertainty of whether or not the parties were going to get divorced, whether there was a potential for reconciliation.

One of the more prickly aspects of the case is the fact that, in this case, Mrs. Mortner had, during the penalty of divorce proceedings, filed a motion to move another gentleman into the home while Mr. Mortner was still living there, and she has since married that person.

And one of the cases cited in the brief table of check, one of the issues that came up was, is there going to be the potential for reconciliation?

I mean, I understand, but I guess my point is even if there had been no divorce, however, you know, broken down the marriage may have been, it would not have been a basis if the parties had not been divorced.

It wouldn't have been a basis in a probate proceeding, would it, for one party to come in and say, listen, the statute says that you can't disinherit your spouse.

And here's what the spouse gets or whatever, but this spouse was really terrible.

He or she was having an affair with somebody else and didn't care about the other person, and so probate court don't apply the law that way.

The court would say, hey, I have no authority to accept, you know, to sort of carve out an exception to the statute.

I believe you're right with regards to what the probate court would have to do and what it would be constrained to do with regard to statutes, not withstanding the state documents.

However, in this case, if we go back to the rule that ended up getting us into Superior Court in the first place, the general rule of abatement,

one of the very reasons that that rule exists is that death of a party terminates the marriage.

Yes, Mr. Green about that.

So in the Kimball case, which is the original case in the 1800s that talks about the general rule of abatement, I believe one of the quotes from that case, and in case this issue came up, I took it down,

the marital relation has already been ended by the death of the husband.

And so here we have, if the divorce is the consideration for the contract, that divorce essentially, again back to the Kimball case, the object of the suit is merely personal to change the status or relation of the parties to each other.

So that's the purpose of divorce.

If divorce is consideration and death terminates the marriage, then those are the same exact thing from a legal basis for consideration.

The divorce vis-à-vis the death of a party, both of those, according to the law in this state, going back to the abatement principle, equally terminate the marriage.

And so if we're looking at that as a consideration issue, the consideration is satisfied either by a final decree of divorce or by the death, if we're looking at it through the abatement context.

And so in this case, the parties had a contract freely and openly entered into, but for Mr. Warner's death would have been final and would have been incorporated into a decree.

But isn't that the whole point? If the person dies, the divorce simply evaporates. If it isn't final, it doesn't exist anymore.

So the divorce may evaporate. Yes, and that is the point. You're absolutely right. The divorce evaporates.

So the piece of paper, the decree, that particular method of dissolving the relationship disappears.

But the relationship itself, back to my point to Justice Lynn, is that the death, if the death didn't terminate the relationship, then the abatement rule wouldn't exist in the first place.

But, I ask you, but if the idea behind dividing the property was to take care of the distribution

of marital assets because of a divorce, then doesn't that rationale also simply evaporate?

It seemed to me that the consideration for either one of them doing anything with their assets was at least in part the divorce.

I would agree. The consideration...

I will give you this and you will give me that, but it all hinges on the fact that we're going to be divorced.

Correct.

But I would modify that slightly to say it all hinges on the fact that our legal relationship is all such that I, the defendant in this case, Lindsay Mortner, can be remarried.

But that's not what it says. It talks about the divorce decree, right? Doesn't the agreement refer to the decree?

It does, yes.

So it doesn't refer to the broader concept that you want us to read into it. It uses a specific terminology. You asked us to look at these 19 words, and those 19 words include divorce decree, right?

They absolutely do, yes. And so to that, to my point with regards to the interpretation of those rules, and I would submit that the court did interpret a contract here, or we wouldn't be talking about condition receipt in the first place, since that's a contract term of art.

So the court interpreted a contract, found a condition receipt based on those 19 words. What is missing from those 19 words, as is pretty clear from the well and widely established law on the avoidance of foreclosures through the reading in of a condition

proceeding, is any language of clear condition. There is no conditioned on, contingent on. If then, it simply is similar to the Pavlik case, a placeholder whereby the parties would have a time frame that they all knew that they could go back to the court to address the issues through content.

But isn't the question, isn't the question that we have to ask, would these parties have made this agreement if they weren't going to get divorced? And it seems to me that the answer to that question is pretty clear that they would not.

I mean, as I said before, at the very least, wouldn't there have been, have to have been other things that they would have done if they were going to, for example, suppose that this was going to be some kind of a legal separation as opposed to a divorce.

And they were going to make this contract. Wouldn't, you know, wouldn't the lawyer for one party of the, or the other have said, you know, you're going to have to do, because you're still going to technically be married, you're going to have to do whatever you, whatever you have to do to comply with the law to make

sure that if one of you dies, the other one doesn't end up getting back the property that you've just made this contract about. But presumably they didn't do any of those kind of things because they thought they were going to be divorced and that they wouldn't have to do that.

Now if they're not divorced, if they didn't, now if they didn't get divorced, it just seems to be hard to imagine that they would have entered into this contract.

So they did enter into the contract. My light is on, so I'll try to answer this question as briefly as possible. They did enter into a contract through the divorce proceeding. And so one aspect of that was, again, the divorce.

But we have the termination of a relationship anyway, which I submit is, as I've said, that is tantamount to the consideration of a divorce decree.

My contracts professor would probably dispute that.

Understood. What I would say to further answer your question, Justin Lin, with regards to what these parties were feeling and what they were going to exchange or not exchange and when, why, where and all those things.

At the motion hearing on the motion to dismiss, one of the other issues or assets to this case, in addition to the $250,000, which by the way is not mentioned in that provision so there can't be a condition proceeding, at least to the American Bailey Mining Limited Partnership

interest that's in my brief, is this again was a representation through counsel of the defendant. We were uncertain whether American Bailey Mining would allow the stock to be split, but we wanted to get divorced anyway.

So what we said was, you know, let's use all our efforts to do that. But if we can't, this is split the stock. You're still going to convey the stock. And if Mr. Mordner is, you know, gone in a couple of three years, you're still going to provide this family with the stock dividends or the stock itself,

meaning the risk of death was born by the defendant in this case. And as represented in spirit court, they understood that regardless of whether they can meet some of the contingencies in this case, and regardless of whether or not Mr. Mordner survived long into the future, this benefit was not only for Mr. Mordner, but it was for his estate, his heirs,

heirs, assigns, etc. And so I think that does address your question and that though this was through the guise of divorce proceedings, the idea is separating the relationship, which is done through the death of Mr. Mordner, but it was not only for Mr. Mordner, it was for his estate, and that's recognized.

In fact, it's recognized in the amendment to the contract that says, if we can't do this going through American Bailey Mining, I, Lindsey Mordner, am going to take the responsibility to make sure that you still get this, me personally.

And then if you're not here, you're a state. So there's more than just the separation of the union, the legal union between these two parties. There is the consideration of taking care of the estate.

I would argue briefly, since my red light's not on yet, hopefully I can make it, is that in this case, the condition was satisfied because though abated, literally, which we construe, conditions are being strictly and literally, literally a divorce decree issue.

This provision did not say within 30 days of the judgment date. It did not say within 30 days of an unabated decree. It said within 30 days of a decree, a decree issue.

Literally, the condition proceeding was satisfied, meaning the obligation of the promise then comes into effect. And though my red light's not on yet, I will end on those remarks unless there are any questions pending.

Thank you.

Good morning and may it please the court. My name is Tim Coughlin and I represent Lindsey Thompson, who is the wife in this original divorce proceeding. And I suppose Justice Lynn, I have you to thank for the privilege to appear before this court again and that when we originally argued this case some months ago,

you suggested whether or not the forum was right for this disagreement, whether we should have been litigating still in the family division or whether there shouldn't have been some sort of enforcement action brought by the estate to enforce the agreement.

I'm not suggesting you had it, you were the primary reason, but in fact, we had that lawsuit filed in the Superior Court. And Judge Howard made a relatively simple decision in my view, a very simple decision based upon the same decision that Robert Foley made when this matter was before him.

And that is that certain things have to happen in order to make a divorce agreement enforceable. In the family division, there needs to be the issuance of a decree and that that didn't happen and therefore the enforcement of the...

I know you're on a roll, but would you address that point briefly? Your opponent said that literally a decree did issue, whether it had any effect or not. It's another issue, but it did, in fact, issue a date before her death. Is that correct?

Yes. In that particular case, the documents were given to the court and the decree was issued. I moved to abate the issuance of the decree based on the death of Mr. Mordner and Judge Foley ultimately agreed that because one of the parties had died before the decree was issued, the matter was abated.

Judge Howard similarly found that this contract that existed between the two parties couldn't be enforced because a conditioned precedent to the enforceability of that contract was the issuance of the decree.

And Judge Foley, I think, said that it was implicit in the language the parties used, which is consistent with counsel's assertion that it wasn't expressed anywhere, right?

I'm sorry?

It's an implied conditioned precedent, not an expressed condition.

Right.

I thought it was disfavored. I mean, under the Bonneville case, aren't we looking for, and most cases don't they involve specific explicit language of a conditioned precedent?

Well, in this particular case, Your Honor, I would suggest that the contract did, and maybe it's been sort of ignored until this point.

If we're going to talk about 19 important words, I would suggest you look at the divorce decree itself, which was on a form and right above where the parties to the divorce and counsel signed in July of 2014.

This is the following. We request that the court approve this decree and incorporate all of its terms and conditions as part of the decree of divorce.

So there's an expectation when you sign this agreement in the family division that it's not done until it gets approved, looked at, and blessed by either the marital master or the judge now presiding.

And I think Justice Howard found the same logic instrumental in his decision that there was an implied conditioned precedent to the enforcement of this particular agreement.

So if we look at, I mean, it just seems to me, if we looked at this sort of really cynically and said, you know, look, as your opponent, I think it sometimes would have us do that this was a contract that existed separate from the divorce.

So then we would say, well, okay, then that would mean that if they, if for some reason they didn't, you know, she hadn't died or I'm sorry, I guess he hadn't died.

One of them hadn't died, but they hadn't got divorced. What would the contract be? Well, the contract would seem to me that the husband would have gotten all the consideration that he wanted.

He would have gotten half of the mining stock and he would have gotten $250,000. And if we say cynically that what the wife really wanted was to get remarried, she would have gotten nothing because she couldn't get remarried because they wouldn't have been divorced.

So how could we enforce that? How could we say that we're going to enforce that contract? He gets all the benefits. She gets what?

I mean, that assumes that what she really wants is to get, is to get remarried and she can't do that if they're not divorced.

Well, she did get some consideration from the divorce. She didn't get nothing. I mean, it was an equitable settlement.

Mind you, it was heavily negotiated and she did give, pursuant to the contract, she gave quite a bit of value to Mr. Morton, rather to that document.

So, and I guess I would also suggest that if he would have died during the divorce, she would have inherited the entire marital estate. Answer your question.

Right. No, no, no. I hear what you're saying. I'm just sort of saying if we tried to assume that this contract can exist separate from the divorce, it's hard to think how that really, you know, how that would be, how that could have happened

and how it would be fair.

Well, I would suggest that, I think we're kind of back on Morton or one, if you will, but I would suggest that, and it occurred to me last week.

Last Friday, I was involved with a mediation with former Judge Hess, now a mediator in a marital context, and we agreed to settle half the case, if you will.

And driving over here this morning, I got an email from the opposing counsel saying my client is having second thoughts or wants to, and we signed it and we agreed that it would be filed with the court as a partial settlement.

He's having buyer's remorse or seller's remorse. He no longer wants to have that agreement put into effect.

And in my opinion, if he were to die next week or today, God forbid, that agreement would be not subject to enforcement by the court.

You know, it is an agreement, it exists, it's a contract, but I think what Judge Howard found is the key element here, and that is that things have to be finalized.

Things have to be completely done and decreed by the court, and until that happens, these are just simply negotiations.

This is paperwork involved in a divorce, and I think that's the instrumental decision that he made.

Why wouldn't equity, general equity interfere here or intervene here and afford the estate some relief?

Well, I understand the question.

I do, you would.

If you would make a decision based entirely upon fairness, you might decide that Mr. Mortner's daughter ought to recover in this case.

And that was true in the first Mortner case.

However, there were rules that needed to be enforced, and the rule that was enforced there was that if a party dies during a divorce, regardless of where they are in the case,

whatever negotiations exist, whatever paperwork exists, maybe even contracts that have been signed.

A parenting plan maybe was signed, but there was no property settlement.

You can't pick and choose which documents you're going to enforce, and unfortunately when a party dies and during the divorce process, the matter is abated.

I would also suggest that if you really weigh the equities in this case, you might find differently as to whether Ms. Mortner should recover.

My client worked for this mining company as an administrative assistant.

She was a relatively lightly compensated employee, and something very fortuitous happened to her during the course of her employment.

She was given a mining share of stock in this company by the CEO of the company.

I think it was a 1% or less amount.

But that wealth, if you will, the $250,000 and the corporate stock that is being debated about here today, was a result of her hard work for that company.

So you're making a very good argument, but what Judge Howard says is you don't get you or your opponent, don't get to make that argument because it doesn't state a cause of action in equity.

I'm just wondering why equity.

I mean, I agree with you. I would probably balance in the same way, but why shouldn't the plaintiff have a shot at it?

I suppose what you're talking about is the second claim here, which was the unjust enrichment claim.

Well, yes and no. Equity doesn't always need to be, as you know, equity often deems done what should be done.

So I'm more concerned about a general application than about the unjust enrichment aspect of it.

Well, I think my client would suggest, Your Honor, that if you do weigh the equities, I suppose the nature of the relationship between her and her stepdaughter, if you will,

the fact that she hadn't added anything to the relationship over time, their relationship wasn't a unhealthy one,

it would be unfair now to suggest that she bestow upon her the benefits of the marriage.

I'm sorry to interrupt, but I know where you're going.

Would you say generally that an heir would have no expectation, reasonable expectation over recovery in these circumstances?

I would suggest that be the case, Your Honor.

I think hard lines have to be drawn.

Judge Foley fully knew how the equities weighed out when he made his decision.

And I think you knew when his decision was appealed that it's not always based on what should be the ideal result, if you will,

that we revise things and make sure that things come out appropriately based on what we think.

These rules are harsh sometimes.

The rules associated with the statute of limitations, the rules associated with filing pleadings on time,

as our other case discussed earlier this morning, they're harsh.

They're harsh, they're hard, and they're fast, and there's a winner and a loser.

And I'm not here to suggest that this isn't a harsh result for Ms. Moore, I think it is.

But if you look at the law of unjust enrichment, I don't even think it applies in this case.

As I see the unjust enrichment law in New Hampshire developing, it's where a party provides some sort of service or benefit to another party

without a contract and that would be unfair to say, well, you should have contracted.

Instead, there was a service provided and the beneficiary of that service has been unjustly enriched,

so therefore they ought to be paid for their services.

This is not a case where Ms. Mortner has some sort of indebtedness to my client.

Nothing like that exists.

There is no bestowment of any benefit during the marriage upon my client.

That now needs to be returned to Ms. Mortner.

One other point I would make, Your Honor, is with regard to the Pavlovchik case,

which I thought was probably the best argument that could be made.

It's a Massachusetts case.

I think it's a 1985 case.

And that agreement was enforced despite the fact that a divorce decree had not been issued.

But I think it's a very important matter to distinguish the fact that that, it was a separation agreement,

actually, it was a document that was enforced.

And that agreement had been approved by the court.

The court had looked at it.

It was a preliminary agreement that had been reached on the divorce,

but it had been fully approved by the court before it was attempted to be enforced.

Unlike the situation in the family division in Dover, Judge Fully had never seen the documents,

had never approved them when Mr. Mortner died.

He thought Mr. Mortner was alive when he reviewed them,

but he hadn't fully blessed the divorce decree, and that's why the matter was abated.

The timing was difficult for Ms. Mortner.

So as a result of the argument you've heard this morning, Your Honours,

we would ask that you affirm the decision by Judge Howard below to find that there was a condition precedent

that had to be met, an implied condition precedent which resulted in the dismissal of this action.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Mr. Dennis, do you need your time?

I will use it.

Thank you.

First with regards to the issue of unjust enrichment, we should get our shot.

One of the ideas that is one of the backbones of the different methods in which the courts

use the equitable doctrine of unjust enrichment is that but for something, some problem,

some legal problem with the contract, some result would have occurred.

In this case, but for the death of Mr. Mortner, this contract would have been incorporated

into a fully valid decree of divorce and the result would have occurred.

One of the things I think is missed in the idea that these assets were garnered and collected

by Mrs. Mortner at the time is what efforts, what aspect of the relationship did Mr. Mortner

contribute to allow her to retain those assets.

In any event, the party's freely and openly contracted that away.

And since this is through a divorce, those became a presently held interest in Mr. Mortner

at the time.

So they were no longer her assets.

By way of their attempts to get this done contractually through the divorce court and

legally through the divorce court, she had freely and openly in exchange for whether

it be just simply a divorce or other assets.

One of the things she did get was a condominium in this case.

So there were other tangible assets that she obtained and she was negotiating for.

So we should get our shot because but for the death, this contract, especially since this

is a motion to dismiss, not a motion for summary judgment, would have been valid.

She has married somebody else.

I think all reasonable inferences, there would have been no reconciliation.

I think we have to take that as a reasonable inference with regards to the motion,

with regard to the unjust enrichment issue.

In essence, she got what she bargained for and also what she bargained away.

I would suggest that that is an earmark in an unjust enrichment case.

With regards to some of the points on the condition proceeding, during the family court

argument, a motion to reconsider to abate the divorce, Ms. Mortner herself said that

the contingencies were likely in there for a reason.

If a party is telling a judge in a family case that contingencies are likely in

there for a reason, when we get to the end of the day where we are looking at

that language more clearly, if we then say, oh, we can read in a complied condition

when the party herself is attempting to rely on that, is only likely in there for a reason,

I don't think we can bridge that gap.

Additionally, one important fact, in this case, when the parties filed their memorandum

of opinion, the contract in this case, or memorandum of saying, excuse me,

a letter was sent to the court that said you can approve the party's agreement

but simply hold for notice with regard to this American Bailey Mining

Limited interest to issue your decree. There was never an objection from Mrs. Mortner

that the court could approve the agreement. So they knew this was going into the court

with the potential to be approved. It simply wasn't. It was one of the arguments I made

in Mortner 1 that was just the rendering of judgment and needed to be left.

That argument failed. However, here it supports the party's intent.

It supports the unjust enrichment argument. My red light is on, and so I will

include it. Thank you, counsel. Case submitted.
