This is case 2016-0649, the Travelers Indemnity Company versus Construction Services of New Hampshire, LLC.

The record should reflect the fact that Justice Lynn is disqualified from this case.

Ms. Traveler, please.

May it please the court.

My name is William Alvillic-Lees and I represent the Defendant Construction Services of New Hampshire.

The sole issue in this case involves the tolling of the statute of limitations based upon the doctrine of administrative tollings.

In this case, there was no administrative tolling of the statute because the Department of Labor had no jurisdiction over three of the four contractors.

Did the Department of Labor determine that at the outset or some while down the road as this was going on?

I think it was a couple months after the request for a review by the Department was filed that they determined that three of the four contractors were not properly before the Department.

Does that make a difference?

In other words, while the Department was trying to figure out whether it had jurisdiction, there might have been tolling?

Well, you could argue that, Your Honor, but if there's no jurisdiction to begin with, it can't be conferred on the Department.

Therefore, there should be no tolling.

But we're talking a matter of like two months because the Department in October of 2010 determined that there was no jurisdiction.

And I think the request had been filed in maybe June of 2010.

There can only be administrative tolling when there is in fact jurisdiction and the matter is actually pending before the Department.

It's undisputed in this case that there was no jurisdiction over the three.

Well, doesn't that sort of beg the question when you say it wasn't pending before the Department?

But there was one claim that was filed by your client with the Department.

And it remained pending even though some of the entities that were part of it were, the Department said we don't have any jurisdiction over those entities.

But your client submitted one, it was a dispute about one bill, right?

No, that seems right.

Isn't there one bill for $98,000?

Not broken down?

I'm sorry.

You're right.

In terms of the one bill for the adjusted premium, yeah, there was one.

But there were four contractors that made up the total that was due.

And in fact, travelers broke down the four contractors.

And the court in 2013 on the appeal decision specifically found that the Department of Labor found that travelers was owed $19,740 because of the spider portion of the bill.

Right, but that wasn't until 2013, right?

No, I'm sorry.

I'm wrong about that.

I mean, ultimately the trial court affirmed in 2013, wasn't it?

I'm sorry.

Yes, it was.

It was March of 2013 that the decision of the Department of Labor was affirmed.

Right, and then the travelers filed within three years of that decision.

That's true.

However, that wouldn't apply to the other three contractors because there's no jurisdiction.

And travelers had every right to file a suit against the construction services for breach of contract for actually all four because there was no requirement that the administrative remedies be exhausted.

The statute that my client utilized to get it before the department was permissive in nature.

It's like you may petition the Department of Labor to challenge an audit.

So without any kind of requirement that administratively the remedies had to be exhausted, travelers had the right to file a suit at any time and they failed to do so.

But wouldn't that have created litigation or dispute in multiple forms which is precisely what the administrative tolling doctrine is designed to discourage?

Not at all because when the defendant filed the appeal in 2010, travelers could have filed a cross complaint seeking damages for breach of contract.

They could have filed their own separate complaint and asked it to be consolidated with the appeal so that the judge would have had all four other cases before it.

So no, it would not have resulted in peaceful litigation.

But your client already had a claim before DOL that already filed something at DOL that was working its way through.

Right.

Once the defendant filed the appeal to the Superior Court, travelers then had the opportunity to file their own lawsuit or request that or file a cross complaint and ask that they all be consolidated and resolved at the one time,

therefore eliminating any kind of peaceful litigation.

In fact that probably would have been the preferable way of going rather than waiting five years after the premium was adjusted and then filing the lawsuit.

This is ultimately an equitable doctrine. Do you agree with that administrative tolling?

I guess you could call it an equitable doctrine, but it certainly has its limitations.

And I mean the claim limitation is the premise that there is something pending before the administrative agency that needs to be resolved before you can file a lawsuit.

And what the judge did in this particular case is he really premised his decision on primary jurisdiction, which has no applicability because primary jurisdiction requires that there be concurrent jurisdiction with the administrative agency in the court.

And in this case, at least depending to the three, there was no concurrent jurisdiction.

So primary jurisdiction really doesn't apply to this case that the judge premised his decision on.

But if we look at the equities here, isn't it equitable your client had noticed in 2010 of the dispute in fact filed at the DOL?

So no question about everybody's on notice there's a problem here.

And isn't it most equitable that the issue get resolved on the merits rather than procedurally that would bar analysis of the merits of the situation?

Well, that's the whole point of purpose of statute of limitations.

If a litigant sleeps on their claim, they should be penalized.

They shouldn't have the benefit of extending that statute of limitations.

We're talking five years after the audited premium claim was asserted that the lawsuit was filed.

That's a long time, and we don't even know if one of these contractors is even available to testify.

What happened in this case is we entered into a contingent settlement in preserving this issue before the court

because a trial at that point five years later would have been virtually difficult to maintain

and in terms of establishing the criteria that the statute requires.

I mean, in this case, there is no, you know, one of the issues was that there was an overlap of facts.

And there is no overlap of facts because each of the individual contractors had to establish under the statute the 12th criteria

so that if one contractor had his own employer ID and the other contractor didn't,

it would have no bearing on the findings that relate to the other contractors.

For example, the ruling in the spider case had no presidential effect on the other three contractors

because each of the status determination had to do with complying with those 12 enumerated facts

in 281 to Roman numeral 6B.

So there was no overlap, there was no potential for inconsistent ruling because, again,

each of the contractors had to comply with the 12 enumerated findings.

So it's conceivable that spider may have been an employee, but built-right may have been a contractor

because of the 12 enumerated factors in the statute.

Given that administrative tolling is an equitable doctrine,

what's the standard of review that we should be applying here?

Well, I think administrative tolling doesn't apply in this case, at least as it pertains to the three contractors

because the department had no jurisdiction over them.

Spider is a different situation because the matter was before the department, it was appealed,

but even with spider there was a significant delay in filing the lawsuit.

I mean, even though there is an appeal, the appeal doesn't have to be exhausted for the statute of limitations to then begin to run.

And once the Superior Court found in 2013 that the department's ruling was going to be upheld,

the lawsuit should have been filed at that particular point.

Because keep in mind that the appeal to the Superior Court was very limited.

It wasn't a de novo.

It was basically a review by the justice as to whether the, there was a basis in the evidence to support the filing.

And the court did find that that was in fact the case, and the appeal was dismissed.

But at that point the travelers could have filed a lawsuit within the period of time which they failed to do.

Within the period of time? What period of time?

When the department ruled in 2010 that Spider was an employee, that's when the spider statute should have begun to run.

Because at that point travelers could have filed a lawsuit against Spider for the, not against Spider, but against construction for the collection of that particular premium.

And they failed to do so.

Wasn't it under appeal at that point? Wasn't your client appealing that determination?

Even though it was under an appeal, again the appeal was very limited to a review of the record, but they certainly could have filed a breach of contract claim for that particular matter.

So let's leave out the other three. Let's just talk about Spider.

Isn't that precisely the scenario where administrative tolling is appropriate to let the administrative proceeding and then the challenge to it run out?

No, because at that time, again travelers had the option at that time to file a lawsuit for all four.

Once the Department of Labor determined the spider's status as an employee and they failed to do so.

The court, if travelers had filed the lawsuit, the court would not have deferred ruling on the case because there was no basis of deferred ruling on the case.

There was no, as they said, free requisite that the administrative process be complied with.

But unless I'm missing something there remained a possibility that your client could have prevailed in that appeal?

That's one aspect. And there's also the possibility that the court at the same time would have appell the Department of Labor and ruled on the breach of contract claim,

which would have been the preferable method because at that point all four cases would have been resolved at one time.

Was this action brought within three years of the 2013 decision?

Yes, it was. It was June, I think, of 2015, the lawsuit was filed.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Any other questions?

Thank you.

Please, the court, my name is Garrett Harrison of here today representing Travelers and Dementia.

To start up, Your Honors, I'd like to just address briefly what this case was all about from the get-go.

It was a claim for a single premium in construction services, like a lot of construction companies they had subcontractors that worked for them.

The way the premium is calculated is you look at all the payroll for employees, contractors who could be deemed employees under the statute,

and contractors who are uninsured themselves for workers' compensation insurance.

But isn't that single premium made up of premiums based on these four companies?

It's a single premium based upon adding all of the payroll that's picked up in the audit, multiplying it by the classification,

which in this case was a carpentry classification, and that's how the premium's determined.

But one thing I really would like to make clear, because this has been a contention of construction services from the beginning,

is there's no separate billing for individual contractors, there's no separate claims for individual contractors.

It's a single premium, all of which was appealed by construction services to the Department of Labor.

The Department of Labor decided with respect to three of the entities for which premium was sought that it did not have jurisdiction.

So at that point in time, though, then those employees belonging to those subcontractors would have to be removed from the issue before the Department of Labor?

Yes, the Department of Labor did not make decisions with respect to them, and there was one individual left of Mr. Spider,

in which they made their decision, in which construction services then appealed to the Superior Court.

So why didn't the clocks start ticking as soon as DOL said we don't have jurisdiction over these three entities?

Well, that's the issue in the case, Your Honor.

Right, and what's the reason?

It's part of the administrative process that's provided for under Chapter 281A Section 43,

which is basically that a claim is made at the Department of Labor for the determination,

and then there's a right of appeal to the Superior Court.

And did you appeal that decision that there's no jurisdiction?

There was a decision by the DOL that there's no jurisdiction.

No, we did not appeal that.

We did not appeal that, no.

We did not challenge that the DOL did not have jurisdiction for those particular helpers.

So shouldn't that matter to us?

Once you decided not to appeal that, why doesn't the clock start ticking?

Because you still have the issue that it's a single premium of which one element is now in play as far as the administrative agency goes.

And so our position has been that it would not make sense and would be an unnecessary step to file one action

to try to calculate out a portion of the premium that relates to some payroll that was picked up,

wait for the result with respect to spider, and then file another action,

or amend the action to bring it back in.

Because in any case, the claim to the premium, which would always be the claim here,

would be unresolved as to exactly what the amount being sought was,

because part of it was being addressed by the Department of Labor and then by the Superior Court.

What was the amount in play in front of DOL as opposed to just their status?

The amount is in play only to the extent that the DOL likes to have as a matter of knowing what it's addressing.

They like to break out mathematically what the amount would be for the particular person in front of them,

which is that $19,000 figure which you see in the paper.

And their ultimate determination is that Mr. Spider was an employee for purposes of Chapter 281A

and that the traveler's audit with respect to him was accurate.

So therefore, that leads to the result of that mathematical amount which was calculated again for giving the DOL a number.

That's solely attributable to Spider?

Yes. So it's literally if you had four people each with payroll of $25,000 each

and the payroll was $100,000 for all of them,

you'd be looking at the $25,000 just for one person.

And I'm having a hard time understanding why travelers didn't make separate claims against the four entities.

Can you explain that?

Yes, because you don't make claims against the entities.

For instance, we would not be suing Mr. Spider.

What this involves is construction services had work that was done forward by Mr. Spider

and by the company called Built Right and by two other entities.

The claim is only against construction services because they're the one,

it's their workers' compensation insurance premium.

Oh, they're the umbrella, so to speak.

The umbrella, they're the insured entity and they're the one obligated to pay the premium.

I mean, to put it even simpler terms, if you had a...

Yes, please help me.

If you had a business with four employees, the way the workers' compensation premium is calculated,

you look at all the payroll for all four employees, figure out what classifications of work they were doing,

the rates are set essentially by the Department of Insurance in New Hampshire

pursuant to a filing by the National Council of Compensation Insurers,

and you'll literally just multiply that classification rate against the amount of the payroll.

So for instance, the payroll was $100,000 and the rate was $10 for every $100,

then it would be $110 of what the payroll was.

So construction services, if money is owed, construction services is the entity that owes the money?

Yes, because they are the employer.

And that's regardless of whether DOL has jurisdiction over any of these folks?

Well, the DOL didn't have jurisdiction over the people necessarily as persons.

The question was whether they had jurisdiction to decide the limited issue as to whether

any one or more of those persons would be deemed employees for the purposes of the workers' compensation law,

and if so, construction services would be obliged to pay premium based upon the payroll to them.

Everybody agreed on the number.

I mean, they don't want to pay it and you want to get it,

but the number, the $98,000 or whatever it was, was not in dispute.

Well, I think it was in dispute on some level,

which was why for purposes of getting the case here on the essential limitations issue,

we just, rather than going to the expense of a trial and everything, we agreed on a figure.

But the essential, and it's most essential point, the dispute wasn't as to the mathematical calculation of that number.

It was whether that number included payroll that should not have been included

for a number of reasons, most specifically whether they were people that construction services was paying a premium for

that were not, in fact, employees' advance for purposes of workers' compensation law.

So let me follow up on that.

I don't think I understand it completely.

But with Spider, there was about $19,000.

Is that what the premium was determined to be?

If you would mathematically take it out, yes.

Right, and so once that was decided, why, and then they said,

the OL said, well, we don't have jurisdiction over these other three entities.

Once you had those two things fixed, why wouldn't it then be appropriate to go ahead in Superior Court?

Why wouldn't the clock start ticking at that point?

Well, because our argument is that that's part of the ultimate determination of the administrative issue

of the decision by the Department of Labor that basically that issue is still in play

because now the Superior Court has the appeal of that for the limited purpose

of deciding whether that Department of Labor order was correct.

And could the Superior Court have come back and said, well, it really should be $17,000 or $25,000?

They could have done virtually anything.

The more extreme thing would have been for them to say, no, the Department of Labor was wrong.

There's no money owed for work.

And if they either said they're wrong or it should be 25 or it should be 15,

how would that have impacted the possible result vis-a-vis the other three entities?

Would that have affected the number for them?

It would not have affected the number for purposes of calculating the premium which relates to those other three entities.

So then what were you waiting for?

That's the part I don't understand.

We were waiting for finality of the processes to exactly what the premium was going to be.

But the issue was whether these subcontractors were independent contractors

or included in the rate as employees, right?

So it's not really the number that was at issue.

It was that determination which was what was appealed on behalf of one of the four to the Superior Court.

And the issue of the Department of Labor not having jurisdiction over the other three

wasn't at issue before the Superior Court.

So I guess I echo since the determination of whether the other three were independent contractors

or employees was not before the Department of Labor,

why not get that ball rolling in the Superior Court?

I think the goal is to have a premium that would be filed upon to collect the entire amount

rather than doing it in what would be essentially a piecemeal fashion.

But you're going to have to prove it piecemeal regardless involving each of the four entities.

Right, but it would still be a proceeding that would be piecemeal

in the sense that you would, for instance, have a proceeding for part of the premium

because it relates to three of the entities and then we would still have unresolved

what's going to happen with Mr. Spider.

So how, you know, procedurally that would be something of a quagmire that you'd be in.

So you agree you could have filed for the other three entities

after you got the decision of no jurisdiction.

In fact, you could have filed before that, right?

Well, something could have been filed, but again, the question is whether there's a tolling

because what we have is a single premium charged to construction services

that happens to be calculated based upon a number of components.

Right, but as I understand your argument, it would be,

yeah, we could have filed for three and let the spider process run through the Superior Court,

but that would have yielded multiple pieces of litigation

that were sort of involving the same issues and that's what the administrative,

part of what the administrative tolling doctrine is designed to discourage.

Yes, and that's how we read the valid decision is basically

to not have unnecessary steps, particularly where the,

in this case the party not only is on notice as to the claim what the issues are,

but they're the ones seeking administrative relief and for the proceedings

to try to get that issue addressed.

So we think under the valid case that there should be tolling to avoid that sort of procedural problem

where you have multiple cases and then I don't know if there could be a contention

that could be a claim against fighter could be precluded if it's not raised

because it's pending in another court.

Just this, and again given the authority at the Alley case,

seems to be not only the most efficient way of handling it,

wait till there is finality to the premium dispute

because whether it's part of it or all of it, it's still essential to the premium dispute

and then have a case filed where now you've got that resolved

because if you have no administrative proceeding if they commenced by construction services

then obviously we wouldn't have that issue.

So I assume you agree that given our case law if there weren't the spider aspect of this case

then we'd be in a different place and in fact the decision of no jurisdiction

would have started the clock-rolling?

I would agree that if somebody had gone to the Department of Labor

and said we have no jurisdiction, we're not going to do anything

and nobody had appealed that and nothing happened

then you would have finality for purposes of Alley as far as the administrative proceeding goes.

That's obviously now what happened here.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted. Court is in recess.
