This is case 2016-0270, state of New Hampshire versus Robert Sunsulo, Jr.

May please the court Christine list on behalf of Robert Sunsulo.

Officer Phelps consistent accusations coupled with a controlling environment

communicated to Mr. Sunsulo that he was not free to terminate the encounter and leave.

The questioning did so in three ways.

Officer Phelps repeatedly told him that she knew he was guilty of sexual assault

and consistently maintained that his story was a lie.

She ignored his statement that he had told them all that he could.

And finally she repeatedly communicated to him that his story was unacceptable,

urged him to get on the same page so that she could take the answer she needed to her superior.

After the initial 25 minutes of the interview the questioning took on a dramatic new formula.

Officer Phelps asked a question Mr. Sunsulo answered

and Officer Phelps implied that that answer was unacceptable.

In response to at least 12 of Mr. Sunsulo's questions Phelps responded

remember when I told you I already know the answers to the questions I'm asking.

At least twice she expressly told him he was lying

and many more times responded with I know that's not true and I have evidence to prove it.

She told him his answers were not sufficient to take to her superior

and that they needed to get on the same page.

Finally Mr. Sunsulo said I've told you everything I could possibly tell you

but the confrontation continued.

This persistence in the face of his vehement denials

signaled to Mr. Sunsulo that he was not free to leave

because as this court has recognized it is reasonable reasonable people do not believe

that the police will allow a person guilty.

One might think that if he really was entertaining that possibility of thought

he might have just tried.

He might have just said I'd like to go now

since they had told him you can leave when you want.

She told him that once in the first 90 seconds

and we are not arguing that in the beginning of this interview that he was in custody.

But one might I mean wouldn't it be

a reasonable person in that circumstance so to say

I'm not really sure I can leave but maybe I'll just ask.

Perhaps that would be some person's initiative however

I think this court's recognized that a reasonable person would not believe

that the police would simply allow someone to a walk around

a police department unaccompanied in fact he signed in as a visitor

and was escorted everywhere and to allow a person they believed was

they clearly believed was guilty of a serious offense leave

and I think when we're looking at the effect on the

essentially effect on the listener here effect on the person in this position

I think the court's case law supports that it is not reasonable

but he was signed in as a visitor and had a visitor badge right?

Yes he was.

Is that the normal practice for somebody who's being

interrogated to be brought in and get a visitor's badge?

I don't believe that the normal practice was in the record

and I could be mistaken on that but certainly

I think the state's argument relies on the factors that

exist in the lead up to the interview and in that first 90 seconds

but as this court has recognized we look to the encounter as a whole.

We are not arguing that he was in custody when he agreed

to go to the police station to find voluntary to the police.

Or when they let him go.

As I understand it at the end of this they let him go.

So you're telling us that he wasn't in custody when he came there

he wasn't in custody for some period of time at the beginning

of the interview then he was in custody and then they let him go.

They did not communicate to him once there was that change

in the interview and became very clearly accusatory.

There was never a repetition as there one was in lock

that a repetition that he was free to leave.

So what you say is that what they should have told him is

this is getting a little more intense now but you understand

you can leave now if you want to or at the end of this

we're going to let you leave.

Perhaps yes and I think that would be a different situation

and I don't think it needs to be that express.

I think perhaps just in the midst of these confrontations

by the way there's the door you know or by the way

we can leave but I want to talk to you about this.

I'm certainly not saying that officers can't confront a suspect.

You have the videotape.

I do your honor I believe it was transferred to the court yes

that the video and the transcript the video that cuts off

and so the transcript finishes finishes the interview.

So are you saying if we watch the video that we'll

at 25 minutes we're going to sense a big sea change

and what was going on.

Yes your honor and I think I think about the video

and that I'm almost positive it's about minute 25

but it's about page 35 of the transcript

and we also have it's not just the accusations here

it's also factors in addition about the controlling environment

we are in a police station in which he is not familiar with

although there were only two officers questioning him

if he had walked out the door he would have been confronted

by many more officers.

It's not reasonable to believe he would have been permitted

to walk around the police station freely

and his physical ability to leave

required an officer getting up and leaving.

I'm sure it's not in the record but one could argue

that this is a vintage National Police Department conversation.

Yes I think actually it is in the record.

So there was a conversation about this

mirroring some other interrogations

that the National Police Department had done.

In fact the judge makes note of the room being the same setup.

Thank you.

Good morning Your Honours.

Elizabeth Woodcock for the State of New Hampshire

the trial court committed no error in determining

that this was non custodial questioning.

Because you say he was free to leave at any time?

Well that's one aspect of it.

Obviously they told him he was free to leave.

The tone of the detective's questioning never changed.

The detectives were not threatening him

or doing anything of that sort.

They simply told him that they didn't believe him.

And at one point the defense has just

characterized the defendant's statements

as being vehement denials.

I'm not sure that the trial court found

that the denials were vehement

but the trial court did find that the detective

addressed him in a calm voice

and that her demeanor never changed

and at one point the trial court found

that she said to him

I don't want you to say anything to make me happy.

She was basically saying

I don't expect you just to give me the answer

that I expect.

But she confronted him repeatedly.

And that was in response to him say,

if I recall correctly, him saying something like

well if this is what you want me to say I'll say it.

And she's saying no, that's not what I want you to do.

That's correct.

And he was free to terminate the interview at any time.

So if you're looking, reviewing the trial court's findings,

the trial court finds that while the court acknowledges

that he thought it was a close case

that this was not custodial.

What's the difference between this case and McKenna?

Well I think at one point in McKenna

the defendant started to go walk down a path

or turn to walk down a path

and the officer said

wait a second Tim we're not going down there.

And I think that it's at that point

that this court found that by restricting

the defendants walking

that that became a custodial situation

but that up until that point it hadn't been.

And I think that this is closer to that

pre I'm restricting your movement situation

in McKenna which this court found was non-custodial.

If the court has no further questions for me

I would ask that the case be submitted.

Thank you counsel, case submitted.

Court stands adjourned.
