This is case 2016-0370, Wayne Ross, trustee of the Wayne Ross revocable trust at all versus

Donald W. Ross at all.

Mr. Ramsdell.

Good morning, Your Honors. May it please the Court. My name is Michael Ramsdell. I'm here

on behalf of Appellants Wayne and Ruth Ross. I have asked to reserve two minutes of my

time for rebuttal, and I waive any initial period of non-question in the Court.

That's a good thing. These guys can never hold their tongues for three minutes.

See, it would have been so much fun to watch, but okay. The trial court made a fundamental

error of law that altered the outcome of this case. And it's not that the trial court didn't

understand the issue. The trial court's order on the Ross's motion for reconsideration

demonstrates that it plainly understood the issue. The trial court wrote, and I quote,

the plaintiff's principle legal argument is that the Court did not address the issue

of whether or not the lease, which the Court found to exist, violated the statute of

frauds, RSA 506-1. In fact, in that same paragraph, the Court went on to explain the issue. The

Court wrote 506-1 provides that an agreement for the sale of land may not be maintained

unless the agreement, or some memorandum thereof, is in writing and signed by the

party to be charged. But isn't the problem that in the first order in footnote 1, the

Court observed that the plaintiffs concede that the lease is sufficient under the statute

of frauds? Isn't that when the issue should have been joined? And is the Court right

about that? The issue was joined at that point. The Court is wrong about that. The

Ross's position was never as finite as the Court described it in that footnote. The Ross's

position was you have a lease that is sufficient. You have a document that is sufficient as

a lease if it is interpreted as a one-year lease. However, the Ross's also argued to

the trial Court both in an objection during the course of the trial and in their post-hearing

memorandum. And recall that there were no pretrial memoranda or pretrial statements

required by the Court. Instead, as happens in many bench trials, there was the trial

and then the memorandum were submitted. And it wasn't until the order came out

that the Ross's could know that the trial Court was going to drop that footnote saying,

oh, you've conceded no statute of fraud. And I suggest to you that it's the Court's

own order on the motion for reconsideration that demonstrates that the Court understood

that the issue was broader than it had indicated in that footnote. Because the Court

goes on to explain, not just say that this is the issue and the issue is done. You've

waived it. You didn't raise it. No. The Court went on to say the lease contains the essential

elements of a writing sufficient to satisfy the statute of frauds.

And so how do you say that's deficient? Why doesn't it satisfy the statute of fraud?

Because the Court went on to say the only essential elements. And I think that's important

that the Court uses the phrase essential elements of a lease. You've got writing and

you've got signatures. What else do you need? Right. It's a lease for a term of years for

long duration. I know. That's the problem. For all evidence had to be admitted to explain

the party's differences of opinion. That's what the trial Court found. The trial Court found

that there are only two essential elements to a lease longer than one year. The only two

essential elements the trial Court found were the identity of the property to be leased and

to the price. But that's wrong. That's plainly wrong on its face. But what about the I mean

let's assume that we would agree with you on that part of it. That there needed to be that

if you were just looking at the statute of frauds there needed to be some recitation of the

term. Let's assume we agree with you on that. But isn't there a well recognized exception

that says that you that that the absence of that can be substituted by for example part

performance. So couldn't the court have said here wait a minute based upon all the evidence I've

heard it's it's clear that there was performance here it was for a lot more than a year and it's

you know that that sort of substitutes for the duration term. No your honor and I'll get to the part

performance in a minute but before you even get to that it is the law in this state

and it is the law in many other jurisdictions as we point out in our reply brief

that the essential elements of a lease for the term of years cannot be proven by extrinsic

evidence in order to get outside the statute of fraud. The writing must have each I apologize.

Isn't there no but I guess what I was asking is isn't there for example suppose you and I

make an oral agreement that I'm going to buy your house. Right. Nothing. No writing at all.

I give you you know whatever the price is and I move in and you know three years later you say

you know out we have no agreement can't I say we sure do have an agreement. Here's that you know

here's the go to here's my bank records that shows I paid you whatever the price was and I've got

50 witnesses will say I've lived here for the last three years. There are cases that we've cited

in a brief that say that's not sufficient to begin with that you can't create or any cases recent.

The most recent one is I think 1978 I'd have to I'd have to look at my brief but more importantly

there's a significant difference between proving the sale of real estate as you just described

between you and I then proving the duration of a lease. That's what the doctrine of partial

performance is. You need three things to satisfy the doctrine of partial performance. First you

have to have all of the essential terms. Well it's fairly obvious as you describe it that you're

in this piece of property. You're paying me X amount of dollars while you're there.

If you're not paying also the taxes and doing other things to improve the property I suggest

your example is not sufficient to start with but let's assume you're doing all of those things.

Then you can demonstrate that what we've done is we're talking about me selling a piece of

property to you and because it's real property and there's no substitute for it. That is the only

piece of that real property on earth. I can't you can't be compensated in damages nor arguably

is there any alternative explanation for your conduct and that's what's critical here.

What's the alternative explanation for this art performance for a number of years?

Because once Donald Ross started managing the farm he got all of the revenue from the farm. My

clients no longer got any revenue. He received all the revenue and secondly isn't that the issue of

a lease though. Right exactly doesn't that support exactly the opposite conclusion that there was

that there was disagreement. No it's well yes it shows that there may be a lease but it could

just as easily be a year to year lease. The other thing is he also as part he anticipated

he testified to this there was evidence to this that he expected to inherit the farm upon my clients

deaths. Sure and so he's got every incentive to keep the farm in proper working order to increase

the revenue as much as he can and it doesn't have anything to do with an expectation.

What is the what is the reasonable expect explanation for him keeping the revenue? I mean

that wouldn't you know if this was not a lease and he was just doing this because he expected to

inherit wouldn't you wouldn't you expect that that your clients were going to be keeping the

revenue because they still own the property? Not if they were paying not if he was paying

them $21,000 a year. The problem is the mistake the trial court made is the law is you cannot take

a lease a piece of paper like this one that says $21,000 per year and say as the trial court did

there is no zero evidence of what the duration of this lease is. Mr. Ramstell let me ask you this

how do you I'm having difficulty reconciling your position that you didn't concede that the

statute of frauds was that this lease was sufficient under the statute of frauds but then a

lot of parole evidence was allowed in without objection as to the length of the lease isn't that

right? I apologize your honor I didn't mean to cut you off. No no do I misunderstand I thought I read

that a lot of that evidence came in without objection. No your honor it didn't come in

without objection in fact and I could give you the exact page references I believe it's

168 to 170 but I'll check that while I'm sitting down that the trial judge there was a discussion

the trial judge gave trial counsel a standing objection and the standing objection was phrased

this way you have a standing objection to all parole evidence regarding the duration of

the lease so it was as clear as it possibly could be and that's why trial counsel did not

continually object to the admission of that testimony he was granted a standing objection

and again I'll find the exact page that that's on did anyone testify that the intention was that

only that it only be a one-year lease yes both of my why isn't that parole evidence

because it's not parole evidence if it's a one-year lease if in fact the per year means that it's a

one-year lease there's not a statute of frauds problem it would still be a parole evidence problem

that is correct I mean doesn't doesn't the lease on its face the language I mean if I'm

renting something for you for from you for a year wouldn't it be relatively

unlikely and that was all it wasn't going there was no expectation of it going beyond that

wouldn't it be at least a little bit strange to say the rent is $500 per year as opposed to

simply saying the rent is $500 what do I need to say per year if the only if the term is

only one year oh I believe and that this was presented in some of the pleadings filed by

trial counsel as well is that it was a yearly lease it specified $21,000 per year and that it

could be renewed annually but it could never be more than 12 months at a time because that would

violate the statute of frauds thank you I take it we're here this morning because it's too late

to salvage this family right to be candid your honor I believe that's true and I will tell you

to everyone's credit not just my clients but also opposing counsel and and their client we tried to

the court mediation process as well and we were not able to resolve the matter the animosity is

ongoing Mr. Callahan thank you your honor may it please the court I'm Peter Callahan from

from pretty Flaherty and I represent Donald Ross

and Rossview Farm and of course I am happy

to take questions whenever the court wishes to ask them.

Two quick things, I think what we just heard

and what this appeal is about is a complete rewrite

of what happened over the two and a half years

of that litigation below and what happened at trial

and what happened in the post trial pleadings.

This is completely different than what they argued below

and I think a lot of their arguments

about statue of frauds really don't matter

because as Justice Lynn picked up on,

this is about part performance.

There was so much evidence in the record

and so many factual findings made by the judge

which he made a point repeatedly to say

he relied heavily on his credibility findings

and he found that Donald Ross was credible

over Wayne and Ruth Ross on just about every key point

and the part performance doctrine

is well supported by the facts of this case

and I disagree with the counsel

and what they said in their reply brief.

They completely misstated the law

on when the doctrine of part performance applies.

Their suggestion is you need to have a memorandum

that has all of the elements,

you need to have a sufficient memorandum

in order to have the doctrine of part performance apply

but think about that for a second.

The doctrine of part performance applies

when you don't have the sufficient memorandum.

Otherwise you wouldn't have the issue

of needing the exception for the statute of frauds.

The Green versus McLeod case, 2008 case,

that kind of lays it all out,

we relied heavily on that.

There was no memorandum in that case.

There were deeds that were incomplete

and McLeod cites to two cases,

Siazos and Sawan, where there was no documentation.

The scenario that Justice Lynn raised

where you have an oral agreement, no documentation.

The precise case presented in those other cases

the court found part performance

in every single one of them.

On a factual record-

To satisfy a statute of frauds?

Yeah, well to take it outside the statute of frauds

and enforce the oral agreement.

And I think the factual record

in every single one of those cases

doesn't even come close to the factual record we have here

where Donald Ross gave up 10 years of his life,

not just money and not just improving the property

and not just building the business.

He gave his life and all of his time

based on the oral agreement.

That, curiously, they don't bother

to try to challenge on appeal.

And to Justice Bassett's question

about whether there was an objection on parole evidence,

the objection that came up at trial

was when Donald Ross was testifying.

He was the third, or he was more than the third witness.

Wayne and Ruth Ross had already testified

and I've cited extensively to their admissions

about the oral agreement that was made.

They supplied some of the best evidence for us

to support the agreement by what they admitted they said,

what they had said in public statements,

and then, of course, their conduct

in divesting themselves of the business

and the 826 tractor that they made a big deal about

in direct testimony.

All of that evidence from Wayne and Ruth

came in without objection.

And it wasn't until Donald Ross's testimony

that an objection to parole evidence was raised

and that was on a narrow issue

to try to prevent us from talking about

the term of the agreement.

And you'll see if you look at the transcript

where the court gave a standing objection,

I objected to that precisely for the reason

that we're here today, because I know what happens

with those, no one makes a clear statement

of when they're really objecting

and then it allows counsel just to say,

well, he objected to everything, so he's covered.

That's not the way it should work

and I did object at the time to that.

But the court did accept it as a standing objection, right?

I think it was the court's suggestion, yes,

and counsel went along with that.

So despite your protestations, that's how it went forward.

That's how it went.

But I don't think the issue ever really came up

significantly after that.

At what point do you argue

that the statute of frauds issue was triggered?

I don't think they ever triggered it.

I think every single time,

and it was clearly in their post trial memo

and in their motion for reconsideration

and then their objection, or sorry,

their reply to my objection,

all three times they took the position

that the statute of frauds was satisfied

because the document, the June 23, 2006 document

was not ambiguous.

They said it three times.

And to the Justice Bassett's point about that footnote,

when the court referenced the foot in footnote one

in its first order and made that statement,

the response from the appellants

was to agree with what the court had said.

Now, if they really thought the court misinterpreted

their position, that's the time where you say it

in a motion for reconsideration, and they didn't.

They actually took the position

that they agreed with the court.

And the suggestion now on appeal

that the court misunderstood what they were saying,

that's not the case.

And there's never an instance

where they pointed that out to the court.

So you're sort of saying that the way they presented

the issue to the trial court was,

this is a document that satisfies the statute of frauds,

but it's only for a one-year lease

and it's not ambiguous.

And what the court essentially did was to say,

okay, I agree with you that this was that,

or I accept because you haven't contested,

that this is a written document

that satisfies the statute of frauds,

but I think it really is ambiguous

because it doesn't say, because the reference to per year

suggests that it's, or at least could suggest

that it's for more than one year,

and therefore because it's ambiguous,

I can consider this parole evidence.

Right, and I think the court made that statement

to counsel on the record at trial

and said, this does not say it's a one-year lease.

That's clearly what the appellant strategy was at trial,

and Justice McNamara said, no,

I'm not reading it that way.

So they knew right in the middle of trial

that he wasn't gonna buy that argument,

and then that's certainly how it all played out

in the order and the order on the motion to reconsider.

And I think this kind of circles back

to one of the problems with what they're trying

to do here by raising an issue

that was never raised below.

We don't know, and I think what really happened.

Could they have raised it below?

They could have argued in the alternative, right?

It's kind of a Hobson's choice, but they still could have.

They could have.

There was plenty of opportunity for that,

and you'll see in the, I think it's in the order

on the motion to reconsider,

the judge references his pretrial order.

There was a motion eliminated that the plaintiffs filed

to try to define the scope of the trial,

and we didn't file pretrial pleadings,

but they filed this motion to try to get the court

to be very clear about what's that issue in this case,

and Judge McNamara wrote an order,

which he quotes in his order denying the motion

to reconsider, saying what the issues are.

That was a perfect time for them to raise it

if they wanted to, and they knew that we were,

they knew our position on the oral agreement

because there had been summary judgment papers filed,

and we staked out extensively.

All of the evidence we presented at trial

was presented document and testimonial

through Donald Ross's affidavit,

all in our summary judgment opposition.

They knew our position.

That's why it really never came up as an issue.

I think what they were doing is they made a strategy

decision that they thought they would lose

if they raised the statute of frauds argument

that's being raised now.

They thought they're probably gonna lose

because the part performance doctrine was gonna kill them.

It seems like you started to say,

well, this illustrates the reason why

we have a preservation requirement

to make the argument below,

but then you didn't finish the thought.

So what's the end of that thought?

What would have happened differently?

So the thought is they made this decision

knowing if we raise statute of frauds,

we're gonna lose on part performance.

So our only hope here is to try to get the court

to interpret this document as a one year lease,

and that's what they staked their case on.

And so the problem with allowing what the reason

for the preservation argument,

I think one of them is if that's your strategy

and you lead the court down that path

and the court follows you and rules

on what you've presented,

you can't then come back on appeal

and find fault with what the court did

when they followed you.

And I think that's exactly what's happening.

How would the trial have been different

had it been raised?

Sure, I think I am convinced that based on the record,

just the evidence alone in that case

that was found, most of it uncontroverted at trial

and where Judge McNamara had to make findings,

he relied on credibility as I said

and all of those factual findings

would have supplied in more than adequate basis

for the judge to write another paragraph saying,

I don't have to reach this issue of statute of frauds.

Here's the exception that part performance doctrine.

And he could have answered it right there.

The record is plentiful on that point.

Do I understand Mr. Callaghan that the,

it seemed to me as I read through the court's order

and both sides briefed it,

it struck me that there was not a lot of,

maybe I'm over characterizing,

but it didn't seem to me

there was a lot of sort of directly contrary testimony

between your client and his parents,

but more so what inferences would you draw

from certain testimony?

In other words, it didn't seem like somebody said

the light was green and the other side was saying,

no, it was red.

They were both sort of saying,

well, there was a light there

and they were sort of drawing it,

what inferences you would draw from it?

Is that correct?

I think you're right

and would agree with you to a point.

And that point is there really wasn't a lot of dispute

about what they had all discussed.

And a lot of it was in public records

and most of it was backed up by documents recorded

with the state filed on file actions

that no one could dispute

because it was all documented.

I think I saw the evidence as much stronger

than relying on inferences

because Wayne and Ruth admitted the extent

and scope of the oral agreement

in much the same way that Donald Ross did

when he testified later.

Right, well, I mean, I guess one thing

that just comes to mind in particular

is this whole incident with regard to the alleged abuse

of the sort of hug incident

that my impression anyway was

that the parents were saying

this was sort of an assault.

And your client was saying I was, you know,

I don't disagree that I hugged my father,

but I wasn't, the purpose was to calm him down,

was not to assault him.

It would be a factual issue for the trial court

to decide whose version is accurate.

And you're absolutely right.

On the abuse issues, that's exactly the way

it went at trial.

We didn't dispute the events that they testified to.

We disputed the intent and the significance of them

and that's one area where Judge McNamara clearly found

Donald Ross to be more credible

and accepted his explanation,

which I think he was entitled to do

and they don't challenge that.

They try to challenge the overall finding,

but they don't challenge the evidentiary rulings

that form the basis for that finding.

So I do agree that it was all about inferences

and how do you interpret the witness testimony

on the abuse issue.

Thank you.

Do you need your time, Mr. Ramstell?

Very quickly.

I was on flat 100 pages, the colloquy between the court

and the council about the standing objection

is between 269 and 270, not 169 and 170.

All right, what's your response to what Mr. Callahan said

about the nature of the objection

and what evidence had come in

before that objection was made

and that it was actually narrow

as to one particular witness?

Well, it was only limited to one witness

because there was only one witness that testified

that this was a lease that was longer than one year.

And so there would not have been.

My clients wouldn't have objected to their own testimony

and that's why, of course,

it was limited to just that one witness.

That's why it came up then

and that's why it came up the way that it came up.

But I'd suggest to the court,

there isn't any better evidence

about whether this issue was fairly presented

to the trial court than the trial court's own order.

The trial court's own order says

your principal issue is this lease violates

the statute of frauds.

The court then finds there are only two essential elements.

It's frankly the same phrase that's used here,

the essential elements, but the court got it wrong.

There are four essential elements.

There are four essential elements in New Hampshire

and there are four essential elements to a long-term lease

in all of the states in which we cited in our reply brief.

It's about as plain an error as a court can make

not to understand that to have a long-term lease,

a lease of more than one year,

you have to have some writing that says,

this is how long it's gonna be.

Of course, we haven't even discussed the fact

that in theory this lease could have been performed

within one year.

Could be performed, yeah, absolutely.

But you can't find, and the trial court

couldn't properly find,

that it could be performed over my client's lifetime.

And just one, if I may, just-

Finish your sentence.

Promise, I'll make it along.

No.

This whole discussion about part performance,

none of that took place in front of the trial court.

The trial court didn't have the issue brief.

The trial court didn't take any evidence on the issue,

so there were no findings made by the trial court

on this issue that can't be their savior in this case.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted, the court is in recess.
