This is case 2016-0562, appeal of Claremont School Board.

Mr. Broth?

Thank you and good morning.

Mark Broth from the Drummond-Woodson law firm

on behalf of the Claremont School Board,

here with my colleague, Megan Glenn.

On June 8th, the 107 members of the class of 2017

graduated from Claremont Stevens High School.

As a result of the PELRB's erroneous order below,

the Claremont School Board was prevented

from providing those graduating seniors

with educational approaches and methods of instruction best

suited to meet their needs, as is required

by the New Hampshire Constitution and state statute.

This appeal is intended to prevent other students attending

Stevens High School from suffering

the same deprivation in the future.

Given that those students have graduated,

why isn't this case moved?

Because there's three more classes

at the high school who are currently

moving through a dysfunctional educational system.

In a collective bargaining agreement,

that this issue is about, and ends now, right?

It ends a year from now, I believe.

All right.

The question, and I suppose the question you're posing

is that if the PELRB was correct

and the issue of student schedules

is a permissive subject of bargaining,

does it simply go away when the contract expires?

And frankly, if the law was clear on that point

and the school board could simply

say once the contract expires, we no longer

will have the student's schedule that we believe

doesn't work, then this case probably would not be necessary.

But as made clear in the association's brief,

they don't agree that the law is as clear as certainly

the school board thinks it does

as to whether or not permissive subjects simply go away

when parties enter a status quo period.

But your client's position, if I've got this straight,

is that it's not the subject of bargaining of any kind, right?

Our position is that it is a prohibited subject of bargaining

and that the provision of the current collective bargaining

agreement on this is voided and enforced.

Is there room to decide the case on a more narrow basis?

Yes.

So the school board takes two principle arguments.

The first is that the PELRB's error

was in enforcing an arbitration award that

was contrary to public policy.

The arbitrator in this case, after a series of procedural

steps that have the case in arbitration

to decide the merits of whether or not

there was a breach of the collective bargaining agreement,

that was determined in the first arbitration case.

The school board went ahead and implemented the AB

schedules for the 2015-16 school year.

Anyway, there was an unfair labor practice charge.

The parties agreed to go back to the arbitrator

to fashion a remedy.

The remedy fashioned by the arbitrator

was to give the affected bargaining unit members some money

for the 2015-16 school year.

Was that 8% over a period of years, or was that just one year?

8% for the one year.

Thank you.

The arbitrator then ordered the board

to go back to the block schedule

which the board and the administrators and teachers

through a committee had determined

was injurious to the interests of students.

The board again, we gave the teachers the 8%,

but the board declined to go back to the block schedule.

That resulted in the second unfair labor practice charge

and ultimately the PLRB's order that we're here appealing.

Our position is that the PLRB should not

have enforced the award of the arbitrator

on public policy grounds, which

is that now or aground than the prohibited subject.

Where's the authority for your view of the public policy issue?

RSA 1891, RSA 193C, and RSA 193E2,

and particularly RSA 193E2, because they're

the legislature in fulfilling its constitutional obligation

under Claremont to provide an adequate education,

as told local school boards, that is their responsibility,

that is the responsibility of local teachers, administrators,

and school boards to identify and implement approaches best

suited for the students in their communities

to acquire the skills and knowledge.

Doesn't that count cut against your argument?

Not at all.

If the teachers are part of that process?

The teachers are part of that process, absolutely,

because teachers are educators.

The statute does not say anything

about collective bargaining or bargaining organizations.

The Sugar River Education Association

is not synonymous with the teachers.

The association is a corporate entity

that has specific responsibilities.

They try to achieve fair treatment and fair compensation

for their members, but they are not an educational body.

Teachers are educators, administrators are educators,

and the school board members ultimately

have the responsibility for adopting and implementing

approaches to education best suited.

It's an odd incongruity, though, wouldn't you say,

to have evidently very concerned teachers who

want to go to the AB schedule and then their union that's

fighting against it and fighting in favor of block scheduling?

I'm not shocked that that's the case.

I mean, clearly, the association's goal

is to protect its statutory collective bargaining rights.

The arbitrator determined that they had achieved

the block schedule in some fashion

or protected it through collective bargaining.

And the association's role would

be to try to protect those collective bargaining rights.

Our position is, OK, there was a contract provision.

There was a breach.

If it's a permissive subject of bargaining,

then there's an entitlement to a remedy.

But the remedy that gets imposed

can't be a remedy that would deprive

the students of their constitutional right

to an adequate education and the school board

of its statutory responsibility to identify and implement

the approaches to education best suited to meet the students.

So is it your position that the students have

a constitutional right to an AB schedule?

No, they have a constitutional right

to approaches to education, curriculum,

and educational delivery methods

determined by teachers, administrators, and school

boards that are best suited to meet their needs.

And isn't that what happened here

through the collective bargaining process?

Well, if, in fact, as the arbitrator found,

the school board had in the past collectively

bargained for the block schedule, which was disputed,

but the school board lost on that issue,

the question arises if it is subsequently determined

by the people identified by the legislatures having

the responsibility for making this determination,

administrators, teachers, and school boards,

that that choice of education was wrong

and that students were being harmed by the block schedule,

which, in fact, this committee in the school district

determined that it was contributing to dropout rates,

that it was contributing to lack of retention

and delays in future instruction,

and that an alternate schedule was

in the best interest of the students,

we can't have the collective bargaining process

take precedence over providing that adequate education.

Can I just ask a question?

You've now followed the arbitrator's award after the PLRB

ordered you to do so.

Is that right?

Yes.

So I just want to make sure I'm understanding.

Does that mean that you did not give the teachers the 8%

raise?

They received the 8% for the 2015-2016 school

year when the block, when the AB schedule wasn't available.

So they didn't get both.

They didn't get both.

Once we complied with the arbitrator's award

and went back to the block schedule,

they no longer had that 8% into their wages.

Let me ask you this question.

Under the appeal of state doctrine,

the court said that the third step or the third test

that must be met, that if the proposal were incorporated

into a negotiated agreement, neither the resulting contract

provision nor the applicable grievance process

may interfere with public control of education

or whatever the issue is.

But yet the court said that's a permissive subject of bargaining.

I mean, is that something we should reexamine?

That basically says if we accept the PLRB's view

that this was a permissive subject of bargaining,

doesn't that sort of suggest that even though the statutes

prescribe that certain people, the school board, whatever,

are supposed to have control of a certain policy,

the school board can say, oh, well,

we're willing to give that up.

What's their sort of authority to do that,

is the question I would have.

I think it's an excellent question.

And the distinction between the first prong

and the third prong of the Henry State test

has always been difficult to find where exactly that line is.

Clearly, if there is an express delegation of authority

to some governmental body, then they should be prohibited.

But my view is that where we're talking

about constitutional rights being protected

through statutory action and specific parties identified

as having the responsibility for doing it,

the state cannot subordinate its responsibilities

to a collective bargaining process.

Here, clearly, it wasn't expressed enough

so that the board recognized it when they negotiated

the contract.

I mean, the history here is a bit awkward in the fact

that this language relative to block schedules

did not arise through the ordinary bargaining process.

There were a series of side letters

that were entered into two collective bargaining

agreements that were in place over the entire period.

And what does that mean?

What does the side letter mean?

Well, according to the arbitrator,

it meant they were addendums to the collective bargaining

agreement.

The school board took the position

that they were just confirmations of what

was actually taking place in the school at a time,

not a promise that it would remain that way going forward.

In a cooperative effort.

Right.

The arbitrator took it as an addendum

to the collective bargaining agreement

and essentially locking the school board in

to maintaining that particular method of education.

What did the arbitrator say?

I mean, what did the arbitrator say about your position

that doing what the remedy that the arbitrator ordered

was going to negatively impact the education of the children?

I mean, what was her response to that?

I think the arbitrator properly determined

that he didn't have the authority to construe state

law, that his authority under the collective bargaining

agreement was limited to construe the terms of that contract.

And where the remedy for breach would normally

be in the collective bargaining context,

specific performance, do the thing that you promised to do,

that's the direction you went.

He largely ignored the public policy argument,

left that for the PLRB to look at.

Didn't the, if I'm remembering correctly,

didn't the side letter or side letters

describe what was happening as a pilot project?

It was intended to be done that way,

and there were a series of amendments to that pilot.

But the block schedule remained in effect

for quite a number of years, and it wasn't until

there was some change in the administration

at the school board, at the school district

where they took a hard look at student performance,

retention, dropout rates, that they came to the conclusion

that the block schedule was a significant contributor

to student failure.

Or another way to say that might be a failed pilot.

We know about that from the family division.

Sure, yeah, I mean, if it had been treated

by the arbitrator as simply a pilot program

that would have sunset it at some period of time,

then we wouldn't need to be here.

But there was no deadline placed on the pilot.

There was no sunset provision that was built into it,

so it was treated certainly by the arbitrator

as an ongoing obligation of the district.

So I'm clear, AB stands for Alternative Block,

is that correct?

I believe it does, but basically the difference

is block courses are taught in one semester increments.

AB courses are taught over the entirety of the school year.

So you could take a math course in the fall of 2016

and then perhaps not take math again

until the 17-18 school year.

So the gap, it's bad enough that students

have the summer to forget,

but now they could have full semesters

to forget what they've learned,

which affects retention and really delays forward progress.

It's also injurious to those people

who are getting ready for advanced placement exams

and for other things,

where an interruption in course instruction

in a particular subject.

Do I understand your, am I correctly understanding

or is this your interpretation of your opponent's position

is, or at least they don't concede this,

that even if we say that we uphold,

if we were to uphold the arbitrator's award here,

their position would be that

because you've engaged in this permissive subject of bargaining,

even when this contract is over

under the status quo doctrine, you must continue.

Presumably, you must continue at infinitum to do this.

That is my understanding of the association's position

that in effect, the school board could be held hostage

to providing this form of education delivery,

which they've said is, you know,

the appropriate people have said

this is the wrong way to go,

can be held to this indefinitely.

And if you think it in the context of any other business,

any service industry or manufacturing industry,

if you're locked into a method of production

that is failing and you are forever prohibited

from changing it without the consent

of your employee's labor organization,

that business is doomed to fail.

And we've seen that repeatedly in the private sector world.

Is there any empirical evidence in the record

as to the relative effectiveness

of these two methods of teaching?

The reports of the committee that did the study

in terms of what their determinations were relative

to the block versus AB was in the record

of both the arbitration decision and the PLRB decision.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Mr. Almonddinger.

May it please the court, my name is James Almonddinger

and I appear this morning on behalf

of the Sugar River Education Association,

the APLE in this matter.

The school district has made an argument

that has many fine sounding words,

but when one looks past those words

at the law in this case,

one concludes that the school district's arguments

do not withstand scrutiny.

Well, what do you say about the,

I mean, does the union contest or did it contest

that this was a, that the findings of this committee

of the, you know, that included teachers apparently

that the AB system was a better system?

No.

I would encourage the court to look at the 10 pages

in the record at pages 273 to 283,

which comprise the entire documentary record.

What do they say?

Of the better nature of the AB schedule.

What you will find is a page or two of minutes

from two committee meetings held in the fall

of 2014, starting two months after the parties entered

into their 2014-2017 collective bargaining agreement.

After the minutes of the two meetings,

there's one memo from the high school principal

to the superintendent that talks

about various schedules under consideration

without making a recommendation

for any one schedule in particular.

But eventually we will look at all of that in the record,

but eventually it was recommended

that the AB schedule was preferable, right?

That isn't in writing in the record

until the May 2016 PowerPoint prepared

by the superintendent.

What difference does that make?

Well, the vote by the school board

to go to the AB schedule has no document

supporting it other than a May three months later.

But we're not entitled to look behind their decision-making.

No, but if you look at the documentation

that's in the record,

you don't have to look behind anything.

Isn't it possible that you're the only,

you represent the only association in the United States

that is arguing for block scheduling curriculum?

They've had a block schedule by agreement,

part of the collective bargaining agreement

since the year 2000s.

To back up for a second,

at the close of its brief in chief,

the school district makes the following concessions.

First, that the arbitrator correctly ruled

that the existing block schedule had been incorporated

into the party's collective bargaining agreement.

Well, we all know that.

Well, it's not a pilot program.

The pilot program was an advisory period

that got kind of sandwiched into the block,

I believe in 2011.

And it was a short period that allowed students

to have informal interactions with staff

at a set time during the day.

That's the only pilot.

The suggestion of this, Mr. Almeter,

suppose that it was,

and I understand that you may dispute it to some extent,

but suppose that it was,

there was absolutely no question

that the AB system was a better educational system

for the students.

If I'm understanding correctly that you would say,

well, because you agreed to bargain about this,

that doesn't matter.

It doesn't matter whether it's a better educational system

or not, you agreed to bargain over this

and that's too bad, you're stuck with it.

And I guess if that's true,

isn't that really terrible public policy

that we would say that,

basically you elect the school board,

I assume they're elected in Claremont,

you elect the school board and you ask them

to do sort of the right thing and they do the right thing

and then, I'm sorry,

they elect them to do the right thing

and then they can sort of say, well, you know what?

We're willing to sort of sell this out

or bargain this away to somebody else and that's okay.

That issue is not before the court this morning.

If in fact the school board came to the association

with the perfect block schedule,

I believe the discussions between the association

and the school board would have been different.

The teachers voted twice on this new AB block schedule

as a group of teachers and both times the vote

was strikingly in opposition to this AB block schedule.

They were concerned that students

were going to have twice as much homework,

that's in that 10 pages of discussion.

They were concerned that students

were going to have more difficulty

handling eight classes at the same time

as opposed to four classes at the same time.

But isn't the problem with that,

that I don't question the good faith

of the teachers for a minute,

I don't question that,

isn't the problem with that that it's not the teachers

that were assigned that responsibility,

it was the school board?

Well, the school board has to discharge

a number of responsibilities

as a legally constituted body.

In this case, the record shows

that they started considering

a different high school schedule back in 2011.

They then signed a collective bargaining agreement,

a three-year collective bargaining agreement

with the four-by-four traditional block schedule

in June of 2014,

three years after they had been considering

what different schedule to go to.

Two months later, they start this committee

that ultimately came up with those 10 pages in the record

that the district points to

as justifying the AB schedule.

Now, I don't know when the school district decided

that the traditional four-by-four block schedule

was ultra-veries, was void, ab initio.

Presumably, it was sometime after they signed

the first side letter in 2000,

the second one in 2009, the third in 2010,

the fourth in 2011, the fifth in 2014.

But if they started talking about it in 2011,

they could have raised it at the bargaining table in 2014.

They could have said, we don't wanna continue

the side letter in the collective bargaining agreement.

Can I just follow up on that point?

If we accept your argument,

is the school district stuck with the block system

till the end of time, or not?

Is that your position?

The, at the bottom of page 26 of the school board's brief,

you will, and at the top of page 27,

you will read the following sentence.

To the extent that permissive subjects

of bargaining addressed in a collective bargaining agreement

remain part of the post-expiration status quo,

if the class schedule is a permissive subject,

the school board would be perpetually powerless

to fulfill its statutory obligation.

There are many qualifiers.

But what's your opinion?

That wasn't an answer to that question.

That wasn't an answer to the question.

I wasn't dodging the answer.

I was really, no, I was trying to set the stage,

because as attorney broth acknowledged,

we don't know what the answer to that question is.

It's a complicated question.

It brings in notions of the status quo.

It brings in notions of permissive subjects of bargaining.

And it brings in notions of permissive subjects

in collective bargaining agreements.

And when the court, at some point in the future,

has that case in front of it,

you will then stir the pot and come up with,

I'm sure-

So you're saying we don't have to decide that.

That's an issue for another day.

Yeah, because this breach occurred

at the end of the first year of a three-year collective

bargaining agreement.

So what's left for us to decide in this case?

I would like to suggest that our arguments are so persuasive.

You don't need to hear anything else from us.

Try to answer the question.

Well, I can't answer that question.

And I'm sorry.

And I don't want to speculate, because as the court knows,

these cases are fact sensitive.

And that's apparent in this court's rulings

with regard to other public policy

is a basis for overturning an arbitration award.

But the question at the core here

does seem to be, at least according to the appellant's

brief, whether or not this is a prohibited or permissive

subject of bargaining.

And if we say it's prohibited, well,

that's the end of the story, right?

We don't think the school district has

made that argument successfully.

If you look at RSA 189, 1A Roman II,

what you find is a statute that talks about, quote unquote,

the delivery of instruction.

And that's the phrase in that particular statute

that is the core of the school district's case on appeal here.

We argue that that requirement to deliver instruction

is a broad requirement in its terms

and is indefinite in its meaning.

If you look at notions of what could possibly

be considered delivery of instruction,

it's not just the class schedule.

It's textbooks, it's internet-based instruction,

it's field trips, it's internships, it's distance

learning, it's webinars, it's vocational education,

it's career education, it's college.

But it's also AB versus block scheduling.

And the showing that the old schedule is bad

is not strong if you look at those 10 pages in the record.

And the showing that the new schedule is good is speculation.

But how about, I mean, if we, isn't this, I mean,

suppose that, for example, that something even more mundane

than this, well, maybe that's the wrong word.

But let me give you this example.

Suppose that the school board decided

that the textbook for chemistry should be the A textbook

and at a time.

And they ended up in a, somehow, this

got put into a collective bargaining agreement.

And later, the school board decided no.

And on excellent authority that this book is really,

it's not anywhere near as good as the B textbook.

Could the union say, hey, wait a minute,

you bargained for the A textbook, that's what we want.

And you can't, this is a permissive subject

of bargaining, and you can't change it.

The union could say that if the school board puts it

in a collective bargaining agreement.

Presumably, the school board has the good sense

to be careful about what it agrees to in collective bargaining

agreements.

And with the textbook, as with this competition

between these two high school schedules,

there's no showing of urgency on the part of the school board.

Changing the textbook next year as opposed to the year

after next is probably not going to cause the educational

edifice to come crumbling down.

And the argument that the district makes that somehow

or another this old schedule is constitutionally inadequate

has absolutely no basis in the record before the PELRB.

They did not make that argument before the PELRB.

They argued before the PELRB that its role as a school

board with local control, including arguments

about Claremont giving them local control.

I mean, I tend to think you've got a good point on that.

I think to say that this one thing somehow renders

constitutionally inadequate seems like, to me,

frankly, a stretch.

But on the other hand, doesn't the district

have a very good public policy issue?

Even if this would not render it unconstitutional,

it seems to be pretty demonstrably a bad idea

in the opinion of those who are supposed

to make that decision.

And yet, why isn't the arbitrator's remedy

of giving your folks the 8% raise?

Why isn't that sort of good enough?

Because it would create a situation where

some but not all of the high school professional staff

would get the 8% raise.

Not all of them, certain special ed personnel,

the guidance counselor, the librarian, other education

professionals wouldn't get the 8% because they don't.

I mean, would it be because they are not adversely impacted?

That's why they wouldn't get it?

The school nurse is going to be the school nurse,

no matter what the schedule is at the high school.

So not all the high school teachers get the 8%.

None of the middle school teachers get the 8%.

None of the elementary school teachers get the 8%.

And none of the teachers at the vocational rehabilitation

train or in a voc tech center, sorry, down the road

get the 8%.

So you create a small group in a larger bargaining unit

that's got a nice little 8% pay increase.

It creates disruption and difficulties

from the union side, which is trying to make sure.

So are you suggesting that they're

willing to give back the 8% to avoid that disruption?

Well, they only got the 8% for the one year, the 2015-2016

school year.

There's no expectation that they're

going to get the 8% at any time in the future.

But no, the 8% is not a panacea.

It creates a lot of problems within the bargaining unit

because only a small group of the classroom teachers

at the high school are going to get the 8%.

Nobody else gets the 8%.

And that creates real problems among the staff

and for the association.

The other point I would make is that the school district

really didn't, I mean, not only is there

no evidence on the record of constitutional inadequacy,

the school district, in our view,

did not adequately preserve that issue in its motion

for rehearing.

It focuses on two sentences about halfway

through its motion for rehearing.

In those two sentences, it does not

identify Part 2 Article 83, which is the basis

for all the constitutional adequacy, Claremont,

London Dairy School funding cases.

They got that wrong.

They cited instead the 14th Amendment

to the United States Constitution, which

is the wrong target.

And then they changed that by saying,

well, we're going to argue the Equal Protection Clause

under the New Hampshire Constitution.

There again, that's incorrect because it's

Part 2, Part 2nd Article 83.

What that means is that the PELRB would

have had to supply as part of its reading of the district's

motion for rehearing the proper citation

to the New Hampshire Constitution

and the proper citation to the case

because it didn't cite the Claremont decision either.

Just one question.

I should know this.

But does the board have jurisdiction

to decide constitutional issues?

No.

OK.

No.

So there wouldn't be much point after all.

Well, no, but that doesn't mean that without a factual foundation.

I'll stop.

That without a factual foundation.

Court is in recess.
