This is case 2016-0427, appeal of a state of Beatrice Jacoby at Public Protection Fund.

And Justice Hicks will participate in this appeal.

Mr. Latticey?

Good morning.

May it please the court.

I'm Steve Latticey.

I'm representing the administrator of the state of Beatrice Jacobyak.

And I can guarantee you that this is the last Jacobyak case you will ever hear.

We've heard that before.

There are a number of issues that are raised in this appeal regarding the extent of and interpretation of the regulations of the Public Protection Fund and how far reaching those regulations are to prior recoveries made on behalf of a claimant who ultimately ends up

before the committee.

Is it your position that a claimant should be able to have double recovery if they have lost $100 and there's insurance or some other recovery they can get $150?

Is that?

No.

No, it's simply a question of determining what is the gross amount of the claim of the victim prior to the submission of that claim to the or prior to the

adjudication of that claim before the committee in how those prior recoveries get applied to reducing that prior claim to a net amount.

And that's really what the issue is here.

But wouldn't the follow-up on Justice Batten, if we did what you want and sent the money to the probate court, wouldn't the probate court then following either the will or

the interstate, the intestacy laws have paid half of that money to is it Thaddeus who was already fully compensated so Thaddeus would get double recovery?

No, he wouldn't because there were four entities from which Mr. Tessier stole money.

The Lillian Smiley Trust, which was before this court, personal assets stolen from Thaddeus Chakobia, personal assets stolen from Frederick Chakobia, and assets stolen from the estate, four separate claims, each involving separately owned assets.

And so the committee has made an adjudication on the claim of the estate and has found the net amount that was stolen from the estate after applying the gross amount of the recoveries.

That's the estate's claim.

How that money then gets allocated out to the beneficiaries is a matter for the probate court.

But the probate court, I mean could the probate court say in the face of us either the will or statute that said either each of the brothers get 50%, could the probate court say, oh, I'm not going to follow that, I don't care what the will says or the intestacy law says, I'm going to give all the money to the other brother?

Yes, absolutely.

And in fact, that's exactly what we did when we made those recoveries on behalf of the estate when we submitted that net claim to the estate because monies from the estate had theoretically already been given to Thaddeus, there was a differential allocation of the proceeds of that recovery, most of which went to Dr. Chakobia.

But I mean, was that done with the consent of the parties?

Yeah, absolutely.

That's what I'm saying.

What I'm saying is if there was no consent, if the issue before the probate court was, nobody's consented to anything, now you've got this pot of money, you have to, you probate court have to distribute this money.

Could the probate court say, I don't care what the intestacy law says about each one gets half, I'm going to say that I'm going to make, I'm going to award all the money to one of them because the other one's got enough money, they already recovered from some other source.

Isn't that exactly what Judge Patton did in the smiling case?

He looked at all of this and he said that these two lawyers made some sort of allocation and allocated losses to Dr. Chakobia and so that Thaddeus wouldn't suffer and therefore I conclude that Thaddeus has been made whole.

That's exactly what he did.

So this whole argument that Thaddeus has been made whole is premised upon some pretty extraordinary conclusions.

I mean you have to accept the fact that you've got two attorneys, neither of whom represent Thaddeus, who are making decisions and making allocations that are somehow down the road binding on Thaddeus.

I mean neither of these attorneys have a fee agreement signed by Thaddeus, there's no consultation with Thaddeus, there's no input by Thaddeus.

Mr. Lattice, let me make sure I understand your argument.

With Thaddeus, the recovery that is referred to in the order previously where he's been made whole, you're saying that was a personal claim of his that had nothing to do with the estate?

Absolutely.

Absolutely.

So that's just sort of fortuitous information. He got some money for another claim and so you're saying that has nothing to do with this, you shouldn't have reduced this by half because of some other money he got, right?

Right, exactly.

And keep this in mind, whatever allocation, whatever agreement is being made here between Attorney Bash and Attorney Rockefeller allocating these losses and deciding amongst themselves who's going to bear these losses and who isn't.

It's all contingent upon the settlement agreement with Mr. Tessier and he breached it.

So when he breaches that agreement, what happens to the agreement that's been negotiated that's contingent upon Mr. Tessier continuing to make payments under the settlement agreement?

It evaporates. It goes out the window. It's meaningless.

So let me just, this issue about Thaddeus, it's a $14,000 issue, right? About half of $28,000 and that's that point, it deals with $14,000 but your bigger argument has to do with the adjustments that were made of the gross amount.

Exactly.

That has more dollar impact.

Yeah. I'd like to move on to that aspect of it because what the committee, you know, the regulations clearly say that you can't

include in your claim against the Public Protection Fund a claim for lost income and it seems to me that it's on that basis that the committee completely disallowed the lost income claim on the probate bond

because when we pursue a third party recovery before we get to the committee, which is what we're supposed to do,

you got to look at what was that claim. The claim wasn't limited to the assets that were stolen from the estate because those assets had been stolen over, you know, they'd been missing from a considerable period of time,

but it's the lost income on those certificates of deposit. That's part of our claim on the probate bond.

So when we make a recovery of $250,000 on that probate bond, that $250,000 gets allocated to the gross claim of the estate which includes some sort of lost income claim.

But it seems like your argument would read out the limiting language in the rule.

No, because I'm not making a claim for lost income on my claim against the fund. So if my net claim is X, I'm not making a claim for lost income on that X amount.

That's the net amount that we end up with. And you have to look at what is the net asset of the estate. You have the loss to the estate, the claim of the estate is that differential, the delta,

between what was stolen and the net amount that's recovered because that's what gets distributed to the beneficiaries.

And I forgot that.

But is that, I mean, when you say the amount that was stolen, if I, you know, if I rob a bank and steal $100,000 from the bank and, you know, and you don't recover it, it's not recovered for a couple of years,

does that mean I've stolen more than $100,000? I've stolen $100,000 plus what it could earn over those two years?

No, but again, you're confusing the gross claim on behalf of the estate on the probate bond with the claim that is submitted to the Public Protection Fund.

And all I'm trying to do is get to a net amount. And the committee tried to get to the net amount, too. It's just a matter of what deductions you're going to make against it.

Now, we're in agreement here that the gross amount of the CDs in the attorney's fees that were stolen are part of the gross claim.

The committee applies the gross recovery of the, on the third party recoveries, the recovery against the probate bond and the recovery against the accountant, and subtracts that from the gross amount of the claim to get to their net amount.

And I'm saying that, no, the net amount that the estate recovered is the only thing that gets deducted and applied. The committee doesn't get the benefit of claiming those legal fees as part in reduction of the claim.

Please clarify for me. Do you dispute the calculation of gross eligible claim being $298,000, which is made up of stolen assets of 209 and stolen legal fees of 89? You don't dispute that.

Yes, I do. I dispute that because we claim that the amount of the legal fees should have been $96,500. And that difference is based upon a check that was...

Right, but putting that issue aside, this 209 and 89 or 95, you basically agree with the magnitude of the gross eligible claim. And then the fight is about what should be set off against it.

Yes, yes. The fight really, the disagreement here is what should be, how much of that claim gets reduced by the recovery. And our position is it's the net recovery and not the gross recovery.

And the committee just simply does not get to make any further. Once they reach an end result here as to what the amount of the loss is to the estate, the net loss to the estate, and the reimbursable claim, that's it. They're done.

They don't get to make any further reduction. It was back to the probate court, and it's up to the probate court to make the appropriate allocation because that's the appropriate place to do it.

This last point you're making, that's the argument about 28 versus 14.

Right, right.

But it's a different number, once you increase the gross amount or the net amount of the compensable award, then theoretically that 14,000 number goes up to what? I don't know. That's why it should go back to the probate court.

That's the appropriate place to sort it all out.

Thank you.

Thank you.

May it please the court. I'm Keith Diaz. I represent the Appellee, the New Hampshire Bar Association Public Protection Fund.

I'd like to pick up with the points that were raised by the appellant. We last left off with a discussion about exactly what the appellants claim, the basis of the claim is.

There seems to be some confusion about it, and I think I believe it's worth reviewing because by reviewing it, I think this court can understand what it is exactly the committee did.

Would you mind keeping your voice up a little bit?

Oh, sorry. Maybe I'll get a little bit closer.

So does the court have the certified record with it today?

I'm sure we do.

It has it out here with us now.

Okay, sure. If you go to page 95 of the certified record, you'll come to nearly the last page of a memorandum that was filed to the committee by the appellant.

In it, it was submitted prior to the final hearing, and in it, the appellant set forth its claim.

So, you know, can I just make sure? The issue that I thought I understood when I came out here, and then in light of Mr. Justice Bassett's questions and some of your opponent's answers now, I'm not quite sure that I do understand it correctly.

But here's the thing. I was under the impression that one of the things that the committee said, particularly pertaining to this, you know, cutting the $28,000 down to $14,000 was that there was a certain amount of money that was stolen, that was recoverable under the, that was recoverable under the, under our rule for the, for the committee.

And that once that number was calculated, the Thaddeus received, whoever that money was owed to, it was still a, it was still a certain amount of money.

The amount was sort of known that's, that's capable, that was, that was subject to restitution from the fund. And when, when Thaddeus received a recovery from another source, that amount should not have been paid to the estate because he would then have gotten half of that again.

And is, I mean, is that correct or is this really a separate debt?

No, I think you've, you've characterized it correctly. The, the committee, when it reviewed the evidence that was available to it, in particular the, its decision in the Thaddeus Jacobi case where the committee considered evidence that largely arose out of Judge Patton's decision, which included the negotiations between Attorney Broch and Attorney Rockefeller, right?

By once, there was some recognition that Attorney Tessier had misappropriated assets. The effort by those two attorneys was solely to, to make sure that Thaddeus Jacobi was made whole.

In doing that, the two attorneys examined the assets available in the Smiley Trust as well as the assets available in the estate, the, the appellants assets.

Judge Patton in reviewing this issue because it was a, it was a claim made on the, on that probate bond relative to the trust in that matter.

Judge Patton examined both the assets available to Thaddeus Jacobi Act in the, that was owed to him through the estate as well as the Smiley Trust.

The conclusion was that through the efforts of Attorney Boesh and Attorney Rockefeller, their accounting, which I provided to the court in the appendix to the brief, you can see on page 161, it says the Beatrice Jacobi Act estate and it's, it's a,

I think the purpose of this document was to allocate federal estate allocations. However, in doing so, all of the assets of the, of this estate, the appellant were taken into consideration.

So you can see here, what they did was they divided, they made allocations, one to Frederick Jacobi Act and the other to Thaddeus Jacobi Act.

Of note, the five CDs that are at issue before the court on appeal as well as the insurance refund are identified in the sheet.

The very same assets that add up to the $208,000, which the committee determined had been stolen.

So when you look at this spreadsheet, you realize that Thaddeus Jacobi Act through the efforts of these two attorneys, which was affirmed by Judge Patton and affirmed by this court on appeal,

that these findings were sustainable, reasonable and followed the law.

So when the court had the, this issue brought, it's seen out the court, when the committee was considering the claim of the estate, it had, it believed that had to follow the basic principles of Rule 55.

That is really two things.

One, you know, you can only make a payment from the fund if that for proven losses and two, those proven losses have to constitute the actual dollar value of the money that property lost.

Well, I think a reasonable interpretation of that rule excludes double recovery.

And the committee examining the efforts by Attorney Broch and Attorney Rockefeller, as well as the findings of Judge Patton in this court's affirmation of Judge Patton's findings that Thaddeus Jacobi Act had been made whole.

So he actually received everything that he was entitled to through the Beatrice Jacobi Act estate on page 161 of the appendix is a good example of that.

Well, of course, with regard to this claim, again, we're only talking about the assets, which are the CDs and the insurance refund, which are specifically accounted for in this document that I keep on pointing out.

So, after the committee calculated the gross eligible claim, in doing so, by the way, we excluded the interest, the interest of the lost income that was claimed.

Again, referring to, based on Rule 554, the committee calculated the gross amount of the estate.

Then deducted from that the gross amount of the third party recovery to get to the $28,000 we've been discussing today.

And then from that recognized that if this was the basket of estate assets that were left over, we couldn't ignore the reality that Thaddeus Jacobi Act had been made whole.

He received his entire 50% of what he otherwise would have received from the estate.

Now, for purposes of this appeal, we're not talking about the full $539,000.

We're only talking about the values of these CDs and the life insurance refund.

So, again, the committee reached the decision that, based on the evidence available to it in its consideration of the Thaddeus Jacobi Act case,

which was incorporated as evidence at the final hearing without objection from the appellant, we took into consideration of the reality that Thaddeus Jacobi Act had been made whole.

So, Mr. Lattice seems to essentially be arguing, this is an independent claim.

It's like he had a tort case or something and he recovered that and that was in his name and he had that right.

And so it's got nothing to do with the estate, but you take issue with that characterization.

Well, first of all, clearly has everything to do with the estate, in particular the amount of stolen assets because, again, these CDs are specifically accounted for.

They're the same specific assets that he recovered for before.

Exactly.

Is that right?

Exactly.

So, the committee, I don't believe in applying the Supreme Court Rule 55 can ignore that.

And so that's exactly what it did, to prevent a double recovery.

We took the, I think we say the gross net eligible amount of $28,000 and divided that in half.

At least that's the rationale and I don't think it's a bad rationale, frankly.

The...

What about the rationale of not paying for the attorney's fees that were necessary in order to recover against the bond and all of that?

Sure.

Is there a reliance just on the language of the rule or is there...

Absolutely.

It's a strict interpretation of Rule 55-4.

In its application, I'll read it to you.

The maximum amount which may be paid on a claim shall be the dollar value of the money or property lost by lawyer theft or defalcation and shall not include interest on the amount lost or money spent attempting to collect that loss.

So, the offer of proof at the final hearing on the merits before the committee by the appellant was, yes.

We deducted from the gross amount of the third party recoveries the attorney's fees that were spent in acquiring those recoveries.

Well, the application of Rule 55-4 I think is pretty clear.

You can't include that.

If you subtract out the attorney's fees, then the fund now by virtue of that calculation and doing its net eligible calculation would be including compensation for those attorney's fees, which would be contrary to Rule...

I think the express wording of Rule 55-4.

I mean, it seems to me the rationale for that is that this is an attorney-funded fund and is designed, I mean, largely anyway, and is designed to provide a sort of base level to make sure that people who are...

Who's lawyers steal money from them get back that but not really much more than that.

I would agree and I think the...

It's reflected in the express wording of Rule 55, not so much in Rule 55-4, but it definitely indicates that it's a fund of last resort, right?

And you need to go and you need to resolve, at least go and pursue any third party recover you have that's available to you before we are going to make any payments.

And again, actually the express wording of the Rule says that it provides some means of recovery.

And so I think that the committee's decision satisfies the standard of review.

It seems to me quite clearly that the committee in exercising its discretion correctly applied the rules to the facts of this case.

Does that deference extend to interpretation of the rules or just application of the rules to the facts?

Well, if I understand your question, I believe that...

Well, maybe I don't understand.

Well, I mean, it seems like the fundamental issue of whether you should net out attorney's fees or not presents an issue of interpretation of the regulation.

Correct.

We don't really owe deference to the committee on that point.

We can figure it out ourselves.

Absolutely, Ron.

Yeah.

It's certainly up to this court to decide how to interpret the rule and whether or not the committee has applied it correctly.

So we have any, like, chevron deference to the committee or not?

Well, we have said, haven't we said that we...

I mean, we don't have chevron, but haven't we said that we owe some deference to it?

I think the standard of review clearly states that it's a pretty high standard and absent some complete abuse of discretion on the part of the committee, the committee's findings will be upheld.

I have nothing further to add unless the court has questions.

Thank you.

Case submitted, the court will take a recess.
