This is case 2016-0007, state of New Hampshire versus Ernesto Rivera.

Mr. Johnson, I understand you've reserved one minute. Is that right?

Yes, thank you, Your Honor.

Please proceed.

May it please the Court, Christopher Johnson, on behalf of Ernesto Rivera. There's two issues in this appeal.

I plan to focus on Joinder, and specifically on the question of relatedness.

And I've organized my comments, first, by making a general point about Joinder law.

Second, by talking about the application here of the Brown factors.

And third, by diagnosing the trial court's mistakes in its analysis.

But I'm happy to take the Court's questions.

Can I just ask a question about the record? Is the gun the same gun or not?

It's not the same gun.

It seemed to be different.

Different gun.

Different perspectives on that.

Yes.

It's a different gun.

It's a different gun.

So there was a gun at the gun class that was either the gun class's gun or Gertin's gun.

And then the other gun is a gun that Rivera's alleged to have bought later.

Thank you.

So with respect to Joinder law, the touchstone here is relatedness.

And when we're in the logically and factually connected variant of relatedness, we're in catch-all territory.

Because by definition it's already not a single criminal episode.

And it's not a common scheme or plan.

So the brown factors in this setting are A's in trying to support a consistent application of that catch-all factor across cases.

To perform that function, the brown factors need, there needs to be a definite and articulable link between the facts of one crime and the facts of another.

To what extent did the volume of the original charges play into the trial court's analysis?

I don't think it did really.

And it certainly shouldn't have, except in a kind of symptomatic sense that the more charges we have here, maybe the more likely it's going to be hard to construct a relationship among them.

But certainly there can be cases where there's lots of related charges and cases where there's very few charges that are unrelated.

So I don't think the number particularly factored.

But I want to sort of make an example of my point about how these brown factors work by reference to the temporal spatial factor.

So the question with that factor is, well, how far apart in time or place do two crimes have to be to cease being related?

The answer I think is that the measurement is not by miles or days, but it's conceptually.

The question is does the time and place of one crime tend to prove the commission by the defendant of the other crime and not by propensity?

So with that understanding of the law, I've turned to the brown factors and first to this temporal spatial factor.

The state I think asserts a kind of a miles and days analysis.

It says that Merrimack and Hudson are towns that are not very far apart and May 5th and May 13th are, you know, eight days apart.

But the problem with that I think is, one, it begs the question, well, why not? You know, compared to what?

Here, the answer is that doesn't support relationship because the time and place of one of the crimes doesn't support the commission by the defendant,

the proof of the commission by the defendant of the others.

And May 5th was the gun safety course?

Yes.

Yes.

So for example, and to use that charge as an example, the gun safety class, the fact that it happened in Hudson doesn't make the other charges any more,

doesn't tend to prove the other charges any more than if the gun class had been in conquered.

The place and the time of the gun class doesn't carry over in any relevant way to prove the others.

But if you're saying tend to prove is the analysis, isn't that inherently prejudicial?

Well, I think that's because we're in this area where we've already said it's not a single criminal episode.

It's not a common scheme or plan so that they were falling back on, well, logically and factually connected, but not by propensity.

We need some sort of disciplined way to understand how far apart would be too far apart.

And so I think, yes, so because the time and place of the gun class, for example, did nothing to prove the commission of the others,

it is too prejudicial.

Witness overlap.

So this is another one of the brown factors.

The concept, and this court has said the concept behind this factor is that the state shouldn't have to prove the same set of facts in separate trials.

Fair enough, that's a very good point.

So the question then is, under this factor, is are the same witnesses going to say the same things in separate trials?

If yes, that's a pretty good sign they're related.

If no, it's a pretty good sign that they're not.

And here, even the overlapping witnesses are not in any substantial way going to be giving the same testimony in the separate trials.

Witness overlaps does not support relationship.

The witnesses for May 5th, they're largely the employees of the gun center, right?

Right.

And they had nothing to say about any of the rest of it.

And even Gertin is a witness who certainly had something to say about the gun class because she attended it.

But she didn't have anything to say about the drugs.

She had very little to say about, she had something to say about the other gun charge.

But what she would have said about the other gun charge that she had bought the gun, she says,

would not be the same thing she would have said in a trial on the gun class charge.

She would have just said, we went to this gun class, he was there, I was there, I watched him shoot a gun.

You don't need that for the other charge on the guns.

And you certainly don't need that for the drugs or the witness tampering.

We get a lot of cases here on appeal that involve gun charges and drug charges.

And they're tried together all the time.

And we rely on the jury following the judge's instructions.

I think in many of those cases, the basis for Joinder that the state asserts is common scheme or plan.

That is, the gun is possessed by the defendant in order to facilitate or support the drug dealing activities.

That's not what the state has argued here. That's not what the trial court found.

The trial court did not say common scheme or plan.

We're in logically and factually connected territory.

And so what I would say, in the absence of any showing or any evidence that the possession of the gun had anything to do with the drugs,

it's a question of unfair prejudice.

It's the jury having heard maybe they're a little more persuaded about the gun things than the drug things,

where all two different people lived in the house where the drugs are found.

And they'll think, well, Rivera's the one who had the gun, he must be the one who had the drugs too.

And that's the danger. That's the improper propensity inference.

What's the importance of the fact that the gun and the drugs were found in different areas of the home?

Well, I think if the gun had been found in the safe with the drugs,

then the state would be able to say something persuasive about the gun seems connected to the drugs.

They were stored in the same place. So that didn't happen.

And again, in the absence of any evidence, they didn't have witnesses say to whom Rivera allegedly sold drugs.

That just wasn't part of the case.

So they didn't have any information about what he was using the gun for,

or that he was using it in connection with the drug, whatever drug activities he was involved in.

So if we were to agree with you that the trial court aired by not severing the gun safety course charge,

what would the direction be to the trial court?

Well, I think, you know, it's convictions reversed.

And I think because it's a mutual matter.

How many charges would get retried?

Right. I mean, I'm asking for a little more.

I'm envisioning three trials.

If you agreed that there could be only two, you would reverse for the two, the gun safety charge and all the rest.

The state hasn't argued harmless error and the court won't raise it to a spot and so there's not a question, you know, of prejudice in that sense.

So it's your view that if we find that the trial court aired in any respect in terms of joining these charges,

that all the charges should get retried?

Yes. Yes.

And then turning to the third brown factor.

So another brown factor is mode of operation.

The concept here is modus operandi.

Does the defendant have a unique or sort of signature criminal technique that brings together these different charges in a way that doesn't show merely propensity?

The state here has said, the jointer is that he, Rivera has asked people to lie, you know, to which I'd make two replies.

First, that doesn't apply to the safety class and that doesn't apply to the drug charges.

In any event, it's propensity.

It's not sufficiently distinctive kind of way of doing a crime, especially when the crime is witness tampering,

to be the factor that transcends propensity and becomes modus operandi.

My third area, I want to talk now about, so where did the trial court go wrong?

How do we know this is an unsustainable exercise of discretion?

So first, the trial court made some mistakes in its assessments of facts.

There was the gun thing. It thought it was the same gun. It was a different gun.

The second thing it said, on my brief of page 17, I've got a quote from the court's order.

The court at one point says that it was Cursey who told the police about the defendant's possession of the gun in May.

That was Gerton.

Cursey never saw the defendant with the gun, and that was her testimony.

And third, and still within the sort of factual area, there was very little overlap in the testimony of the witnesses.

So there's lots of witnesses who wouldn't even have appeared at multiple trials,

but even of those witnesses who would have appeared at more than one of these trials,

the testimony they gave at each would have been very substantially different.

Second problem that the trial court had.

The trial court had a problem with the legal standard, and I think the state repeats this problem.

The question for severance is, are the offenses related to each other?

It is not. Is the narrative of the police investigation link these cases together?

So for example, consider a defendant who's suspected of murder, and the police search his house,

and they find some forged documents during the search.

It's not a forgery charge, but the forgery has nothing to do with the murder.

The fact that the police kind of came upon the forged documents while doing a search is a fact about the police investigation,

but it has nothing to do with whether the offenses are related.

Does it matter here that we've got two separate searches?

I think those are facts about the police investigation that have nothing to do with the connection between the crimes,

that the severance and joint law looks at.

It's not the procedural facts about how the police, you know, which officers...

Both searches were geared toward the gun.

Well, so the first one, I think, what the state's saying is that at first they were looking for the gun,

and they were looking for documents about the gun safety class,

and during that by happenstance they found drugs too.

So the way they got to the drugs was in part through the gun safety class.

It doesn't matter, though. That's not what severance and joint analysis is about.

The police, you know, perfectly properly...

It's not a suppression issue, but the fact that they found evidence, so in my example,

that they came upon a forgery when they're looking for a murder,

doesn't mean you try the forgery and the murder together.

Can I ask you to shift to the second issue?

Sure, sure.

If there's error, why is the error plain?

So the question is, what's the unit of prosecution for solicitation of witness tampering?

Which we've never addressed before.

So how could any error be plain if we've never addressed the issue?

I think because there's only one possible answer to that question.

And the cases I've cited that sort of get us there are solicitation of...

the witness tampering unit of prosecution and some solicitation cases.

The question is, what is the act that the defendant is asking these people to do?

And if what he's asking them to do is one thing, that's one act of solicitation.

And I think the reason this is plain is this kind of applies across this kind of crime.

So the cases I've cited, somebody who calls his girlfriend from jail

over and over and over again, asking her not to come to court to testify, that's one.

Even if it's spread out over months?

Even if it's spread out over months, because he's sort of making...

he's got one witness, he's trying to get to do one thing,

one sort of witness tampering thing, is one.

But are there cases that go both ways on that issue?

So what happened in the state of Washington where that case came from

is after that decision the Washington legislature said we want it to be each call

and so they rewrote the statute.

So fair enough, I mean it's a legislature can do whatever it wants when it exercises its judgment,

but in the way solicitation and witness tampering statutes are generally written

and the way ours is written, and I think the way theirs was written before that case,

it was that the unit of prosecution is the act that the defendant is seeking to have happened.

And so here we have the defendant wanting two people to work together to have one meeting

to communicate one message to cursey, which is recant.

So it seemed to me your argument's too good because if it were, you could make...

the defendant could have made calls to separate people on separate days

to try to influence one witness and you say that would be one charge.

That would be two. If he's envisioning like bombarding a witness with multiple different people,

I want you to tamper with her and then I want you to tamper with her,

that would be soliciting two different tamperings.

So two calls on two different days to two different people would give rise to two charges

but two calls on separate days to one person is one charge.

Depending on what it is the defendant wants.

So like even multiple calls on separate days to two people, if as here he says

I want you people to work together.

I want you of the tally to drive La Voie to her house once. That's one.

Whereas I think in your example, if it's like I want you to go there and tamper with her

and then I want you to go there and tamper with her, that would be two.

Thank you very much.

Ms. Woodcock.

Thank you, Your Honor.

May it please the court, Elizabeth Woodcock for the State of New Hampshire.

I think that Mr. Johnson has oversimplified the State's position in terms of its analysis under Brown.

He has said basically that we are a days and miles kind of argument

and I think that that's not quite correct.

If you look at what happened here when the police did the search warrant of the house

and they found the safe, they didn't just find drugs in the safe.

They found a box of ammunition.

The box of ammunition was missing nine bullets.

When they found the gun, the gun had nine bullets in it.

When they found the gun case in the garage, that had a serial number

and that matched the serial number on Chantelle Gertin's receipts.

These things were all connected.

Now, to suggest that the trial court didn't sort of think this through, I think it's a little bit unfair

because if you look at what the development of the events were

and you look at how this all got triggered,

it got triggered by an argument that the defendant had in Manchester at a restaurant

and he was charged with I think simple assault and some other things,

maybe criminal threatening, something like that.

When they separated him from Chantelle Gertin, the police patted him down

and they found drugs on him and he was charged with possession with intent to distribute.

That case was separate and while all those facts aren't in front of this court

but the purposes of this case, this court heard that case and affirmed his conviction.

So that case was tried entirely separately.

So the court did consider what the different things were

and saw the connection in this case between the gun class, the purchase of the gun,

the subsequent warrant and then the witness tampering.

To ask you the same question I asked the defense,

did the volume of different charges impact the trial court's analysis

in separating out which cases would be tried together?

Well I think that the volume of charges did

because you had essentially three groups of charges

and the court found the gun charge and the search warrant charge

and the subsequent witness tampering which I think is obviously related

because he's trying to get people to change their testimony

in order to get him off the charges that he's being tried for.

But there was an August 20th, 2012 charge,

a group of charges that came out of that event.

Then you have the group of charges that came out of the event on July 21st, 2013

that I just described for you.

So the court was looking at the different groups of events

and trying to figure out whether it was unfair to join the cases.

Well I wouldn't have made more sense to join the drug charges together

rather than pull this drug charge out and try it with the gun charges.

I think that the problem with that, Your Honor,

is that if you try the stuff that comes out of the safe

with that July 21, 2013 charge,

that bolsters the possession with intent to distribute charge

of which the defendant was acquitted.

He was convicted of possession in that case.

But if you add in the drug ledger and everything else

into what I think is a fairly discreet event of this fight at the restaurant

and the police arrive and you have all the same witnesses,

you're not bringing in them, Elvira Curse, or anybody else.

If you start to say, okay, well we'll take the stuff that comes out of the safe

and we'll throw that into that July charge,

I think that that could very well have been a mistake by now.

Let me ask you about the gun safety charge.

It does seem to me the witnesses are very different

and how could it be that the jury's evaluation of the gun safety charge

wouldn't be affected by the other two charges,

witness tampering and the firearm and the drug charges?

It seems like a very different issue that they would bleed into each other.

I think that the gun safety charge is directly related to the purchase of the firearm,

bearing in mind that then the police find the receipts for the purchase of the firearm

and the gun safety completed documents,

plus they find the gun case in the garage

that matches the documents related to the gun safety class and the purchase of the gun.

So is the gun the same? I asked Mr. Johnson at the beginning.

The trial court thought the gun was the same.

Is it the same? Is the state's position the same?

I don't think that the gun is the same, but that doesn't really matter.

First of all, I would point out that to sit here and say,

well, the trial court got this wrong,

nobody brought that to the trial court's attention as far as I know.

No one filed a motion to reconsider as far as I know.

So the trial court, if it made mistakes,

if it made a mistake saying Elvira Cursey was the person who did this,

that would have been a perfectly good reason to file a motion to reconsider

or a motion to correct the court's work.

But certainly this issue was front and center with the trial court,

the whole set of what should be joined and what shouldn't be joined.

Right, but the trial court was working with multiple charges on several different occasions.

And it drew the conclusion, bear in mind that you're looking at whether the court

exercised its discretion sustainably,

not whether somebody else might have drawn a different conclusion.

In this circumstance, the court is looking at what it's presented with,

and it's presented with multiple charges.

It reaches the conclusion that these charges should go forward

in three different trials.

And as I say, I think that there were pit files,

certainly the pit file with the July 21st, 2013 charge

in which he gets into the fight with Chantel Gertin

and is found with drugs on him.

If you start to add in the search warrant to that,

I think that changes the complexion of that case significantly.

How do you defend keeping the witness tampering charges with the drug and the gun charges?

Well, the witness tampering charges are directly related to Alvira Curse's testimony.

She testified in Spanish with a translator,

but she testified that the defendant was constantly after her to get rid of the gun.

And so if you say, oh, the witness tampering charges can't be tried with the gun charges,

well, what is he tampering with her for?

He was concerned about the gun charge, I think particularly,

because he was not only charged as a felon in possession,

he was charged as an armed career criminal.

So he was looking at significant time, and he knew it.

So when he's calling her, you have her testimony,

and then you also have the telephone calls from the jail

in which he's talking to other people saying,

you've got to get her to change her testimony.

This is the only way I get out of this.

If she changes her testimony, then I'm okay.

It does seem to me that the defendant has a good argument

that there's not much of a temporal relationship

or a sufficient temporal relationship between the seizures in August of 13

and the firearm safety charge.

They're separated by several months.

Well, they are separated by several months,

but the key component to all of that is that the reason that they're at the house

is that Chantelle Curtin has told them about her participation in the gun safety chart classes,

her purchase, her straw purchase of the firearm,

and then when they do the search warrant, again, as I say,

the gun case that they find in the garage matches the serial number on that gun case.

Matches the serial number of the gun that she made the straw purchase for.

So it is related.

And I think that when you're trying, if you're at the trial court,

you're trying to figure out where are these connections and where do I separate this?

And again, it's not whether somebody else might have reached a different conclusion.

It's whether this was a sustainable exercise of discretion.

And the court looked at this and considered it carefully.

I mean, the state's position when it went into this whole jointer issue

was that everything should be tried together.

Now, I think that that's an extreme position,

but that's what the court was presented with.

And it was trying to figure out,

do I have enough of a connection in this group of charges to have them tried together?

So if we were to decide that the trial court aired in joining the May 5 charge,

what should happen then?

That we reverse that charge, the conviction, and what happens?

How many new trials are there?

Well, that's where I have the problem.

I mean, you're going to have Chantel Gertin come back from multiple trials then

because she's a common denominator in a number of those charges.

And all the charges get retried.

Is that right?

I think that the court could reverse the conviction on May 5

without reversing the remaining charges.

I do understand that there would be a situation in which you would be weighing

the prejudice to the defendant,

but I'm not sure that May 5 firearms, safety class,

well, I don't think that standing alone is particularly incriminating.

I think that it becomes that its connection to the subsequent purchase of the gun

is where, and that's why I think it's properly joined,

that it's the connection to the subsequent purchase.

She doesn't make that purchase if she doesn't go to the firearms class.

I mean, essentially.

Now...

Can you address the double jeopardy argument?

I think that we've addressed it in our brief.

I don't see that the first...

There are three telephone calls to Rene Lavoie

and I think that those two charges, based on those three calls,

because one of the calls is obviously interrupted.

When you read the transcript, the operator, whoever at the jail, interrupts

and he calls, Mr. Rivera calls the guy back,

and so that's obviously a connection.

Then he calls the second time,

and so I think that those two charges are properly separate.

The two that come out of the single call asking Rene,

asking the woman to introduce him to both transport him

and introduce him to Welvera Curse.

I think as we put it in our brief, that's a closer call.

Yes, I would agree with that.

I will just add one thing.

I tried to do an analysis of that under plain error

and honestly and truthfully,

if someone has been convicted of something and it's double jeopardy,

I really don't think it's entitled to a plain error analysis.

You can't be convicted of the same thing twice.

So I think if the court looks at that and determines that that's an error,

I think that it's an error that defies plain error analysis.

So the fact that we haven't addressed that particular unit of prosecution issue

shouldn't matter to our plain error analysis here.

In good conscience, I can't say that having somebody convicted incorrectly

of the same thing twice, even though the sentences in this case are concurrent,

it's still a separate conviction.

I wish I could stand here before the court and say,

I feel that this should be subject to plain error,

but I think that lightning bolts might come out of the sky.

It would seem that the state's position on December 11th call

without which two charges arose is a bit weaker than in regard to the December 9 and 10 calls.

Is that your view?

We certainly have acknowledged that in our brief, Your Honor.

Yes.

But I think returning to the original question,

when you're looking at what the trial court did in this case,

it took a number of different charges.

Again, the state's position was that they could all be tried all at once.

The court analyzed that, came down with a decision.

If it made errors in the decision,

no one drew it to the trial court's attention to my knowledge,

and therefore the court acted within its discretion in joining the charges.

I see my red light is on.

Thank you very much.

Mr. Johnson, do you wish to take your one minute?

Maybe I'll take 30 seconds of it.

Just to say that I think it's significant and called the court's attention to the fact

that in answers to the questions about the gun safety class,

the state, like the trial court, went to facts about the police investigation

that it led to a search, and that just isn't what joint law looks at.

It's the crimes, not the police investigation.

And so that was the court's error.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.
