Your Honor, I've asked the clerk.

This is case 2016-0679, Charles Cote et al. versus the town of Danville.

Mr. Cronin, what were you about to say?

That I've reserved three minutes for rebuttal, which I often forget to say at the beginning of the argument.

The record should reflect the fact that Justice Bassett is disqualified from this case.

Your Honor.

Please proceed.

Please accord to counsel.

Name is John Cronin with the firm of Cronin, Mr. Nzolinsky in Manchester.

My clients, Mr. and Mrs. Cote, are with us here today in the courtroom.

This case before you is a zoning case.

I'm sure when you read the briefs, there's a lot going on between domesticated strains of fur-bearing animals,

farming use, agricultural use, and the amicus brief asking you to make some legislation.

The fundamental question is, do dogs equal livestock?

I don't think that's a question at all, Your Honor.

What is it then?

The question is whether the so-called importing of dogs is prohibited under the Danville zoning ordinance.

If we don't think that raising dogs is agriculture, then that would be an alternative basis to affirm the trial court's decision. Would it not?

Not necessarily, because I think you'd still have to look at the zoning ordinance.

There's a prior non-conforming use argument that's in the case that you would have to look at, and you'd also have to look at the zoning ordinance.

I think if you go down that road, you're making a terrible mistake and have unintended consequences.

There are numbers of people throughout the state, probably in every neighborhood, in every town, that are selling dogs without some type of zoning permanent.

The state, said as many as 400, are taking dogs from other places, whether it's in town, across town, in state, out of state, and reselling them.

But here's the thing I guess I don't understand, Mr. Cronin.

If dogs are agriculture, then why does the statute have a separate provision?

The statute says it defines agriculture to include the raising and sale of livestock, but then goes on to say, and any practice incident to such farming operations, such as the use of dogs for herding, working, or guarding livestock.

If dogs are agriculture, why is there any need to make any special mention of them in this other section?

Doesn't that sort of suggest that dogs, except for that other section, dogs would not be part of agriculture?

I think the activity is very different.

Using dogs for farming purposes, whether they're herding, running throughout your neighborhood, or your property, herding cattle, is very different from breeding them and raising them.

Also, I think you're jumping ahead.

If you look at the actual statute, and then you compare it to the ordinance, it doesn't only talk about agriculture.

It talks about farming uses.

And in the hearing below, the trial court and the town agreed that it was okay for the Codes to sell dogs from their property.

The only thing that they questioned was that appropriate for the Codes, who got into a skirmish with the town in 08, which was resolved in their favor, they took some of their dogs that they owned to a relatives farm in Kentucky when the dog was ready to deliver.

They weaned them in Kentucky, and they brought some of them, not many of them, back to New Hampshire.

The process now, you don't see the pet store in the mall anymore.

The way this works, and I think you go online, or you go to the pound.

If you go online, you find someone like the Codes that has a kind of dog you're looking for.

The dogs are born, you have to wait eight weeks before they're weaned, before you can sell them, get a health certificate, you put the pictures online, and people say, I want this one, I want that one, I want this one.

And that's how it works.

When the Codes sent a few of their dogs out to Kentucky to breed the puppies, they would have orders for those dogs, and on the way back, they might deliver one in Massachusetts, they might deliver one in Rhode Island, they may stop in New Hampshire, and they never make it back to the Danville farm.

But the town distinguished between and approved of breeding the dogs as an agricultural use on site.

That's correct.

They did not approve, under the zoning ordinance, import importation and sale of dogs, which was a commercial activity in the agricultural zone.

So haven't they drawn an appropriate distinction between the breeding of any of these rabbits, can be pets, they can also be bred for other purposes.

So haven't they drawn an appropriate distinction between the farming activity of breeding and the sale?

Absolutely not.

Your Honor, if you were advising them, you would have told them to draft it in their ordinance.

So it would be clearly defined, and they would have a basis to make that distinction.

The zoning board members who sit as an administrative appeal shouldn't be making up the rules as they go.

There's nothing in the zoning ordinance that talks about the origin of where the animals come from, or the quantity.

Doesn't the ordinance say in general that all uses not expressly permitted are prohibited?

In that particular, not specifically, but there's a, it may, I'm going to let,

but there is a presumption section in the farming statute, which counters that.

And the enabling purpose, which says if there's any farming activity, it's presumed to be allowed.

And that's in 674.

So that's just the opposite of what the typical zoning statute would apply.

And it leads to an absurd result, basically what they're saying, and let's take 150 for a number.

If zoning is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the community, I can breed and

have 150 puppies and sell them from my home.

Put them on the internet, people come, I deliver them, whatever.

That's the impact to the neighboring community, right?

Health, safety, and welfare of the community.

What they're saying is I can't have those same 150, some of them never make it to Danville.

By doing it the way that they're doing, you're minimizing the impact on the community.

You're not increasing it in any way, shape, or form.

It makes absolutely no sense under the tenants of zoning.

You would think every town, if they wanted to minimize this operation,

would be in support of this type of activity.

And if you look at the farming issue, so you take that statute and say, I can have badgers.

I could have as many chickens or roosters as I wanted.

I could have 1,000 head of cattle, and it's all allowed.

I can't raise some dogs.

No, there's 10 to 14 dogs per litter.

Can't have 10 litters a year and sell them.

That just seems contradictory to the whole purpose.

Essentially, you're arguing their office is on the farm.

But the sale of the dogs is virtual, not on the farm?

No, it depends.

It's not a retail sale, so to speak, as you would see in a shopping center.

You don't have regular hours.

You don't have signage.

You don't have a storefront.

You don't have a parking lot.

It would be like the women selling lullaroo and Tupperware in their homes.

I don't know how you would classify that.

I wouldn't call it retail.

I think it's what millions of people in this country do to make the mortgage payment.

It's a part of daily life, and it's not regulated by zoning.

People don't go in and get a permit.

And this has been going on in farms in New Hampshire for ions.

If they wanted to limit and say, hey, we want to define commercial dog sales.

We want to pass a zoning amendment and say, look it,

when you get to a certain number of dogs,

it shouldn't matter whether they're raised or bred on the farm or at the house next door.

But if you sell more than 50 of them.

But you know what, did Judge Schumann actually, he never really considered.

In other words, he didn't say, and you correct me if I'm wrong,

he didn't say, well, if all the dogs were bred on the farm

and they weren't sort of bred, in words, all the dogs were bred on the farm.

And what your clients were doing was not only breeding the dogs on the farm,

they were also selling the dogs from the farm as if it was retail.

He didn't say that would have been all right, did he?

I think he did.

And I think, in fact, he said the longer you kept them, the better off it would be.

But did he talk at all about the sort of the circumstances of the sale?

In other words, that if the evidence was that your clients were breeding all the dogs on the farm

and they were open every day from nine to five for people to come and buy dogs,

that that would have been okay.

That was my import, both at the local level and from Judge Schumann.

Now, that wasn't the primary focus of what we were doing,

but I read the decision and the underlying minutes and records to say

if it was all done on the property, that was fine with no limitation in numbers.

I see my lights on.

I want to make one point about the prior non-conforming use.

If you look in the certified record, I believe it's page 24,

there's discussion in the opinion about not giving any information on dogs and records and so forth.

In that particular page, you'll see a history of dogs since 2006 that were sold from the premises.

And that runs up to 2015.

The commercial kennel ordinance in town didn't go into effect to 2008.

Now, there seems to be some issue with the local people and the trial court

that you have to have some documentary evidence like tax returns or something else

to support a prior non-conforming use.

That's not the law in this state.

The case is cited.

It's enough for a lawyer to make an offer of proof to meet your factual burden on the zoning case

by providing the evidence that there were dog sales in 2006.

That alone satisfies that prior non-conforming use.

On the zoning record, to go down that path of agriculture and make that decision,

you folks have never really been in the business of making advisory opinions.

When you have a zoning record, it's not like having a trial.

This is best for the legislature where all people who are selling dogs have an opportunity

to get notice and be heard.

And they take the competing arguments.

And if the legislature wants to change it, I think that's the way it should be done.

Thank you.

So the town isn't arguing that the dogs can't be sold on the farm?

Is that right?

That's correct.

They're saying you can't bring them from Kentucky.

Have them born in Kentucky.

Bring them to Danville and sell them.

Thank you.

May it please the court?

My name is Robert Eaton, and I represent the defendant,

Apollee, town of Danville, with me here today.

Also representing the town is attorney Peter Laughlin.

I think the issue here is quite clear.

Does Article 4A1C of the Danville Zoning Ordinance, which was adopted in 1982,

restrict uses in the residential agricultural zone to, among other things,

farms, farm uses, and customary farm operations?

The main issue here, I think, is whether the decisions of both the zoning board and

the Superior Court, holding that the Cote's puppy importation business did not constitute

a farming occupation within the meaning of that article,

of reasonable support in the record.

So you agree, I just want to be clear that I understand here,

you agree with Mr. Cronin's characterization of the issue.

That is, you can't import puppies and sell them.

That's correct, Your Honor.

I agree.

That's what the decision about the zoning board and the Superior Court were.

I understand that.

But you're not arguing about whether dogs are livestock or anything like that.

No, I'm raising the issue.

RSA 2134 talks about raising and selling of livestock as being part of agriculture and farming.

It does not talk about importation and selling of livestock.

I think for-

It's not farming.

That's your point.

It's not farming.

Not one's being imported.

Okay.

And the evidence is overwhelming here that all of the puppies were being imported.

So let me just ask, suppose this was, I guess I want to make sure that-

Excuse me, Your Honor, again.

I'm sorry.

So suppose that the situation here was that these were not puppies, but they were cows.

And the evidence was that the claimants here, the plaintiffs here,

were importing cows from other locations.

Were keeping the cows on the property for some relatively short period of time and

then selling the cows, would that be okay?

I don't think it would, Your Honor.

It would be the same importation of livestock that there wouldn't be any connection with the land with regard to the livestock.

In this case being cows, I don't think there's any difference whether it's cows or dogs.

The importation here is a problem.

The amicus brief brings up whether this dog breeding on-premises constitutes farming or not.

And we're not addressing that issue because that's not what the zoning board, and that's not what the superior court decided.

But I think it's important to understand is that, unlike my brother has indicated,

that this wasn't a situation where there were puppies being bred on the Danville property, and puppies being imported from Kentucky.

Mrs. Wanda Cote said twice, once in a May hearing before the zoning board, and again in a September hearing before the zoning board,

that she has transferred all of her puppies to Kentucky and brings them back to Danville.

She said she was tired of Danville and transferred all of her dogs to Kentucky.

And this was corroborated by a witness who was a former employee there,

said that none of the dogs were raised and bred in Danville, that they all came from out of state.

And this is-

Didn't she do that to avoid, I mean, didn't she do that to try and assuage the town's concerns?

I'm not sure that she was trying to assuage the town's concerns.

Apparently she was having difficulties with the town and

decided she didn't want to deal with that, so she went to Kentucky.

But whether there would have been other issues at that point, I don't know.

But the issue here, the issue before the court, and I'm not sure how much that's really in the record,

is that all of these puppies were imported.

And that's what the state vet, well, the state vet didn't say that.

The state vet said that 120 free puppies were imported during an 11-month period in 2014 to 2015.

The Cote-

And then based on the certification that has to be applied to the puppies from the vet, right?

There's a certification when they cross.

And so back to the cow example, if someone brings in a herd of cows to graze on the farm,

is that importing cows?

And they keep them there for a couple of years?

Well, I'm not sure who's selling the cows and-

Well, you bring in a herd of cows, they graze a couple of years go by, and then you sell them.

Well, I think that might be different because there is a connection with the land at that point.

It's not just a retail puppy store, as the court has said.

These cows are grazing on the land and using the land.

I believe it's a different situation.

So the evidence, just so I'm clear, the record here would say that these

dogs would, they only came on to the property, so to speak,

incidental to their being sold.

That's correct, your honor.

They were not kept on the property for any length of time.

Not at the time of the Board of Selectments order here.

As I said again, Mrs. Cotay said that all of her puppies came from Kentucky.

Maybe at one point at some time earlier on, that might have been different.

We don't know that because we haven't been given that information, despite the request for

the information from the zoning board.

And I think that information is relevant, tax records, business ledgers to find out.

What it was indeed going on here in the past, which might have been relevant,

this certainly would have been relevant information as far as the grandfathering issue.

If this importation business had been going on for a long time, going all the way back to 1982.

But in fact, the only evidence that was presented on that matter

was the puppies that were being sold going back to 2006.

But we don't really know where they're from.

Mr. Cotay did testify that they'd been raising animals on the property going back 50 years.

Curiously, he doesn't say that they've been raising puppies going back 50 years prior to

the enactment of the zoning ordinance.

He just says animals.

Although acknowledging in that same letter that talks about going back over 50 years,

that they also had horses and goats on the property.

I would submit that as far as the grandfathering issue is concerned,

that they would have had to prove by a heavy burden

that they were importing dogs to the site going back to before 1982.

In fact, we don't even know whether they had dogs on the site at all going back to 1982.

And that's not the kennel part of the ordinance.

That's the commercial activity, so to speak.

I'm sorry, Ron.

Which would not have been allowed under the residential agriculture zone.

I mean, the kennel portion of the ordinance came in in 2008.

But the part of the ordinance as to what's a permissible use in the residential agricultural zone

being limited to, amongst other things, farming, farming occupations, farming uses was 1982.

Right.

The later one was regulating commercial kennels.

So your point is that commercial activity of importing and selling, just sales.

Not raising, but sales needed to predate 1982.

I do say that, but I would also say that there's no evidence that any kind of puppy sales are raising.

There's no evidence of that going back to before 1982.

And final question maybe.

The town does regulate home occupations, correct?

Yes.

So Tupperware Lady, would that be a home occupation regulated by the town?

You know, I don't really know the answer to that question.

I would say, Your Honor, that that issue was raised down below and it was not addressed in the brief by opposing counsel.

And I would suggest that argument had been waived.

And I haven't focused on that.

I would also like to point out to the court a case from Massachusetts that was cited and relied on by the Superior Court here.

And that's modern continental construction company versus the building inspector of Natick.

As I say, I find this case very instructive because there the local farmer wanted to build a warehouse to slaughter horses on the property.

And the building inspector originally denied that.

And it went to the land court and then eventually went up on appeal.

And the import of what happened there was that they said that the court said that slaughtering of horses was an agricultural activity.

But they noted that basically the importation of horses for slaughter was not.

And basically saying that, you know, I think this is analogous to the, you know, raising dogs on the property.

That may be a farming activity.

Importing dogs onto the property for sale is not a farming activity.

You know, the court in modern continental said that the judgment was limited to permissible slaughtering activity to livestock raised on the premises.

And again, the evidence here at the time of the Board of Selectments decision was that the puppies were not being raised on the property.

They were coming solely from the state of Kentucky.

So if this question were framed differently, the town might say, even though these puppies are being raised on the property, dogs aren't livestock.

You might.

We might.

Because that question isn't squarely in front of us.

And therefore we're not being asked to answer that question.

You are not being asked to answer that question by the appellee.

That is a question that's been raised by the amicus brief.

And while I find that the amicus brief compelling, it's not, I think it would be disingenuous for me to argue that point today,

in the fact that was taken by the position that was taken by the zoning board and the superior court.

But I'd also just like to say that I think it's common sense that where there's no connection with the land,

that where the coattes were importing puppies and nothing more, and that evidence is overwhelming,

totally supports the conclusion that the coattes were not farming when they were selling their imported puppies.

And this court's review of that decision by its own wording is deferential.

And the coattes have a heavy burden of proving that those decisions were unreasonable or unlawful.

And I would suggest that those decisions were entirely reasonable and unlawful.

And I respectfully request the court affirm the lower court decision on that.

Now the coattes also make the argument that, you know, why is this any different than a farmer selling imported apples at a roadside stand?

And it is different.

One thing is that RSA 2134A3 limits imported sales to 65% of dollar sales.

Here it was 100% of sales.

So, you know, it is different than a retail farm stand selling imported apples.

But I'd also say that common sense argues that farming must have some minimal relationship to the land.

And where 100% of the puppies are imported, there is no such minimal relation to the land.

Rather, it's, as the court down below said, it's a retail pet store.

And it's not a farm.

I'd also submit that the coattes have the burden of proving that their puppy import business pre-existed in the 1982 adoption of Article 4A1C

and that it was not a grandfathered use.

To be a grandfathered use, there must be proof that this puppy import operation was operating continuously from the adoption of that ordinance in 1982.

As I said before, there's no such evidence of importation happening prior to that time.

Indeed, there's very little evidence given on that point.

As I said before, Mr. Cote said that he was raising and selling animals on the property.

Cote says nothing about dogs.

And at nine hearings, six of which were on the substance, there was no real evidence given of the relative puppy importation

versus puppy raising going back to any particular time.

There are no contracts, no tax returns.

All the coattes, excuse me, are the coattes allowed?

Say they raised horses.

Excuse me?

Say they raised horses.

And then for the first decade, and then they raised cows.

And then they raised dogs.

Is there a distinction?

Is it still a farm over those 30 years?

I'm not sure that it is.

It's certainly a different scope of farm.

But I would also say, again, that there's no evidence of importation, whether it be horses, dogs, or anything going back to before 1992.

Well, that leads to my question.

Let's say they raised horses and then decided as the process of horse raising changes over time.

It's better for the horses if they're bred somewhere and then come to the farm to be trained and then sold.

Well, I think they have to be continuously operating the same business.

You know, if it was they switched from quarter horses to thoroughbreds, you know, I could understand that as being a grandfathered activity.

But to change to something totally different as the selling pets versus raising horses for other uses,

I don't think that that's the grandfathered use.

So I would submit that the Cotés have not sustained their burden of proving that they're importing puppies as a permissible pre-existing use.

And again, would ask that this court affirm the judgment of the Superior Court.

And I will rest on my brief with everything else, unless there are other questions from the court.

Thank you.

Thank you, Your Honor.

You need your reserve time, Mr. Cronin.

Yes, I'll just use it briefly.

I would think it would be a fair result for this court to look at the statute that my brother cited, and that's at Roman 8 in front of our brief.

And it says, a farm roadside stand shall remain an agricultural operation and not be considered commercial,

provided at least 35% of the product sales in dollar volume is attributable to products produced on the farm or farms on the farm stand.

That 35% rationale, if you issued an opinion and said, hey, we don't have an issue with this and where the dogs come,

as long as 35% of them are raised on the property.

Wouldn't we be rewriting the statute, as you suggest we should not do?

I think it says agricultural operation, so if you fit it into there, you wouldn't necessarily.

You could rely on that statute.

Mr. Cronin, let me just ask you this.

I'll take this out of the dog situation.

I assume you would agree there would be no question if your clients were buying fertilizer, let's say, and using it on the property,

that nobody could say that that, to raise crops or whatever, nobody would be able to say that that was not agriculture activity.

But suppose what they were doing is buying, they would buy loads of fertilizer and then we're selling it and that's all they did with it.

Would that be agriculture?

That happens every day.

Look at it for hay.

You drive by it every day out here.

So in other words, what you're saying is that somebody can basically open up a fertilizer distribution business and that's all they do.

They live in my house, my house in Wyndham.

It's one acre, there's no farms on it or you couldn't possibly farm on it.

If I decide if the ordinance was the same in Wyndham as it is in Danville, I could start importing fertilizer and selling it.

The fertilizer never comes close to the ground.

It just comes in and I sell it and I could say that's farming?

Absolutely.

Now the town of Wyndham, knowing that boy, they wouldn't let you do anything down there.

But in terms of doing it, fertilizer could come in, it could get split with other things, they thin it out, they do all sorts of things that they bring in farming.

The statute specifically talks about manure operations, which by contrast is manure, but I don't think you have to get that far.

You look at it in terms of puppies and animals, that's the nature of what's going on here.

Where they come from, if the town is really concerned about that in the impact on the health, safety and welfare of the community, because of traffic, because of noise,

they should put it into their ordinance.

And I think that the proper date is the later date, not the earlier one, because Section 4 doesn't prohibit what they're doing.

It says farming and that's what both the court and the town agreed to.

So it's the later date for grandfathering.

Thank you.

Case submitted, the court is in recess.
