Good morning again.

Good morning, Your Honor.

Deja vu.

This is Case 2016-0357, Condominiums at Lilac Lane Unit Owners Association versus Monument Gardens, LLC, et al.

Counsel?

Good morning, Your Honors. My name is Edmund Alcock. With me is Tom Ellsworth from my office.

I represent the Lilac Lane Condominium Association.

I think where I would start would be the New Hampshire Condominium Act has a detailed scheme within it for the creation of units in phased condominiums.

That scheme has four main components to it.

There has to be some detail in the condominium declaration about which scheme you're actually operating under.

There's a time limit, either five or seven years, depending on whether it's convertible or expandable.

There's a requirement for certification.

When you say that you rely on this substantially complete language, right?

Yes, Your Honor.

I guess my question is, is it your position then that that means that before you can register a condominium or seek approval, so to speak, from the Attorney General's Office, the units have to be substantially complete?

No.

The units have to be substantially complete before the, or at the time the declaration of condominium is created.

Or in a phased condominium, they have to be substantially complete before an amendment adding those units.

So then explain, I guess, explain the difference then to me between getting it approved and the declaration.

Registration with the Attorney General is a process where you, the developer goes to the Attorney General's Office and says, here's what I plan to do.

Is this, is this okay?

Does this fit?

And you're saying he doesn't have, as part of that approval process, the developer does not have to give the declaration or, you know, a proposed declaration to the Attorney General?

I don't think he gives a proposed declaration.

I think there's a checklist of what type of project he's going to do, how many units, what the sort of elements of that project are.

But, but, but nothing is, nothing is on the ground at that point.

The, the, the point, you know, again, that's registration.

And I think the purpose of registration in the act is to let consumers know.

All right, so then that means, for example, if I understand, let, let's just, let's suppose that there is a single development, a single phase development of 300 condominium units.

Am I understanding that what you're saying is that you can't file the declaration until all 300 units are substantially complete?

That is correct.

You can't, in other words, you can't, you can't start to sell, you know, as things are going along, you can't start to sell 20 units.

You can't start to, the first 20 units, you can't, and.

You have to do a phase project.

If you want to, if you want to do a 300 unit project in, in phases, you have to do it, you have to choose either convertible or expandable.

If you want them all in.

Why do you say those are the two exclusive avenues to phase a condominium?

Because those are the two methods that are identified in the act.

Does it say only these two?

Well, well, your honor, I think I would rely on the statutory maxim that the inclusion of one thing excludes the other.

And in this case, in particular, this act is modeled on the uniform model.

Right.

Back in the 19, I think the 1977 version, not the 1980 version.

That's right.

And when you look at that act, you see that they came up with these two options.

And they explained specifically the commissioner's comments that if you want to build something out over time, you can choose this convertible option or this additional or expandable option.

They didn't present, the uniform commissioners, when they came up with this, didn't present a third option.

But I bet, but I bet they anticipated that you would be here today with this issue.

Isn't the problem, I mean, you know, it strikes me that the issue of a phased development, isn't that, at least in part, designed to give notice to the people that are buying condominiums about,

not only about how big this property, this condominium development may be, but perhaps more importantly, how small it might be.

So that, for example, if you're, let's say you have a four unit development in phase one, and the rest is to be phased, so that with conditional convertible land, that kind of thing.

Well, that tells me that I may be buying, I may be one of only four homeowners, and there may never be any more.

Correct.

But if, but if, that's not the situation here, is it?

Well.

If you tell somebody, look, we're going to build, you know, we're building all these four phases.

We're not telling you we might not do that.

We're telling you we're building it all.

Then I know.

Well, your honor, I guess, I guess I would disagree with you on the facts in this case, because the declaration does not say that they are going to build all 120 units.

The declaration says they have a right to build a maximum or up to 120 units.

It actually has this declaration, even though it doesn't specifically say it's a convertible land condominium, has all the hallmarks of a convertible land condominium.

Quite frankly, I would submit the developer could not build all of the units.

And in fact, here we are seven years after they created the condominium, and they have not built all of the units.

Just for, just a point of clarification, you're saying the, I don't know about number of units, but you're saying the original declaration went all the way up to building 16.

It's, yes, it says, it says they may build up to 120 units in five, and actually, even more interesting, your honor, they recorded a memorandum of understanding right before the original developers sold it to the successor.

And that articulates the so-called phasing plan.

Is that our issue here today? Is that when the new financing was extended by Eastern Bank?

Correct.

Okay. Thank you.

At that point, I think at that point, somebody recognized that this thing, what is this?

It doesn't really comport, is this a phased condominium?

Because when you look at the declaration, when you look at the declaration, you see 120 units.

The schedule of the declaration identifies 120 units.

And we all knew, and you can tell when they filed the memorandum of understanding, that only 24 units had been created, I think in 2012, when the MOU was recorded.

May I just have a clarification on who's paying the real estate taxes?

In your brief, you say that unit owners paid taxes on buildings 13 and 14 while they were being constructed and continue to pay taxes on land designated for 15 and 16.

Who are you referring to?

Whoever the unit is.

Who's paying?

The unit owners.

The way that's supposed to work.

We've got unit owners in Unit 12, right?

We have 24 unit owners in Building 12, correct.

In 12.

Are they the ones paying taxes on the buildings 13 and 14, which have been constructed, and buildings, the land on which buildings 15 and 16 are projected to be built?

Who's paying the taxes?

The distinction, Your Honor, under the statute is if it's a convertible land condominium,

then you have these parcels of land where ultimately buildings are going to be built.

Like, so for example, 15 and 16.

There's no structures on 15 and 16.

And the way the statute is supposed to work is you declare that as convertible, and then the developer pays the taxes on that until such time as he converts or the time period runs out.

Okay.

So, but all I want to know is, in fact, because the way you phrased it, I couldn't figure out who, in fact, was paying the taxes.

The unit owners.

Wait a minute.

What unit owners?

The unit owners in Building 12?

The unit, well, that's a, that's a, that's a complicated.

Or a monument.

That's a complicated question.

I guess the answer is, is all of the unit owners.

Right.

So what you're saying really is that the developers are paying the taxes for the units that may, they may not, they may have low value because they don't have any buildings, but they're paying the taxes for units 15 and 16.

All, all of them, all, the 24 in Building 12 and then the 48 theoretically in, in 13 and 14, which, which is, yes.

So that's the answer.

So, but is your argument, I was trying to follow it in your brief, is your argument that there is some inequity with regard to real estate taxes?

Help us understand the inequity that you're arguing.

Well, the, the, the point of that was, was, was again, just to show that had they done this correctly, had they done this correctly, had they created a convertible land condominium, they would be paying the taxes.

The developer, Monument Garden, as developer, not as unit owner, would be paying the taxes exclusively for the portions of the land that have not yet been built upon.

That was the only point of that, because that, because, because that shows up in.

But are they not, maybe, I don't understand your answer.

Who's getting a tax bill and how is it being paid?

It's being paid by, um, each of the three building unit owners.

So, partially by the unit owners in building 12, and then partially by Monument Garden as unit owner in buildings 13 and 14, which again, we contend were not properly created.

And who's paying the taxes on the, on the unbuilt units that are 15 and 16?

That's, that's the point.

Who, who?

All of us.

All of us.

Collectively.

Including the developer.

A developer.

As unit owner.

Right.

Not as developer.

I understand.

He's sharing it.

Right.

He's sharing it instead of paying it exclusively.

But doesn't he have a bigger share?

Oh, of course.

He has a, absolutely, your honor.

He has, assuming those are valid units, he has a bigger share.

But under the statute, if he had done this correctly, he would have a hundred percent share.

So maybe this, the, the taxability isn't really the core issue here?

No, no.

Thank you.

It, it was a very minor point.

Okay.

I mean, your big concern is control over the association, right?

Well, yes, your honor.

My big control, my big concern is that this condominium was, was not properly created.

They can't create buildings 15 and 16 at this point because they're beyond the five-year period.

And really what the trial court did here is they allowed, if you look at the trial court's decision, the trial court recognizes the existence of 120 units on day one.

So, I, I believe the, the, the, the trial judge said, because the units were always identified as units, they were never part of the common area, and therefore there is no need to convert the common area into units.

That's right from his decision.

Now, that belies the whole intent and purpose of the substantial completion requirement.

And, and it, it's funny, if you read the commissioner's comments from the uniform act, the point of these, of the substantial completion requirement was to prevent the creation of so-called phantom units.

But how do you, you know, how, how, how, I, I grant you that there seems to be some language in the, in the substantial completion thing that, that sort of seems to me to be sort of out of place.

But how do you, how do you substantially complete a portion of a unit?

What does that mean?

Well.

Substantially complete a portion.

That's a great question, your honor.

And, and I think the answer to that is what they're talking about is depicting on the plan units or portions of units.

So you've got two different plans that are going on.

You've got, and, and, and section 20 deals with a site plan and a floor plan.

So it says the site plan must depict the, the unit or the portions of the unit.

And the reason that you get portions of the unit is if you have a big development, you have a site plan with several sheets and you might wind up with a portion of the unit on sheet one, a portion of a unit on, on sheet two.

Do you mean by, do you mean by that my kitchen is on sheet one and my living room is on sheet two?

No.

I'm not, I'm not understanding.

No, that's a floor plan your honor.

What, what, I'm not understanding what a portion of a unit is just as, Justice Lin seems to be wondering.

Well, it, it's not a portion of a unit.

It's the depiction of units on the plan.

But what is a portion of a unit?

Okay.

Well, so, so let's, let's take a, a large site plan.

Let's say you've got a thousand units in the development.

You, so, so sheet one shows 300 units and it cuts it off.

Right where building, right in the middle of building 12, you would show the portion on that sheet and then on the next.

But that, but the statue talks about substantially completing.

I mean, whether, whether it's shown on one sheet or 15 sheets, how does that have to do with substantially completing?

Well, your honor, section 20 talks about depicting.

It, it, it says these, the, the units must be depicted on the site plan and they, you know, the, the entire unit or the portion of and certified as substantially complete.

So we're really talking about a site plan.

To answer Justice Delinus' question, it, it, let me get back to that in a second.

On the floor plans, you might have a two unit condominium.

So floor plans are by floor.

First floor, you're going to show the entire first floor.

If you have a two, if you have a two story condominium, you're going to show a portion of your unit on floor one and a portion of your unit on floor two.

To get back to Justice Lin, in addition to just it being chopped up in a site plan, you can actually have a portion of the unit depicted outside the structure.

For example.

But, but can I, can I just, am I just understanding what you're saying?

You are, you are, am I understanding that you are saying that the substantially completed language that we're talking about is talking about,

not whether the, whether it's physically substantially completed, but whether it's depicted on the, how it's depicted on the paper.

Let, let, let me read it actually, Your Honor, because it's easy.

In section 20, in, in section 20, the, the title is contents of the site plans and floor plans.

Each site plan shall be certified as to its accuracy and compliance with the provisions of this paragraph by a registered land surveyor.

Said surveyor shall certify that all units or portions thereof depicted on any portion of the submitted land other than within the boundaries of any convertible land have been substantially completed.

So this is dealing with, um, we're talking about what the site plan actually has to show.

And, and then, and then the, the site plan has a little portion of it and, and, and they're in the appendix where the surveyor has to say, um, I depict that what's shown on that plan has been substantially completed.

And he did it, he did it in this case for building 12.

But, but.

So your time is up, but Justice Hicks has a question.

I'm, I'm going to try to be brief.

You agree that we have to look at the condominium statute as a whole, correct?

Correct.

And you, do you agree with me that the condominium statute is written in derogation of the common law?

Correct.

Created a new form of ownership that came about, frankly, when I was in law school.

That's Pinewood, Your Honor.

Correct.

Uh, so do you agree with the general maxim?

And you've cited the rule of exclusion, which I think is, is very valid on your part.

Do you agree with the general maxim that a statute, uh, generally statutes are, that are enacted in derogation of the common law are strictly construed?

I do, Your Honor.

Okay.

And, and I, I guess to answer your question to the extent it's a question is, I would, I, I would say that, that what we have here and what, what emanated up from the model act is a scheme, a very, it's a scheme that's easy to follow in terms of five year limit, seven year limit.

You go convertible, you go expandable, um, you have substantial completion.

You have to record an amendment, which was never recorded in this case.

I apologize.

If you're right, why could, why should the, why did the lawyers for Eastern Bank miss this?

Well, I think, I think the, that's a great question, but, but it's happened before.

I mean, I was up here on Shepherd's Hill.

Right.

Where they missed it as well.

Um, and, and I cited cases from Rhode Island and Massachusetts where it's been missed as well.

Um, I, I think.

Um, I, I think.

But I thought Shepherd Hill, there was an acknowledgement.

In fact, we were dealing with convertible land.

Correct.

Correct.

And, and absolutely, Your Honor, there was an acknowledgement that we were dealing with convertible land.

Here, it has all the hallmarks of convertible land.

They just didn't call it convertible land.

But, but I, I think just to get back to Justice Hicks.

Your time is up, sir.

You and I agree anyway.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Mr. Mr. Tilsley.

Thank you.

May it please the court, Roy Tilsley again.

Uh, this time on behalf of Monument Garden LLC and Eastern Bank, uh, as the respondents in this case.

So the whole, the crux of this case is, is this convertible land or not, right?

It's not.

But that's the, that's the core issue.

Sure.

Sure.

And, and your opponent argues that if we uphold Judge Horan's decision, it gives your client forever.

There are no limits.

Maybe they'll, it'll be completed in three years, seven years, 15 years.

Is there no outer limit based on your argument?

There, there's a distinction here.

And, most condominiums are created on a declaration before the units are built.

Forty years of condominium practice in this state, people don't build condominium units and then go and register.

So that, that was my point earlier.

Okay.

In other words, you, you're, you're sort of suggest, the, the, your opponent's suggestion that you build, before you file the declaration, you've built the condominiums.

If you're saying that's not the case.

It's not what happens.

And if the question you asked, I'm going to come back to your question about the, can you register the condominiums before you build them under their version of the statute?

The answer is no, 356B51 requires you when you register your condominium to submit plans consistent with 356B20, which is what they rely on for a substantial completion requirement, and requires you when 356B51K to submit the declaration.

So under their, under their theory, you'd have to, a, a, a developer would have to say, I'm going to incur all the expenses of building this condominium.

Right.

Right.

And maybe the AG will approve it, or maybe he'll tell me to go pound sand.

Right.

But I'll just spend the money.

And when I'm done, I'll go into Tilsley's office.

He can draft some documents, put an application together.

To get back to the timing question, the distinction is this, a convertible condominium, an expandable condominium, a withdrawal condominium is a blank slate.

You don't know what you're going to get on that land.

And there's a time limit there so that if you buy the, the, the expectations of a consumer, you buy, you've got this question mark in the middle of your condominium,

you know there's only a limited period of time for the developer to decide what to do with that blank slate.

Because the developer can do what they want with the convertible land.

They may build a hundred townhouses in phase one, have convertible land, and then build garden style on convertible land.

You don't know what you're going to get.

When you declare a condominium and show units that have not yet been begun, and indicate whether there's an obligation to complete or not complete those units,

the declarant is tying him or herself into a specific type of development.

So if I show, in this case, buildings 15 and 16, as not yet begun, and I'm the declarant, I have the right to build those buildings, I think at any time in the future.

Or you also have the right to sell the right to build those buildings to somebody else.

Correct, but I can't just change my mind and say I'm going to build something else.

Right, but just theoretically, there's no time limit, because your opponent criticizes you for that.

Theoretically there isn't, but I think that's consistent with the statute.

As Justice Lin pointed out, I think it was Justice Lin, when you buy a condominium, you want other people there to share,

you do that because you want to share costs and expenses with people.

I mean, it'd be nice to have the pool all of them myself, but I don't want the pool bill to be split one way.

So when I look at this and I see, okay, this is the plan, I see there's going to be townhouses here,

I know that the developer either is or is not obligated to complete them.

As a consumer, I have an expectation of what I can expect and make a decision.

Whereas convertible land, you have time limits because it's a blank, it's a blank canvas.

So you're saying there's a third type of property that exists alongside the Condominium Act,

that being a property titled to which is unencumbered by the strict terms, the time limits of the Condominium Act.

Correct. It's a declared condominium that has not yet been substantially complete.

And part of that is the condominium statute, the registration process,

is designed to have the developer complete his or her obligations in the condominium.

So if the statute says, if the declaration says, I'm committed to building this particular building,

the Attorney General's office wants to make sure it's going to happen.

If you put a five-year time limit on that, developer can just ride out the time limit and say,

sorry, Attorney General, I'd love to complete that building for everyone's benefit, but it's five years and one month.

I can't do it.

And your position here is that, given this plan, there's a right to build but not an obligation to build?

On this particular plan, right. And that's right there on the plan.

If I'm a consumer buying in there, I know that the developer may construct units building buildings 15 and 16,

but may not have to. But I know he can't put something else there.

He can't put townhouses or high rises.

And by the same token, you say the projected buildings, say 15 and 16, are not common area.

They are not common area. They are, it's land that's been submitted to the condominium form of ownership.

It is subject to the declarant's rights to build buildings 15 and 16.

Right. So, therefore, they're not common area, as we generally know.

Correct.

Goes with condominiums.

Correct.

Okay.

And in terms of the, you know, just to go back to the taxes issue, I would assume, correct me if I'm wrong,

that what they would, that those unbuilt buildings, the land, the land that's under where 15 and 16 would go,

that for tax purposes, the, the taxing authority presumably would say, we're going to value what this land is,

and it's, and if there's supposed to be 15 units in building 15, you know, each, the developer owns all of those,

that that, the proportion of that value that's attributable to that is taxed to the developer.

It, it, it can be done a number of ways. That's one way it could be done. I don't think there's any evidence in this case as to how the taxes were apportioned on that land.

Again, I guess as a practical matter, if I own townhouse number one or garden style apartment number one, um, the value's not going to change much whether this additional land is included or not included.

I, I really want to talk about the Uniform Act because the Uniform Act positively supports our position here.

The Uniform Act was adopted in 19, created in 1977, and if you compare our statute to the Uniform Act, there are some similarities.

I wouldn't say it's an adoption of the Uniform Act, but I would certainly say that legislature had the Uniform Act in front of it when it adopted our condominium statute.

The Uniform Act contains a very explicit substantial completion requirement, much more explicit than the vague requirement that they rely on in RSA 356B20.

That is, this substantial completion requirement in the Uniform Act is in 2-101B.

Um, now I would posit that if the legislature had that language in front of it and chose not to adopt it, that the legislature determined that it did not want to have a substantial completion component in our statute.

The other really interesting piece where this puzzle comes together.

You know, can I just ask one other question on this, on the Uniform Act?

Is there, I, I, I'm just, I simply don't know the answer to this, but hopefully you do.

Is the, our statute requires, what I would refer to as a sort of permission statute.

In other words, you can't bill unless you get permission from the Attorney General to do so.

That's where.

Is the Uniform Act simply a registration requirement?

You don't have to have anybody's permission, you just simply have to file it in the register.

Let me explain it to you.

The Uniform Act contains, and you have it in the amicus appendix,

amicus appendix, I think that's right, ten years of Latin down the drain.

Um, the Uniform Act has an optional section five.

And section five is a administrative agency registration and approval system similar to what we have in New Hampshire.

Actually a little lighter than what we have in New Hampshire.

And in the Uniform Act they say specifically in option five, and this is in our brief, that in lieu of having a substantial completion requirement, because we know that that's not practical in some ways.

You can adopt this administrative registration and enforcement provision and get rid of the substantial completion requirement.

And again, you read that optional five, article five, you look at what our legislature did, and we have a very comprehensive registration and approval process.

RSA 356B, I think it's 49 to 68.

So clearly what the legislature did when it had the model act, it said, you know, we're going to take this article five, we're going to take this option to create a comprehensive registration and approval system.

We adopt that and they got rid of the substantial completion requirement that was in the model act.

That's how this works. The reason we have this attorney general registration is to make sure that developers follow through and fulfill their obligations when they record a declaration,

which is almost always recorded before a condominium is finished.

The registration process, the approval process, the requirement to post bonds, the requirement to show the attorney general that you have the financial wherewithal and the financing to complete the project is all designed to make sure that these not substantially completed units get completed.

I also want to go back to, I guess, their position that by definition, a rule of exclusion, any condominium unit that's not built on the day that you record the declaration is by definition convertible.

Go back to the Uniform Act in 1977. Look at their article five. They say you can drop the substantial completion requirement.

You still have, in the Uniform Act, convertible condominiums. So it certainly is possible to have a statute that has convertible condominiums as a blank slate and the ability to record the declaration before condominium units have been substantially completed.

There's no inconsistency with this statutory scheme. And so you say if the ability to record these unbuilt buildings is followed, that's all that's necessary.

As long as you do it up front with the original condominium declaration that the plan is to build these buildings on this land, it can't be convertible.

Correct. It's a declared condominium. The units exist at the time that you record. Obviously, they don't physically exist, but they exist for legal purposes at the time that you record the declaration.

And that's now on notice. If I'm going to buy a condominium, I can look. I can see what we're going to get. I can see what the developer is committed to doing, what he's not committed to doing.

And I can make a decision. Do I want to buy unit number one or two or three or four in this particular condominium?

Sure.

Can I just ask a clarification that this is the plan we're talking about? Is that right? I mean, it's really hard to read.

How can I come up?

Well, it's, I think it says proposed building 15, 16, not yet built. Is that right?

I believe it is. I mean, I guess I would say this. I don't believe the trial court's decision turned on those specifics of the plan. I think we agree on the facts of the case. Buildings 15 and 16 are not yet built.

But isn't it important to your argument that it be identified in the recorded plans that they're planned and they aren't built? Isn't that the notice that's supposed to?

Correct. And that meets the reasonable expectation of a consumer who can say, okay, I can see it's planned. If they build something here, this is what I'm going to get.

And so convertible land is land. I'm just imagining this. Let's say there is seven acres and there's only one building that is planned with 24 units. That gets filed with the declaration. One building, 24 units. Just, it's a hypothetical.

Okay. The rest of the land is convertible land because that's commonly owned land that goes with the one building. So I'm just trying to understand the big picture here.

Then the remaining land, because it's not shown as dedicated to other buildings, is common area land and that would be convertible land, right?

Convertible land has to be specifically depicted as such. So if I have…

I see. It's got to be labeled convertible.

Right. If I do my declared condominium, I'm probably going to have some mix of completed and uncompleted units.

Right.

And then I may have your seven acres as convertible land.

I see.

And that's really a blank canvas. I've seen plans without…

And that's the area subject to the time limitations.

Correct. And the developer has to convert by recording an amendment to the declaration saying, I am going to use those seven acres and here's what I'm going to use them for.

And if it's not listed as convertible land and it's just the seven acres with no building on it, then a buyer would assume there aren't going to be any buildings there.

Correct.

And legally that would be right.

Correct. And just to show you how their position is in contrast to the overall statutory scheme, you can't convert land until you record an amendment to your declaration.

So that seven acres is common area subject to the right of conversion. Under their scenario, you can't record or amend your declaration until you've completed your buildings.

But if I'm the declarant, I've got no right to go onto that seven acres of common area and dig a hole and start pouring concrete and start building something.

I can't do that until I convert. But I can't convert until it's completed. When you read the condominium statute as a whole, when you look at the comprehensive registration process,

look at the reference to units or portions thereof to be built, units to be built, it's clear we do not have a substantial completion component.

It's not practical to build a condominium project and then go and get your approvals and registration. No bank would finance it.

It's contrary to the statute. It's contrary to the registration process. And it's contrary to 40 years of condominium practice in the state of New Hampshire.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Thank you.
