This is case 2016-0558, appeal of Nashua School District.

Mr. Clausen.

Chief Justice Delanison may it please the court.

My name is Tom Clausen.

I'm an attorney with the law firm of Jackson Lewis.

And I represent the Nashua School District.

I've reserved two minutes for rebuttal,

and I'm prepared to answer questions from the court

at any time.

Is there any way that the union can ever

be defeated under your theory?

It seems to me that if the school district wins,

then the custodians are always going

to remain in that bargaining unit unless they

try to break it up themselves.

I'm not sure that I follow your question, Your Honor.

I would certainly say that if my theory is correct,

the way I read the current law, what I'm saying

and what my client is arguing is there's

no circumstance that presently exists

by which a public employer can decide to privatize

as opposed to keeping the union in place.

That's my point.

Right.

And that's only because the union,

whether the employer, would be forever barred

from altering the composition of the bargaining unit.

Is that correct?

Well, if circumstances changed such

that a modification petition would

be entertained by the PELRB, I suppose

that would be one mechanism to try to change the bargaining

unit.

So why isn't that solution here?

Why isn't that solution available to your client?

Because arguing that economic factors have changed

or that it would be more efficient for us

to hire a third party as opposed to using our staff,

our existing employees, wouldn't qualify or wouldn't

satisfy the requirements for a modification petition

under the PELRB's rules.

Are there any other solutions?

I don't believe so.

That's my point.

The custodians, under no set of circumstances

that you can see, can stop doing the work

that the bargaining unit currently does.

Yeah.

The point, as I see it, so 20, 30 years ago,

the National School District made the decision

that it was going to provide custodial services

by buying the equipment on its own,

having its employees do those jobs.

30 years later, things have changed.

The school district decides it's more efficient.

It's more cost effective for us to go out

and have another company provide these services.

The way this decision affects the current precedent,

I don't think there's any way that the school district

can make that decision

without facing an unfair labor problem.

But let me ask you this.

Couldn't suppose that the PELRB says

you have to bargain this, right?

Yes.

Bargaining does not, if I incorrect me if I'm wrong,

but bargaining doesn't mean you have to accept

a proposal from your opponent, right?

So couldn't you just say,

okay, PELRB told us we have to bargain this.

So we're going to go in and bargain,

and our position is we are not going to,

we want it, we're going to privatize the custodial staff.

You don't want to agree to that?

Fine, I don't agree to it.

We're not, we just, we won't have an agreement.

Well, then what happens?

An unfair labor practice is filed

if we try to privatize without getting their permission

and the PELRB stops us.

I mean, that's the outcome.

But what would be their authority to do that?

In other words, if collective bargaining

doesn't require you to agree to anything,

can't you just say, listen, we're not going to do this?

This is where, in other words,

I assume that why would that be any different than wages?

Let's suppose the custodian said, listen,

our position is we all want to make $100,000 a year.

That should be our salary.

The school board says that's very nice.

Our position is we're not giving you that,

you know, and we can negotiate that from now

until the cows come home, but it's not going to change.

Because if negotiations break down

and you don't reach an agreement on wages, for example,

the status quo is maintained.

So the school district couldn't at that point say,

okay, we're going to pay you zero.

The school district has to keep the wages

where they currently are set.

Certainly the union doesn't get an increase

if there's no agreement, but the status quo is

they get the wages they're currently being paid.

And here's the status quo.

The status quo in this situation is we can't lay them off.

Right, the status quo would be

that the custodians can maintain their jobs.

Correct, and there's actually, ironically, I guess,

it's a Nashua school district case

from a number of years prior that says,

when you're in good faith,

bargaining in the status quo process,

you can't privatize.

So that's why this is so nefarious.

Isn't this sort of a,

I mean, it seems to me this is,

seems like sort of a quintessential management.

I mean, if you can't, presumably,

if we accept the PLRB decision,

that would mean even if, let's say, the school district,

suppose this became kind of a political issue.

People were running for school board,

I assume they're elected in Nashua, maybe I'm wrong.

People are running for school board and one person says,

my campaign is we're gonna privatize the custodial staff

and the other person says, no, we have to remain.

Even if the voters overwhelmingly voted

for the candidate that wanted to privatize,

too bad the PLRB decision would say you can't do that.

Correct, there's a PLRB decision

that has very narrowly defined what the management right is

in this particular context.

It's held that we can conduct a true reorganization,

that's the phrase they use.

What they mean by that is we can say,

all right, we're not gonna provide any custodial services

either with our employees or with a third party.

Right, we don't need to keep the schools clean.

That's not an important public responsibility.

We wanna keep the schools dirty and that's okay,

but if you wanna privatize them, you can't do it.

That's how I read the law.

So we could decide we're not gonna provide

custodial services and lay off the custodians.

That would be a legitimate exercise of a management right.

But at least as I read the current status of the law,

it's not a legitimate exercise of management rights

to say we want Sodexo to do it as opposed to our employees.

Well, what's the, is there a way out of the stalemate?

I don't think so because if it's very,

if the remedy is bargaining of some kind,

the problem is it's highly unlikely

that the union is ever gonna bargain itself

out of existence.

Of course, why would it?

So I think the resolution to the stalemate

is the solution that the PELR be recognized

in the Lisbon Teacher's case.

There's a narrow window in that case

when it was appropriate to privatize.

You can't do it while a collective bargaining agreement

is in place because that would undermine the terms

and conditions of that argument, of that agreement.

You can't do it if you're negotiating

because it's just too heavy handed a tool

to bring to the negotiating table.

But if you tell the union, hey, listen,

at the end of this collective bargaining agreement,

when it expires, we're going to privatize

this particular function and we're not gonna bargain

with you about it.

That would be the appropriate time to allow privatization.

That's what the PELR be said was okay

in Lisbon Teacher's and that's what we did.

In its decision in this case,

the PELR be didn't even cite Lisbon Teacher's,

which is remarkable.

I mean, that's the one precedent that it had

on the books that was sort of directly on point.

Did you argue it?

Yes, oh absolutely, up and down.

Because that was frankly the strategy that we pursued.

We made it clear to this union

that at the end of this collective bargaining agreement,

we're gonna privatize.

We'll sit down and we'll negotiate with you

about the positions that we're not gonna privatize,

but the custodian positions we're not gonna talk

to you about because we wanna privatize those.

Maybe it doesn't matter, but does that mean

if we keep the discussion at that level,

does that mean the second issue,

that is whether there had been some negotiation

at the time the decision was made,

is moved and doesn't really matter?

Well, I don't think it matters, Your Honor,

because the union to its credit in its brief

acknowledged that we didn't engage in negotiations.

I don't think that, you know,

I just don't think the issue

was clearly presented to the PELR be.

Let's say you had fiscal concerns.

The taxpayers had fiscal concerns.

Would a ULP result if the school district

went to the custodians and said,

look, we got all these money troubles.

We really don't want to privatize

because we understand the value added

that you give the schools,

knowing the kids, helping them out,

going more than your seven hours a day or whatever it is.

Can we talk about adjustments to the wage scales

or something like that?

Would a ULP result there?

No, no, that would be just normal,

give and take negotiation.

And certainly we could also, if we wanted to,

as an employer, we could say,

we're gonna lay off a certain number

of custodians to get to this solution.

The problem is, I mean, when the client did the RFP,

it wanted to try to maintain the same level of service

at a less expensive cost.

Well, isn't that always the way?

Well, yeah, I think it always is.

But the problem, frankly, is the difference

between an employee and a third party,

in this case, is the benefit load.

And that's no fault of the custodians,

but it's a lot cheaper to go out

and get a third party that is an independent contractor

to come in and do this work.

But that's like privatizing prisons.

You think it's gonna be a great deal,

but at the end of the day,

typically it has proven not to be.

Oh, no doubt about that, Your Honor.

I don't disagree that it might prove

not to be the panacea that the client thinks that it is,

but I guess what I'm suggesting

is they at least ought to be able

to explore that as an option.

Well, you know, can I follow up

just a question I asked you before?

You said that, you know,

well, we couldn't just sort of tough it out

in bargaining because we'd have to keep on,

keep the custodians hired during the status quo period,

but I guess in one sense, why isn't the answer so what?

As I understand the law in this area,

you would not have to give any raises

to anyone in the bargaining, right?

So in other words, why couldn't the school district

say, listen, we're really serious bargaining,

collective bargaining unit members.

We're getting rid of the custodians.

We're going to privatize this.

So you want to bargain about this?

We'll bargain about it.

Our offer is we're not changing our position

and we'll continue to pay you

during the status quo period,

but we're not giving any raises to anybody.

And so, I mean, I could see where it might take you

a while, but eventually isn't the,

you know, when raises for everybody else

or if everybody else is getting a raise and they're not,

at some point, don't they say, okay, you know?

No, I don't think so, Your Honor,

because if the alternative is that we're gonna,

they're gonna agree to let us privatize,

they're better off not accepting

the raise and keeping their job.

But what else is in the bargaining unit here?

Is this the same bargaining unit that includes the teachers?

No, no, no.

This is a, the bargaining unit is made up

by and large by custodians.

There are some, some.

Security people and maintenance.

Security guards, there's a plumber, electrician.

This is not the teacher's bargaining unit.

This is predominantly the custodians.

But the problem, Your Honor, is it's not so much that,

if we stayed in the status quo,

it's true that we're not increasing the cost

of providing this service.

But we are forgoing the savings

that we could recognize if we brought the outside party in.

And those are not insignificant.

They're hundreds of thousands of dollars.

Is the difference between having our employees

with a benefit load do it

and a third party under an RFP.

So, yeah, we could maintain this stalemate.

But status quo benefits the union in this situation

because they continue to get their benefits.

They continue to get paid.

And we can't explore this other option.

That's really the problem.

To what extent does the PLRBs finding

that the district had undertaken negotiations,

which we now agree isn't right?

To what extent does that infect their entire analysis?

And would we?

I think it renders almost all of their analysis flawed

because my contention, my reading

of the Lisbon teacher's case is there's two requirements.

You have to wait till the end

of the collective bargaining agreement

and you can't have started negotiations.

So I don't think there's any dispute

between the union and the district

that we didn't start negotiations.

Right, but that was part of the premise

of the PLRB decision though.

Yeah, they said we didn't buy either,

well, they didn't even adopt the Lisbon teacher's test,

but they also found that we had engaged in negotiations

so therefore we were foreclosed.

Right, so as one possible result here,

a remand to the PLRB saying,

you made this factual mistake, everybody recognizes it,

and oh, by the way, Lisbon,

and so why don't you take another look at it?

Well, I don't think so, Your Honor,

because I think that you have to resolve

the fundamental legal question

of whether the Lisbon teacher's case applies

and if that's the window that exists.

Well, if the PLRB really didn't think about it,

maybe they need to take a look at it first.

Well, I think I would,

Or you're saying they had a chance.

I think the PLRB did think about it

and said we were not convinced

that there should be a window.

That's my take on it.

Thank you. Thank you, Your Honor.

Councilor.

Good afternoon, Your Honor, Your Honor.

Joseph DeLaurie for the American Federation

of State County Municipal Employees

and I want to express my and my organization's thanks

for allowing the motion for me

to be able to appear before this court

and I would be amenable to taking any questions if.

So to follow the same questions that Chief asked,

how about, what do you say?

Suppose that the city or the school district

wants to privatize custodians.

How do they do it?

Article five of the contract, Your Honor.

I'm sorry, say what?

I'm sorry.

Article five of the current Collective Bargaining Agreement

provides, as the board said on the second to last page

of its decision, the parties have negotiated

a detailed process set forth in Article five

for addressing subcontracting activity

inclusive of final and binding arbitration.

But that's the old contract, right?

How do they do it?

So you're saying that they are bound forever

to either negotiate, I'm sorry, Your Honor.

No, no, I'm saying, but are you saying that

that provision of the old contract

binds them forever to follow that procedure

if they want to privatize?

Well, that's the language both parties agreed to

in that contract, Your Honor.

So it, the Chief Justice said,

is there a way out of the stalemate?

And my note to myself was, yes,

have the parties avail themselves of Article five,

which is where the board suggested

the parties direct their evidence.

So they go, let's say you're right,

everybody goes to binding arbitration

and no position changes.

The custodians say we are not gonna agree

to go out of existence and the district says,

well, somehow or other we're gonna get private custodians

and we're back in the stalemate, right?

We live with the decision of the arbitrator, Your Honor.

Well.

But you're saying that that would go on forever then.

There could be no change.

It's okay.

I don't, I'm sorry if I'm giving that impression, Your Honor.

My thought would be this is a detailed process

that the parties agreed to

as to how do we deal with the issue of

an employer wanting to engage in privatization.

It wouldn't be the union, of course,

presenting that as an option.

So you would be happy, I think,

if we just said that's right,

go to binding arbitration.

Go keep your word.

You gave your word at the bargaining table

that the parties have adopted in article five

a means to address the employer's desire

to privatize part of the work of the bargaining unit.

It involves multiple steps,

designating someone to be the president of the union,

gathering the facts, present a record,

ultimately putting it before an arbitrator.

Right, but here's the, I'm sorry, go ahead.

So the chips would then fall wherever they fell.

The interesting thing, Your Honor,

is when I was preparing for today,

I was looking at the standard

that the court would apply regarding errors of law,

and I was prepared to say there weren't

a couple of the important findings that the board made.

And then the second reasons

where you can disturb a decision

is if it's unjust or unreasonable.

The board said in its decision,

you folks negotiated for a way to deal

with the issue of privatization.

Go take advantage of it.

But I guess tell me,

here's the thing I'm having some trouble with.

If we were in that collective bargaining agreement period

and the school district was saying,

during the period of that collective bargaining agreement,

we want to privatize, I agree with it completely.

That period is now over.

But that's, during that period, Your Honor,

is when the employer saw fit to

that language notwithstanding,

send out the RFP.

Oh, no, no, but he sent it out to you.

He sent it out for it to begin

at the end of the collective bargaining agreement.

I understand that, Your Honor.

And our argument is you've made a promise

within the four corners of the collective bargaining agreement

that if you're going to pursue privatization,

this is the method we've always wanted to do.

And when, under your view, when does that promise end?

I guess when you've kept it.

So in other words, if you would say if this,

if they sent out this notice saying at the end

of this collective bargaining agreement,

we're going to privatize,

you say, sorry, you can't do that.

You have to go through the article five provision.

And even if we, you know, remained in,

even if five years went by,

you'd say, I'm sorry, that was still that agreement.

You know, we didn't arrive in any subsequent agreement.

So you still have to comply with that.

But that's the distinction, Your Honor,

between having an arbitrated deal with it

and having negotiations go on forever.

The parties agreed to have a neutral command

and issue a final and binding decision on this

that the neutral is someone with whom everyone's back.

Pursuant to article five.

That's the point.

Well, I guess another way of asking the question

is why, on what basis does article five

survive the expiration of the CBA?

Because the contract, there were two conditions

preceding to the contract remaining in effect.

One, notice being given by one of both of the parties

that success in negotiations would take place

and that was met.

And two, for the subsequent negotiations to take place.

That second condition preceding didn't take place

because of the purposeful inaction.

I'm not saying it was in,

it was in bad faith for the purposes

of the collective bargaining alarm.

Not saying it was in bad faith

upon the part of my brother-in-law's client.

But they chose the tactic to say,

no, we're not going to engage in negotiation.

Therefore, you're not going to have the second condition

preceding to the so-called ever gaining clause kicking in.

And the board said, no, your failure to conduct yourself

in accordance with the collective bargaining law

will not provide you safe haven.

And your obligation to negotiate continues anyway.

So let's just, I guess I'm trying to think

of the implications of this.

Let's suppose that this becomes a really big issue

in Nashua and there's different factions

and people run for the school board

on either support privatizing the custodians or not.

And so they have a campaign and the public's on.

And let's assume that the people who say

that the candidates who proposed privatizing one,

overwhelming, you would say, sorry,

this, you made this collective bargaining agreement,

you know, yesterday, so to speak,

the last time, doesn't matter what the public thinks,

what the political process thinks,

sorry, you've got to go to binding arbitration

essentially forever.

How does that sort of fit in

with kind of representative government?

Well, go to binding arbitration,

make a good argument and prevail before the arbitrator.

We'd go to arbitration, make a good argument.

So I as a citizen of Nashua should,

I should hope that I'm voting for arbitrators

as opposed to candidates for the school board.

Your Honor, when my colleague

who was the staff representative

who negotiated this contract brought it into me,

I have to admit I found it to be novel.

And I said, well, an interesting way to deal

with the issue of binding arbitration,

but it is as the board provided a detailed method

that both parties agreed to.

So for the board to say to the PELRB

to say to the Nashua board,

keep your word engaged in the system

that you negotiated with and live with the results,

which will be the result of a decision

of an arbitrator who's neutral,

that's consistent with the promise

that was made in good faith by the employer.

And it's appropriate for the board

to direct the employer to keep their word.

Mr. Clausen seems to think that Lisbon teachers

somehow supports his side of the argument.

How do you see it?

That the board did not commit any error

in the decision that they issued.

They concentrated on the tactic that was taken

by the board, I'm gonna call it the employer

so we don't get the board's confused,

to do two things.

We leave itself in an alacot matter

of some of its bargaining obligations

and the board to unilaterally modify

the bargaining unit that was established by the board.

And the board said, neither of those options

is available to you.

You have a bargaining obligation for the unit

as was certified by the board.

This court had said in a footnote,

I think it appears to have a lot of part of my brief,

it is the board that defines the units.

You cannot relieve yourself in whole or impart

a bargaining obligation nor modify the unit.

Opposition is those two findings

do not constitute error of law.

Absent error of law,

the decision of the administrative agency

should not be set aside

unless it's unjust and unreasonable.

I address the justice and reasonableness

of the decision in my brief

and as I did earlier in this presentation.

For the board not to direct the employer

to engage in the system that it had bargained for,

would deny our members the benefit of the bargain.

We bargained in good faith

and said this matter goes to arbitration,

so did the employer.

And presumably the sides gave up something else

in favor of this.

That's generally how it works your honor.

I was not at the table.

But I assume it was a result of good faith bargaining

because no charges alleging anything else were processed.

So the board made applied the law to the facts.

As I say in my brief, there was no error of law.

Error of law was grounds for this court

to set aside that judgment.

Or an action on the part of the board

was unreasonable or unjust.

Directing the parties to go back to use the system

they had bargained for is reasonable

and assuring that both parties

get the benefit of their bargain

and deal with the very vexing issue of privatization.

I, we deal with it all the time,

but it seems like, I'm sorry.

No, no, let me just ask you about article five,

which is what you say they should go back

and engage in that process.

It looks like the parties sort of agreed

to a pig and a poke here

and that it's, they really know standards.

What's the arbitrator going to do?

If you come in and say we're gonna save $10,000,

what's the arbitrator gonna do in response to that?

There's no standards here.

Help the parties frame the issues,

frame the issues for the parties

if the parties cannot conduct him or herself

in the manner that industrial arbitrators

do both in the public and private sector

and apply their experience and expertise,

which is what the parties bargain for

when they bargain for arbitration and a labor contract.

And so the arbitrator could say,

well, saving $500,000, that's not a good reason.

And then forevermore, there will be janitors

through this collective bargaining unit in Nashua

because of that.

I only can suggest to the court

that when parties bargain for an arbitrator,

you bargain for what the experience and expertise,

the arbitrator brings to how to help resolve

the issue put before him or her.

But usually there were then some framework

of legal principles or something.

This has nothing.

Other than the covenant of good faith and fair dealing

that implies to this and every contract

and the relationship between public employers

and public employees, it's for the arbitrator,

if it's not clear from the language

to call from the arguments of the parties

what the purpose of his or her role is

and to work with the parties to reach what it was

they wanted the arbitrator to do.

I'm sorry for an amorphous answer.

No, well, it's an amorphous clause.

So I can't expect any better.

I can't speak to the lack of detail.

I can only speak to the fact

that it was a mutual agreement of the parties

that had it included in the agreement.

And to the extent the Chief Justice had asked

that question, is there a way out of this stalemate?

The union's answer would be yes,

the negotiated arbitration proceeding

that the parties both agreed to should be included

in Article Five.

And then we just wait for the next appeal.

The existence of Article Five is, as I said,

in my experience, unique.

And maybe the next appeal that comes along

will not have that.

And maybe an employer, a subsequent employer

could say there's a lack of justice

or reasonableness.

But here, I think that's the last section

of my brief, Your Honor.

We talk about this particular employer,

and the board talks about our decision

is limited to the question of whether the district

had violated its bargaining obligations.

This employer on this set of facts

with this collective bargaining agreement,

including Article Five, is somewhat unique.

It has access to resolution on the issue

of privatization via the vehicle

it bilaterally agreed to with the union

and is incorporated in Article Five.

If the next case comes along

and that safety net doesn't exist,

perhaps the board would speak more towards the gap

that my brother speaks of.

And as I said in my brief about the finding

that my brother referenced,

the board found that negotiations

had taken place for the residue of the unit.

My brother said the record didn't support that.

I had to agree with him.

The record didn't support it.

And I talked to my folks who do the button.

No, that never happened.

But in my brief, I also say I don't want to engage

in conjecture or surmise as to why the board

made that finding.

They're not really my client.

I'm here defending the words

within the four corners of their decision.

Why they didn't speak to Lisbon?

Why they didn't address some other issues

for the same distance between myself and the board?

I can't speak to it.

So I'm sort of limited to the four corners.

So given that factual error,

why doesn't it make sense to send it back

and say there was this mutual mistake somehow?

I think for the reason that's dressed in my brief

that I say it's an error without an adverse consequence.

And it is addressed in my brief.

I think I use the phrase in my brief

the next language used by the board

gives me comfort in that they say

that language success and negotiations

should take place as superfluous

because the statute says success and negotiations

should have taken place.

So I don't have the command that I have on my brief

that I had reduced to writing

but I'm confident it's towards the latter end of my brief.

Thank you.

Thank you both, Paul, excuse me.

Do you need your reserve time, Mr. Clausen?

We would have, had we decided to do this

during the term of the contract,

we would have had no choice

but to follow the provisions of article five.

And as Brother Dolore said,

the so-called evergreen provision in this contract

in order for that to kick in,

one of the preconditions is that there

is a commencement of negotiations

and we consciously made the decision

not to start negotiations

to avoid triggering that provision of the contract.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.
