This is case 2016-0241 Halifax American Energy Company LLC et al. versus Provider Power LLC et

al.

Good afternoon. May it please the Court? My name is Andrew Volinsky along with Talisa

St. Mark. We represent the appellants who in this matter we generally refer to as provider

of power. We've reserved two minutes for rebuttal.

At the outset, I would make clear that we do not intend to defend the conduct of our client

as found by the jury in this matter. Notwithstanding that, we think the key issue for you to decide

is whether provider power could have interfered with PNE, Power New England Contracts, at

a time when PNE was not legally permitted to perform their contracts because its license

as an electricity supplier was suspended. And that's for the time period of February

till June of 2013. Do I assume correctly that your position would

be that during the suspension period you could interfere, so to speak?

It wouldn't be interference because there'd be nothing to interfere with.

So to speak.

Moreover, we're talking about a commodity electricity that needs to be constantly supplied.

So absent reaffirmation, the contracts became void and did not spring back into

existence when PNE came back out of suspension some four months later.

So we're talking about the four month period then?

We are talking about them being out of license compliance for four months.

And when they came, let me see if I understand you, when they were back in license compliance,

did the original contracts spring back into life or not?

No, Your Honor.

And why?

Because the A, the contracts didn't provide for it.

And B, there's nothing in Chapter 374F that provides for that.

And C, the plaintiffs made an effort to re-solicit a number of their clients.

And I think the testimony was they got about half of them back.

So they re-initiated negotiations, signed new contracts with roughly half of their clients,

which we think of in terms of being a reaffirmation, whether they went to these same exact prior

terms or not.

So what's your authority for the proposition that as of license suspension, the contracts

no longer existed?

The authority for that would be twofold.

One is we cited to the CNS Grain line of cases in the Semi-Circuit, I understand it's not

New Hampshire authority.

And then we cited to the PUC ruling from September 12 of 2016, which was a ruling issued by

the PUC on a transferred question in what we call the PSNH case, as you might recall,

the plaintiffs sued both our group of clients and PSNH over their business failure in February

of 13.

And so in the PSNH case, the PUC had to rule on whether PSNH's conduct was within the

tariffs, the laws that applied.

And there's specific language that we cited in our brief in the PUC decision that makes

it clear that their contracts were void.

And that's a key distinction here, void versus voidable.

A voidable contract requires action on the innocent party's behalf, so to speak.

So your point is you can't tortuously interfere with a void contract.

Correct.

Why wasn't there still an economic relationship that survived the voiding of the contract?

I think some of the same arguments apply for the four months or so that PNE was suspended.

They couldn't have a contract, and they couldn't offer contracts, and they couldn't set up

contracts because they had no ability to operate as a competitive energy supplier.

So you're almost arguing economic impossibility, sort of.

Was this argued to the jury and provided to them with instructions?

The argument that they were suspended, their license was suspended.

Jury knew that.

Was given to the jury, argued to the judge first, obviously.

The fact that ISO New England, which is the grid on which you can buy and sell

electricity, had suspended them, argued to the jury, argued to the judge.

And the fact that PNE and resident power had sold all their clients immediately before the

license suspension, either to Fairpoint or by default to PSNH, creates the kind of impracticality,

impracticability, defense that you're referencing.

So we had both the legal and the impractical.

But before any of this went to the jury, it's clear, believe me, it's clear the

jury was pretty upset with our clients.

And I get that.

And I'm not here defending any of the conduct.

But this judge had a gatekeeper function on directed verdict and then a similar function

on JNOV.

To one of the elements here was that a contract existed or that an economic relationship existed.

One or the other existed.

And what I'm saying is that legally and practically neither existed for these four months.

And there's no proof in the record of a reaffirmation at the conclusion of the four months.

So none of those claims should have gone to the jury in this matter.

Mr. Nolence, can I just ask you to maybe shift gears a little bit and focus on your

argument, essentially what I understand to be a causation argument, that there was not

sufficient evidence to show that the actions of your clients, without testimony from customers

or something like that, that there was not sufficient evidence to show that whatever

your clients may have done actually caused the harm.

Can you focus on that?

Yes, sir.

So different element.

Right.

So there are four elements under Demetracopoulos.

One is that there was a contract, the one you're talking about is proximate causation,

that we substantially caused the customer to breach its contract.

And there are various ways to prove that.

None of them were used in this case because the specific terms of duration of the contract

and early termination were not disclosed to this jury in either the contracts themselves,

which were not generally put into evidence, or by calling the customer.

So there was no proof as to why the customer left.

There was proof they had a customer, we did bad stuff, and the customer left.

Why can't the inference be drawn among those three things?

Because unlike the Fred's grocery store case, that the plaintiff's site, we didn't become

the supplier for those customers.

There were about 1920 customers.

We got three or four of them, small ones, out of the group.

So I agree that you could infer that we interfered and substantially caused the problem

if those customers came to us.

But as in the case with the town of Wyndham, one of their witnesses, their sales manager,

Sean Worth, testified that there was a dispute between us and them,

and the town went to an RFP process and then issued it to a third party.

So we can't be accused of interfering with the town's RFP process, it was above board.

Except to the extent your dispute gave rise to the RFP process and the loss of the business

to the third party, I suppose an inference could be drawn that you were somehow culpable.

That's a pretty big inference without having Wyndham testify.

So in theory, you're right, and Wyndham could have testified,

pox on both of your houses, we're going this third direction.

Wyndham didn't come to this trial, that's our point.

You're sort of saying, maybe I'm simplifying this, that I'm the Chevy dealer in the town.

You're the Ford dealer.

You produce evidence saying, I came to Judge Hicks and

told him those Chevy's are terrible by a Ford and

Judge Hicks ended up buying a Chrysler.

We might have problems saying how you caused the arm.

How did Judge Hicks make his decision without asking Justice Hicks?

That's my problem.

If I could, my light's on, I just want to touch on the fee issues.

There are two kinds of fees awarded in this case.

The first is the fees from the DuPont matter, the tort of another doctrine fees.

They were about 98,000 and the second was the 350B trade secrets fees.

The tort of another fees, you haven't adopted that doctrine, you may in some case.

This is not that case.

DuPont did enough bad stuff on his own to have justified suing him.

Moreover, it's pretty clear from the plaintiff's billing records that for

tactical reasons they chose not to join my clients in that case.

That's the only reason they have a tort of another claim in that case.

Because they chose to sue my clients, siriatum after that case was resolved.

On the 350B fees, the jury found the trade secrets were worthless.

There was no loss and there was no unjust enrichment.

The most important factor in making the discretionary decision

to issue fees is success in terms of the count on which fees can be worth.

The court acknowledged that that was an important factor and it took it into account.

And yet on balance it made the award that it did.

Hearing your argument, recognizing your argument.

Right, except there's nothing on which to balance against.

So there weren't-

So if there had been $1 in damages then no problem?

No, I'd make the same argument.

Right.

So $100 I'd make the same argument.

Yeah, I know.

There are $400,000 in fees.

That's a lot of fees for a $1 verdict, or $100 verdict.

Right, but the court undertook the analysis about why we have the fee awards

and gave it careful thought.

But I think it's a policy decision for you.

Is there a right to a full stroke of attorney's fees on a less than nominal verdict?

So we don't even have a nominal verdict.

And we're doing it in the context of trade secrets.

Trade secrets are defined to have economic value because it's not public.

What this jury said is there was no economic value.

Well, didn't they have to find economic value in order to find against your client?

In theory, but then they returned zero.

So it's inconsistent with the court's instruction that you have to find.

But finding economic harm doesn't necessarily mean that you can quantify it to a level

that's not sufficient to put a number in, right?

Well, in those cases, you have injunctive relief, or you have unjust enrichment.

So there are three aspects to the trade secret scenario.

Equitable relief, unjust enrichment in dollars, and loss in damages.

They didn't ask for preliminary or final injunction.

No success possible because they didn't ask for it.

And there was no loss found and no unjust enrichment awarded even by the court.

So there's no justification for a $400,000 fee

award when there was no success on the account for which fees could be awarded.

There was a bad faith finding, no fees were awarded for that.

But there was success in the underlying claim.

Not for the trade secret claim.

There was success on the tortuous interference and economic relationship claims.

Not on trade secrets.

That's our point.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Mr. Carter?

Good afternoon, may it please the court.

My name is Chris Carter, and I represent the plaintiffs in this case.

I'll try to refer to them as the plaintiff companies to avoid confusion.

As a matter of housekeeping, the Defense Council today has referred to the town

of Wyndham, an issue raised for the first time in their reply brief.

There is documents that were part of the trial record that are not part of

the appeal record, including an email that addresses specifically whether

the town did ask for an RFP or whether Frank Dumont asked the town to

pretend that it issued an RFP to cover up his misconduct.

I have the exhibit here.

I can supplement it later or.

Does Mr. Volinsky have any objection?

To the supplementation, ideally, I'll file a motion.

Okay.

Are you sure there's nothing in the record that references that?

There is trial testimony that refers to the female, Your Honor.

Okay.

And it's Frank Dumont's testimony at page 573.

But just to close the loop on that, Frank Dumont testified in this

document, which is a September 2013 email, was among the more egregious

evidence that the jury saw and heard of the causation.

And the conspiracy, Dumont emailed the town and said, I'm in trouble in

essence, can you please help me out by sending an email that claims that you

asked for a general solicitation.

And the town responded saying, no, I emailed the plaintiff companies for

a price and you responded on behalf of the defendants.

So this whole ruse of an RFP was among the more compelling

evidence of the joint misconduct by the defendants.

I'd like to frame this very specifically.

This case involves 19 accounts.

Three of them were for P&E.

There were some joint accounts, there were Halifax accounts,

Freedom Energy accounts, and Resident Power accounts.

The suspension only affected P&E.

The PUC proceeding that Attorney Belinsky cites had nothing to do,

the accounts that issue there had nothing to do with the plaintiff's claims.

Nothing to do with the 19.

Nothing, and that's referenced in a footnote.

It's referenced again in the reply, but to address that briefly.

P&E had an agreement with Fairpoint to sell its residential accounts.

Not its commercial accounts.

The 19 accounts are commercial accounts of the four companies.

There was a dispute that arose because after the contract to sell those

residential accounts, which numbered 8,500, was signed.

The suspension occurred and PSNH prevented through the electronic

transfer of those accounts to Fairpoint.

So the dispute in the PUC and in the that you've heard referenced today

concerned those 8,500 accounts and the testimony by Bart Frometh,

including the testimony actually cited in the reply,

makes it very clear that those 8,500 accounts had nothing to do

with our claims in this case.

Again, those were 19 commercial accounts, only three concerned P&E.

Now, so I can follow you.

The other 16 involved your affiliate companies?

Correct.

In our exhibit, JJ, Your Honor, by way of example,

indicates what are among our proof was we provided compendiums,

compilations, if you will, and made all these of it documents

available to the defense before trial, and they didn't avail themselves

of that opportunity.

But our compilations, including JJ, listed the start and end date

of the 19 accounts, how much they were using per month,

and how we calculated our damages.

By way of example, the Stonyfield account, which

was a Halifax account, began in May of 2009, ended in July 2013.

Main Mall Motors began in October 2012,

and ended in July 2013.

Those are just two examples, Your Honor.

Main Mall Motors actually was another account

that on the issue of causation,

there was documents and testimony that Frank Dumont

was obtaining bids from the plaintiffs under the ruse

that he was submitting bids to Main Mall Motors

on behalf of plaintiffs, was sharing the bids with the defendants,

and then the defendants were bidding with Main Mall Motors.

That was one of the accounts, I believe

that was one of the accounts that they took.

Well, Mr. Polinski says, and I'm just

trying to understand this, that as bad as what happened was,

didn't cause you folks any harm.

How do you respond to that?

Well, the jury and the judge found otherwise,

and I submit, Your Honor, that the evidence abundantly

supports that decision, the harm,

if I hear your question, the question, you know.

I'm just trying to understand what

Mr. Polinski is telling us this afternoon.

He's saying, there's no causation.

And because only three came back to us,

everybody else went somewhere else.

So you have not been harmed, and the jury gave $0 in damages.

So the $0 in damages pertains to the misappropriation claim.

And I'd like to just put that to a side.

Justice Bassett, I think you put your finger on it.

An economic harm is an element of the trade secret's finding.

The jury found a willful and malicious misappropriation.

The defense did not appeal that finding.

The jury had to find that these trade secrets

had economic value.

They either could have found that we

didn't prove the value, or equally likely,

that there was an overlap between that damage

and the damage on the torsion interference claims

and decided not to award duplicative recovery.

On the contractual claims, Your Honor,

much of what is said today only concerns the three P&E accounts.

And I believe Justice Hicks pointed out

the defendants have not challenged the award on claim

for, which was tortuous interference

with economic relations.

So even if, hypothetically, the court

were to conclude that the jury and the trial judge abused

its discretion in finding that there was a contract,

the economic relationship continued,

and the trial court made specific findings to that effect.

I'd like to point out one critical point

on the P&E contracts.

In the defendant's appendix, the defendant,

let me back up a minute, they did not argue below.

They did not argue below that these contracts were void.

That was not argued.

There's no citation to any preservation anywhere.

And as a result, we did not make some of the arguments,

address these arguments below.

We're hearing from them for the first time.

Mr. Carr, but I guess I'm not,

it's not clear to me that you really have answered

the chief's question, which is really a question that I have.

What is the, your opponent says,

whatever the bad things, so to speak,

that his clients may have done,

you didn't really prove that that caused harm to your client.

And in particular that, what seems to be,

at least in his view, and I have to say,

it seems to me to be a fairly significant issue,

there, whatever they may have done,

they, it appears that the decisions

that were made by consumers were not

generally in their favor.

These, many consumers went apparently to third party.

So how does that...

Respectfully, that's not what the evidence was.

That's what they've argued,

and that's what the 8,500 irrelevant contracts were.

A couple of points.

First, they, is the truck work found,

they conceded below that our evidence showed causation.

And we've cited that in our brief.

They conceded it in their motion for JNOV.

They also conceded that we prove

the existence of valid contracts.

They did not argue below, or in their brief,

that as a matter of law,

we were required to parade in innumerable

customer representatives to testify.

But you know, let's assume just for a minute

that we would, that we disagree on the issue

of whether they conceded it.

Can you just sort of, in a sort of summary fashion even,

just tell me, what would,

what is the evidence that if I'm a fact finder,

you could, you know, you showed that,

that would support the conclusion

that it was the defendant's conduct,

as opposed to some sort of independent decision making

on the part of the customers

that caused them to leave your client.

So on the issue of causation, your honor,

we had exhibit A, which was 636 pages,

which included innumerable email exchange

between Dumont on behalf of the defendants

and specific customers.

And we've cited a few examples of that

in our appendix brief,

where he's saying to them,

you gotta go with this new company,

you can't trust the plaintiff companies,

and you know, they treated me horribly

and they treated you horribly.

So there was Dumont's testimony.

So you're saying that Dumont

actually drove the customers away from you.

Exactly, your honor.

I should make that very clear,

and that's what these email show.

He used bid information from ours to interfere.

And it doesn't really matter,

it doesn't really matter where they went,

it's just they were driven from you.

Thank you.

An element of our tortuous interference claim

is not to prove that they got the customers,

they did get four of them.

Notably, the trial court observed

that their conduct here had in the trial court's words

an error of spite and malice.

One of their objectives here

was to cast harm on the plaintiffs,

not necessarily to enrich themselves.

We were involved with,

the plaintiffs were involved with the defendants

in an ongoing dispute in Maine

that resulted in a $1 million verdict against the defendants.

At the precise same time

that that case was getting ready to go to arbitration,

they recruited Frank Dumont to secretly

undertake this conspiracy.

So the element that there was not a requirement of proof

that they took the customers.

In fact, this case is very much like the Alpert case,

which the defendants have not sought to distinguish.

That was the jewelry merchant case out of Connecticut,

almost exactly the same facts

where an employee induced customers

and prospective customers to go to a competitor.

I'd like to make one point

in terms of the existence of the contracts.

The P&E contracts had a clause in them

and I'll give the references.

The appendix, the defense appendix at 45, 47 and 147.

There's a clause in the P&E contracts

to which states that the contracts do not terminate

during periods of suspension

as a result of regulatory issues.

We didn't raise this issue below

because it wasn't argued below in terms of the voidness.

But the contracts and you'll see them have this language

that if there's a plaintiff company,

if P&E could not continue because of a suspension,

a regulatory issue,

within 30 days the customer could terminate

if they provided written notice.

There was testimony from Sean Worth,

Bart Fromuth, Frank Dumont,

all about the standard practice

at the plaintiff customer companies,

including the P&E views,

to handle the fluctuation in rates,

moving customers to and from as needed the utility,

maintaining the economic relationship

with their corporate relationships

within your multiple clients' corporate relationship.

Yes, yes, Your Honor.

That was the way they defended against spikes

if for a variable rate, Your Honor,

if they saw a high rate coming,

they would affirmatively place the customer,

for example, with utility for a period of time

and then when rates stabilized,

they would put them back in the market.

So on appeal, the question is,

did the trial court abuse his discretion

in finding that the evidence supported

both the existence of the contracts,

again, in that respect,

we're only talking about three P&E,

and secondly, was there proof of causation?

And our arguments, again, are they conceded that below,

there's no legal requirement

that we presented customers.

You can see the difficulty

that that kind of rule would present

in a case involving many, many accounts

that were interfered with.

And then beyond that, the evidence was very clear

to support the testimony and the documents

all showed exactly what was happening here.

My orange light is on.

I would like to, we've done our best

to cover most of the issues raised in our brief

in terms of the 350B issue

as Justice Bass had pointed out,

the trial court did a careful balancing

of the three real factors that the courts look at

under the Uniform Trade Secrets Act

and also patent law,

which UTSA cases look to for guidance.

It involves not only the award of damages,

but also the willfulness of the defendant's conduct

and the policy to be advanced

under the UTSA by awarding damages.

And the trial court fee order shows

that the trial court conducted a very careful balancing

and find that in this case,

it weighed solidly in favor of an award

based on both the combination

of the willfulness of the defendant's conduct.

The trial court used words like

siphoning off our accounts,

doing it notingly, the attorney of Linsky

has not tried to defend that bad faith

in willful conduct today.

And secondly, that this kind of conduct,

it was not simply open competition,

it was wrongful conduct,

which is what the UTSA seeks to discourage.

And so considering those two factors,

the trial court found that the balance weighed

in favor of an award,

and I submit that the trial court

did not abuse its discretion.

My red light's on.

Thank you.

Do you need your reserve time, Mr. Valenzky?

Just a couple of points.

I wanna go first to the argument

that the fact that the plaintiffs

had voluntarily in the past

placed some of their customers with PSNH,

the default utility to avoid a price spike

justifies the finding of a contract here.

They're completely distinguishable.

Judge Anderson relied on that argument,

but here's why they're distinguishable.

When it happened voluntarily,

the customer agreed to go to the utility

and they went to the utility

for the purpose of avoiding the spike.

And then they came back.

Here, the customer didn't agree,

it happened by operation of law,

and the customer could not come back

when the spike concluded

because they still hadn't gotten their license back.

So it was not with intent

and it was not with consideration,

which are traditional contract terms.

So that's the first issue I wanted to make.

The second is there's a higher allowable level

of bad conduct in an economic relations count

than there is in a contract count.

So the idea that you can just say,

okay, no contract,

then they're automatically economic relations matters

doesn't work, you can't morph one to the other.

And finally, in certain circumstances,

you could say defendant torsiously interfered

by just causing the client to leave,

but unless you have that client or customer

to say I left because of those bad things,

you know why the customer left.

There was proof of why the customer left.

The fact that I post an article in the union leader

saying something bad about my competitor

does not prove proximate cause

that I substantially was responsible

for that customer leaving.

But you would agree that it doesn't matter

where that customer went.

No, you need the fact of whether it impacted

the customer's decision to leave substantially.

And that's the piece that was missing.

Thank you.

Thank you all.

I feel better.

Thank you.
