This is case 2016-03-05, SegTel, Inc. versus City of Nashua.

The record should reflect the fact that Justice Bassett is disqualified from this case.

Council.

Good morning. May it please the court. My name is Celia Leonard. I'm here to represent the City of Nashua.

I've reserved two minutes for a rebuttal.

This case is about whether or not there's an agreement under 7223 for the City of Nashua

to tax SegTel, who's an attachee on licensed polls in the city right-of-way.

This inquiry is informed by two statutory schemes, the taxation scheme under 7223

and also that of RSA 231-159, etc., regarding licensing of telecommunication polls.

SegTel tells us that overarching this dispute is the fact that the Federal Telecommunications

Act specifically provides that CLECs, like the plaintiff's SegTel, are entitled to occupy

the utilities polls in right-of-ways.

What is your position with regard to the effect of that requirement?

The Telecommunications Act's primary goal is to even the playing field for telecommunications

companies. The Federal Legislature many times in the Telecommunications Act says when things

are preempted. It says preempted, period, says it. Nowhere in there does it say that local taxation

when done fairly and applied equally is preempted. To your specific point, the argument was not

addressed by the Court below, not sure it's exactly preserved here, but the argument that

somehow a conditional license under a state and city scheme conveys ownership of a right-of-way

such that they control who can be in it at any time in any way is not legally valid.

When they say right-of-way, Fairpoint and other incumbent utilities have easements

throughout the city. They have them on city land, not highway. That's a distinction. This

is all a very nuanced issue. But you're saying there's no preemption under the Telecommunications

Act on this issue that's before us today? Yes, that's our position.

If we agree with Segtel, I don't know whether we will or not, but if we do, doesn't that set

up a situation whereby any provider of similar stuff, whatever it is, can simply work out

a side deal with whoever the person is who has the antenna up on the pole and get away without paying

anything in taxes. That's correct. It would eliminate, I don't know how big this market is,

but it would eliminate any municipality to control and get revenue for this sort of activity.

That's correct. It would curtail this.

Those such providers would have a remedy with the legislature. The statute says you've got to

have an agreement and leaving aside your implied agreements, Segtel has no agreement that the

city can tax it. I guess I can't put aside the quote implied agreement. It is a written

agreement. It's there. It's in the public. But what do you say is the written agreement?

The pole license. The license, but does the license say you will pay taxes? Yes. It has the

taxation language and Segtel is not disputed that it has that. But it doesn't, Segtel isn't

party to that license? Well, there's where we disagree. The language on its face says

that it goes to the licensee and anyone in occupying the right of way pursuant to it.

All right. I'm sorry. I want to make, because Justice Hicks clarified that.

I think I may have had a misunderstanding. Was there any direct license by Segtel

to the city? In other words, did the city issue a direct license to Segtel?

No. In other words, there's no, there's no

privity kind of agreement of any kind between the city and Segtel.

You're not willing to give up privity. Yeah. I'm sorry, what? I couldn't hear you.

In other words, you did not, whether you sought their Segtel's agreement or not,

am I understanding correctly that you never sent a document entitled license to Segtel?

No, because we didn't have to. We already had one in the public record.

All right. But you know, here's the thing I guess I'm having the other difficulty with.

If I understand correctly, you tax PSNH and Fairpoint for their polls.

Correct. And is part of that tax based upon the value of the polls, which I assume means

the value to PSNH and New England and Fairpoint of the rent that they can collect or the fees

that they can collect from Segtel. Is that right? No. No. This was addressed in the

affidavit in the record from the deputy assessor LeMay, the city taxes PSNH for its polls,

which will now going forward be statutorily determined how to do that.

And it taxes PSNH and Eversource for their use of the right-of-way. We look at it like a layer

cake and everybody's got their wires. Taxing PSNH for Segtel's use of the right-of-way

would be like taxing your neighbor's house. They don't use, Segtel has exclusive use of miles

of city right-of-way. That's not PSNHs. We can't tax PSNH for that. We don't tax PSNH for that.

But what is the tax to PSNH based upon? Their poll, because that's their structure,

right? And the legislature allows us to do that. And their own wires. It's based on that.

But I mean, do you, so you're saying that you in no way consider the income that PSNH

or Fairpoint gets from sub-less lessees, so to speak, of the polls?

A lot of this is factual inquiry that wasn't addressed below. My understanding is for that

tax share, that was not done. And I'm basing that on the affidavit in the record.

In other words, I think the thing I'm having, I guess what I'm really driving at is,

to the extent that you were including the value in the tax bill to PSNH or Fairpoint,

to the extent that you were including in what you taxed them on,

value consisting of the rents, so to speak, or fees, whatever you call it,

that they got from Segtel. Even if we agreed with you, wouldn't that mean that at least going

forward next year, you know, maybe you can tax Segtel, but you're going to have to reduce the

tax bill to PSNH and Fairpoint to the extent it did consist of that income?

I disagree and here's why. Again, you've got a poll and you've got attachments.

If there's rent on the poll, perhaps that goes to the value of that particular poll,

which is one structure in real estate. What we're taxing is the use of the right of way here.

We do not tax PSNH or Verizon, New England Telephone, whoever, anybody else for

Segtel's use of the right of way. Their wires go through the right of way.

That's not attached to the poll. I don't know where that ends at millimeter off,

two inches off on either side, right? So maybe the attachment fee goes to the value

of that particular poll, but that's again nothing to do with the line stringing for miles

through the city. We cannot and do not tax. I feel we cannot tax another entity for another

entity's exclusive use and occupancy of city. Judge Lynn is just suggesting that you could,

if you used an income approach for appraisals and income technique, that's all.

So let's get back to the statute. I mean, that's the gravenment of this case.

The statute says that you can't, that the town, city cannot tax someone who occupies a

space without an agreement, unless there is an agreement. So where is the agreement with

Segtel, whereby they've agreed to be taxed? I believe it's in the poll license,

and that's our argument. The H.E.A. says you don't have to have a direct

agreement between the two parties. Rochester one dealt with whether or not there was an

agreement. It said that poll licenses are agreements, and it looked to the totality of the

circumstance, it looked to the utility, I can't remember which one it was, the new one on the

telephone, that they went and it basically assumed, do you have a required licensure

statutory scheme? How do you get consent in there? Well, it's either not required,

or it's like when you go to get a driver's license, when I go to get a driver's license,

I consent to everything that comes along with that, being stopped, having my car inspected,

you know, everything. So when they went in the right of way, knowing that they had to be licensed,

knowing that there was public licensure that said that they're going to be taxed,

knowing it said that anyone who holds and occupies the right of way pursuant to the

poll license is going to be taxed. And although we don't tax the attachments,

we tax the use of the right of way, it is a physical reality that they cannot be in the

right of way but for the polls. Your opponent argues that this is not a taxation issue,

but if the city is unhappy with the use of its right of way, it could remove,

require the removal of the wires. I take that, I made a special note of it because I thought it

was a little odd that they, they are, Sigtel argued, well, this isn't a taxation issue if

the city can remove it. What is your position on that? We would, well, I guess I'll be clear here.

We believe that they are licensed, so we have not sought removal. That's the first thing. We

believe in the poll license. But let's say they're right about this. Then yes, we would ask

that they be removed. If they're not going to be in there under the conditions that we have

asked everybody in the right of way, and arguably have to because of people protection, then they

would be removed. So Sigtel could be removed without having to take down PSNH's wires. Oh,

absolutely. Yeah. Well, couldn't, I mean, isn't the problem here, couldn't you solve this problem

by doing one or two things or maybe both, by, by adopting a new ordinance that says

no one shall attach any wires or things, whatever, to the two polls, whether owned by the city or

anybody else, unless they have a license. And in order to get a license, the persons that are

going to get the license have to agree to pay taxes. Yes, the city already has an ordinance

that says, well, following the state statutory scheme, the city already has an ordinance that

says that to be in our right of way, you have to be licensed. And that actually follows our charter.

And is the amount in question $1800? Is that what you read? No, no, they've, what is it then? Oh,

no, I mean, it's not challenged. They were seeking an abatement solely on that it was

a ultra virus, not amount. But the amount of the tax would be $1800? Yes. Would it strike me

that intelligent parties could have figured out a solution to this problem? We see it as an

overarching issue really on how to treat all similarly situated rights, but they might win.

We might not agree that this is an implied license. And then you'd have to go remove them,

and then they would pay, and we'd all be in the same place in the end. But with clarity.

But this brings me back to my original question about the impact of the Federal

Telecommunications Act. SegTel tells us that that act specifically requires that collects,

like SegTel, are entitled to occupy the incumbent utilities polls in right of ways. So that suggests

to me that you couldn't remove the wires, even though in your opponent's brief that is suggested.

That's another issue. But are you constrained at all? Do you believe by the Federal Act?

I see you may finish answering. Yes, we're constrained such that we have to treat everyone

similarly. That's what the Telecommunication Act says. If you're going to have rules and

regulations that if they're not strictly prohibited or preempted, which that statutes

very clear when it's preempting, as long as you're treating them all the same,

you can do it. That's what the city's trying to do here. We tax all other attachees for their use

of right of way. If we have to remove, because someone's not paying taxes, we would do that

in a fair manner. Thank you. Thank you. Good morning, your Honors. May it please the court.

I'm Carolyn Cole again. I'm here representing SegTel. Initially, I just want to point

out that nothing legally or factually distinguishes this case from the recent cases

brought by Lebanon, Hanover, Manchester, Plousta, Plousta, Place, Plousta, Belmont, Alexandria,

and Durham, in which multiple Superior Court judges have found that right-of-way taxes

assessed against utility are ultra-virus where there is no license.

But let's assume we agree with you. I want to make sure that I'm going to say,

are you saying that the city couldn't change its ordinance and basically say, look,

if you want to attach a pole to, if you want to attach wires to poles in our right-of-way,

you, whoever it is, whether you own the poles or not, you, in this case, SegTel,

have to get a license. And a condition of the license is that you agree to pay taxes. Could

they do that? Well, I guess I'm not going to, I don't have a particular opinion about whether

the city can come up with its own ordinance, but I would say that at this point,

nothing in RSA 231.59 at SegTel requires a license to be acquired after an attachment

has been made. 231.60 and 61 require, really, specifically, if you... But in other words,

are you saying that because you've already put the wires up there that you've got a vested right

to keep them there forever and there can be no licensing requirements? Yes, I'm saying that,

and I'll tell you why. Until the statute's changed? Until the statute's changed, correct.

Okay, so you say that you have a vested right to keep your wires up there without paying any

taxes forever? Well, vested is a little bit of a loaded word, but statutory right, yes.

That is our position. And the reason is, is that 231.61 requires a utility intending to put

poles in the ground. This is about digging up city streets, really. 231 is putting poles in the

ground or digging up conduit to obtain a license or permission. Now, we don't believe that that's

that particular statute applies to us, but even if it did, we got permission and the city concedes

it in its brief, that it permitted us to be on the poles. And by way of a very quick background...

I thought I didn't know you were on the poles until after the fact.

No, no, no, no. They participated in us going on the poles. So you...

Segthel asked the city for permission to get on the poles, and the city didn't say

not until you enter an agreement with us. Correct. Because back in the day, and this

from the beginning, they're called, we call them CLEX instead of CLEX.

In another case, the parties called them CLEX. Oh, is that right?

That's where I'm getting it from. I got educated by another case.

CLEX it is. The CLEX didn't really come into being until the early 2000s. The Telecommunications

Act of 1996 really brought telecommunications into competitive mode, and it wasn't really until

the 2000s, mid-2000s, that in least in New Hampshire, that Bay Ring and Segthel and a

bunch of others were coming into the force. And so what would happen is that the CLEX

attached pursuant to federal law, 47 to USA. But that says, that says, you quote in your

brief, that that says that they can require a company to pay fees to recover an appropriate

share of the increased street repair and paving costs. I mean, it seems to me and you could read

that to say, to the extent that taxes, you know, are designed to do that, that they can

require you to pay taxes. Well, they can certainly require, 253 does allow,

47 USA 253 does allow a city to maintain its property and snow plow and dig around.

And it may... Well, is it your position that because you had an agreement with Fairpoint

and PSNH, which apparently provided that you had to pay part of its taxes? Am I right on that?

No, not entirely. Okay. The poll attachment, I want to make a point of clarification so that

nobody's confused. There are two different types of agreements. And Ms. Leonard was referencing

the poll license with Fairpoint and PSNH. Let's say poll license pursuant to 231,

to dig up the streets and put the polls in. SegTel signs a poll attachment agreement with

the poll owners to attach. And the FCC... And in that agreement, do they in essence pay

a share of the taxes that the utility pays to the city? Yes, according to the FCC and the New

Hampshire PUC, which adopted the FCC's ruling, it's not specifically stated in our poll attachment

agreement that SegTel will pay property tax, but the FCC and the New Hampshire PUC have

a portion of, some portion of that... So my question is, is it your position that in fact

you are paying taxes? We are. That is our position. Even though you don't have to.

We have to pay a fee to the poll owners. And that compensates the poll owners for a number of

things that include the property taxes. So in effect, if the city starts taxing you,

your tax twice? Twice. But so, I mean, that's sort of what I was trying to get at before,

but couldn't the... I suppose, I'm not sure why they would want to do this,

but could the city sort of decide, listen, we want to... We're going to collect from

public service and fair point a fee that will be somewhat lower because it won't include the value,

the tax part of what you are paying to fair point and PSNH. And instead,

they're going to collect that tax directly from you. I mean, under the current construct,

that isn't lawful. Under 72. Under RSA 72? RSA 72231, yes, correct. There is no agreement,

there is no written agreement providing for showing... Let me say,

evidencing that SEG-TEL is consented to paying property taxes. How often is there a... The

license that... Or the agreement that you have with PSNH and fair point. Is that... Are those

in perpetuity or do they... You have to renew them every year? We renew them. They're renewed.

They're renewed. Okay. May I ask your position on something your opponent mentioned? She said,

the attachment agreement is different from use of the right-of-way. So she's... I take her argument

to be that, well, you may pay the utilities a part of their taxes for the polls, but you have an

obligation to pay for use of the right-of-way as these wires traverse the city. She makes a

distinction between use of the right-of-way and the attachment to the polls. In fact,

there is no distinction because the poll attachment agreement that she's referencing

that was amended recently includes the language that 72.231, which is that the

utilities will pay property taxes and consent to pay property taxes. So for the use of the space,

the right-of-way. So they're part and parcel of the same thing. They are taxing the polls as

property, as real estate. They are taxing the use of the property pursuant to 73.10. And I just

want to read that because I can't commit it to memory. It says real and personal property.

So the poll itself shall be taxed to the person claiming the same or to the person who is in the

possession and occupancy thereof if that person consents to be taxed. So real property is generally

taxed, the poll, and those who occupy municipal space pay if they have consented to be taxed.

And that is consistent with this court's case law and read and LLP association.

The legislature must have in mind that it's only the owners of property that are ultimately

responsible for taxation, correct? I think that's correct. And let's think about this.

I've had a lot of time. I've been at this since 2008 and I've had a lot of time to think about

right-of-way. And what does this mean? This isn't really a utility issue. It seems to

be right now, but it isn't. I mean, the public UI, we use public property all the time.

We walk across a park. We put mailboxes on the public right-of-way.

If we suddenly had this idea that you could have implied consent towards taxation, although

there's nothing in the statute that allows implied consent, do I get taxed for walking on

the sidewalk? Is my mailbox now subject to taxation? Could they remove my mailbox? I think

it would be a federal crime if they tried to. But the idea that this is not really

just about a utility using the right-of-way, we all use the right-of-way.

You suggest in your brief that the town could require removal of your lines. Is that your

position? Oh, it is certainly free to ask us to move. I think we would probably push back

a little bit using 47 USC section 253 on that. But I think that would be preemptive.

As a practical matter, given the Telecommunications Act,

they probably couldn't do that. I would agree with that. Okay.

But they probably, I guess the thing I'm having, one part of your argument I'm having some

trouble with is why they couldn't going forward say, look, you didn't, you know, you, all right,

fine. You don't have a license from us to do this, but you need a license. And we want

you to get a license. And a condition of getting the license is that you agree to pay taxes. You

don't have to. You can say, we're not going to do that. And then we're going to say, you violated

the provision of the federal thing that says you, you have to pay your fair share. Well,

two points. One to just six points that we would be double tax because we are paying

a portion of the tax as it is. But secondly, RSA 23160 at SEC does not require, there's nothing

in that statute that requires an attached or who has been up there for a decade to somehow

suddenly get a license. So, you know, the city is free to amend its ordinance and we're free

to challenge that ordinance. And I also believe that the legislature can change the law that

says something different. At this point, the law is the user of public property must consent

in writing to taxation prior to being taxed. And there is no such agreement. The poll attachment

agreement being referenced is not something SEG tell is subject to. It did not, it was not

a signatory to that agreement. It didn't sign on to that agreement. It is a poll

attachment. And let me make one quick point to Ms. Leonard's point of HEA realty. HEA realty is

completely right. She's correct that there doesn't need to be a direct agreement between SEG tell

and the city for there to be taxation. In HEA, that was where the city had least space to

national airport authority, NAA, and they were both tax exempt entities. The NAA thereafter

leased to HEA realty. But in the sublease between HEA and NAA, there was the magic language

of consenting to property tax. So the agreement can be there. So if there had been an agreement

between Fairpoint and SEG tell that SEG tell agreed to pay national property taxes, that would

be that would be valid. Wasn't that the effect? Even though there was no language about payment

of taxes, I understand from the briefs, the SEG tells payment to the to the utilities included

payment for at least some of their taxes. So to answer that question, that would be an

after the fact inquiry. And the reason is that there's nothing in the agreement itself that

makes reference to this. There was some discussion later when some of the utilities around the

country wanted to do taxation and they were talking about carrying costs and there were

lots of fights between SELEX and ILEX about what they could charge. And long and short of it,

this was many years after the fact the FCC said, look, the incumbent utility can charge

a certain amount for carrying costs and they will include a myriad of things. And so it

wasn't as though SEG tell understood at the time of signing the pole attachment agreement

that it was paying for real estate taxes for itself. It was a sub tenant. So think about

any tenant in a building. I'm a tenant at a building. I don't pay the city's property tax.

The landlord does. My rent, however, may in fact go towards paying that property tax and

any other carrying costs and maybe profit if they're lucky. And it is exactly the same thing here.

So I hope that answers your question. Thank you.

Has any other questions? Thank you. Thank you very much. Is there anything to add,

Attorney Leonard? I guess this goes to a point the lower court had made and we disagree with.

There's nothing in 7223 that says written. There's nothing in 7223 that says explicit.

There is a required statutory scheme. Much as in Rochester 1, when a license is put forth and

the public good requires for it to be amended, the utility was found to have agreed to it.

They accepted it. They presumably assume the status of a licensee aware of and willing to accept

the conditions imposed by the city and legislature. Things aren't set in stone. They do move. And

where you have something that requires consent and agreement mixed with licensure statute under

both state law, city ordinance and charter. Where is the consent and assent? When does that come

into play? Argument is it comes into play when you knowingly place those wires. This

follows contract law. We have contracts, again, don't have to be explicit. They don't have to be

written. We tell our juries that. When we describe to them that you don't have to have a written

contract, that it can be established by spoken or written words. And in fact,

as an example of a gentleman walking by and taking an apple and nodding at the

grocer and walking off, that's an agreement. So I just want to make it clear that our

law does not require in Rochester what you don't have the problem here. It isn't the problem here

that you you don't have. You don't even have a direct. You didn't issue a piece of paper to

say tell that says license. You have no you have no direct. You can't even say that that

that they have a license that you issued them a license. You issued the license to

PSNH or Fairpoint. We issued it under public notice and there's language on its face that

says it applies to those who are occupying the right of way pursuant to the license and says

licensee and others. If we're to I would like to think we could give that language import

after it went through the public notice process and is in the public record. Thank you. Thank

you. Case submitted. The court is in recess.
