The court had an unavoidable conflict that prevented him from remaining for this argument.

However, he will participate in this appeal. Mr. Lawn.

Thank you. Good morning. May it please the court?

Brad Lawn for the appellant. This is the second time I've been before this court

on precisely the same agreement not to export.

The first case was Holloway v. Lucic, the 2008 case in which the court addressed

this particular contract and upheld its validity.

This is one of those unusual situations where a plaintiff's lawyer

can properly argue to the court that the damages are not ascertainable easily,

maybe not provable, and difficult to prove.

That's the essence of this case because it is the key component

to the enforceability of a liquidated damage clause.

Because in Lucic we said if you can easily ascertain the damages,

then you may create your liquidated damage clause.

But if you can't and it turns out to be wrong, there's a look back.

And I think what you're saying here is you have to take the look back

and there was no damage at all. Isn't that the point of your position?

Yes, you can only take a look back if the damages are easily ascertainable.

That is what the case law says.

In this case, the damages are not easily ascertainable.

We went through this at some length.

It was an offer of proof rather than a testimonial hearing.

And we went through it in some length.

And page 87 and 88 of the appendix show the different kinds of damages

a dealership suffers typically when a vehicle is purchased and exported.

That's what happened in this case.

The vehicle was exported to China.

Now the purchaser of that vehicle in China is not likely to get it serviced here in New Hampshire.

Right, but perhaps I didn't make my point or maybe I'm wrong and you could help me.

I thought that the fine is a $15,000 penalty that Mercedes-Benz imposes

if the dealer does this, if there's a violation of the agreement not to export.

And in this case, that was the number that was settled on as liquid data damages, right?

Yes.

And then at the end of the day, there was no fine imposed and no other damage incurred.

Well, as of the date of the trial, yes.

There was no penalty or what's called a chargeback by Mercedes-Benz USA on the dealership.

That doesn't mean they can't do it later and that's in the appendix.

I thought there was a statute prohibiting them from doing so.

There is a statute, Your Honor.

And that statute in my view has nothing to do with this case.

That is a statute that regulates what manufacturers can or can't do as between dealers, okay?

This gentleman, the defendant, is not a beneficiary of that statute.

That statute gives us a defense, the dealership, in the event that Mercedes-Benz tries to impose something, okay?

One of the reasons that, it strikes me, one of the reasons that would make this clause, I mean, that would make this provision valid even given the statute is presumably a dealer could say,

look, I have a defense under the statute only if I can show that I didn't know.

But I don't want to take the chance that I'm going to have to have a fight with the manufacturer about whether I knew or not.

And as a result, end up having to lose some money.

So what I'm going to do is I'm going to put this provision in the contract to the buyer and say, listen, if you do this, you're paying me $15,000.

And therefore, if the dealer, if the manufacturer comes after me, at least I'm not going to lose any money out.

I mean, maybe I'm going to lose some attorney's fees or something that might go in addition to that, but at least I'm going to be protected to the extent of $15,000.

That's right. And Mercedes-Benz USA does whatever it wants to do.

And as you can imagine, the dealership doesn't want to fight with the manufacturer.

They have a relationship that's ongoing, they make money together.

So this statute has no relevance in this case.

The only difference between this case and Luchak was that the defense lawyer in Luchak didn't bring up this statute, which was in effect at the time of the argument in this case and at the time of the trial.

It's a May of 09 amendment to 357C.

That's the only difference, but the statute doesn't change anything.

We have a contract here.

This gentleman, the defendant, walked into the dealership, paid $70,000, signed an agreement, promising that he would not export it, telling them this was for his family.

Within two weeks, it was in China.

Can I ask you, I seem to remember, and maybe my memory is incorrect on this, but I thought that in the Luchak case there was some, either it was stated in the briefs or there was some discussion at our argument that there is some,

customs issue or some regulation or something that comes to bear here.

In other words, I was under the impression that, for example, if Holloway wanted to directly send a new car overseas, they couldn't do that.

There would be some problem either with Mercedes or maybe with the customs laws or the international trade agreements or something like that.

My impression was that the reason that this is done by people like your opponent's client is that that way they can say, I'm not really exporting a new vehicle.

This is really a used vehicle because I owned it for some period of time.

Well, yes, but the dealership in Manchester doesn't want people to come in, buy a car, and export it.

They lose all kinds of revenue.

We estimated at the trial $4,800 over three years.

That is what a dealer typically makes on a Mercedes-Benz.

I understand that, but I'm asking you, is there some other issue here?

Is there some federal problem with this?

No, there's no federal problem, but there's a problem with the manufacturer.

They have different markets all around the world and they decide what they sell these cars at in China and in South Africa.

The dealers aren't supposed to interfere with that, just like selling Red Sox tickets outside the park.

You're really not supposed to do that.

That's what happened here.

Mr. Giacalone came in and bought it and he made money.

He defrauded the dealership.

We have a claim for misrepresentation.

That's one of our counts.

The court never ruled on it, but Mr. Giacalone and Defense Council can't deny that he misrepresented himself when he came into this dealership, signed this agreement, and then within two weeks exported it.

So while the statute arguably prevents Mercedes from penalizing your client under certain circumstances,

Mercedes could still bring an action under the contract, under the dealer arrangement with your client,

and your client would have to defend itself and the statute would be part of the litigation.

That's right.

They still could.

Mercedes-Benz tallies up these instances of what we call floaters.

Those are exports in violation of the franchise agreement.

And if there are too many of them, the dealership gets penalized by in various ways.

They're called charge backs, but the allocation of vehicles is cut back by Mercedes-Benz.

It affects the profitability of the dealership.

The loss of revenue that you were just talking about in terms of work on the car in future years, was that part of your offer of proof?

Well, yes it was.

And the offer of proof was supplemented by a memo of law that the judge asked us to submit.

Both parties did.

And we submitted the interrogatory answers that laid out the damages that we're claiming here.

But the court made a finding that this was nothing but, quote, wild guesses.

Exactly right, Your Honor.

And that's your point.

That means it's not easily ascertainable.

It is speculative.

It is difficult to prove.

We have damages.

We, the dealership, have damages, but we just can't ascertain what they are at this time.

Wild guesses is another word for speculative, which is why the court should not reverse itself in its ruling on the Lucic case,

and find now that this same clause that it upheld five years ago is now invalid and unenforceable.

Well, in the Lucic case, didn't the court also say that the burden on these issues about ascertainability,

and whether it's grossly disproportionate, lies on the party that is seeking to invalidate the provision?

That is correct.

And what was the evidence put forward here on the other side of the ledger by the defendant?

The defendant?

As to damages or whether it was easily ascertainable?

Yes.

I'll let defense counsel address that.

We presented evidence, even though we didn't have the burden of what these speculative damages were.

The court didn't like it.

The defense counsel said, well, there you go.

They can't prove it.

It's a wild guess.

It's not ascertainable.

You should strike down the liquidated damage clause.

And in the Lucic case, the court said that there are occasional cases where damages after a breach are certain,

indicating that it's the exception to the rule when you can look backwards at the time of trial and specify what those damages are.

This is the usual case here.

And the court in that case said, we agree that the possibility of speculative future damages rendered Holloway's actual damages difficult to ascertain.

This is the same case here.

It is difficult to ascertain.

And the court went on to say only easily ascertainable damages, meaning damages that are no longer speculative at the time of trial,

trigger the retrospective appraisal, meaning you should not do a retrospective appraisal unless those damages are easily quantifiable at the time of the trial.

Just one other thing about attorney's fees.

This contract, which the dealership has been using for many years, has a clause in it that says, if we are required to litigate, you're going to pay us our attorney's fees.

We were required to litigate.

The car showed up in China.

I wrote a letter to Mr. Giacalone.

You're in breach.

You've got to pay the $15,000.

If you don't, you're going to have to pay attorney's fees.

He ignored it.

We had to file suit, which is why we were required to file to litigate.

We should get our attorney's fees.

But your argument is that the outcome is irrelevant.

If you file a case, you're entitled to attorney's fees.

But what if you file a case and the defendant's able to prove that they, in fact, didn't sell the car to China?

That's not the case.

They admit that they did.

But it seems like you're arguing too much here.

I mean, you've got a breach of contract case here, and there is a breach.

I think there's no dispute about that.

Or maybe Mr. Cairns will say differently.

But it seems like there's no dispute.

But that seems to me to the argument, not that any time you file a case, you get fees.

It's if there's a breach, you get fees.

Right.

That's the better argument.

And we also have the misrepresentation claim.

It's in the writ.

We asked for attorney's fees because we had to chase this guy for doing something he repeatedly promised he would not do.

Is there anything in the record about how much money he made on this transaction?

No.

Didn't come up at trial.

Thank you.

May I reserve two minutes?

Didn't you already?

I didn't say anything at the clerk about it.

You can reserve it, but you may not need it if everything has already been said.

I hope not.

Mr. Cairns.

May it please the court? Matt Cairns for Stephen Jack alone.

Excuse me.

The trial court made findings of fact that Holloway's damages were zero and ruled that the liquidated damages clause was grossly disproportionate and constituted an unenforcable penalty.

Mr. Cairns, let's assume just for the moment that we agreed with you.

How is this case any different than any other case that would happen?

Doesn't this basically, if we accept that what happened here in the trial court, doesn't this basically mean Holloway can't use this clause anymore?

Or it's going to be practically ineffective?

Your Honor, to do that, you need to look actually at the contract.

And you have to look at what the terms of this contract specifically look to.

Holloway drafted this contract.

Mr. Lowell told you that they've been using it for many years.

I know that they used it in the Lucic case back in 2011 or actually 2009 I think was when that contract was signed.

Although the liquidated damages amount was different.

If you read the preamble, the predicate to this contract, it says that Mercedes-Benz will assess charges.

Will assess charges.

Therefore, in consideration for the sale of the vehicle, therefore meaning because this is going to happen, in consideration for the sale of the vehicle, the contract is at page two of the appendix.

So you say the contract itself limited potential damages to damages that would have been imposed on Holloway.

And because the statute prohibited that kind of damage, there can be no damages.

None of this looking at what was argued by your opponent at trial, aside from any penalty by the manufacturer.

You understand what I'm saying?

Exactly.

You say they're limited by their own language in the contract.

Exactly, Your Honor.

That's our position in a nutshell.

So you would say then that this contract, in order to meet what you say would make it valid in light of the statute, they would have to say something like the manufacturer might impose claims on us.

Yes.

And then it would be okay.

It would be okay to get to the last part which would then still require some retrospective analysis if we can prove that the actual damages are readily ascertainable.

Well what about, I guess the thing I don't understand is why isn't it entirely appropriate for a company like Holloway to say listen, we understand that the statute is now in effect and that the manufacturer would have to prove that we knew.

But we don't want to have that fight.

We don't want to be in a situation where the manufacturer is going to allege that well, your salesman really did know this guy based on the way the negotiations went or whatever, or the fact that he's been here before or something like that.

Somebody in the organization really knew and therefore you owe us the money.

We don't want to take that chance.

We want to be sure that if a fact finder later on decides that that's true, we're protected because we're going to get the money from you.

And we're going to get it whether or not that happens because we don't want you to do that so that we're furthering what the manufacturer wants us to do.

The issue without your honor is that that may have been inside of Holloway's head, but that was not expressed in the contract.

Holloway had an opportunity to draw this contract.

They drew it in a manner in which they did.

And frankly, knowing that they can't impose that penalty, they're seeking to make an additional $15,000 a profit.

This strikes me that that really is sort of apples and orange.

There's no question that your client represented in the contract that he was not going to sell the vehicle.

And that was fraudulent.

He had every intention of selling the vehicle.

If I may, your honor, Holloway also represented in its contract that it will be charged penalties by Holloway, by Mercedes-Benz, which was also fraudulent.

So both sides of this agreement have made misrepresentations or acted in misrepresentation ways here.

Well, but Mercedes had a right to charge back $15,000 against the dealer for its contract.

And so it's saying that will in regard to Mercedes.

I mean, you can't control what Mercedes is going to do.

Maybe they just forget some time about charging back.

If that's the case, your honor, and I'll accept that here, you then have to do the retrospective analysis.

This contract was for one year.

This was a one-year contract.

At the time of the hearing, Mr. Lown conceded in both his briefs, his representation to the court at the trial court.

And here today that they were not charged, they have not been charged, and they never were told that they might be charged.

That was before the trial court.

But there's still a contractual right to do it, isn't there?

There's still a contractual right that Mercedes had to do it or not?

I don't know. The contract between Mercedes and Holloway was not part of the record to my recollection, your honor.

But the other thing that distinguishes it from Lucic is that in Lucic, Holloway was assessed $300 per vehicle,

and in Lucic, evidence was presented that there still might be commissions owed to the foreign dealers

who didn't get a chance to sell the new vehicle in China.

None of that evidence was presented in this case.

But what happens? Again, suppose that two years from now the manufacturer doesn't audit and looks and says,

wait a minute, unlike all the other dealers in New England who maybe they sold one car that ended up overseas,

Holloway sold 15, and we think from that an inference can be drawn that people at Holloway knew

that they were really part of the scheme, so to speak.

So we're going to now go back and we're going to ask, it's within the three-year statute of limitations,

we're going to go back and ask Holloway to pay whatever the fee is for all of those 15 vehicles.

Wouldn't that be a basis for Holloway saying we don't want to run that risk?

That's why we're going to be protected by collecting this money from all the people we sell cars to

if they in fact violate the terms.

I understand the argument, Your Honor, but one, there's no evidence that Holloway, that Mercedes has ever done this.

Number two, at the time of the trial there was no representation made that that might be coming down the pike,

that that's in the future.

And number three, we can do a retrospective analysis.

Don't you have the burden on that?

In other words, you say there was no evidence, but it was your burden to show that this could never happen.

I disagree with Your Honor.

It was our burden to show that at the time of trial damages had not been suffered,

and that the damages that were suffered, allegedly suffered were readily ascertainable.

I think it's important also to notice that if you look at paragraph four of the contract,

paragraph four prohibits exporting and transfer to third parties, right, to third parties.

So that would prohibit me buying the car and transferring it to you, Justice Lin.

But when you move to section five, section five only creates liquidated damages if you export it.

So all of these opportunity damages that Mr. Lowne talked about in his brief and in the argument,

the wiper blades, the oil change, the things that Judge Michael found to be wild guesses,

guesstimates at best, are focused only on export, not what would happen exactly if I sold the vehicle to a third party.

But isn't the rationale for that to be, you know, the likelihood would be sure.

It's possible you might, you know, if you bought the car from a dealer in Exeter,

it's possible I suppose you might sell it to somebody in California.

But the likelihood is that if you're just selling it to somebody else, not for export,

you're probably going to sell it to somebody else in the area where you live,

and so there's a reasonable chance that those people are going to come back and get their servicing at Holloway anyway.

I would disagree. It speaks to transfer, not sales.

So you could transfer this car to your child who takes the $70,000 SUV to school at University of Virginia,

and therefore they get all their service down there.

That would, if you believe Mr. Lowne, not trigger all these opportunity costs.

We get back to the fact that this contract is looking only at the damages,

the charge backs that will be imposed.

It's not assessed against Holloway Motors.

Well, wait a minute. Where's the limitation that the damages have to be only the charge backs by Mercedes?

I don't see any limitation here that the damages, alleged damages that Mr. Lowne talked about,

the lack of profits made on future servicing can't be incorporated.

Where's that excluded?

Yeah, you have to read paragraph four and five together.

Paragraph four has two prohibitions, export and transfer to any other person.

Paragraph five, liquidated damages, only applies to export.

So if there really was a concern about loss of opportunity costs, opportunity revenue, post sale,

then that clause would extend also to the transfer to a third person.

Well, let me ask you this.

The agreement not to export, which is the agreement we're talking about being breached here,

says that the parties agree that it would be impractical or difficult to fix the actual damages to HMC.

So if all we're talking about is the Mercedes charge back, that's not hard to quantify.

It's either it's going to be what it is.

So it was referring to something that was impractical to try to quantify.

It would seem to me beyond the charge back, which is very easy to quantify.

Why doesn't that make sense?

And wouldn't the future service revenue fall into that category?

The charge backs are not specified in the contract.

It will assess charges against HMC.

It does not say what kinds of charges.

It does not say whether we are going to impact your ranking.

It does not say we are going to charge you X dollars for every export.

It does not say we are going to deny you other vehicles.

Well, those are all good reasons to have a liquidated damages provision.

That all relate to the penalties being imposed by Mercedes.

That's what this is referring to, Your Honor.

It is referring back to the uncertainty of the amount.

So you just say that it's limited to that as opposed to a motivation for entering into this contract.

I mean, I suppose you could reasonably conclude that we're not limited to penalties

that might be assessed by the manufacturer.

But by other penalties as well, we're setting it forth.

That's what's motivated us to put this contract together.

But does that act as a limitation?

I believe the fact that it refers only to the charges that may be imposed

or will be imposed charges in quotes without definition

that may be imposed or will be imposed limits it to that.

Holloway drafted this contract.

It could very well have put in a clause that said we'll assess charges against HMC

and whereas Holloway will also lose other unspecified undetermined revenue

as a result of the export of this vehicle.

Therefore, in consideration, we are agreeing as follows.

But you're asking us to read into the agreement a clause that says and will assess charges

and that is what we will go after you for is the only if we get charged back from Mercedes

and we're going to limit it to that.

That's what you're saying this means.

I am.

And the interpretation-

And that would have been easy to say.

It would have been very easy for them to say and they didn't say that.

Right.

Right?

Yes.

But they also didn't go farther.

So what you have to look at is the reasonable expectation of the parties to the contract.

Obviously we recognize that interpretation of a contract is an issue of law for this court.

But you have Mr. Giacalone coming in getting presented with a contract

with no inability or no ability to negotiate any of the terms to this contract,

no ability to set the number of $15,000,

no explanation of where the $15,000 comes from.

How do we know that?

Well, how do we know that he didn't have any ability to do that?

He could have gone to another dealer or he could have-

There was an un-controverted offer of proof made at the trial.

That he tried to change it?

That he had no opportunity to negotiate that

and that was un-controverted by Holloway when it was made at trial.

The offer I believe if you look at the transcript was

and I'm sure that if I asked Mrs. So-and-So

that if Mr. Giacalone wanted to negotiate that number,

she would have been no.

And there was no counter offer that that's not true.

She would have testified that he could have negotiated that number.

So that fact was before the court.

But your client could have gone to another Mercedes dealer.

He absolutely could have. No doubt about it.

Just as he could have had his car serviced at multiple other Mercedes dealerships

as they recognized and as they set forth in their answers to interrogatories

the five or six dealerships that were far closer to his home

than driving all the way back to Manchester.

So that gets to the point my time is up.

If you have any questions for me, I'll continue.

If not, I'll wrap it up.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Do you need more time, Mr. Lam?

Okay.

Well, you're limited by two minutes.

All right.

The damages are fully set forth in the appendix at page 87 and 88.

And also the Mercedes-Benz

no export policy is at page eight of the appendix.

And on page nine, they itemize the types of charge backs they can impose on the dealer.

It's all right there.

Defense counsel said that the court found that the damages...

In spite of the statute.

In spite of the statute?

In spite of the statute.

They do what they want.

Defense counsel said that the court found the damages were zero.

No, not exactly.

The court said essentially zero.

And the word essentially highlights the problem in this case,

is that it's very hard to pin down what the damages were.

On page 31, you'll see that Mr. Giacalone went to four different dealerships

and spent a lot of money buying Mercedes-Benz,

and they were all exported to China.

He's a serial exporter.

He could have gone to any other dealership.

The idea that he came in here and was forced to sign this agreement is just nonsense.

He didn't have to sign this agreement.

He could have gone to other dealerships the way he already had.

And the evidence of the exports is in the appendix at page 31.

Should it matter to our analysis that he's done this before?

Why should that matter?

I have a misrepresentation claim.

I think it supports that, that he lied to the dealership.

When he came in, he does this.

He goes around and defrauds other dealerships and does the same thing.

It's relevant because he has the power to go somewhere else

and do this to another dealership.

He didn't have to sign this agreement.

He read it. He signed it. It says what it says.

Finally, Defense Council said this was a one-year prohibition.

That is true, but it doesn't say that the damages that flow from that export

cannot go beyond the one year.

In fact, they have. They're just not ascertainable.

Thank you very much.

Okay. Submitted. Court is adjourned.
