Say when you're ready. All right. The matter before the court is State of New Hampshire versus Tristan Woluski. The state is represented by Attorney Peter Hinckley. Mr. Woluski is represented by Jay Rancor. Attorney Jay Rancor, I understand, Ms. Rancor, you have reserved two minutes. You may begin whenever you're ready.

Thank you. You may please the court. My name is Jay Rancor. I represent the appellant, Tristan Woluski, who is serving a life sentence for a conviction of first-degree murder.

What do we know about the murder of Mr. Wilkinson? We obviously know it was a very violent offense, but do we know how it occurred, even as we stand here today? And I would argue we do not. Why is that? Because even the state's theory of the case changed from before trial to trial to after trial.

And I point to evidence to support that, in that if you look in the addendum at the court's factual background in its orders pre-trial, the trial court reiterated the state's theory of the case.

And that's at my addendum, page 50. My page 50. I had not numbered it the right way, so you're page 58, just for reference.

And in that, the trial court stated, Woluski and Tatum then stabbed Wilkinson with knives, while Panette attacked him with the machete and later a knife.

So the theory leading into trial was that Tristan Woluski wielded a knife and actually stabbed Mr. Wilkinson.

Well, what happened at trial was pretty clear that the state's quote-unquote eyewitnesses did not corroborate that theory of defense.

But there's no dispute that your client tackled the victim and brought him to the ground. Even he acknowledged that when he testified, right?

Correct.

And he acknowledged that he was doing so in the course of effecting a robbery against the victim.

Correct.

That's so—that's not disputed.

It's not disputed that that was what—their intent going there was clearly to commit a robbery, that Mr. Woluski participated in the beginning of what he believed to be the planned robbery.

And what Mr. Woluski testified to was at the point when the attack happened, where the stabbing started to happen, the attacking with the machete, at that point, he didn't know—he no longer was restraining Mr. Wilkinson.

The testimony from—

But he was still participating in the crime.

Well, he participated in the robbery.

I would argue that once the robbery switched to a murder, where his co-defendants at that point started stabbing Mr. Wilkinson, Mr. Woluski's testimony was that at that point he was not participating.

But he participated in trying to cover it up, certainly.

Exposing of the body, texting the victim, even though the victim was in his trunk.

So that evidence could be construed by a jury to suggest that he knew exactly what he was doing throughout the course of this event.

It could have been construed by a jury in that way, but I would point the court to the fact that what the jury was presented with was no clear picture of how this had occurred from the time when they reached the end of the driveway.

That's not uncommon in a case in a three-person crime like this, that there would be three different versions, and they might change from week to week.

It might change from week to week, but I think the defendant needs to go into a trial knowing what he is defending against.

And that is the problem in this case, is that Mr. Woluski went into this trial, defense counsel went into this trial, as is every indication pre-trial, thinking the theory of the case is that Mr. Woluski wielded a knife and stabbed Mr. Wilkinson.

And you can see from the focus of the cross-examination of the two co-defendants that that was really the focus of the attack of their credibility, was you can't put a knife in his hand, and you can't establish that he stabbed the victim.

But witnesses change their testimony, not infrequently, and that's fodder for cross-examination, an argument to the jury, and the state doesn't get to choose who the witnesses are to a crime.

They have to use the witnesses that they have.

Correct. But one of the reasons why depositions are permitted pre-trial is to avoid unfair surprise.

And the unfair surprise in this case ended up being the theory of the case changed.

What reason do we have to think that depositions would clarify that?

Well, we don't have the deposition, so it's hard to say, but we do have pre-trial, we knew, the co-defendants' stories were evolving and changing constantly.

And what you didn't have, if you have a sworn deposition, you have the ability to say, you're under oath, you gave a statement, I asked you what happened at the end of the driveway, and you said this.

Do you really think it would have made a difference to these fellows?

Oh, I think it would have made a difference to the jury, because what these fellows were able to do, because there were no depositions, was basically disavow pre-trial statements.

Say, oh, as Mr. Tatum said in his testimony, oh, no, I told the police that, I told that to a law enforcement officer.

When? What law enforcement officer?

Oh, I don't really remember, I don't know when.

So the jury may have been left with an impression of, oh, yeah, he corrected that statement.

Whereas if it's a deposition, under oath, you swore to tell the truth, you signed this deposition, and you didn't say this, now you're saying that.

I know you weren't trial counsel, but was the theory argued to the jury that Mr. Woluski was an innocent bystander?

The theory, the defense theory argued to the trial was that Mr. Woluski, once it was clear to him that this planned robbery had turned into something much more violent and was going to be a murder,

that he was not a physical participant in that attack at that point.

He was no longer restraining Mr. Wilkinson, and he did not participate in the physical attack upon Mr. Wilkinson,

and not until it was over and Mr. Wilkinson was dead did he then cover up after the fact, which he admitted to.

I mean, there was a colloquy pre-trial where he admitted to those allegations, so that was really not in dispute at that time.

But I think the other thing that's important to note when we're talking about depositions is that it also permitted Mr. Panett,

who was, you know, relied on by the trial court to say, all right, Tatum, Mr. Tatum was clearly not credible and changed his story

and said he had memory problems and was all over the map.

But, you know, parts of Mr. Tatum's testimony were believable.

But even Mr. Panett at trial was able to offer new evidence that he had never testified to before,

which, again, created an unfair surprise for Mr. Wiluski and his counsel.

And that's the purposes for pre-trial depositions.

Well, isn't that fodder for the defense?

My understanding is that the city provided the defense with more than 12 hours of recorded interviews

and proffers and polygram examinations of Mr. Panett.

So if he's coming up with new evidence in the middle of trial, isn't that just more fodder for cross-examination?

Certainly there was a lot of fodder for cross-examination in this case,

but not the gravitas, I would argue, of a deposition, of a sworn testimony under oath

because it gave the co-defendants a lot of wiggle room.

Was he asked which times were you lying?

I believe they were asked which times they were lying many times during trial

because their testimonies had changed.

So, I mean, from day-to-day, moment-to-moment, their testimony was changing.

As far as Mr. Tatum was concerned, his testimony was changing from one question to the next in the courtroom.

So this case does create a somewhat unique circumstance, I think, for this court to look at.

I don't think the law necessarily is.

The law is founded on the issues, on the deposition issue and on the motion for new trial issue.

I think that what creates a difference for this court is that you have a trial court who looked at this case

in the motion for new trial and said,

okay, I will agree that a reasonable jury would not have relied upon one of the co-defendant eyewitnesses.

I mean, this is an individual who took the stand and testified for two days in a trial,

a significant witness that the state relied on to establish facts of this case,

that then you have a trial court saying,

okay, that person is not reliable, is not credible, so let's completely disavow that testimony.

Then we go to the second co-defendant and look at his testimony.

And then, again, you have a trial court who sat there and listened to the evidence and says,

okay, significant portions of his testimony are also incredible.

That is significant.

And the state really wants to gloss that over and say, well, okay,

we couldn't really establish our case through these two defendants,

but look at what the defendant did before and look at what the defendant did after.

And, you know, you still could have found him guilty.

That's a very different case presented to a jury than offering this testimony to the jury,

offering contradictory evidence to a jury, saying,

here's Mr. Panett's testimony and here's the medical examiner's testimony.

We, the state of New Hampshire, are offering you both of these testimonies.

But, again, they don't get to choose who the witnesses are.

I mean, the medical examiner is the medical examiner.

One of the co-defendants is one of the co-defendants.

The state puts forth the best case they can, and sometimes witnesses come from different places

and disagree with each other.

That happens all the time.

When the evidence offered by the state is completely contrary, they both cannot be true.

Either Mr. Panett was not telling the truth, he was offering false testimony,

or the medical examiner was not offering accurate information.

Well, one can be incorrect or mistaken without perjuring themselves.

Well, I mean, I think that's the state's argument, because that's the argument they have to make.

But when Mr. Panett was, Mr. Panett demonstrated the attack.

I mean, he stood in a courtroom and said that Mr. Woluski, wearing work boots, stomped with force on Mr. Wilkinson's head.

Was that offered in cross-examination and not in direct?

It was.

So the defense brought that evidence out.

You can't blame that on the state.

Well, the demonstration of it was brought out by the defense.

I believe Mr. Panett offered it in his direct testimony,

but then he was cross-examined about it more specifically.

And your client was brought as well, correct?

Yes, he did.

Yes.

So the trial court didn't buy the argument that Panett perjured himself.

How can we get behind that?

The trial court did not indicate that they found it to be perjury,

but the trial court did say that a reasonable jury would not find that testimony to be credible

in light of the testimony of the medical examiner.

I'm not sure how you get around the fact that the state knew that going into trial.

The state knew that testimony, the stomping on the head, was not new evidence.

That was not something that was changed from the pretrial statements.

They knew that going in, and they also knew what the medical examiner was going to say

regarding that injury and that they were not consistent.

And yet they still put Mr. Panett on the witness stand.

So is the state supposed to decide which of those witnesses they believe?

Isn't that what the jury should do?

You put forth the best evidence you can muster, and sometimes it's not fully aligned.

The state has a burden not to present testimony that they know is false.

But the court found that they didn't sworn perjury.

The state did not do that.

I understand that's the trial court's finding.

I think what Justice Bassett is asking, there are a number of factual decisions that we'd have to make

in order to reverse the trial court there.

That's not what we do.

I don't think that that's a fact.

That's not a factual issue, I don't believe.

I don't think those facts are in dispute.

The facts are that Mr. Panett said it.

The facts are that the state knew it going into trial.

The facts are that they knew the medical examiner was going to contradict that.

Which is in your purview is to say that that's presentation of false evidence as applied under the case law.

But witnesses disagree all the time, and that doesn't mean one of them commits perjury.

And I don't know of any precedent for us stepping in and finding that somebody's committed perjury

from where we're sitting in the process.

Well, I think it's different when it's unequivocal, as in some of Panett's testimony, for instance, was equivocal.

The stabbing in the stomach testimony was certainly equivocal, even though that was contrary to the medical examiner.

He equivocated.

Your bite is on.

You still have two minutes in rebuttal.

Well, thank you.

Sorry about that.

I know it's not invisible.

Thank you.

Sorry, I didn't notice.

Mr. Hinckley.

Good morning.

Peter Hinckley on behalf of the state, and I'll take questions at any point in time.

Mr. Hinckley, if you're comfortable.

Sorry, go ahead, Justice Dunivant.

If you're comfortable, you can take your mask off.

That's right.

Do you have a question?

No.

Okay.

Thank you.

Do you acknowledge our jurisprudence that the trial judge sits as a 13th juror in the context of this case?

Absolutely, and the judge here had ample evidence, including the defendant's own lies on the stand,

to establish the guilt of first-degree murder beyond a reasonable doubt.

I heard from counsel an apparently new argument that was not recent or brief with respect to depositions,

and that depositions were warranted to avoid unfair surprise because the state's theory of the case had changed.

That certainly was never asserted by trial counsel below,

and I don't believe that counsel raised that in her brief on appeal.

But even if she did, that certainly was not the case that the state's theory had changed.

The defendant was always charged as an accomplice to first-degree murder,

and the state went into this case under the theory that he was an accomplice to first-degree murder.

With respect to the evidence of his guilt of murder, the jurors could have credited Mr. Tatum's testimony that he saw the defendant stab the victim,

which in Mr. Tatum's testimony in large part was corroborated by the defendant himself when he testified.

There was only a small portion of events, certainly the most important portion with respect to the murder charge,

that the defendant did not dispute when he himself testified to.

But the jurors could have credited Mr. Tatum's testimony that the defendant stabbed, or he saw the defendant stab the victim.

I thought that was Panett.

Was it Tatum or Panett that testified to that fact?

Mr. Tatum testified that he saw the defendant stab the victim.

Mr. Panett testified that as of the time of trial,

he could not accurately say that he saw the defendant stab the victim.

The jurors could have accepted Mr. Panett's testimony and all the other evidence in the case

that the defendant was not a mere bystander and was an active participant in the deadly attack on the victim.

With all that the defendant did in terms of the conspiracy to commit robbery,

he brought a weapon to the crime.

He acknowledged that they discussed the use of knives in the car,

although he implausibly testified that it was the other two and he just put that aside.

He admitted that he lured the victim out of his house with the purpose to commit violent robbery against him.

The weapon he brought was a knife, correct?

Excuse me?

The weapon that he brought was a knife.

Correct.

But neither of the witnesses could put the knife in his hand.

Mr. Panett testified that he saw the defendant with the knife at the time of the deadly attack on the victim,

and Mr. Panett was the one who said that he saw the defendant holding the victim down while he and Mr. Tatum stabbed the victim to death.

The defendant himself acknowledged not only that he initiated the robbery by violently taking down the victim,

he corroborated Mr. Panett's account that while the victim was trying to get up,

he held him down while Mr. Panett was striking at his legs with a machete.

So again, most of the testimony of Panett and Tatum was corroborated by the defendant himself,

and the jurors could have decided that he acted as a principal and actually participated by stabbing the victim,

or that he acted as an accomplice by holding the victim down as he tried to free himself during that deadly struggle

in which the other two stabbed him.

So, and that was the theory of the case wrote.

It never changed, and with respect to this argument that depositions were needed for that,

again, it's my understanding, I don't recall the defense making that even on their appellate brief.

With respect to the arguments that they actually made with respect to depositions,

the arguments that were raised were first, there was an absence of information.

That certainly was not the case here.

As Your Honor pointed out, we provided the defense with hours upon hours of reported interviews

which were also transcribed by the defense.

They used that effectively at trial to zealously advocate on behalf of Mr. Willisky.

The defense had a written memorandum of agreement with respect to those two witnesses.

Although the defense on appeal claims, as they did below, that there was an absence of information,

what I have yet to hear from the defense is what information was lacking.

What exactly is the absence of information here that required depositions?

The counsel pointed to a quote from trial counsel.

None of the police reports or statements of the attorney general's office

delve into the deep and burning questions that the jury eventually will have to answer.

Whether the informant's own interests and outcome of the case

are prejudiced against the defendant weighs in the testimony of the informant.

I frankly don't know what that means in terms of lack of evidence

for trial counsel to impeach these witnesses.

The same could be said of any witnesses in terms of their subjectives, beliefs, or expectations

in testifying.

And this is purpose of cross-examination, which again, trial counsel used effectively at trial

to impeach Tatum and Pannett.

With respect to the second ground for deposition noted by the defense was inconsistency in accounts.

Well, the defense at trial wanted inconsistencies in accounts between Pannett and Tatum,

and they used the inconsistencies effectively in asserting a strong defense on behalf of their client.

What I have yet to hear from the defense, and the onus is on them,

is to explain why inconsistencies necessitated a deposition in this particular case.

They have yet to articulate that, and it clearly wasn't articulated to the court below.

The third ground for deposition that was argued below and on appeal

was unequal access to the two informants, Mr. Pannett and Mr. Tatum.

Well, this case is no different than any other case in that respect.

And regardless of inequity to access to the witnesses,

there was absolutely no inequity to access to information.

When new information came to light and the limited interactions that the prosecutors had

with those two witnesses, we immediately brought it to the attention of the defense

by way of Zwicker disclosure, including when Mr. Tatum brought up for the first time

during a routine trial prep meeting that he had discussed with the defendant,

his involvement in prior robbery.

So these witnesses, as my understanding, were subjected to two polygraphs, one by each party?

No, that's incorrect.

What happened was that they were subjected to a polygraph examination

by somebody from state police, and the results of that were not passing.

I think it's deceptive, non-deceptive, or can't determine.

The results of the polygraph, again, in a miscible trial,

but the results were that they were non-deceptive.

And then the defense retained an expert who did not conduct an independent polygraph,

but reviewed the test results and paperwork that were conducted by the state examiner,

and he came to a different conclusion.

Which was, they were deceptive?

That they were deceptive, and the defense tried to introduce that at trial.

We filed a motion.

The judge appropriately denied that evidence, which is clearly admissible on a new trial.

So who elicited the testimony from Mr. Panett with respect to the stomping of the victim?

That testimony was brought up on direct examination,

and then cross-examination was when the illustration was brought up,

and he was asked to demonstrate for the jury how hard it happened.

With respect to that, as I think many of your honors have questioned counsel about,

inconsistencies and contradictions in a witness testimony does not perjury made.

If that was the case, then frankly, any case, a lawyer would be suborning perjury on either side.

In this case, frankly, it was no different in terms of inconsistencies and contradictions.

What would have been suborning perjury?

If we had told Panett, hey, testify that you did not see the defendant stomping the victim in the head area.

That would have been suborning perjury.

Because it's inconsistent with the medical examiner's testimony.

It clearly, yeah, that would have been consistent.

Panett testified to what he believed he saw, and it was our duty to present that.

We could have also not presented that and be accused of hiding contradictory evidence from the juries.

We brought it out.

It was not suborning of perjury.

It was that's what he believed, whether or not it was accurate or not.

And with respect to perjury, I find it hard to believe that Panett would have purged himself on that matter.

It certainly did not exculpate him from the crime of murder.

And it didn't inculpate the defendant in the homicidal acts, which were stabbing and slashing the machete.

So why would Panett lie about that?

We certainly did present that for the jurors to evaluate for their own, which is, frankly, what we should be doing in that trial.

Right.

So it didn't affect the outcome of the trial?

Because, if anything, it diminished his credibility.

Exactly.

It was the defense was able to use that to their benefit to further add on to the inconsistencies and contradictions.

And it was a primary focus of their cross-examination of the medical examiner and of their summation and of their brief on appeal.

The jurors certainly had all that information.

They also had a wealth of information upon which, and the judge did as well, to determine that that verdict of first-degree murder was not against the weight of the evidence.

Unless the court has any further questions, I'll rely on you.

I do have one question.

And just, I was curious, on page 21 of your brief, where you're talking about consciousness of guilt and the actions the defendant took after this incident.

It talks about the defendant's testimony at trial and professing of a lack of involvement in the killing.

And then it says, the defendant's in trial denials were yet more evidence of his consciousness of guilt.

And I just didn't follow why his denial at trial was an evidence of consciousness of guilt.

It just seems to me like the jurors could have reasonably seen that this was just another in the lengthy steps that the defendant took to try to absolve himself of the murder, which he clearly participated in.

And from the very get-go, and then his attempts to hide his involvement in the crime immediately after it occurred.

And then once he was arrested, trying to pass blame onto Panette, solely on Panette, not Tatum and Panette, solely on Panette.

And then after his indictment, he sought to sway the testimony of those two witnesses through a friend and suborn perjury from those two witnesses, frankly, or to get them not to testify at trial.

It just seems like a reasonable juror could have just seen his testimony as yet another step at him trying to evade responsibility as he had done so ab initio when he text messaged the victim who was dead and bleeding in the trunk of the car minutes after that crime occurred.

Unless the court has any further questions, I'll rely on my brief and ask that the judgment be affirmed.

Thank you.

Thank you, counsel.

Ms. Rancourt?

Thank you, Your Honor.

I just wanted to make a few additional points.

First, there were differences between other facts, not just the facts of the stabbing and who was holding down and whatnot.

There was also disagreements about facts leading up to this, such as did Mr. Woluski have a knife on him or did he leave it in the car?

Or did he know that there were other weapons in the car?

The trial court's findings in the decision on the motion for new trial found that the evidence at trial demonstrated that the machete specifically was in the trunk of Panette's vehicle leading up to the arrival at Mr. Wilkinson's house.

The state argues in its brief that it's in the back seat and that therefore it was incredible for Mr. Woluski to say that he didn't know that the weapon was there.

But that's not even what the trial court found, sitting and listening to the evidence.

Also, whether or not Mr. Woluski had ever taken his knife out of the car or had it on his person was also a fact in dispute, and the witnesses were not in agreement.

There was also evidence that the three defendants drove around for quite a while in an automobile before this incident occurred.

What was the nature of that testimony?

What were they talking about?

There was agreement that they had discussed the nature of the robbery and how it was to occur, but they did differ on some facts, I would say.

Not total agreement of how it was going to happen, how they were going to approach the house and get him out and, you know, would his dad see them and things like that.

I would say they were not solidly in agreement on that.

There was some differentiation in the testimony on that.

Also, just wanted to point out that the state said that Mr. Woluski agreed that he was holding Mr. Wilkinson down when he was struck by the machete.

Mr. Woluski's testimony, just to be clear, was that he was holding down Mr. Wilkinson when Mr. Panett began to strike Mr. Wilkinson with the machete,

which is the point in which he got off of Mr. Wilkinson's back and did no longer hold him down at that point once he realized that Mr. Panett was armed and violently attacking Mr. Wilkinson.

But the jury was free to find that credible or not, that testimony, right, from your client?

That's correct.

We took some of your two minutes.

Could you wrap up?

Thank you.

I apologize for taking some of your two minutes.

No, no, it's fine.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you, counsel.

Very ably argued and briefed.

Case submitted.

Course in recess.

Thank you.
