This is case 2016-0313, state of New Hampshire versus Ernest Justin Blanchett.

Good morning. May it please the court. My name is Brad Davis. I represent Ernest Justin Blanchett in this case.

And I do waive my uninterrupted time if you have questions.

Ernest Justin Blanchett was a sergeant with the Belknap County Sheriff's Department at the time that he

transported an inmate to the New Hampshire state prison for women.

The order from the Superior Court boils down to this.

A reasonable trier of fact could find the defendant was employed by the New Hampshire State Prison for Women to carry out the task of transporting and delivering BH an inmate.

As the agent employed for this task by the New Hampshire State Prison for Women, he had a direct disciplinary and supervisory position over BH.

Would you mind if I skipped around because I recognize that to be perhaps the most concrete issue?

It is.

As to number three, sufficiency of the evidence, why isn't the testimony on page 26, I don't mean for you to read it, by the victim that, to the effect that quote, he has like control over me?

You're familiar with that paragraph in that line?

I am.

Yes. Why isn't that sufficient for purposes of coercion?

On coercion?

For a jury to find.

Yeah, I think what I was arguing in the case in the book of the cross examination was there was a degree of consent.

In our position, in fact, that, you know, her determining the location of where she wanted the officer to take her with her comments or her admission that she was leading him on.

Well, she was a quid pro quo at play, though.

She may have been leading him on, but she had intentions to get something in return.

I guess that's according to her testimony.

Right. And the jury could have believed her.

As to coercion they could have, they certainly are entitled to take, you know, that one small piece of evidence and determine that that was enough.

I'm sorry I distracted you, but thank you for your answers.

And again, on the threshold issue is the order of the Superior Court is really saying that a sheriff is employed by the New Hampshire State Prison for Women in this particular case.

That's important because the court took judicial notice at the state's request that in fact that this inmate was part of the New Hampshire State Prison at the time of the transport in July of 2015.

That's the transport of which Deputy Blanchette was charged.

That was requested by the state.

I did not object to that.

And the jury was instructed that the court was taking judicial notice.

She was a state prison inmate.

Well, what's wrong with the state's argument that there are a number of ways one could define employed by and use for a particular task is one of those ways.

And so I'm thinking, well, okay, I employ my broom to sweep my floor, but I don't pay it.

So isn't this sort of roughly analogous to that?

It differs because the term agent.

And initially, the Superior Court said, isn't he an agent of the state prison, which is I think what the judge was indicating in that order.

But that would be incorrect because if he's an agent of anybody, he's an agent of the court.

And that's by statute because once they're committed, it's the court that directs the sheriff to transport the individual.

So the basis for your position is 622.8?

That's correct.

That's correct.

Because the statutes do lay out.

There is a difference between a sheriff and a correctional officer.

You're right.

It is the direction of the court, but it is an executive branch function from the moment it begins, correct?

It would be, yes.

Because the sheriffs are actual law enforcement officers.

Distinctly different than a correctional officer who's employed within the county facilities and within the state prison.

And they all have separate statutes as far as the sheriff's department, county correctional facilities and state prisons.

The legislative intent, I think they clearly chose the term employed by the correctional institution.

That was suggested by the attorney general's office, Anne Rice at the time, in the legislative history.

But then wouldn't it subtract from the control that a deputy sheriff might have over an inmate going or coming to or from anywhere?

It wouldn't, because certainly a sheriff has the powers of arrest to prevent escape,

things of that nature, and would have immediate control, but not direct.

Can I walk you back a little bit?

If memory serves, one or more of these incidents occurred after transport to a dental appointment, is that correct?

That's correct.

That would be at the direction of the court, would it?

I'm sorry?

That would not be at the direction of the court.

That would not.

That wasn't a charged act, was it?

It was not.

There currently is an indictment on the Belknap County transport that is pending awaiting this court's determination.

That was prior.

That was in September of 2014.

He was charged with a transport in July of 2015.

And that was evidence that was determined to be admissible in the Superior Court, which is one of the issues I raise under a 404B analysis that it was highly prejudicial.

So is it your position in terms of employed by that the answer is just let's look at the W2 and see who pays?

No.

I think it's, well, the plain and ordinary meaning of the term employed by would be if you're performing a task for some sort of consideration,

whether that's pay or something of that nature, but the corrections institution, the facilities, the place, they don't direct the sheriffs.

They don't govern their pay.

They don't set their hours.

They don't provide their equipment.

It's completely separate and distinct from the superintendent of the jail or the warden of the state prison.

They're very different.

But they're used for a purpose that the jail has.

They are used for that purpose.

And it's interesting because under statute, the jail can actually take correctional officers, line officers, and use them as custody transport officers.

So that's actually under RSA 30-B.

So they have the option of taking their own employees and using them for transport officers, but they don't do that.

They choose to ask the sheriff's department to do transports.

Is there another section of the statute, the sexual assault statute?

Let's assume we agreed with you.

Is there another section of the statute that would capture this conduct?

Another sort of official capacity kind of section that would cover this?

Not specifically to police officers and sheriffs.

There's other statutes that deal with doctors and patients or lawyers and clients, things like that, that are specifically addressed.

But the legislature didn't specifically address a consensual sexual encounter between police officer, sheriff, and a person that they're transporting.

It'd be very, very easy for the legislature to include that.

And in fact, the superior court did indicate that the legislature needs to address this,

just before Judge Abramson had to do the best she could with interpreting this case.

Well, as a matter of common sense and public policy, why should the level of protection for

the inmate turn on who happens to be paying whom for the transport?

Well, the answer is because the legislature decided that it's the people that have extreme control over the inmates,

the people that have the day-to-day interaction.

You're not arguing that the deputy didn't have control over the inmate during the transport, are you?

He didn't have direct supervision over her.

Sure he did. If she let her out of his sight, that was going to be a problem.

That would be immediate authority. The reason I'm distinguishing the word direct

is because there's testimony exactly on point, page 82.

Here's the question that was Attorney General Anne Rice was addressing.

If a person is a state prison inmate, a correctional officer from Stratford County

wouldn't have supervisory authority over that inmate.

It's on the middle of page 82 of the index.

So they looked at some of these.

Well, they wouldn't if the personnel at the House of Correction

didn't have the inmate in the House of Correction, of course they wouldn't, at that point,

have supervisory authority over the inmate, would they?

They would not.

And who does? The deputy sheriff who's doing the transport.

Under the statute, according to this legislative interpretation, no, we wouldn't

because they didn't want to capture those outside facilities.

When the inmate is in the cruiser with the deputy,

who has supervisory authority over her?

It would be whichever facility she has housed at.

He or she has housed at whether that be the county facility or the state prison

because they have the full disciplinary authority as far as, you know,

locking an inmate down, taking away privileges within the facility.

Things of that nature, a sheriff can't.

All he or she can do is prevent the escape.

Just make sure they get from point A to point B.

And certainly affirming this conviction would turn sheriffs into correctional officers.

However, a local police officer, say here in Concord, goes over to the jail in Bosco

and to pick up someone for an arraignment and drive them to the courthouse would not.

In other words, it seems to me that what you're really saying is that the legislature

made this statute narrower than it had to be.

For example, if the statute had simply said under element B that, you know,

in A it says defendant engaged in sexual penetration and B that he was in a position

of authority over her where he had direct supervisory and disciplinary authority over BH.

If it just ended there, then it would seem to me, as the chief just pointed out,

no question that that would be true and that your client would be captured.

But it goes on to say what could be viewed as a limitation by virtue

of being incarcerated in a correctional institution where the defendant was employed.

Correct. They specifically added that language.

So to the state's point then that employed can mean use, this deputy is being used, right?

Well, he's being used by the jail for the purpose of the transport.

That's my point. So isn't he being employed by the jail for the purpose of the transport?

He is not. He is not being employed by the jail at that time.

Because the jail isn't paying him, but you earlier in response to Justice Bassett said,

no, getting paid isn't the lynchpin here.

Well, it's more broad than that as far as employed.

And again, the distinction is, is I think the legislature tells us what they meant by.

I can't imagine they wanted to carve out a transporting sheriff and let them run free.

If they intended to encompass it, it's a very simple solution,

which is to either include agents of or acting at the direction of the correctional institution,

anything like that, but they specifically chose employed that specific term.

And nothing in the legislative history discusses transport officers.

Nothing in there discusses sheriffs and police officers.

Everything is correctional officers dealing with the folks within the walls of the prison that have that control.

Again, and the testimony in page 83 is any correctional officer has extreme control over an inmate's life.

Well, why doesn't this sheriff have complete extreme control over the inmate's life when they're driving?

It's a brief moment in time.

Well, but it's pretty complete for that brief moment in time.

Isn't that really all that matters?

It is, but again, it's not direct.

It's immediate, but it's not direct.

There's a distinction.

How much more direct can it be?

There are two people in the car, correct, in the transport?

Right.

How much more direct can it be?

I'm using the definitions that the legislature came up with when they included the term direct.

It was significant to the legislature when that was included to focus on correctional officers.

And it's not that he has this immediate as a deputy sheriff, you know, powers of arrest over her,

but he can't change her life within the prison.

He can't get to the prison and say, you ought to give her some more time out of her cell

or she should have a cell alter herself.

She should be allowed to.

He can't extend any privilege to her on her day to day life within the prison.

But he did extend privileges to her by unshackling her and by giving her a cell phone and all.

And cigarettes, he did do that.

There's no question that he did those things during a transport,

but he can't extend any favors to her within the institution,

which is what the legislature was trying to add a criminal sanction to the policy

that correctional officers can engage in romantic relationships with those within the prisons

and the jails.

That's what they were trying to craft here.

They were careful to include the secure psychiatric unit and probation and parole officers

because they recognized that they may not be employed by the correctional institution,

so they specifically identified these places.

So a correctional institution, a secure psychiatric unit and a juvenile detention facility,

these are physical places where inmates are housed and kept.

They're not, you know, county sheriffs transporting someone.

That's what they were concerned about.

If they wanted to encompass and incorporate transport officers,

either take out where the actor is employed or add another section that describes

or those acting at the direction of the correctional institutions.

You know, there's many ways that they could have, but they didn't do that.

And we can't add things to the statute.

And the legislative history is clear that they weren't discussing sheriffs

and police officers in transport situations.

It was their concern was correctional officers within facilities,

engaging in these types of relationships.

And if I can move off that point, there was an issue that I had raised on sentencing

because, again, we had this Belknap County evidence that was admissible during the trial.

During sentencing, the judge indicated that she was considering the evidence

that she heard about a Belknap County transport, same individuals,

in fashioning her sentence.

And I believe that was in violation of the New Hampshire Constitution,

Part 1 Article 18, which is penalties need to be proportioned to the offenses.

And the concern there is, is like I said, in indictment in Belknap County,

if that activity was already considered in his sentence in Hillsborough County,

I'm concerned about, you know, being penalized twice for the same offense.

And I think that that could violate the Constitution.

Thank you.

Thank you.

May it please the court, Elizabeth Woodcock, for the State of New Hampshire.

I think that one of the things that was just said was that the legislature could

add or those acting at the direction of the correctional institution.

And I think that goes back to Chief Justice Salinas's point about employing your room.

The deputy sheriff in this particular case was acting at the direction of the correctional institution.

And what are the facts that support that statement, as opposed to just the operation

of the statute?

What are the facts and the record here?

He transported the victim a number of different times at the direction

of the House of Corrections.

Each time he was bringing her to the dentist or to sentencing, he was acting at their direction.

And how was that direction conveyed?

Is there something in the record about who asked whom or is there a letter or a call?

Or what's the state of the record?

I think it's a logical conclusion.

She talked about him being employed by the sheriff's department,

that the sheriff's department was next door to the jail,

that each time she was transported by him, that he was doing things, it was clear that he wasn't.

Who is she, is she the victim?

Yes.

So who issues the transport order?

I've forgotten.

I'm not sure that that's part of the record.

I think in the case of the dentist's office, it would have been the jail.

I think that probably when transport order is issued, it's issued by the court to the jail.

But there has to be something from the jail to the sheriff's department.

Because otherwise, what is he doing?

He's just showing up.

I guess we're speculating, but this is something that is the subject, as you know, 240 years of custom.

So I can understand why it wouldn't come out.

Right, it's almost like trying to prove the obvious.

He wouldn't just show up and take a prisoner to a dentist appointment.

How would he know that the appointment exists?

I guess the thing I have some trouble with, I mean, there's no question that you have a good argument that the statute should cover this.

But really, isn't the question whether the legislature did?

In other words, the fact that this conduct should be prohibited doesn't answer the question of whether the legislature did prohibit it.

And I guess I do have some trouble with the idea of the use of the term employed.

I mean, I agree that the employed can have other meanings, but in the context of the wording of the statute,

it does seem to indicate that what they meant by employed was your work there.

Well, I'm not so sure that I entirely agree with you.

Because the House of Corrections or the state prison has people being moved all the time for various court hearings and things of that sort.

And if they are asking someone to move the person and that person has certain specific responsibilities,

part of the legislative history of this is not just employed by it's that the person has supervisory responsibilities and also undertakes a certain responsibility in being.

But you see that's, as I said before, if the legislature wanted to capture anybody that has supervisory authority over a prisoner,

they could have done that very easily by sort of ending the statute, as I pointed out earlier, when asking a question of your opponent.

But they then sort of limited by it's not anybody that has supervisory authority over a prisoner,

it's somebody who has that authority by virtue of the person being incarcerated in an intercorrectional institution where the defendant was employed.

I think that they wanted not to address, I admit that the statute could be more clearly written.

But I think that what they wanted to address was this hypothetical of the probation officer who has no direct supervisory authority over the person.

It's hard to imagine a situation in which someone has more direct supervisory authority over somebody if they're shackled in a car alone with the person.

And I think that when you think about what the concern was that the legislature was thinking about,

was that the person has no ability to consent really to this sexual encounter.

Because the person doesn't have any ability to make decisions for himself or herself.

I guess what I said before, you don't have to convince me that the statute should cover this.

I guess my question is whether it does.

And I mean, if the legislature meant employed to be used not in sort of an employer employee term,

but as the chief pointed out in another, you can employ something without the employer employee.

Isn't it more likely that they would have used other land, they would have said,

employed by or acting at the direction of a correctional institution or acting under the authority of a correctional institution?

They could have added those words, but in my view I think it would be redundant.

Because I think that the concept of employee includes acting at the direction of.

And this is particularly true when you look at the common law here in New Hampshire,

which and in the United States it says one of the duties of sheriffs is to transport prisoners.

The way that the law knits together in this particular instance is that this man was acting at the direction of.

He was employed by the Belknap County House of Corrections.

Let me ask you, what is the evidence that he was doing this at the direction of the House of Corrections?

It seems to me to run counter to the judicial notice that the state asked the court to take under 622-8,

which just says that this happens at the order of the court.

That's the tension I see, I don't get it.

There is a tension I will admit in my view of this in a certain sense because of course the statute says that once somebody is sentenced to the Department of Corrections,

they're an inmate and that makes them somehow kind of the responsibility I suppose of the Department of Corrections.

The problem with that is that she's sentenced but she's still in the courthouse.

She's still under the control of the people who have directed this man to transport her.

Now you can say well that's the direction of the court but it isn't really, once the person is sentenced, the court is no longer really kind of responsible for them.

So you have a situation in which the defendant has transported her to be sentenced and then the entire criminal liability,

certain argument is that the entire criminal liability changes simply because the court has imposed sentence and that doesn't make any sense.

If it was criminal for him to have sex with her when he was bringing her to the dentist,

it was criminal for him to have sex with her if he was bringing her to the New Hampshire State Prison for Women.

I understand that argument, it just seems a little counter to 622-8, which the state put forward below.

I understand that and I think that part of that was that they were trying to explain the status in a certain sense of the victim.

But I don't think that that's necessary, it wasn't part of the jury instructions, it's not part of the indictment.

The issue is not kind of who, which specific body has responsibility for this person.

In a certain sense it's, is this defendant acting at the direction of the correctional institution?

And I think if, whether you decide that she was under the custody of the New Hampshire State Prison for Women or

the Belknap County House of Corrections, he's still acting at the direction of the correctional institution.

And we don't know here, what's the record as to who directed this to happen?

There is nothing in the record about that, right?

I think the only thing that is there, they talk about him having responsibility for

transporting prisoners, something of that sort.

And then there is the common sense, just as fast, it's really what it boils down to.

If I showed up at the House of Corrections and said, I want to take so and so to a dentist appointment,

they would say, thank you very much, Ms. Woodcock, the door is over there.

Well, what we know for sure is that the court doesn't schedule inmates' dentist appointments.

No.

And the inmate becomes the property of the executive branch as soon as she gets convicted and sentenced.

So it can't be the court.

So what Justice Bassett points out is, has some resonance here because the court doesn't order any of this

once the person is sentenced?

Correct.

The person, if you knit together, as I say, the common law behind this, which is sheriffs transport prisoners,

and you add in all of the information that you have before the court,

the only logical conclusion about all of this.

And juries are allowed to draw conclusions.

They're allowed to look at the evidence and determine.

The only logical conclusion is that he's acting when he brings her there at the direction of the Belknap County House of Corrections.

If this court decides that after she's sentenced, he's acting at the direction of the Department of Corrections,

then the end result is the same because he's acting at the direction.

He's employed by the correctional institution.

Can you just clarify, am I correct that the conduct here that gives rise to this charge is the transport to the prison?

Correct.

And the dental appointments aren't part of the charged act.

They were entered in evidence, but they weren't charged here.

That's correct.

They occurred in a different county.

So they were charged.

That's the other charge that was referred to earlier is a different matter.

I see my yellow light is on.

If the court has no further questions for me, I would ask that the case be submitted.

Thank you, case submitted.

Council may come forward in the.
