This is case 20170050 in the matter of Katharine Goslin and Heath Goslin.

May it please the court.

My name is Jack Coutters and I represent Katharine Page, formerly Katharine Goslin.

This was a divorce case, the parties got divorced in 2010.

And since that time, there were fairly complicated procedural history.

There was numerous hearings on support, numerous motions to discover your quest,

typical divorce sort of things.

Then in November 2014, the trial court issued a support order.

Mr. Goslin was supposed to pay support.

They reduced his support by 25%.

There was some confusion, some conflicting statements on the record about whether or

not that was a final hearing.

This court said that that was improper and bumped it back down to the trial court.

The trial court then held a new hearing in 2015.

And at that hearing, they completely reversed all support payments that had been made from July of 2012 to July of 2014.

And ordered Ms. Page to repay Mr. Goslin for that amount.

Now, the judge correctly found that this was not justified by the child support guidelines,

but and this is where we differ, found that it was justified based on 458C5J,

which is the special circumstances.

Specifically relating to Ms. Page's then fiance, now husband,

who was contributing mortgage payments.

Now, that finding guidelines aside simply was not supported by the evidence.

It doesn't appear to be disputed that there was no mortgage payments or

escrow payments being made between July 2012 and July 2013,

which is when Ms. Page was in bankruptcy proceedings.

Now the court-

Can I jump to, am I correct that while this case was going,

while Mr. Goslin was paying support during the years this case was going on,

Ms. Page was paying the child's expenses?

Yes, that's true, Your Honor.

Ms. Page was paying the child's expenses.

I think there's some dispute as to exactly how much all the parties were paying, but

Ms. Page certainly was paying the vast majority of the expenses.

And there were some statements from the court which led her to believe that that was a requirement while she was paying the child support.

That was the requirement as the recipient of the child support.

Yes, Your Honor.

And so when the retroactive calculation was made,

were those expenses offset or allocated in any way?

They were not, Your Honor.

And I would note that it would be difficult to do so this many years in advance.

I mean, obviously when you're paying for the child's needs, it's not a big lump sum payment that's easy to calculate.

It's the everyday expenses.

What relief are you requesting?

Well, Your Honor, we think it needs to be bumped down to the trial court for

a hearing on when support was made and whether or not this support fits with the guidelines.

This court requires in Gordon and Barrett that anything that differs from the guidelines

be justified with a more than a terse explanation as to why the guidelines are being violated.

Now, here, there is half a paragraph in which the trial court found that a fiancé

contributes the necessary expenses to her household totaling $3,000 per month towards mortgage and

escrow as well as fuel oil.

Now, that is simply not supported by the evidence when it's not disagreed to that for more than half of that period.

There was no mortgage payments being made.

So if a special circumstance is justified by someone else paying your mortgage,

that mortgage isn't being paid, then it's not justified.

Now, if the trial court wishes to order something under C5J for special circumstances,

they need to give an explanation as to when mortgage payments started and how long they went on for in order to justify this repayment.

More than that, if the trial court is going to apply a specific number under C5J,

then they should apply that to the child support guidelines.

Simply deciding with very limited explanation that all support for a period of time should be repaid is not supported by 458 and it's not just.

Did the court consider C5H?

I'm not sure, Your Honor.

I'd have to go back and look.

In terms of whether there was agreement for variable expenses,

whether the, I guess, the de facto shared custody reduced your client's fixed expenses.

Was there any discussion of any of that?

I believe there was, Your Honor.

The court did find that Mr. Goslin had the child for 40 something percent of the time,

looked into the various payments being made, so I do believe that that was considered.

However, I don't believe that the outcome was just given the circumstances.

Thank you, Council.

Thank you, Your Honors.

Good morning, Your Honors.

My name is Attorney Melanie Bell.

I'm here representing Heath Goslin.

I have been involved in this case since 2013.

The only attorney who is still involved, Miss Page, has been through three attorneys and

we are on our third judge and second trip to the Supreme Court.

Over a case that should have been very simple and decided in 2012,

when my client followed the proper procedure to modify the petition for

custody and child support based on the fact that they had shared parenting arrangements.

They had similar incomes.

Did your client, again, while he was paying support,

was Miss Page responsible for all the child's expenses?

Not at all, Your Honor.

And in fact, in the temporary order issued in August 2014,

the court made a very specific finding that there was each party paid equally in this expenses for the children.

So that statement that she was paying the expenses is simply not true.

Well, expenses for the child when the child was with that party, right?

And extracurricular expenses.

Each party had been equally responsible.

There was a specific finding in the court's order of 2014, which is included in the appendix.

2014.

Yes, and that was the temporary order that we had appealed.

Based on the court's decision to reduce the child support by 25%.

And his failure to really consider this $3,000 a month in additional income that Miss Page has been receiving all along.

I'm not clear why we're even discussing whether the mortgage payment is relevant here, that's her household expense.

My client pays a rent, they both have those expenses.

Under the order prior to this court's remand, she was receiving $3,000 in support from her spouse.

She had an income of $3,000 and was getting child support on top of that for almost $7,000 a month in income.

My client- Was she receiving the funds from her fiance spouse in kind or in cash?

I believe it was shared expenses as much as anything.

I have no direct knowledge as to how that was made, but those contributions.

She used those in her bankruptcy proceeding in order to refinance the house.

Every court, but the family court, she has asked that that income be considered for her benefit.

I think it's grossly unjust to say it's okay in this court, but we're not going to consider it for child support purposes.

With the prior order-

It could be considered, but didn't the trial court take a meat cleaver approach when it just completely rescinded the retroactively the child support obligation?

I don't think so at all, Your Honor.

I mean, it had been reduced by 25% already.

We have shared custody, okay?

These are people who have the child 50% of the time each.

Right, but the statute doesn't allow you to modify child support solely on the basis of shared custody.

Right?

Absolutely, but that is why the court instead relied on paragraph J,

which provides that you can make a modification to avoid a confiscatory order, and that would be the case here.

That's how it would be able to only support his child on $2,300 a month after paying support to the mother.

She was getting $7,000 a month.

How is that providing for the best interests of the children when they're both paying expenses?

They both paid extracurricular expenses, that's all notated in the first order from this court.

This has been up and around, and the reason this case has been so protracted, honestly,

is because a constant desire to keep that support going for her sole interest.

And I don't think that's what child support was meant for.

It's for the best interests of the child, not to enrich the spouse.

And that's what was happening here, until finally the court took proper consideration and

made an order that was fair and reasonable and in the best interest of all.

Was your client able to, well, your client was able to pay the support during the pendency of this case?

Yes and no.

He had to live in very modest surroundings.

He wasn't able to get what he normally would be able to get.

Certainly it was, it's just unfair.

She, again, but it's about the, you know, what's best for the child.

She was living in, and is, continuing to live in a four bedroom home,

on which he's still on the mortgage because she hasn't removed him from that mortgage.

She has just benefited from drawing this case out.

It's all pretty well explained in my brief.

But if you have any further questions, I think it's abuse of discretion standard.

The court is in the best position to make those decisions.

So absent and abuse of discretion here,

I think this court must uphold the lower court finding.

Thank you, council.

Thank you.

Case submitted.
