This is Case 2017, 0487, In Ray Simon, Garzinski, Irrevocable Trust.

And the record should reflect that Justice Hicks is disqualified from this matter.

Council.

Good morning, Your Honor. May it please the Court, I'm Dorian Connor and I represent Michael Garzinski.

We are here today to ask this Court to reverse the probate court order and allow Mr. Garzinski,

a reasonable period of time to complete the closing on his family home because the trustee

prevented him from closing prematurely during a six-day timeframe that ran from December 17, 2016 to December 23.

Didn't your client have a reasonable time to close on the property when the Court first ordered that he had 60 days to

prepare the closing documents, get the check, and get it done?

No, Your Honor, because the closing, according to the probate court, could and should have taken place up until December 23,

and yet the trustee refused to allow that to happen, cutting his time to close short by six days.

And when the trustee made that decision on Friday, December 16, at 4.59 in the afternoon, the trustee was aware that

Mr. Garzinski's attorney, the following day on Saturday the 17th, was headed to Florida on a pre-planned family vacation.

The trustee should have known when she set that deadline that the 60 days actually expired six days later,

and she should have been aware that the court order with respect to closings anticipated the possibility of an extension by agreement.

And Attorney Kennedy, in his offer of proof, indicated that if at any time the trustee had said the drop deadline is December 23,

as opposed to the 17th, he would have made arrangements.

So why didn't your client file a motion of the court asking for an extension if they couldn't get one by agreement, prior to January?

Because the trustee had already decided on the 17th that the closing could not occur.

The trustee wrote a letter on the 16th indicating that the deadline would close by the 17th and then followed up on December 22 by saying,

your client failed to close, he has lost his right to purchase.

This is one day before his timetable should, in fact, have closed.

Right, but there was no motion filed with the court until January, I believe, 11th of the following year, right?

That is correct.

So why didn't your client file a motion with the court before the deadline expired?

My client shouldn't have had to file any motion because he should have been allowed to close up to the 23rd.

Was he prepared to close on the 23rd?

Yes, Your Honor.

At that point in time, as of December 17, my client, or Attorney Kennedy, had in his possession a certified bank check in the correct amount of purchase price.

But not made to the right party.

That is correct, but the importance, Your Honor, of having a certified bank check is the fact that we know the funds were there.

So if the funds are there, then certainly the bank is going to be willing to amend the payee to be addressed to the irrevocable trust as opposed to the revocable trust.

That would have been a simple matter for St. Mary's Bank and Manchester to deal with.

Was there ever a revocable trust that became irrevocable in this whole matter?

That I'm not aware of that predated this litigation, I'm sorry to say.

So on December 17th, now we're still a number of days away from December 23rd.

The closing date, we have a bank check, we have a check for the prorated closing cost, and we have a deed that is acceptable to the trustee.

On the 15th, it said, quote, there were very minor details that needed to be addressed, adding a middle initial, changing the word grant to grants.

So it was pluralized, and in addition to the numerical designation of the consideration, also putting it in words.

Ms. Donner, it seems to me your argument hinges on our acceptance of December 23rd as the closing date.

Is that right, rather than the 18th or the 16th?

That is correct, Your Honor.

We've made an alternative argument as well that there had been a motion to reconsider filed by James Gershinsky,

because he was upset about the court order with regard to the time allowed for his relocation.

And as alternative ground, we have asserted that the 60-day timeframe should start from when the court decided the motion to reconsider.

That would push it out into January.

Correct, Your Honor.

So what sort of level of deference do we owe to the probate court in regard to its determination that the date actually began to run on the 24th of October?

Do we owe any deference to that, or should we examine that de novo?

If you are talking about the argument that the trustee made in the brief for the first time that was not in a cross-notice of appeal,

that in fact the probate court aired, and the closing date should have been the 17th as opposed to the 23rd,

that is not an issue which this court should address.

It has very well settled law before this court that it will not consider issues that have not been presented by a cross-issue of appeal.

I certainly haven't had an opportunity to address that because it was not in the notice of appeal.

And I would point the court to both the Argonaut case and Codswell v. Tower in which attempts were made to raise issues that were not in the notice of appeal.

And this court said, no, we're not going to do that.

And in fact the lower court didn't have an opportunity really to litigate that issue.

So it would be inappropriate to reach that issue.

On the merits, I think it's pretty clear that the 60 days runs from the clerk's notice unless there's going to be some sort of extraordinary notice within the order itself.

Occasionally notices will contain other language to put you on notice.

But if you are going to have 60 days from the date that Judge signs it in chambers, you actually have less time because you're not aware it's being signed in chambers.

So it makes the 60 days somewhat elusive.

And she didn't issue this order from the bench, correct?

Correct.

All right.

So with respect to your alternative argument that the motion to reconsider essentially told the limitations that the court imposed,

what about Rule 59A that says that a motion to reconsider will not stay a case, absent a written request to do so?

Your Honor, this was not a request to stay anything in particular.

It was simply at what point the order became effective.

Now, I'm talking about your alternative argument that the deadline actually passed in January because there was a motion to reconsider filed by the other party.

That doesn't stay the court's deadline, though, does it?

I believe it does.

And if you look at the nine case 151, New Hampshire at 739, the same thing happened.

And the timely motion to reconsider in fact stayed the order until later.

But Rule 59A specifically says that a motion to reconsider will not stay a court's order, right?

Pro-bate Court Rule 79 indicates that the timely motion to reconsider will stay the order.

Okay.

I'll check it out.

And again, that is an alternative argument.

In the first instance, if we look at simply the undisputed 60 days from the date clerk's notice to the date of closing,

we had a six-day window that was excused.

And I really want to draw attention to the offer of proof that Attorney Kennedy made in the transcript in particular,

page 19, 24, 25, and 36.

And he advised the court that if anyone had told him closing had to occur before the 23rd,

he would have made sure it happened.

He rightly or wrongly assumed that asking for a three- to four-day extension of time

so that when he got back to Florida, he was going to close on Monday, the 26th of December,

or Tuesday, the 27th, that that was in fact not unreasonable.

And given the fact that we are here now a year and a half later and these two gentlemen are still in the same house,

it certainly seems that the three- to four-day extension of time would not have been reasonable.

But isn't it true that all this could have been avoided if your client had gone to the bank a little sooner

or gone to the bank with some effective ID?

That is true, Your Honor.

But on the other hand, he should have had until the 23rd.

And by the 17th, he had dealt with his identification issue at the bank.

He had a cashier's check.

He just needed to go back one more time to have the payee corrected.

That could have been done between December 23rd and December...

I mean, sorry, December 17th and December 23rd, but the trustee did not give him that opportunity.

What was your client's understanding at the time that he went to the bank for the money?

Didn't he think that he had to close that day?

I don't know. That is not part of the record, Your Honor.

Attorney Kennedy's offer of proof indicated that he believed he had until the 23rd.

He had pushed it forward because he knew that last week that ended on the 23rd.

He was going to be in Florida and that had been expressed to the trustee in prior letters.

That's Attorney Kennedy's December 7th letter to the trustee.

Did Attorney Kennedy address sort of what he thought about the trustee's counsel's notice that the 17th was the drop dead date?

In terms of it being inappropriate or...

Did he respond at all? I mean, he responded a couple days later, but did he present any evidence of how he perceived that when it came across?

Yes. What he did is on December 22nd at 3.46pm, he faxed the letter with the certified bank check,

which hadn't yet been provided because it came to him, his office by mail,

and that he specifically at that time requested a closing on the 26th or the 27th said,

we're ready to go, we have everything we need, and then gets back a faxed response from the trustee saying

it is truly, despite the fact we still at that point at least had a 24-hour window where it could have happened

as Attorney Kennedy indicated in his offer of proof.

Thank you, counsel. Thank you, Your Honor.

Mr. Gordon. May it please the Court. I'm Joshua Gordon. I represent James Garzinski, the trustee of the Simone Garzinski irrevocable trust.

December 17th was, in fact, the last day for closing, and the trust attorney Jody Wilbert had it correct.

The deadline was 60 days from the dates from the date of the court's order, which is October 18th.

Not the court's notice. Orders are effective upon rendition, and rendered is when a judgment leaves the court.

Ms. Connors says that you can't make that argument before us because you didn't make it below.

Well, this issue was not in the notice of appeal or across notice of appeal.

Correct. I don't need a cross-nose appeal. If you look at the, at my sister's notice of appeal question two

and put those words in my client's mouth, I could not have asked this question better,

and I can read it to you, but I think you can look at question number two yourself,

and put those words in my client's mouth. That issue is preserved, and she just argued it.

So I think it's on the table. And whether it's...

But how does that jive with the fact that we all know the notices can be delayed in the clerk's office

so your 60 days isn't really 60 days by the time you get the order?

That's Gravy Kelly. I understand the problem with that.

And there really was only a few days between the day the judge signed on October 18th,

and I think it went out a few days later, the 24th.

But that's the state deluni and Gravy Kelly say so, and I don't think there's anything we can do about that.

And there is a difference between an appeal deadline, which is in Rule 79, and the effective date of an order...

Well, how does your client's motion reconsider effective deadline?

It doesn't.

Why?

Because...

Attorney Conner says it does.

Pardon me?

Attorney Conner says it doesn't.

Because a motion to reconsider doesn't have any effect on the effective date of an order.

It just doesn't. I don't know how to answer that other than Gravy Kelly.

Does it matter that the motion to reconsider was actually not the trustee's motion,

but was the, I guess, interested party's motion, the brother's motion?

My understanding of motions to reconsider is that when they affect deadlines,

if one party files, it affects for all.

So I don't think that matters.

But I don't think a motion for reconsider...

Rule 79, which one of the justices asked about, talks about appeal deadlines.

It doesn't talk about effective dates.

None of those rules that are in my sister's brief talk about effective dates.

They're all appeal deadlines.

And those...

I know we use the word finality for those two concepts, but they're different.

But even if the 23rd was the deadline, even if the 23rd was a Friday,

and so Michael Garzinski had an entire week.

And in that time, he didn't ask the parties to extend.

He didn't ask the court to extend.

He didn't request another closing during that week.

He didn't seek another closing agent if Kennedy was in Florida.

He didn't file a motion to enjoin the sale, even though it was obvious

that the trust was going to sell to the next buyer.

There's no evidence of some mad scramble, even though Kennedy said

he could have done it from Florida.

Who represented the trust at that point?

Who was representing the trust?

Wilbert.

And Tony Wilbert said that he can't close after the 17th.

Correct.

So who is Michael supposed to negotiate with at that point?

Well, if he can negotiate with Wilbert, he goes to the court

and files something, but he didn't.

So there's actions he could have taken, but he did nothing.

The only action is the 22nd, Kennedy wrote a letter that says,

how about we close on the 26th or 27th?

And those dates are beyond anybody's idea of when is appropriate.

Why did attorney Wilbert wait till late on Friday to send a notice,

excuse me, to Kennedy saying, sorry, tomorrow Saturday is the drop dead date?

Why did that Friday at five o'clock?

What she says in the record is that she dictated the letter in the morning

and the secretary got around to it by the afternoon.

And that's what the record says.

Beyond that, I don't know.

Okay.

And second question.

Are we talking really about an anticipatory breach of this agreement?

No.

No.

I realize that there's been this estoppel argument made

and that a breacher can't take advantage of the breach.

But Michael, and Michael claims that James caused the breach

by demanding a closing on the 17th, but the 17th really was the day.

So James didn't cause a breach, but even under Michael's deadline,

he still made no efforts to extend or comply by the 23rd

so the purported breach alleged on James cannot be laid on him or the trust.

I also want to talk about time is of the essence.

And that time is of the essence is a common law practical doctrine

out of respect for the gyrations of day-to-day real estate closings.

And it's a special doctrine limited to that context.

It's not extensible to judgments or to deadlines generally.

Judgments are affected when rendered, which we've discussed.

And there are numerous cases enforcing port deadlines,

court orders that do not have time is of the essence language.

And absolutely, the position is absurd.

The court order, for instance, telling me to be here today at 9 a.m.

I can't say, well, it didn't have time of the essence

and it's all show up at 10 or 11.

There's no time of the essence except in contractual real estate closings.

The trust's duty was to sell promptly at the highest price

and the trust was indifferent as to which brother bought it

because the price was pegged at the highest price.

And its duty was also to a prompt sale,

but Michael had already caused nearly two years of delay.

So wouldn't a sale on the 26th to 27th have been sooner

than the sale in January on the 11th?

Pardon me?

A sale to Michael on the 26th to 27th of December

would have happened sooner than the sale to James in January.

Yes, it would have, but there was this two-year history

of Michael doing exactly what he's done,

which is to wait the last minute and then tank the deal

for one reason or another,

and the court obviously was frustrated with that.

And the trust had no duty to come to Michael,

him having scotched the deal to offer him yet another opportunity.

Well, when you say he tanked the deal, how did he tank the deal?

He wanted the deal.

He went to the bank the day of closing with a nine-year-old ID.

Do we know if he had a more current ID

or that was the ID he'd been using?

I know the answer, but I can't answer it,

but that's where he went to the bank within.

Kennedy took him to the bank,

and there's an affidavit in the record of the banker

having with Kennedy the problem with the nine-year-old ID,

so when you say he tanked the deal,

are you asserting that he did that purposefully?

Well, that's what the trial judge said.

The trial judge said, you know,

he purposefully went to not close that day,

but to close a week later.

The court called that a possibly deliberate act

in the court's words.

And, you know, it's not so clear

that Michael is capable of living in his house

or whether he has the money, he's disabled.

All his siblings think he ought to move on to a nursing home,

so it's possible that he knows that.

Should that matter to us at all?

Well, the judge talked about it being a deliberate act,

and maybe it shouldn't matter.

What should we do about the probate judge's conclusion

that the date ran on the 23rd?

I think the judge was just wrong,

but I don't think it matters because Michael didn't take action

by the 23rd that would have accomplished

what he says he wanted to do, which was by the house.

So had he filed a motion or something,

or had he even, within that week,

tried to close within that week,

this would be a different case,

but when he, on the 22nd, he proposed closing

on the 26th or 27th, which was beyond his time.

So I think it doesn't matter.

Should it matter that in New Hampshire,

with the collegial practice of law that we have,

that people, when people are on vacation,

they usually try to make it work

and try to figure out a way around somebody's preexisting vacation?

Oh, I think so, and perhaps Wilbur should be faulted for that.

But this also was a two-year, a two-year period

where Michael claimed to want the house.

He did it in 2015 as well.

He claimed to want the house in an agreement he signed,

and then he did nothing, and his excuse was,

well, no one came to me to close.

And after the October 18th order,

he said he does the exact same thing.

He does nothing for half of October,

nothing in November, nothing for half of December,

and when he tanks the deal on the very last minute,

his excuse is, in my sister's brief,

well, how come no one came to me and tried to close?

No one owes him an obligation.

Those orders are written as assuming a diligent person

trying to close on the deal

and not someone trying to undermine or avoid it or something.

Michael had two attorneys.

There was an attorney who issued the notice of intent

to purchase on his behalf, correct?

Yes.

And then Attorney Kennedy came into the picture sometime later.

Higum, when Michael was the trustee,

Higum represented the trust.

When James became the trustee,

Wilbur represented the trust.

Kennedy is Michael's personal lawyer.

He wasn't around when Higum was issued that notice

on behalf of Michael that he was going, intended to purchase.

I'm not sure who you're asking about.

Higum, er, Higum, issued a note.

Is the one who issued the notice identifying

that Michael was going to, intended to purchase the house?

So Kennedy wasn't around then?

Correct.

Okay, correct.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you.
