This is case 2017-0328, State of New Hampshire v. Keith C. Fitzgerald.

Good afternoon.

Good afternoon. May it please the Court?

I'm Joshua Gordon. I represent Keith Fitzgerald.

In my short time, I would like to focus on two issues.

Fitzgerald got sentenced for elements never charged by a grand jury,

and the State admits the grand jury did not charge the enhancement elements.

And I have one of the indictments here.

The only indication of the enhancement elements is what I've colored in orange down here, the numerals 6516.

But the body doesn't say anything about the age of the victim,

and there's no indication in the indictment that the grand jury was aware of the enhancement elements.

Under Apprendi, sentencing enhancements are elements.

Under Jones v. United States, 526 U.S. 227,

the Federal Constitution requires sentencing enhancements have to be charged by a grand jury.

Now, I understand that the Sixth Amendment jury right has not been applied to the States,

and this Court held that in State v. Marshall.

But it's hard to see how Article 15 of the New Hampshire Constitution and RSA 601-1

are not at least as protective as the Sixth Amendment.

Here, there was constructive amendment of the indictment by jury instruction.

Tony Gordon, were any of these issues, was this issue raised in the trial court?

It was not, but I would ask that this Court take a plain error view of that,

and the prejudice here is manifest.

Mr. Fitzgerald got twice the sentence roughly because of the problem,

and it goes to the integrity of the process because the penit jury had no authority,

no jurisdiction to be convicting on elements that were not charged by a grand jury in the indictment.

The remedy, I think, is to set aside the special verdict finding on enhanced elements

and remand for resentencing, but reversal is probably more appropriate

because in the opening and closing arguments, the State argued the victim's age,

creating excessive sympathy, I would suggest, and the jury was instructed on the issue

by the court before deliberation.

Thus the jury was tainted by its focus on the victim's age and condition, and the defendant

wouldn't have gotten a fair trial on the underlying theft charges.

Why isn't it sufficient that the jury was properly instructed on enhancement?

Pardon me?

Why wasn't it sufficient that the jury was properly instructed on enhancement?

Oh, there's no question that they were instructed.

The problem is that the enhancement isn't in the indictment.

The grand jury never indicted on those elements.

I see.

Assuming that highlighted section isn't sufficient, right?

Well, it says 651, 6.

I don't think the lay members of the grand jury would understand the implications

of that.

It doesn't even say RSA in front of it.

And likewise we don't know what was said to the grand jury, right?

We don't know.

There's no indication in the body of the indictment that the grand jury had any

idea that they were indicting on the age, the enhancement.

I want to move to indictment number 57.

And my argument is that there's no theft because the money was already stolen.

These charts are in your breeze.

And what you see here is the state charged these three transactions of money

going out of what they call the bucket into account controlled by Keith Fitzgerald.

But the green buckets were in Keith Fitzgerald's sole control.

Sole control.

No, that's not a joint account.

It was a non-existent trust account that he just, I don't know,

pretended existed but didn't.

Well, it was an account.

It wasn't a trust, right?

The account was in the name of the trust that didn't exist.

He was the owner of the account.

So when the money went flow out of the account, it was already stolen money.

It was by the time it was here, it was in his possession.

And I put these next to each other because this was the state's charge on the inflow into these green accounts.

And it's not clear exactly when the money was taken,

but I would suggest it's here, here, or here is when the money was stolen.

And that is not indicted conduct.

The state says that this last exercise of basically dominion over the funds was a theft in and of itself.

Well, I don't quite get that.

If I have, you know, a stolen object in my hand and I put it in my left pocket,

I put it in my right pocket, I give it to you, none of those things are theft.

The theft is when I take it from her.

So it's, you know, I don't quite understand that.

They have a very creative argument in the definition of Obtain in RSA 637-2, Obtainer or another is the language there.

And that language is to ensure that a thief stealing by the process of taking from you and giving to him,

to a third party or another such as State v. Weeks where the defendant took money and paid it to an employee

without it ever actually passing through his hands.

That is a, that constitutes theft.

And I don't quite understand how you can morph that language into something else.

I think that the crime alleged in indictment 57 might be receiving stolen property or structuring or money laundering

or some other crime, but it's not theft.

So I see I still have time.

I will talk about the multiplicitous indictments for a moment.

And these show money coming out of dad's account.

And the, you know, these are the four indictments and this blue account is father's account.

And the charges, the indicted acts again are these orange transactions.

And they go to Keith's account, to Keith's account, to Keith's account, to account Keith controlled.

And they're all, you know, identical.

And the state says they're used for different purposes, but they're not.

The state admitted that this indictment 58 was used for the purpose of personal support.

This one, indictment 59, was paid to the Ambrose brothers.

But those are the contractors who made his dressage rank when he was living high in the hall.

This one over here is, it goes to Richard Adams.

That was a personal loan for 175 grand, I think, and it had something to do with buying airplanes for his personal use.

And this money here went to Tim Brown. Again, it was a personal loan.

I think it was $200,000, and it was used for his personal expenses.

And I think there was some excavation equipment.

Were they separated in time, large blocks of time?

No, this is all the summer of 2010, and there were a variety of dates.

But they were different, they were different withdrawals, weren't they not?

Different what?

Withdrawals from that account.

Yes, but exactly, indictment 58 has these three withdrawals, indictment 59 is one, 18 is one, and this one is one.

But they're all part of the same thing.

In the state's view, it was Keith Fitzgerald's object to take his father's money in the amount of $700,000.

And he did that over a course of a couple of months in a variety of transactions.

But the proof for all these is identical.

This was this account, and you move the money out, this account, move the money out, same account.

The purpose of the money was the same, all his personal expenses.

He was just living beyond his means.

And the same victim, the same bucket of money, it's the exact same account in all of ones.

And I want to suggest also that while I understand in unit of prosecution cases,

and that's what this is because it's a multiplicity issue,

in unit of prosecution cases, I understand the prosecutor has a lot of discretion

in deciding what is the unit of prosecution.

But we have here a power of attorney that was very specific on what Keith could not do.

It said thou shalt not be able to pay your personal expenses through this power of attorney,

which is exactly what he did.

And the power of attorney is what determines here the unit of prosecution.

And given that, these are identical transactions.

This also wasn't raised to the trial court.

Oh, this was, your honor.

This was, okay.

Yeah, no, this was.

And the citations in my brief, I believe it was toward the end of the trial.

I think the remedy for this is, well, even though there's one crime, I think, was charged as four,

and the state got extra time for all that.

And the remedy is remand for resentencing on a single charge.

I see my time is up, and I'll thank them.

Thank you, Mr. Wood.

Ms. Woodcock.

Thank you, Your Honor.

May it please the court, Elizabeth Woodcock for the State of New Hampshire.

I'll take questions at any time, but I would just point out that during the course of all of these e-mails

and conversations and things like that, the defendant repeatedly tried to conceal his actions,

and at one point when the sister was helping his, her father, send him an e-mail,

his response in the transcript of page 384 was that sort of,

he didn't believe that his father was actually sending these e-mails,

even though his father was very sick and was really close to death,

and he sent a response to his sister, Hope.

Nice try, Hope. See you in court.

Let's skip to the legal issues.

I'll admit to you that this is an ugly case.

All right.

By any standards.

Why isn't the state required to present the enhancement issue element to the grand jury,

and why isn't it required to be in the indictment?

Well, of course, we don't know, as the court's already pointed out,

whether that was presented to the grand jury or not.

I think that probably the better rule is to include the language in the indictment,

but the reference to the statute in the indictment gave the defendant notice,

which is the real thing that is required, with the exception of capital case enhancements,

the real thing that is required of an indictment in the course of a sentencing enhancement.

The other thing, as the court is aware, and it's not part of the trial court record,

but we did ask that documents be transferred to the court,

the prosecutor in this case gave defense counsel notice,

and that's why it didn't come up,

because defense counsel knew that this enhancement was going to be sought.

So in the defendant's brief, he says,

well, the prosecutor could have amended the indictment before trial.

Sure, that might have been a solution,

but neither lawyer thought it was an issue, so it never came before the court.

Do we know that, or do we think defense counsel was just not saying anything

because it was insufficient notice?

I mean, how can you be sure?

How can I be sure?

I mean, I think that most defense counsel, if they were presented with something

that they felt was insufficient notice, they would raise it before the court.

Unless they thought the indictment was insufficient.

I think that most defense counsel, if faced with an insufficient indictment,

would make a motion to dismiss.

After the juries impaneled, sure.

Well, yes, sure, but this wasn't the case here,

because both lawyers understood that this was going to be part of the trial,

that the age and the infirmity of the father was going to be used

as part of the trial and as part of a sentencing consideration.

And bear in mind, Justice Gondon, the court instructed the jury

that they should find this, that they should make that determination

as to whether this applied.

Then there was no objection.

There was no objection.

So I think that when you're trying to say to the trial court,

oh, this is plain error.

You didn't do the right thing,

which is essentially what the court is doing.

It's looking at how the trial court conducted the trial

and saying we are amazed that you would do this ridiculous thing

on this set of facts.

This is not plain error.

Well, that's particularly you're arguing under the fourth prompt of plain error.

Right, right.

I mean, I just think that under these circumstances,

nobody raising it.

I just don't see why a trial court,

knowing that the trial court was going to give the instruction,

bearing in mind that the trial court is thinking,

okay, the indictment has been read.

We've heard the evidence.

These are the instructions I plan to give.

And no one is raising any objection or saying anything is faulty.

Now, with respect to the block burger issue,

I mean, I think that the fact that there are different dates,

block burger makes it clear that these series of drug deals

all occurred on different dates and that charging them is separate offenses.

What about indictment 57?

Is it really a theft?

I will acknowledge that I had a hard time wrapping my head around that argument,

that once you've stolen money, if you then spend it, you're not stealing it.

I just have a hard time following it.

But part of the charge is that they transfer the money with the intent to,

that the defendant transferred the money with the intent to deprive the father of it.

Once it's spent, it's clearly deprived.

So prior to that time, the defendant could have spent money on behalf of Dad

taking him on trips or whatever, allegedly?

He could have, although I think just, Hans Raccone,

the problem here is that he would have had to go to his brother.

His brother had was a co-signer of the power of attorney.

But not once the money was in his own account.

He could have spent it on Dad's behalf.

Could have.

He could have, and I suppose that would have been one of those things

that you would have argued to the jury.

This is some mitigating circumstance.

He couldn't get in touch with Clifford III.

His father desperately needed this treatment at the hospital

or was very upset and needed to get away.

And therefore, him taking this money and spending it with his father's

knowledge of how it was being spent, that might be one of those things

that a jury would say, oh, come on, give me a break state.

I don't want to hear this.

We are going to vote not guilty.

The charge is based on the violation of the power of attorney.

Isn't that obligation, fiduciary obligation violated once he spends the money

as opposed to putting it in his own account?

I think it can be violated on both occasions because,

in part because of the requirement that he clear the transactions

with his brother.

But as a practical matter, having tried a lot of cases,

I know that if you go to a jury and the allegedly stolen money

is really just used for another purpose.

I mean, the first case I lost, I had charged someone with,

or the grand jury had charged someone with converting money

pledged to the farmer's home administration by selling a trailer

and it turned out that he had used the money to feed

the other collateral pledged to the farmer's home administration,

the cattle.

So I didn't have a very good argument

and you can imagine how quickly the jury came back.

So I think that there is that kind of quality of

what are you going to actually use this money for.

And I think that the grand jury and the state were trying to show

that beyond just transferring this money,

the money was never used for the father's benefit.

My yellow light is on, if the court has no further questions,

I'd ask that this case be submitted.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Court stands and court is adjourned.
