This is case 2017-0567, appeal of Karen DeMotta.

Good morning. May I please the Court? I'm Brad Davis. I represent Karen DeMotta,

who is the appellant claimant in this case, and I do waive my uninterrupted time.

This appeal raises two issues in this case, and the first that we believe is an error

is the finding that there's conflicting medical opinions submitted by the claimant

in this Worker's Compensation case. The Board did not identify what those conflicting

issues were in the findings of fact.

Can you speculate as to what they might be talking about?

I have difficulty speculating as to what they're talking about, because what I see

is two experts, one being Dr. Jeffrey from New Hampshire Neurospine and Dr.

Genaro from Plymouth Orthopedics and Sports Medicine, both filling out Worker's

Compensation forms indicating a lower back injury and documenting it as a Worker's

Comp injury. The only difference that I see is Dr. Jeffrey identifies it as a lumbar

radiculopathy, whereas Dr. Genaro identifies it as a lumbar strain, but

certainly the radiculopathy can be a symptom of a strain, so they're both

talking about a lower back injury consistent with what the claimant

described as lifting an ice bucket, you have to get up on a step ladder,

lift it up over shoulder height to dump it into the top of a fountain soda

machine is how she described it. I can't see where the Board found conflicting

medical opinions, and this is a case again where there's not an independent

medical exam that the employer had presented or an I and me, these are

just treating doctors that both...

And there's no dispute between the doctors that she was symptom-free

before this injury?

Correct. That is correct. And the second issue that we raised was they're trying...

The Board is basically disregarding those opinions because they felt they were

based on a narrative of the claimant herself, who they didn't believe was

credible, and they rely on the inray FAY decision to support that they can

disregard the treating medical opinions based on that. However, FAY was a

very different case. That was a case where it was an opinion by a

therapist, and it was solely based on the narrative from the claimant. That

therapist didn't review any prior medical records, didn't have an accurate

job description, and the therapist didn't identify what brought on. It was

an anxiety issue that they were raising in that case, but this is a very

different case than that. Specifically, Dr. Gennaro, he reviewed the

records, and you can see in his page 41 in the appendix, he identifies

radiographic data that he reviewed. X-rays. I do have a report of an MRI

which shows a significant disc-based collapse. Do you recall off the top

of your head when that MRI was taken? It was post-injury, I gather?

Yeah, it was post-injury. Dr. Jeffrey had ordered it. I'm looking...

I believe it was some time in November. Okay. Thank you.

But it was post-injury, and there was no question that she has degenerative

disc disease that was identified. But what Dr. Gennaro gives the clearest

opinion by saying that clearly, you know, work did not... Or clearly she has

an arthritic spine which was not caused by work. However, I have no evidence

to suggest that she was not asymptomatic prior to the injury. Therefore,

I believe she strained her lower back, which has now aggravated her underlying

condition resulting in symptoms. Therefore, I believe there is a causal

relationship between her current symptoms and her occupational injury. So it's

a very, very clear opinion. I mean, so much so as it's using the correct

terms under the statute of aggravating and underlying condition, which is

a work-related injury. There is a little... I mean, I would agree that with

Dr. Jeffrey there, he treats the claimant, and then later, I believe

in November or later on, mentions that, oh, I didn't realize she was

making a workers' compensation claim when I first met her. But at the initial

appointment with Ms. Damada, he did fill out an actual workers' compensation

form in his own handwriting. And that's at page 36 in the appendix. So I'm not

sure why he would say that when he hand wrote a workers' compensation form

for the additional visit. Why would it matter to us whether he understood

his initial visit to be related to a workers' comp claim?

It probably doesn't. I guess I was just thinking of conflicts and medical

opinions that maybe this is something that...

But it didn't change his opinion.

It doesn't change.

Once he recognized that this was a workers' comp claim.

Correct.

Okay.

Correct.

You were at the comp hearing?

I was.

Why didn't they like your client?

I thought she was very likable. I honestly don't know.

And I don't see anything in the opinion saying, you know, specifically,

here's why we don't find her credible. They just say, you know,

they question her veracity. And there was some discrepancies in the testimony,

but they were minor. One was she says, I told, you know, Judith said she had

my supervisor the next day. Ms. Shed said, yeah, I didn't recall that.

I remember her saying something about she had a genetic back problem,

something to that effect. And the other issue I guess they had was

the delay in the reporting of the injury, but she testified why she didn't

report or didn't think anything of it because they were going into the

summer break and she wasn't going to be working. I think she had talked about...

So, counsel, when did the summer break begin? I know she claims that

the accident occurred on July 25th.

It was in August.

So she returned to work after the injury.

Continue to work for several weeks?

She did.

And then she took the break sometime in August and then...

Right.

Sees her nurse practitioner in September.

That's correct.

And she says that according to the nurse practitioner, the injury occurred

or the pain began in August as opposed to July.

Yeah, and that is a small discrepancy.

I think what the claimant was saying was back during the summer months.

I don't know if she specifically had said August to that practitioner,

but somehow it's in the right timeframe, at least in my opinion,

that July-August timeframe is when the pain began.

So she worked for at least a couple weeks without reporting this to her supervisor?

Well, her testimony was that she did tell Ms. Shed,

but she hadn't sought treatment, was hoping it was just something

that was going to resolve on its own.

She mentioned, I guess, 10 years prior she had done something to her back

that resolved on its own and did require treatment

and she was kind of anticipating it was going to be similar this time around.

And it would have been one week from the July 25th incident

because she had the entire month of August off.

Right.

Right.

And so it's, and that's not unusual, at least in my experience with lower back injuries,

not to immediately report it and immediately seek treatment.

They usually think, okay, it's sore, it's going to resolve,

and then unfortunately it doesn't.

They go into formal treatment and report it.

And I know that the employer was arguing that or was pointing out

that they had a policy of reporting injuries within 24 hours,

but it's not unlawful.

I mean, the statute allows up to two years to report a work injury.

And I included that statute in the appendix as well.

So it's not unlawful.

I'd agree it's a factor that the board would consider.

But I just, the weight of the evidence in this case,

I believe that the claimant did meet her burden,

both the show legal causation and medical causation.

There's two very, I believe solid medical opinions from two, you know,

well-known, you know, neurologists and orthopedics,

both surgeons, providing their opinions.

And I think it was error for the board to simply disregard

those opinions in the way that they did.

If there's no further questions.

Thank you.

Attorney Russo.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Good morning.

May it please the Court, my name is Craig Russo.

I'm appearing before the Court this morning

on behalf of the Appellee SDH Education West.

And I would be happy to wave my two minute

uninterrupted period

if the Court has questions before then.

The appellee is respectfully asking this Court

to issue a decision affirming the Compensation Appeals Board

decision, which unanimously denied the appellant

slash claimants' claim for workers' compensation benefits.

Our position is that the CAD did not commit

any error of law in the decision,

nor was the decision unjust or unreasonable.

And as such, an affirmance is warranted

and no reversal should be found by the Court.

So what are the differences in the contemporaneous medical

records that the board starts out its decision with,

given the differences in the contemporaneous medical records?

Okay.

I think one of the initial problems

is that when the appellant first sought treatment

on September 30th, over two months after the date of incident,

there is no mention of the appellant's allegations are that she injured

her back lifting an ice bucket.

The appellee employer has from the outset,

or at least from the day that they were first advised

by the appellant that it was a work-related injury

or there was an allegation of a work-related injury,

has denied that this incident ever occurred.

That she didn't lift the bucket or didn't get injured lifting?

Didn't happen.

There was no bucket?

No, there was a bucket.

And clearly putting ice in the sort of font machine

was a task that the appellant would have been assigned to do.

However, the contention is that it never happened.

And I think when you piece together the matter

was evidence that it didn't happen?

There were no witnesses.

It was the appellant herself was there that day

when the alleged incident occurred.

There is no specific evidence that it did not happen.

But the continued denial of the appellant claim

she told her supervisor the next day,

supervisor testified at the CAD hearing that that didn't occur.

Well, did she testify it didn't occur

that she could not recall it occurring?

Well, that's a good question.

I'm pretty sure that just through all the questioning

was that she was not advised that an incident had occurred.

And that's the factual finding of the board.

It's a factual finding.

So when you piece together the evidence,

starting with the first date of treatment, September 30th,

2016, and there's a reference to her symptoms starting

in August and doing some activities in the kitchen,

but there's no reference to this specific incident.

Moreover, when she, so then she has,

I'm not denying that she has some back issue.

What the appellant is denying is that

there was any work related injury

or that the back issues are related to any work activities.

Now, so she goes to see her PCP in September.

There's no mention of this work incident in July.

She has symptoms.

She's referred to the orthopedic specialist, Dr. Jeffrey.

He sees her on about November 10th.

And in that report, there's absolutely no mention

of the work incident.

So there's issues in the medical records.

There's issues in the testimony from the witnesses,

which dispute whether or not an incident occurred.

In fact, the first reference in any of the medical records

of this alleged incident lifting the ice bucket

was when she first saw Dr. Gennaro in February of 2017.

Were there any visits between the November,

Dr. Jeffrey visit and Gennaro,

who was a referral, was that a referral for Mary?

Very minimal.

She did see Dr. Gennaro.

No, not really.

There was very minimal.

She went to Dr. Gennaro because she wanted a second opinion.

But Dr. Gennaro in February is the very first time

that any mention is made in medical records

of this alleged incident where she was lifting the ice bucket.

So the contradictions that you're referring to

in the medical records have to do with the claimant's

description of the injury and the timing of the injury,

as opposed to what the doctor's actually diagnosed.

Oh, it's not a question of what the diagnosis is.

It's a question of the cause or relationship,

because there's no evidence of a work incident documented

in the medical records until she sees Dr. Gennaro in February

of 2017, nine months after the alleged date of incident.

It's not a question of the diagnosis made by the physicians.

I'm completely comfortable with the diagnosis.

It's the question of whether or not there was a work incident

and that the diagnosis and the injury

that she's claiming arose out of that specific work incident.

Dr. Jeffrey addressed at all in his records

why this claim developed or this complaint developed?

He says in November, when he first sees her, that he says

that the symptoms have been present since summer.

She's been working in a kitchen and doing a lot of bending

and twisting and heavy lifting.

Now, again, I'm going to suggest to the court respectfully

that that description of her work activities

was refuted by the employer's testimony

as to whether she actually did a lot of bending, twisting,

and heavy lifting.

Also, it refers to August again.

Maybe this has been covered by Justice Donovan's questions,

but are you saying she did not lift the bucket full of ice?

Yes.

How does the ice get in the machine?

Well, to answer your question from earlier,

yes, part of her task was lifting the ice bucket

to put the ice into the machine.

But the employer and the insurer from day one

questioned whether or not that incident ever occurred

based upon the evidence, the lack of reporting,

the testimony from the supervisor

who was not there when the alleged incident supposedly took place.

We don't find that to be a rather drastic inference to draw.

Well, I think the point is taking all of the evidence

in its totality.

The first time, oh, that's another thing too,

because I asked the claimant on cross-examination

if she reported this alleged incident

to their nurse, to the primary care on September 30th.

She said she did.

However, it's conspicuously missing

from the medical records.

And I find it very difficult to believe

that if a doctor or other medical provider

was in form of a specific work incident

that it would not be in the medical records.

Similarly, I asked her if when she saw Dr. Jeffrey

on November 10th, if she reported this alleged incident

to him, she said yes.

But you'll find no reference whatsoever

in that medical record of this alleged incident.

So it really became a credibility issue

and the CAV panel clearly found that she was not credible.

And they stated as such several times in the hearing decision.

So really, the biggest finding is that she was not credible.

What was it that supports that finding

that she was not credible?

OK, they cite the differences in the medical records

and the differences in the testimony

from the three employer witnesses who all

testified that their first knowledge of an alleged work

incident was after she saw Dr. Jeffrey on November 10th

when she first reported it as being work related.

And that's the other piece of the puzzle here.

There was something going on in her back.

She goes to the primary care physician

who says, who refers her to the orthopedic,

he orders an MRI.

Now, the appellant has no insurance.

So when you put all the pieces together,

it's questionable as to whether there

was some other motivating factor here

or there was actually an incident that occurred.

Was that part of the board's decision?

Not specifically.

But they find that they did document the testimony

from the three employer witnesses, the fact

that it was not reported until in November

when Dr. Jeffrey ordered the MRI.

But wouldn't that be explained by the claimant not

knowing the origin till she sort of sifted it out?

I mean, she did note to her PCP back pain that started in August.

And then she did note to Dr. Jeffrey

that the symptoms have been present since the summer.

And she does relate she's been working in a kitchen

and doing a lot of bending, twisting, and heavy lifting.

So is the claimant supposed to know immediately

that this strain on her back is going to result in pain

symptoms that developed down the road?

No, but the claimant testified that she felt her testimony was

that when this alleged incident occurred,

she felt immediate pain in her low back.

So once, and again, Tony Davis is correct,

there's a two-year statute when the case is reporting it.

But the company policy and many employers policy

is report an injury within 24 hours.

And if she thinks it's not a serious injury

or thinks it will resolve, then we're

supposed to hold that against her.

Well, you know, I've been practicing workers' compensation

law for a long time.

I've heard that argument innumerable times

that, oh, I didn't think it was anything,

so I didn't report it.

But she was well aware that she was supposed to report.

Well, in my practice, I've heard the carers say,

claim denied a number of times, too.

Should I draw inferences from that?

Free to draw whatever inferences you like.

Attorney Rooster, I just want to back up one second.

Do you admit, or does your client

take the position that this task of having

to lift a bucket of ice over her head

and putting it into the soda machine, was that not something

that this employee was required to do?

She was, I wouldn't say required.

They worked together, but she usually

did that in the morning before the supervisor showed up.

So yes, it was a task that was part

of her typical job.

Why didn't your client get an independent medical examination?

Well, that's a good question.

I think primarily because the medical opinion on diagnosis

wasn't the carer's biggest concern.

It was caused a relationship in whether or not

an actual work-related injury occurred as a lead.

So if the panel had found that, in other words,

we weren't necessarily contesting the diagnosis

or any resultant disability.

We're going back to day one and saying

there was no injury.

And it was something else that happened outside the world.

And she did document that she had a longstanding,

although fairly asymptomatic, back condition.

The testimony from the supervisor and another employee,

her witness, was that they were aware.

She had some genetic condition that was going on.

She had something going on.

It's vandalosis.

It's in the record.

Yes.

Vandalosis.

So she had a pre-existing condition.

Your light on, counsel.

Yeah, OK.

Thank you very much.

Case submitted.

Thank you.
