This is case 2017-0142, appeal of N. Miles Cook III.

Council.

Good morning. May it please the court, Michael Tierney, for Miles Cook, and I have reserved

two minutes of my time for rebuttal. Before we get started, I just want to say that it's

our honor to-

Are you going to do it too?

I have to, your honor.

Okay.

I wish we didn't need to be here on your last day, but-

Well, there's something auspicious about that. I'm treating it as a big important day, so

go ahead.

Absolutely. Well, this case concerns statutory construction, and in particular, the definition

of the word need, as it relates to title docs. In particular, my client's doc permit

was denied on the basis that he didn't need a doc because he could drive a half-mile

to a community association doc and just use that community association doc.

Do you think that erases the fact of his doc? If I understand the facts here, he can't really

use it because there's a lot of mud between the end of his doc and the water.

So his current doc, he can't use for a very large portion of the day. He can only use

it a couple hours a day.

With the proposed new doc, that's going to increase the usability of the doc by

25 percent.

So how many hours a day can he use it now, and how many could he use it if he got the

new doc?

The exact details are in the record.

Roughly speaking.

I think right now he can use it for about 33 percent of the day. And if he gets the

new doc, it's going to go up to almost 55 to 60 percent of the day.

But under no set of circumstances, does he get 100 percent of a day?

Correct. Now, we had a proposal that had been submitted years ago when this first

started for all tight access, a 320 foot, 325 foot doc. That was denied by the

department that it was just too long, which is why we sought to compromise and

come in with a shorter doc that wasn't going to be what we wanted, which is

all tight access, but was going to be less than what the neighboring doc, the

community association doc, is at 283 feet, I believe. It's just a couple

feet shorter.

I understand your argument on need. I'm wondering what was the evidence of the

sort of harm, for lack of a better term, the environmental harm that would ensue if

you got the doc you wanted?

So as far as the environmental harm, that's in the regulation. There's 20

criteria. The first criteria is need, and then those 19 criteria, as far as the

fish habitats, the effect on the navigational channel, all of that, all of

those are issues that were never reached at all because the Wetlands Council was

stuck in this idea of need.

So in other words, so am I understanding correctly then that if we agreed

with your position that need means what you say it means and as consistent

with the case involving Nottingham involving the groundwater, if we agreed

with you that need simply means it serves a useful purpose, so to speak,

then the result would be we would remand this to the Wetlands Council or maybe

back to the DES, and they would then have to decide, okay, a sufficient

need has been shown, that doesn't mean you get the doc, that just means that

now DES has got to decide is your need outweighed by environmental harm?

The seven factors which DES based its denial on were all tied into need

in some respect, so number three dealt with whether the proposal was the

least impact on the Wetlands, okay, and DES determined it was not the

least impact on the Wetlands because we could just use the Community

Association doc, and so the long answer to your question is that there are

these other factors that don't necessarily deal with need directly, but

they all come back to whether it was proper for DES to look at whether

you could have full-state access.

So if we take that other doc out of the ability to use the homeowner's

doc out of the picture, then it would go back and the analysis would go

forward absent that aspect, and then they would look into the environmental

impacts, right?

Well, I believe that the environmental impacts have already been looked

at. I believe that my fellow council will probably disagree as far as

what the environmental impacts would be.

Well, I thought, but I thought you were saying that they kind of

stopped doing their job once they said, oh, well, you can go use

the homeowner's doc.

Correct. The council, the Wetlands Council, did not get into anything

other than the definition of need and whether you can look at the...

But are you saying that they wrapped the other six issues into the need

issue?

It was wrapped into whether you could access the Community Association

doc, and sometimes that was talked about as far as impact on Wetlands

because you'd have less impact on Wetlands if you just went to

somebody else's doc.

So how does this... I guess... I mean, I realize you don't sort of raise...

You alluded to it, but you don't sort of directly raise a constitutional

issue. But I guess I'm curious about, as I understand it, your client

has a property right, a littoral right, whatever they, however it's

referred to, to make some use, at least, of access to the water and

presumably the water.

Absolutely.

And so the... I mean, it would seem to me that in deciding on need that

this isn't... Given that you have a property right here, the state can't

simply say, you know, the state's got to take some consideration of the

fact that you have a property right to do this, and presumably has to

have some... They have to have some, you know, outweighing public interest

to overcome that.

Absolutely, Your Honor. And if need is simply a need for a permit, then

there's no constitutional issue. But if need is, as DES had argued, if need

can only be shown if you have a public good in your private doc, an

argument which the Wetlands Council actually rejected, then that

would absolutely infringe on my client's constitutional rights to use

his waterfront property to work out.

You aren't arguing that there's a constitutional right to all tied access,

are you?

There's a constitutional right to reasonably work out to the

navigational channel.

Is that all tied access?

To reasonably work out. I did not brief, and I'm not prepared to

argue how much tied access there is. If the court would like to issue an

order that we have all tied access, I'll gladly accept it.

But that was the application that was submitted earlier, denied, and

not appealed.

Right?

It was appealed, but this court did not accept the

description.

Okay, so that was brought to an end point that...

Correct.

And you're not pursuing that now.

That is not what's before the court. What is before the court is

the permit that increases access by 25 percent?

You know, if we accept that you are correct in what you say the

definition of need should be, in other words, that this serves from your

client's perspective some useful purpose.

Correct.

What do you say about what I understood to be the state's position

that it really doesn't serve your client's purpose?

Because you don't really get much, if any, benefit from the new dock that

you want, the 285 foot, whatever it is, from what you have now.

It's a tiny little amount of extra, in other words, the new dock would

be just very, very slightly higher in the water, so to speak.

Right.

Now, pursuant to the regulations, okay, you can have

docks that are approved with conditions, okay, with mitigating

conditions, or with basically suggested alterations.

The wetlands council had actually dealt with the very issue that you

raise and that if 25 percent increase in use isn't good enough,

all that you need to do is say that you need to have your

dock be longer so that you get all tied access.

And if the department had approved our permit with the condition

that it's made long enough for all tied access, that's not

something my client would be complaining about at all.

It's something which the department absolutely has the right to do as

far as conditional approvals.

What is, could the, was your proposal that if you wanted to put

this new dock in, was this going to be to replace the existing

dock, in other words, was that, was your existing dock going to

come down?

Correct.

The existing dock was going to come down, and we had the

wetland scientists who, in their reports, explained that

replacing the existing dock with a longer new dock is more

environmentally friendly due to the newer design of the newer

dock.

And so while it's longer, it actually has less environmental

impact due to the more modern design.

So then why are you, I may not be understanding you correctly,

why then are you willing to accept the calculus that the

additional 25 percent, if you could get it, would be enough?

It appears to me that if you have literal rights to the water

and you have a dock, you ought to be able to get to the water

100 percent of the time.

But I gather you're giving up about half the time.

The current proposal doesn't get us to water all of the time.

And the reason why it doesn't get water all of the time is

because in the application that we put forth several years ago,

it was rejected, which is why we needed to try to work with the

department in order to find some compromise.

And your client determined that this was a reasonable compromise?

Correct.

And one of the factors that you put forward is that your

client uses this dock for marketing purposes for his

business.

Is that?

Well, how does that fit into the analysis?

It's his personal dock.

I don't think that really fits into the analysis at all.

It was a mention that he did at his house.

This is where he lives with his family, okay?

On occasion, bring clients on to check out whatever boat he's

trying to sell that he brings to his house.

I don't really think it fits into the analysis, so I think

it's such a small, rare occurrence that it really doesn't

affect it.

We've been talking about need, but I think there's...

The vote at the council.

There were two motions, one that your client had not

met their burden to show need, but that failed five to

five, yet, as I understand it, the council still denied

based on that ground.

Correct.

And similarly, there was a motion that failed stating

that your client had failed to meet the burden to show

that the department's action was illegal, but that

motion failed five to five.

Correct.

There's still a ground for upholding the department's

decision.

Correct.

What's the remedy that we should apply if we're troubled

or find it unlawful that one of the council members was not

present for all the deliberation?

It would seem to me you send it back for them to deliberate

together.

The council member who didn't show up for the beginning

of the deliberations should not be able to vote at the end of

deliberations.

Which way did he or she vote?

He voted against me.

He voted against me, and it was a five to five tie, which

would then result in a five to four in my favor.

What's your thought?

I mean, why isn't Justice Bassett right?

Why should we say that you showed up late so you're out,

as opposed to saying, you know, you didn't...

I mean, wouldn't we do that?

We don't say, even in a criminal case, if we have to

substitute a juror midway during deliberations, that we say

that's okay.

You just have to give an instruction that the jury has

to start deliberating all over again.

Why should it be any different here?

Why shouldn't we just say that we remanded it, and this

person who wasn't there at the beginning, they have to

start their deliberations over, and that person gets to

participate from the beginning.

Starting deliberations over would be perfectly consistent with

the case law, as far as in juries and criminal cases, as well

as the case law, as far as land use sports.

What isn't appropriate is to allow somebody who wasn't

there for the beginning of deliberations to vote without

either starting over or telling him, sorry, you didn't

show up for the beginning.

We're going on without you.

Those are the two options.

Can I ask just one other question?

I just want to make sure...

Am I correct in understanding that this person who showed

up late for the deliberations, that person was present,

however, promptly, so to speak, and heard all the evidence

that was presented?

Is that correct?

Correct.

Okay.

Correct.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Good morning, Your Honors.

May it please the court?

My name is Mary Maloney.

I work for the New Hampshire Attorney General's office.

Do you agree that there's a right to vote in New

Hampshire?

B-O-A-T?

A right to vote?

Yes.

A right to navigate?

Yes.

There's certainly a right to wharf out, and certainly a right

to recreate and use public waters.

Is there anything in the...

I mean, I know that at least five members of the council

relied on this other, you know, this sort of community

access, for lack of a better term, a community dot.

Is there anything in the...

I mean, is the plaintiff here a member of an association,

like, in other words, a development association whereby

there's some restriction on the member's, you know, normal

literal rights to use the water?

In other words, it says, you know, you homeowner are

buying into this development.

And you understand that your access to the water is

going to be through this community dot, so to speak,

and not through your, you know, you can't put up a

dock of your own.

No.

There is, as far as the brickyard estate's dock, that

wasn't part...

That is not my understanding that somebody who bought

into the subdivision who would have frontage

necessarily waive their rights to apply for another

dock, which is why the department granted him a

dock in 2005, the part-time access dock.

So what...

I mean, the thing that I have, why isn't...

You know, I went back and read the water, the

Nottingham case, and it seemed to me that if

anything, there the statute specifically talked

about the applicant having a need.

Here the statute doesn't even use the word need,

and yet in that case, the court said that, you know,

need means, you know, using a dictionary definition.

Need means, you know, that it's...

That there's some sort of proper purpose for it.

It's useful.

It's desirable, whatever the other language was.

Why isn't your opponent right that here where the

statute doesn't even use the word need, I mean,

assuming that the regulation, that the DES can

nonetheless adopt a regulation that has that as a

requirement, that the same definition should apply.

Well, here the need criteria is found in the

regulations, which we would submit were properly

promulgated, and with regard to the word need

and isolation, certainly the plain meaning of the

dictionary applies, but under 40 to A, it has a

different public purpose.

What is, why is the, in other words, protecting,

why is protecting the environment, for example,

from, you know, docks that could injure it?

Why is that public interest any stronger than

protecting the groundwater that is, was that

issue in the 153 New Hampshire case?

Well, in the case of 40 to A, the general court has

recognized that submerged lands under tidal waters or

surface waters and wetlands are limited in the state

of New Hampshire.

Much more limited than, for example, our groundwater.

This isn't, New Hampshire does not have a coastline

like the state of Maine.

We have a limited coastline.

We have a limit, and these are protected resources

because they're so valuable.

They're valuable for essential fish habitat.

They're valuable for wildlife.

They're valuable for recreation.

They're valuable for the public at large.

They serve environmental interest in controlling

and filtering water to assist the groundwater.

And was there evidence before the, before the

council of how this dock was going to negatively

impact those things?

In other words, it's, was there some evidence

that, you know, if you do this, I don't know,

though, you know, the water is going to get

dirtier, there's going to be some fish life

or something like that that's going to be harmed

in some way, at some, there's some concrete harm.

There was evidence.

It was contested evidence, but there was evidence.

So as part of the permit application process,

the applicant has to address those issues

of essentialist habitat and turbidity

and those kinds of issues.

The evidence, we submitted evidence from

the National Marine Fisheries Wildlife

and the EPA that the essential fish habitat study

was not done accurately.

So what happens if we disagree with your legal definition

of need and we remand to the wetlands council?

What do you envision would happen then?

For a remand for a de novo hearing

or remand for re-deliberation?

That's my question.

We would maintain that, you know, at first,

if I may, describe how the department

pursuant to the testimony that was submitted

describes need and why the particular dictionary definition

doesn't fully address the issues under 482A.

As I indicated in my brief, it is a fact-based determination.

The department asks an applicant to essentially

just state the purpose of the project,

but two, under the need criteria,

he has to do an alternative analysis.

And then three, the explanation,

the purpose of the project has to be one

that's project-centric and not one

that's related to-

Does the alternatives analysis, though,

always include whether there's

relatively close by public access?

I mean, it seems to me nobody would be building a dock

because there's always some other way.

And my guess is sure-front property owners

pay a hefty tax, property tax,

because of the benefit of their sure-front property.

So in order to use it,

but if there's always public access somewhere,

how does that fit?

Well, this isn't public access.

And I think that the Brickyard Estates dock

is a unique situation.

It's a unique situation that this individual's residence

was part of an authorized community water access

subdivision that was granted to the Brickyard Estates

to minimize impact.

Right, but it wasn't that focused mostly

on the back lots that didn't have waterfront access.

Well, he has deeded rights to use that dock.

Sure, but he also has deeded rights

to have a sure-front property.

Right, and so it is an alternative.

So you can't say that it's not an alternative.

But isn't this, this seems like

it's really a very slippery slope.

I mean, what's, you know, is the next step

that the DES, you know, I say I'm a fisherman

and I wanna put in a dock as I like to fish

and they say, you know, golf is just as good a sport.

And it's even more, it's even healthier for you.

You get more exercise.

So, you know, that's your alternative.

Well, the way the department interprets its regulations

is to balance the interests of the right

of someone to wharf out, which is not an absolute right.

With the impact of the-

What limits the right to wharf out?

Well, the reasonable act, what limits the right to wharf,

this court has consistently held that the state

has a paramount right to protect the public trust

for reasonable use for navigation and other public purposes.

So if it interferes with navigation, that's one.

And other public purposes.

Being.

Well, in this case, protecting title mudflats,

protecting wetlands, protecting the shorefront,

all of those things.

Aren't those all matters of degree though?

Whether your expert is accepted

or your opponent's expert is accepted.

Right, it is a weighing

and the department makes a determination

based upon the best evidence that they've submitted.

In this particular case,

they asked the applicant submit additional information.

But in terms of the whole need and interpretation of need,

the problem in this case was that the department

made a determination that his stated purpose,

that again, they have to submit

by plan an example, those criteria.

By plan an example, he wasn't getting

what he was suggesting he was getting

with a docket, first, he didn't.

Wouldn't the wetlands council be happy about that?

Well, the problem with that is that

then you have those additional impacts, a lot of impacts,

260% increase of impacts and construction

for very little.

So are you saying you disagree with the figures

we were given, which is an increase

from 33% access to 55% access?

Yeah.

Yes.

Are you taking issue with that?

Yes, or his current dock, he has access

four to six hours a tide cycle.

Now granted, sometimes those tide cycles

in the middle of the night,

but there's certainly time during the active summer

when he could have up to eight to 12 hours of access,

that's a current access.

Not everyone on coastal,

who owns coastal frontage has all tide access.

The other thing is that

the six inches of water he had,

what he failed to consider initially

and failed to fully consider was the minus tide days.

And as indicated in the record,

for example, in September there are 20 minus tide days.

On those minus tide days then,

where he has only six inches of water at dead low tide,

that means the water's further out

and that means his boat is sitting on the flat

and he can't use it.

He also testified that his boat

drafts six to eight inches in the water,

which means if he tries to use his boat at low tide

and he gets in it, he's on the bottom.

Can I just ask you one other question?

As I understand it, the way the regulations work,

the entire burden of demonstrating

that you should get a permit is on the applicant.

Correct.

Right.

And I'm wondering, given that this is a property right,

shouldn't there be some sort of shifting of burden

here?

In other words, it seems like you have,

it's the law that a short front owner has rights,

has a right of access to the water

and some right to wharf out.

And I grant you, that doesn't mean you get to go

wherever you want or however far out.

But you have some, the owner has some

property right to do that.

And yet you sort of say, well,

the department's view seems to be,

but you have to sort of show us,

you have to make sort of a threshold showing

that you should be allowed to do this.

Shouldn't it really be the other way around

that somebody should, that the department

ought to have to say, well, wait a minute,

if you said you wanna do something

and you haven't said that you wanna build a landing strip

for Little Green Martians,

so it's not like completely out in the left field.

And now the department should have some burden of saying,

okay, we can overcome your property right

in this circumstance because.

Well, the department does balance,

does a balance and if Mr. Cook had proposed

something that made sense, there could always be.

Well, at least to say what makes sense,

maybe he's going to get a boat that drafts more shallowly.

Maybe he's gonna use an inflatable.

I mean, is it the department's

purview to decide what makes sense for the property owner?

When I see the word makes sense,

we're saying that it's not accomplishing

what he said it was going to accomplish.

Why is that of your concern, of your client's concern?

Because it's unnecessary, random and unnecessary impacts

and that is part of the criteria.

That if something is causing random and unnecessary impacts

to the title wetlands and to submerged lands,

then the department under its own regulations

cannot grant a permit.

I mean, it makes no sense to grant,

to extend a dock out 300 feet

if he's not gonna get all tide access.

Considering this is the Piscataqua River

and the main border is about 400 feet over,

so his all tide access would have had him

clearly near the main border

and all seagulling traffic would have had to go out

into the center of the channel to go around it.

That was navigational.

But there was clearly a dispute

about the additional impacts of essential fish habitat

and the DES relies on the Army Corps of Engineers

and they rely on the National Marine Fisheries

for their expertise in that area as well.

And these impacts were independent

of the existing impact of the brickyard dock.

I'm sorry?

The impacts of this proposed dock were distinct

from the existing impact of the brickyard dock,

which was about the same length.

The brickyard dock is actually about 237 feet.

That's what the, and when Mr. Cook asserts it was longer,

but in the request for more information,

he was asked to take a look at that more carefully.

Right, but that disturbance already exists.

Those disturbances already exist.

His current dock disturbances already exist.

So the issue is, should the department grant a permit

for additional impacts that don't give him

the additional access that he says he's going to get?

He's going to get.

And it's, he admitted in his own testimony

that the six inches wasn't desirable.

He actually said he got a new smaller boat

that drafted less, but it still drafted six,

eight inches.

He didn't take into consideration the minus tide day.

So these are permanent impacts,

not just construction impacts

that the council considered.

They're, they are, they're going to be daily impacts.

If he uses that dock at low tide,

then he's pushing along the mudflat to get out

to open water.

Which he's already doing.

He's actually at low tide.

I don't think he's using it at all.

He's using it four to six hours a day

or four to six hours of tide cycle.

Can I just ask, am I understanding correctly that,

although when it goes to the wetlands council,

when it goes to the council, as opposed to DES,

they, it's sort of a review of what DES did,

but they also actually hear testimony, right?

It's an appeal.

It's a, it's a sort of, it's not de novo, I guess,

but it is, they do get evidence.

Yes.

And, and make findings.

Yes.

So I guess to, I guess the one thing I have a question

about then is if they have to make findings

and they're split, in the words,

is this different than, you know,

that I mean, normally if a, if a trial court,

for example, makes a decision and it comes up here

and for some reason we only have four judges

that can participate and we've, we split two, two,

then the trial court's decision is affirmed.

But we're not making factual findings.

If the, is there, is there a problem here

because it's, it's a 5-5 decision

involving the making of factual findings

and you know, how can they, how can they do that?

Well, they did make several factual findings

in support of the department's case.

They made, they made it a number of factual findings.

Are they all five to five though?

No, they weren't.

The ones that they were five to five on,

it's a little confusing reviewing the transcript

but we did sit through the deliberations

is that when they were five to five

they determined that was not proved.

But some they found were false, some they found were true.

In terms of the motions that they issued,

they, the one that got confusing was when they,

the one that was proposed in the negative

that he had met his burden.

However, they did make a motion in the affirmative

that the department was unreasonable

because if it's determination and appreciable gain,

that again was the appellant's burden

and that did not, he did not prevail on that.

That was a five to five.

The council obviously was hopelessly deadlocked

when it tried to do a number of these motions

but given that it was the appellant's burden

and even if the motion had been,

it was clear that if the motion

on whether or not the department's,

he had met his burden,

even if that were asked in the affirmative,

it's clear based upon the votes

that he did not have the votes there

that would have established that he met his burden.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Do you need your reserve time, Mr. Tune?

I just wanted to make sure to clarify

what seems to be a misunderstanding

as far as the 25% increase in time.

Number one, page 51 of the certified record

has it as 24.99% so I was slightly off on that

but that even understates it

because you go from six inches

where the current dock is

and then there's a foot and a half tall shoal

and then you're going to be going about six inches

to where the proposed dock is

but you get over that foot and a half shoal, okay?

So even though you have a 25%,

it's more than that

because of getting over that foot and a half shoal.

The other thing that I wanted to make sure

to correct any misunderstandings

is that the river is almost 850 feet wide in that area

and the 325 foot doesn't even get

to the navigational channel.

You have the certified record.

There's no impacts on navigation.

If there was an impact on navigation,

that's something for which the department

could absolutely reasonably request modifications

and in an early proposal for the dock,

there was a concern that we were only looking

at big boat navigation, shall we say,

in the channel and not looking at the effect

on small single-person kayaks

and when that issue was raised,

our engineers altered the dock

so that the dock as proposed won't affect one person kayak

and that's the type of reasonable modification

for which a DES has requested.

So are you saying that there's no dispute

that there is no impact on navigation?

There is nothing from the wetlands council

that there's any impacts on navigation.

I don't believe there was anything

as far as the department's order

there was any impacts on navigation.

Early on there was, but that was corrected.

So the proposal that's before the wetlands council

has no impacts on navigation.

And the chief harbour master affirmed that.

Correct.

In the record.

Correct.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Okay, submitted.

Council.
