This is case 2017, 0159, Slenia Enterprises, Inc. versus Appledore Medical Group, Inc.

Council.

Good morning. May it please the court? I'm Lynn Christie, representing Slenia Enterprises.

And I have to join my colleagues and thank, at least thanking you for your service.

No, you don't have to.

I do. I feel I must.

Thank you anyway.

Okay. I'd also like to wave my three minutes. If you have questions, please fire away at any time.

So can I just, am I understanding that the lease in question here had a provision, had a specific

provision that said, in effect, in the event of a default by the tenant, the landlord could

exercise an option of, and I'm paraphrasing here, but I think basically said the landlord

can then either say this, I'm declaring that you're in breach and I'm suing you now for the

whole thing, or could say I'm going to wait, rent it out for whatever I can rent it out,

and then sue you for a sort of installment basis.

That's correct. Yes. It's section 13.1b, I believe, and the alternative possibility was

what Slenia selected.

She selected to keep the lease in place.

Right. So I'm just wondering, is that, you know, even if your opponent might, in other

circumstances, have an argument that in this circumstance, the statute starts to run when

there's a breach, the statute of limitations can be waived, and I'm wondering if by agreeing

to this provision, that doesn't, in effect, amount to a waiver of the statute, at

least as to the issue of whether you can sue on an installment basis, so to speak.

I hadn't thought of it that way. I wish I had, but yes, I think it feeds into that Slenia

is the injured party, so that their choices are the ones that need to be made.

They chose this way. When we entered into a lease, we knew there was two different options.

We chose this way. It seems to me that Appledore, at that point, can't claim that the lease

ended, because we negotiated this lease, and that was one of the options. So I don't

think you can take it away from Slenia once they decide to choose that option.

So that's that, yes. But I think...

If this lease had been of longer duration, more than three years, and the same set

of facts, so the breach happened at the beginning of the lease, and then unlike here

where it sort of ended before the three years ran on that breach,

essentially your client would be foreclosed at that point. I mean, there's

an argument here that your client could have filed right after April 2015 when

the lease payments were determined.

Yes, my client, it looks like from this, yes, we could have filed at that point,

but there was a lot of issues that hadn't been determined yet, a lot of damages.

Under the terms of this lease, the rent adjusted based on the amount of real estate

tax. Appledore was required to pay for utilities. So since they weren't there,

Slenia needed to do that, because clearly they can't let the premises freeze up.

There was other...

So if the end date had been another year, we wouldn't really be presented with

that gap condition. If the lease had extended more than three years, the statute

would have run on the breach before your client could even have brought suit under

your theory, right?

No, actually, my theory is that each month, because the lease continued,

each month is its own separate breach.

What wasn't the term of the lease initial term five years?

It was five years, but they had what I would call an escape clause that

after, I believe it was some two years, that they were able to notify that they

were not going to continue the lease.

So when they wrote the letter in April, I'm sorry, at the end of March of 2013

saying they no longer wanted the lease, to me, that triggered the earliest

time, which would be the escape clause.

So if this, just to follow up on just Hans Marconi's question,

let's suppose this had been a 20-year lease.

Yes.

The tenant breaches before even taking occupancy.

Your view would be you can wait until the end of the 20 years.

It may be that the only thing you can then recover for is the last three years,

because that's the statute, but you would be able to wait the 20 years if you

wanted to, and then sue for the last three years of the rent due.

Yes, if we carry, I think, I think those circumstances would be unusual.

This circumstance of waiting two years before finding a replacement tenant

was very unusual.

And I just think because the recession was a little deeper than we all

realize, it just took longer than any of us would have thought in April of

2013.

My client never would have guessed that it would have taken two years

to re-rent that property.

How should the fact that they never took occupancy impact our analysis?

In my opinion, it shouldn't at all.

I mean, looking at the terms of the lease, once the lease starts,

which you'll find my belief that it did, they paid rent, they had a key

that, you know, they were able to come and go with their architects to

make their plans.

To me, Selenia lost its right to possession once that lease started.

So Selenia didn't have possession.

So that must mean that Appledore had a right to possession,

even if they chose not to use it.

It didn't...

Selenia couldn't have gone in at that point and used it for its own

purpose.

So they didn't have their full possession rights.

So to me, that means Appledore had some form of possession.

But Appledore...

But then chose not to use it.

Right, but Appledore...

There was nothing preventing them from using it.

They chose not to.

I understand that, but Appledore is making an argument that

your legal rights depend a bit and your ability to file,

and when you have to file, depend on whether occupancy has been

taken or not.

I take it you don't agree with that?

I don't agree with that.

Why not?

Really, there's not much to support that in New Hampshire case

law.

But there is in case law from other states.

And why is that wrong?

What?

Sorry?

Why is he wrong in making the argument he's making?

Just because of what I said, I don't think that whether a lease,

your obligations under that lease, I don't think are altered as to

whether you take possession of the property or not.

If there's nothing preventing you from taking possession.

So I think if your obligations are the same under a lease,

whether you take possession or not, it would follow to me

that the lease then has started, and if the lease has started

and obligations are due periodically, as they are in a

monthly lease, that that would then fall under the universal

rule that they found in general thermophysical versus

depui, that if those obligations are paid by

installments, then the statute of limitations would run

from each breach, each month.

Did the lease address a remedy for the party's

failure to agree on the cost of the improvements?

The lease did not.

There was attached with the lease.

There's also a lease improvement agreement.

It gave sort of the outline of what you need to do when you

if they wanted to change their plan, then they submitted

it to Selenia.

Selenia got the cost for doing that, said here's how much

it's going to...

And they thought the price was too high, so then...

They actually didn't reply at all.

They didn't say that the price was too high.

They said here's the price, we're following the agreement.

Here's what these changes are going to cost, and then

dead air.

If I understand correctly, Selenia invoked Section 13.1b

in April of 2013.

Correct.

If instead they had filed suit at that time,

would they have been able to collect for the entire

term of the lease, and how would the damages have been quantified?

I think I still would have said that their letter in March

would have triggered the escape clause, so I think that

the same time period, the end date would have been the same

for the lease calculations.

But like I said, those lease calculations that second year

wouldn't have been accurate because we wouldn't have the

real estate tax calculations, those changes,

or would we have, we wouldn't have utilities,

we wouldn't have any of those things also.

So, I'm sorry, go ahead.

So looking forward, I mean your client would have a duty

to mitigate damages and to try to re-let the property,

but at that time if the suit were filed in April of 13

and the trial occurred in July of 13,

would you know how to quantify the damages after the trial date

in terms of mitigation or utilities or property tax?

I'm not following, I guess I'm not following the question.

How would I know how to...

So if their argument is you should have filed,

you shouldn't have waited, you should have filed earlier.

My argument is I didn't have all the information at that time.

Okay.

But you could have, but I mean couldn't you have,

if you wanted, you don't,

I take it you're not saying that you couldn't have filed that.

No, no, I'm not saying that.

And so if you had chosen to file right away,

wouldn't, I mean just as fast as it's obviously right

that you would still have the duty to mitigate and all that

and but wouldn't the only difference really be

that you would then have to sort of speculate

or at least make reasonable estimates.

You know we're suing today, we have this lease for five years,

we're suing today, we want to collect this amount in damages

and we presumably would have had to present to the fact finder

some calculation saying you know we anticipate

that it's reasonable to assume we'll be able to rent this property

in six months and here's what we think we'll be able to rent it for

and so we've deduct, I mean in other words

the difference would be that you would have to do all of that

in a sort of projected basis.

Yeah, we would have to guess essentially,

I mean you're saying six months we could have guessed

that we would have re-rented it,

well we would have been really wrong because it took two years

so we really would have been damages,

I mean it wouldn't have made us whole

by any stretch of the imagination.

So in past experience, not in the commercial

but in residential leases,

it has had the practice of when somebody says they're not going to move in

then they go about the process of finding somebody else

to take their place and present the difference to whoever occasionally

but it just turned out to be something that took way longer

than we would have anticipated.

But isn't your opponent have at least sort of as a general policy idea

that if we sort of accept that even when there's been

a total breach right at the beginning,

you can wait.

I mean the implications of that,

I mean if we applied that generally,

suppose we didn't limit it to real estate,

we applied it generally so...

I think that's the essential element of the installment contract.

I think if you look...

So you and I make an agreement,

I'm going to work, you hire me to work for your company

and we sign a contract for five years

and you say you're going to pay me $5,000 a month

and you cancel the contract,

you've breached the contract before I even start.

So I can say, I'm not just going to sue today,

I'm just going to wait,

I'm going to wait three years

and then sue you, you are going to pay me $5,000 a month

and I'm going to sue you for the $5,000 times three years

at the end of three years.

I mean should the law sort of encourage that

or should it say look,

there's been a total breach now,

you've got three years to bring a lawsuit,

you ought to bring it within that three years,

you shouldn't wait.

I think that

you'll find that

in every instance where they apply

the installment contract rule, at some point

there's a point where they stop paying

and that I think is what you're saying

is the breach, the total breach,

they stop paying, they don't pay anymore

for the next five years, right?

Those have been the facts

in where they have applied the installment contract rule.

So if you want to

read it the way my opponent wants you to read it,

then there is no installment contract rule

because that's the case in any of these cases,

in Pierce v. MetLife,

monthly disability payments for insurance,

she waited beyond the three years.

Right, but isn't that what happened?

In other words, the tenants stop paying

right away.

Right, at some point people stop,

they stop paying the disability payments,

she waited more than three years

before she sued.

I guess my point is, if that's the hard and fast rule,

then there is no installment contract rule

in any situation, not just in this one.

Doesn't that conflict with Natazi

where no payments were made?

The construction contract won the trial court's sights.

Well, they paid the first payment,

they paid the first $5,000 to get the house moved.

Right, but none of the $45 a day.

Correct.

So why would that conflict?

I guess this concept that,

or maybe it's consistent.

I think it's consistent with the installment contract rule

that they waited until the end,

but each day in that case was a separate breach.

So it wasn't even a month, it was each day.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Good morning, and may it please the court,

Kevin Fitzgerald, and I will join

as the final voice this morning.

Without reference to how old we are

and what I remember, but just as a...

This is a historic moment though.

My very last appeal, and you're arguing it.

I'm going to start crying again.

I have to say it was an unexpected privilege,

and thank you.

Thank you.

I think we need to reset the discussion a bit.

This is a case involving the order of the trial court

that found that the plaintiff brought a claim

more than three years after the complaint discloses

they alleged breach.

That, on its face, the court concluded,

is inconsistent with the legislature's directive

in 5084 that actions have to be brought

within three years of the time the cause of action accrues.

Unless we were to change the law

and accept Selenia's argument that this is,

for some reason, an installment contract.

I think I don't entirely agree with that,

and here's why.

It's, I think, fair to say that the current state

of the jurisprudence in New Hampshire

on this thing that Selenia refers to

as the installment contract rule

is quite undeveloped.

So this court has not had many opportunities

to speak expressly to the kind of very expansive,

and I would submit judicially adventurous proposition

that Selenia would have you embrace.

There are other concepts referred to in other jurisdictions,

and frankly, even in prior opinions

and orders of this court,

which sound in the so-called installment contract rule,

but which take a much more restrained

and pardon-upon-judicious approach

to what that means.

Here, the trial court determined

that we didn't even reach that issue

because the trial court made a finding

that on the facts of this case,

consistent with this court's prior opinions,

there was a repudiation, an unmistakable,

as he described it, an unequivocal

repudiation of the agreement,

and there would be no performance,

and concluded on that basis

that whatever other indulgences,

the so-called installment contract rule might provide

that the cause of action accrued

in the case this court's opinions

on anticipatory repudiation are quite clear,

the breach can occur with respect to the entire agreement

if the trial court makes a finding

that there has been a clear and unequivocal

repudiation of the entire agreement.

I'll square that with the alternate remedy clause

of the lease agreement.

In other words, the option to deem the lease to continue.

So I think that's a recapitulation,

that is the plaintiff's recapitulation

of that provision into a waiver

of the statute of limitations

or some adoption in the lease agreement itself

of their construct of the installment contract rule,

and it's neither of those things.

That argument was made,

and the trial court looked at it and said,

this is an election of remedies.

You have the opportunity to pursue, under this lease,

landlord, a variety of ways to approach your remedy,

and we've talked with counsel about some of those.

It's faced more practically what that says.

For example, if you had a tenant

who was in possession paying rent

and then ran into financial trouble

and couldn't pay the whole rent,

could pay part of it, maybe couldn't pay any.

The landlord has the option under that set of circumstances

to move to evict the tenant,

to leave the lease in place,

take whatever payments happen.

If possible, they could relet the premises

to somebody else and relieve them of the lease.

Those are all, frankly, fairly ordinary, practical

and sensible remedy provisions.

And what the trial court said, well,

but that's what that is.

That's a remedy.

That's not an overriding by lease

prospectively of the statute of limitations.

Nor is it, or can it be as a matter of law,

an anticipatory waiver of the statute of limitations?

It's neither of those things.

And if you accept that the proposition

I've just explained is right,

then Solania is back to the problem it has.

It's not that it had some practical proof problem.

It's Justice Bassett was...

But isn't it a defense

to a unilateral repudiation of the contract?

They don't have to accept the fact that your client says

we're not going to perform.

No, it's not that.

It's a remedy in the event of breach.

But because it is a breach,

the law of the court is quite clear.

You have three years under 5084

to bring a cause of action.

And the burden that that presents under this lease

is minimal to nonexistent.

Frankly, if they had filed it a month sooner than they did,

we wouldn't be here.

We wouldn't be having this conversation.

And that directive is a legislative directive

that I would submit neither Solania nor Appledore,

nor with all due respect,

the courts of the state are free to overwrite

unless there is a development,

Chief Justice alluded to, of new law

which would allow an excuse

for performance under the statute.

Let's say there's a 20-year lease

and you would say that

given the behavior of your client here

at the beginning of a 20-year lease

that the lessor had three years to bring suit.

So they bring suit, say, a year into it.

And they go to trial

and are they then entitled to collect

19 years of rent

reduced to present value?

No.

I mean, I frankly think that A,

finds no home that I know

prior decisions of this court

or even any extensions of the cited cases

in other jurisdictions that the plaintiff offers.

And frankly, I would submit offers

a somewhat ludicrous scenario

that would allow a party

essentially to craft an agreement

with some sort of installment feature

to take unilateral relief

from what the legislature has told us all

are the rules of the game

with respect to when you need to file a lawsuit

to have access to the courts in this state.

Why isn't the argument you're making good

as against the case law that we have

for the installment contract rule

in non-real estate cases?

I'm sorry, I'm not sure.

I mean, we have cases already

that non-C or whatever, non-C.

And there are a couple cases,

as I recall, now I can't find them,

that General Thera-Physical and Natasi

that stand for the proposition

that you can file on the basis

of missed monthly payments.

And the argument you're making

would seem would apply with equal force

to those cases

and argue against those cases.

Well, first,

the trial court here made a specific determination

which this court will sustain unless it finds

it is completely unsupported by the record

or as erroneous as a matter of law

that there was a complete repudiation

of the agreement on day one.

I'd submit that takes us outside

of this installment discussion altogether.

The agreement will not be performed

and on that circumstance

we're into the statute of limitations

without excuse under some version

of the installment contract rule.

With respect to the rule in general,

this court's prior decisions teach that

first of all they are applied generally

in situations where the court is trying

to avoid working a hardship

where a plaintiff has delivered

some consideration or possession

of an asset.

The cases in New Hampshire

exclusively deal with consumer goods

and other goods.

We don't have that present in this case.

We've argued in the brief, I think, about that.

I honestly, as I'm standing here

arguing with you today,

don't think that's really the issue

because I don't think that's what

the court's prior cases on installment rule say.

That is, for example,

this case, this court rather last

earlier this year in the

Cloughlandry Roman Catholic Bishop case

dealt with an analogous set of circumstances

where there was a contract

that had not been renewed

and of a teacher

and the discussion was whether

the cause of action

accrued or failed to accrue

up to the end of the contract

or whether some earlier date would apply.

And the court there analytically said

it's not necessary to wait to the end.

The question is

essentially amplifying

the language and the statute

did the plaintiff know

everything they needed to know

by a particular date

to understand they had a cause of action?

And the court concluded, in that case,

even though it was well before the end of the contract,

she did.

I think the same analysis

informs what you ought to do

about this so-called installment contract rule here.

If the trial court determines

there has been an anticipatory

repudiation of this agreement,

it's unequivocal, and those are the words.

And we've noted in the brief,

the plaintiff did not take exception to that,

didn't seek reconsideration of that

and is not among the three issues

as to which they seek-

So I understand your position about anticipatory

repudiation, but let me ask you,

putting that aside,

it seems you're also arguing that real estate

is different, A, and then B,

the fact that there was an occupancy

makes it different and distinguishes it

from other cases.

Can you expand on that?

I think working backwards,

the latter, I think the lack of occupancy

is among the facts

in the record that the trial court can,

in this case, did look to determine

that there was anticipatory repudiation.

If the court is going to adventure

into animating this thing

called the installment contract rule

to essentially build out

rules of the game that provide

under that doctrine

some excuse for failure

to comply with the literal

directors of RSA 5084,

the defendant would submit

this isn't that case.

There have been no prior orders

of this case, of this court,

rather, or opinions of this court

that have taken it there.

Real estate and leasing in general

is very heavily animated

in a revised statute denotated

with respect to

the legislature's direction

about how things like

failure to perform a lease

eviction and others

are to be remedied in the court system.

But those are

in the residential context

primarily, right?

I think the bulk of them are

but they're not exclusively residential.

I'd simply submit that this is not

the case, this is not the vehicle

for the court to say, you know,

in the case of real estate leases

we're going to expand

the installment contract rule.

Because the possessory

interest conveyed never really

attached or is there some other reason?

Well,

there are a number of other reasons.

Let's turn the question back.

Let's assume this was a 20-year lease.

Is it

the intention of this court to create

a doctrine which allows

a judicial exception

to RSA 5084

for 20 years?

Literally, they can

just sit on their rights even though

the trial court has said

the day before day one

you knew this was breached.

I make that finding

and you can wait 20 years.

Well, that runs afoul

of the very

principles on which

the concept of statute of limitations

are built and the legislative record

on which 5084 is built.

The lease hold interest in your average ride aid

is about 60 to 75 years.

So that would extend to those cases as well.

Right, and you will have

a very interesting

set of circumstances in the trial court

when you have people showing up

to try cases that are 20 years old.

On essentially a landlord-attentive dispute.

I'd submit as a matter

of general policy

that is not a very compelling principle

on which this court

would move to expand the installment

contract rule, so-called.

A more sensible

approach.

I think there is something this court's

made it clear

around this concept of installment contract

is the one it has talked about

as recently as the last

few years.

This court decided in an unreported opinion

in Peter Jay Booth

a matter that dealt

with both

installment contracts and claims that arose

from those and here the court noted

albeit in dicta in a case

of Exeter Hospital versus Hall

137 New Hampshire

that where no payment is made

within 3 years on an

installment plan that

a filing

of suit outside of that 3 years would be

time-barred.

It's cited

to an Illinois

appellate court case

St. Francis Medical Center versus Verdon

as the underlying principle

for that and

that explains the installment contract

rule as if you make a payment

on an installment obligation

sometime

during that installment schedule that

tolls the statute of limitations

and the statute resets.

I think that's a sensible

construction of the installment contract

rule because you have this

anticipatory repudiation but let's say

8 months later the tenant makes a

payment.

Well that's a good place to adopt

the installment contract rule to say

that resets the statute.

The landlord could sue 3 years from that

last payment. That's what this court said

in Exeter and incorporated

and referred to that same doctrine

in its unreported opinion

in the Peter Booth case.

I think that's the right rule

that allows

for the trial court to fashion

a remedy to avoid inequity

but it is not

so broad that you have

this sort of the

statute of limitations is sort of

the first offer in compromise

for

a clever landlord.

So you're saying the case

our approach should turn on whether

or not one installment payment

was made or not?

No, it should

simply that the statute would run

or reset from the date

of the last payment. So here there's

no road to home for Slania. The last

payment was even under their complaint.

They say it was January

of 2013.

They didn't file suit until

late April of 2016.

So their time barred.

And there was no reason for them not to.

They just chose not to.

Thank you.

Thank you, Your Honor, and congratulations.

Thank you. The case submitted.

That part of the court is in recess.

This part is adjourned.

Thank you, Your Honor.
