This is case 2017-0541, state of New Hampshire versus Ricky Flanders.

Ms. Housman.

May it please the court?

Stephanie Housman on behalf of Mr. Ricky Flanders.

I want to address the second issue of excluding evidence related

to the timing of JF's call to the police,

and then the first issue regarding two incidents that

happened between Mr. Flanders and JF when JF was an adult.

But before I address specifically those two issues

and take the court's questions,

I just want to provide a factual context for these issues.

First, JF was alleging acts that he did not report to the police

for over 20 years.

New Hampshire law allows the state

to preemptively explain a delay in reporting,

because we're afraid that juries will sort of naturally

intuit from a delay that the allegations are not true.

So how many months before the disclosure to police

did this event in 2016 occur?

It was at most a couple.

It was described as being in the spring,

and the first call to the police was June 1.

And because the state is allowed to submit evidence

explaining the delay so that the jury isn't

wondering about that, in this case,

the state admitted evidence that JF was afraid,

explained his delay by saying he was afraid of Mr. Flanders.

The state also was allowed to admit

an extensive presentation of his prior allegations

about Mr. Flanders to 10 family members and treatment

providers in the decade prior to his report to the police.

So when was he disclosing to family members?

When did that begin?

In about 2006.

And the state's prior statement evidence

created a risk that the jury would follow

another natural intuition and believe

that a thing said over and over is more likely to be true.

But that's an inference not permitted

by the rules of evidence.

It was against this backdrop that Mr. Flanders wanted

to admit evidence that would provide the jury with another

explanation for JF's call to the police,

that he had been telling this story to his family for years,

that his cousins had acted on it

and were facing serious consequences.

JF would feel compelled to legitimate his lies

by calling the police.

This theory was backed up by more than just

the overwhelming coincidence of timing

that JF had not reported to the police for 8,500 days

but reported the day after his cousins were arrested

for felonies for assaulting Mr. Flanders.

It was also backed up by the cousin Ed's statement

that he and JF had had a conversation.

It was clear from that conversation

that they were discussing both JF's allegations

against Mr. Flanders and the assault on Mr. Flanders.

And by Ed's texts, which are in the appendix to our brief,

it was attached to a motion that make clear

that the assault on Mr. Flanders was because of something

Mr. Flanders was believed to have done in the past.

The defense had no other evidence

to address the state's prior statement evidence.

The trial court erroneously characterized the evidence

as collateral and mistakenly limited the defense

presentation to just cross of JF on that topic.

The evidence was not collateral

and thus would not have caused a trial within a trial

on any issue or matter not central to the case.

What was the nature of the evidence uncovered

during the cross examination of JF?

The defense asked JF, did you know

your cousins had assaulted Mr. Flanders?

He said not until months later.

Did they call you during that assault?

He denied that he even had a phone at that time.

And did you talk to your cousins

about the assault before you called the police

to report this?

He denied that and was one of the cousins with you

when you called the police and he denied that as well.

But the record doesn't seem to be clear

as to what evidence would contradict that

because there was some evidence produced

to the trial court at the motion's hearing,

which was conflicting.

Is that right?

I think what was conflicting was that,

so both of the parties were making representations

about the same interview of the cousin Ed

that had been done by the prosecution.

And so I think in that statement,

Ed denied that he was with JF at the time

that JF made the call to the police.

That was a little unclear, but it was clear

from his recounting of his conversations with JF

that they had had a meeting during this time period

during which they discussed both JF's allegations

about Mr. Flanders and the assault on Mr. Flanders.

So that belied the victim's statements

that he didn't know about the assault.

Yes, yes.

And the defense could have put this evidence on

through calling Ed the cousin as a witness

and also through one of the police officers

who would have been able to establish

the timing of when the assault occurred

and when the arrest occurred

and what they were arrested for

and when JF called the police.

And that officer was called by the defense

for other purposes as well.

So that wouldn't have necessitated an additional witness.

But given the fact that the victim had been disclosing

to family members for 10 years,

does that undercut your argument a little bit?

Well, I think it offered an alternate explanation

for why a person would say something

to their family members for many years

but not go to the police

and then finally go to the police at a certain time.

And also an explanation for why they're testifying

about something that may not be true.

JF was a very troubled person

that that evidence came out at trial.

He had conflicts within his family,

including a troubled relationship with his father

and he was at fault through his alcoholism

for the death of his young son.

So it was clear that there could have been

some significant conflicts within the family

but JF was maybe telling his family members

these allegations about Mr. Flanders

to sort of explain what was going on in his own life

maybe not because they were true.

And he only decided to go to the police

not because he was no longer afraid of Mr. Flanders

but because suddenly his cousins had acted on his words

and were facing serious consequences.

What testimony came in from the family members?

JF was allowed to testify that he disclosed

in that decade prior to going to the police

to approximately 10 people

and then nine of those witnesses testified at trial

from various family members, both of his siblings,

both of his parents, an uncle, an aunt, a cousin.

I'm forgetting all who testified

but it was an extensive presentation

about the prior statement.

Did he disclose to any of those family members

that his cousin Herbie had been a perpetrator?

There was no evidence about that

although I don't know that that would have come in at trial.

It came in at trial that he had made statements

to his treatment providers that were ambiguous

as to whether it was Herbie or Mr. Ricky Flanders

who had perpetrated those allegations against him.

While the trial court excluded the defense evidence,

it admitted evidence of two incidents

that occurred when JF was an adult

and that the state claimed explained his 20 plus year

delay in making these accusations to the police.

One occurred in 2003 when JF had already not disclosed

for approximately 10 years

and the other occurred in 2016

after JF had been telling his family

for approximately a decade

and at most a couple of months

before he actually did disclose to the police

or did make these allegations to the police.

Another incident was especially probative

of JF's reason for the delay

and the state had an admitted evidence

that JF was afraid of Mr. Flanders

from the very first alleged incident.

These other incidents which happened much later

did little to explain why he would not go to the police

especially when he freely told

so many family members these allegations.

So the 2016 event, what was the nature of that evidence?

Did JF allege that Ricky had made certain statements

other than I'm gonna take you out?

His statements were that he threatened him.

I refer to that in my brief as the wood incident

so it sort of was initiated

because Mr. Flanders was upset that JF had told his family

that Mr. Flanders' parents needed wood

and JF's father brought wood over.

And so the threat seems to be focused on

don't tell anybody else what's going on here

at my parents' house.

I'm the one who takes care of them.

I don't want other people knowing what's going on here.

So it wasn't admission.

It wasn't the sort of thing

don't tell anybody about what happened years ago.

I mean, I think some of the state's witnesses

tried to characterize it in that way.

For instance, JF's sort of on again off again

girlfriend testified about that incident on direct.

She said, I have heard Mr. Flanders threaten JF

and tell him I'm gonna take him out.

It was only on cross that she admitted,

well the only time I've actually heard that

is during this wood event.

And so she tried to characterize it

as a more generalized threat

when with further inquiry

it was revealed that it had to do with this wood incident.

Instead, the later incidents served primarily

to paint Mr. Flanders in a negative light

and any probative value for a non-propensity purpose

was substantially outweighed by the risk of prejudice.

You're still arguing also about the drug injection

as well?

I am, I just didn't choose to focus my time on that.

If the court has any questions about that as well.

Unless the court has further questions, thank you.

Thank you.

Good morning, Your Honor.

Stephen Fuller representing the State in this appeal.

I'll start with the same issue that Defense Counsel did.

The court went sort of back and forth

on this evidence of the cousins

beating up the defendant in May of 2016.

And the defendant filed for reconsideration initially

before trial and the court granted partial reconsideration.

He said that you can ask the victim

about whether he knew about this incident

where Edward and William had beaten up the defendant.

And the victim testified that he did not talk to

Edward or William between when the assault

against the defendant occurred

and when he reported to the police on June 1st.

And that was right after their arrest.

I think their arrest was May 30th or 31st

and then he reported to the police on June 1st.

The trial courts suggested that he excluded that evidence

because it was too prejudicial to the defendant.

Well, yes, that's another point

because the evidence really does not go to the falsity

of the victim's testimony about the assault

or the falsity or truthfulness of the victim's report

to the police on June 1st about the assault.

The theory there was he only went to the police

because his cousins had been arrested.

But as the trial judge pointed out in the pre-trial order

and at trial, the theory just simply could have been

now he knows the defendant isn't invincible

and it gave him the courage and the opportunity

to go to the police that he didn't have before.

That doesn't mean that the report itself is false.

That does nothing to impeach the victim.

And so that really is a collateral matter

which has very little probative value.

It doesn't have any impeachment value.

It doesn't have any value to prove the contrary.

And so if that is the inference,

then it simply means even if the victim knew

that his cousins had been arrested,

now he goes to the police because now it's sort of,

A, the defendant is not invincible and I don't have

to worry about his threats as much

and B, the cat's gonna come out of the bag.

I mean, now my cousins have been arrested for this.

If that's the impetus for the assault against the defendant,

then all this information's gonna come out.

So it really has no impeachment value.

It's just, it may have been his motivation.

We don't know from this record

whether that was the motivation to report.

That may have been it.

But that doesn't do anything to say

that the report itself is false.

So we should address this strictly

through the 403 analysis then.

Is that what you're suggesting?

Because the trial court's order really comes down.

We don't need a trial within a trial.

It's gonna delay the case

and it's gonna mislead the jury.

Exactly, because now it's going to come down

to a contest between the victim's credibility

on cross-examination and Edward's credibility

if the defense presents Edward.

The court gave the defense the opportunity

to present Edward for a very limited purpose.

The defense had not subpoenaed Edward

and could not produce him.

But overnight the court had said,

if you wanna produce him just to ask him

about this very narrow issue,

then the court was going to allow that.

So the court was open to allowing this.

And the court just assumed

that the defense was gonna subpoena

this witness before trial

rather than the day they made its decision?

Apparently it did because on page 360 of volume three,

the court ended the hearing by saying

that it would reserve the ultimate ruling

until it hurt from Edward.

Was Edward on the defense's witness list?

That, I don't know.

What was the scope of the testimony from Edward

that the court said it would permit?

The, as I said, the victim had testified

that he had not spoken to Edward and William

between the assault and the arrest.

Edward would be asked basically if that's true

or if Edward had spoken to the victim

between those two events.

So that would have been allowed.

The trial court said that.

Right.

Yeah.

And that would have undercut

the victim's statements that he hadn't?

Yes.

That would have undercut that specific statement.

Right.

And Edward had told the police

that he had spoken with the victim?

I think that was in the statement,

Edward's statement,

because Edward didn't testify.

Right.

He was in his pre-trial statement.

Okay.

So tell me about,

let's go back to the wood incident.

You know, I sort of agree with the defense on this

that there's marginal, if any, relevance to that event.

And given the fact

that the victim had been disclosing for over a decade,

why did the state need to put evidence

before the jury about an event in 2016

that to explain a delay in reporting

when the victim reported a couple months later?

The wood incident also comes only three years

after the 2013 incident,

which involved other threats that he had made

when he had driven his car up and down the street

in front of the victim's house.

The wood incident was part and parcel

of this threatening relationship

between the defendant and the victim,

where the theory of the case on both sides

was really based on the victim's credibility

and the late disclosure was a big part of that.

So in order to explain the late disclosure,

the state had to show that the victim still felt

the threat of the defendant,

still felt that he could not go to the police

because the defendant basically was going to take him out.

But the wood incident shows was maybe an overreaction

by the defendant where the defendant threatens the victim

simply because the victim had delivered some wood

to the defendant's parents

while they were at the same camp.

So for that reaction when the incident is so trivial,

the delivery of the wood shows what the defendant...

But doesn't that require the jury

to sort of presume it's a trivial incident

and there's no history of some other issue

that this was a hot button for the defendant?

The hot button issue would be what?

The defendant said it appears on its surface

to be a trivial issue,

but isn't that asking the jury to sort of assume

a lot of facts that weren't introduced?

No, because it shows,

because it's consistent with sort of the background

that they've already seen.

The defendant threatened the victim,

the defendant threatened the victim

when the victim was a child right after the assaults

and in the school bus,

the defendant threatened the victim again in 2013.

This is yet another reason why

it took 20 years for the defendant to,

I mean, for the victim to...

Well, on that point,

what's the relevance of the victim's aunt

actually driving him to make that first report

to the police?

Had she known of these,

of the victim's reported complaints prior to that day

or was this something new to her or did that not come out?

I'm not sure of the answer to that question.

I know, I think she was one of the people

that he had disclosed to.

As Defense Council pointed out,

he had disclosed to a lot of family members

before going to the police.

Can you address the issue of the defendant's injection

just prior to one of the incidents?

Oh.

Why should that have been allowed?

The defendant attacked it on 404B and 403 grounds.

The court was correct when it said

this is not 404B because this is part of the entire episode.

The defendant hands the victim a firearm.

The victim is a child at this point.

The child victim watches the defendant

inject something into his arm,

then the defendant takes the firearm back.

And with the firearm,

which is incredibly threatening to a small child,

he then sexually assaults the victim in two different ways.

So where does the drug injection?

Well, it's part of the entire episode.

It kind of shows the defendant's actions

immediately before the assault.

The judge suggests that maybe it shows

the defendant's mental state.

I think it also shows the victim's mental state

as a child when he's watching the defendant

do these things immediately before assaulting him.

And it shows the fear,

and it shows not just before the assault,

but after the assault of the defendant.

The defendant is significantly older than the victim,

and he has a firearm, he's doing drugs.

This all goes to the psychological damage

that he's doing to the victim at this point.

It's all part and parcel of the same episode.

It happens all at the same time.

So it's the inexorably intertwined in your views.

His route.

Exactly.

It's the substantial.

Exactly.

And all of this evidence,

the drug evidence, the 2013 evidence, the 2016 evidence,

all goes to show that the defendant,

I mean, that the victim saw the defendant

as a menacing presence,

as a threatening presence in his life.

This was in the face of a lot of other evidence

where they said that they hung out together

at family events, that they did things together,

that they worked together.

That this was a very close family

and they were together quite a bit of the time.

A lot of the family mentioned that too.

And so the state had to demonstrate

that the late disclosure should not affect

the victim's credibility that the victim still had,

should be believed.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Okay, submit it.

Point out that we do have the confidential records

and we have reviewed them

and we will review them again on the last issue.

Thank you.

Thank you.
