May it please the court? I'm attorney Justin Shepard for Fernando Cajeges.

Um, Fernando filed a...

I'm sorry, arms.

This is case 2017-0111, state of New Hampshire versus Fernando Cajeges.

Good morning, I'm Justin Shepard for Fernando Cajeges.

Fernando filed a petition to annul,

which is denied in the Portsmouth Circuit Court.

It's our position that the court exercised an unsustainable

exercise of discretion when it denied that petition.

Can I ask you, and I know Mr. Shepard, this is probably not, it may not be something

you were prepared to answer, but it's something that raises a concern. It's my understanding

from the transcript of the hearing

that your client made a claim

that the trial judge had represented him at some point.

And if I understand correctly, the judge

just sort of said, kind of off the cuff,

I don't remember this, and then proceeded. And I'm wondering if

I'm wondering if, you know,

that is, if something more ought to be

done than that. I mean if, in fact,

it didn't sound like the judge was all that sure, that in fact

your client was wrong. So I think that's one of the troubling issues, judge that

I didn't brief. Mr. Cajeges is pretty certain that

Judge Gardner was his attorney back at the time of the original conviction.

Judge Gardner said that she was not. And then

when he asked that the information be run through the public defender's office,

I believe that the judge was a member of the public defender's office back at the time.

The public defender's office didn't have a recollection of it, or didn't have any documents which would have sustained

what the, or corroborated what the client

was saying in terms of Judge Gardner being his defense attorney.

But that was one of the issues, Judge, that certainly came up

at the time that we argued this. So I guess what I'm, it sounds like

what you're saying is that you did entirely appropriately. I mean you did some

further sort of investigation of this and don't

the records at least don't seem to support your client's recollection.

That's correct. We kind of came to a dead end because when I got back to the office, one of the

first things I did is I tried to corroborate that with the public defender's office and

I don't know if the answer, I can't recall it. I think they might not have had their records

dating back to the time of 1994, the case file,

or the same computer software that would have made it crystal clear

who the defense attorney was. But the client certainly

still believes that she was his lawyer back then.

And ironically, she counseled him on filing

a petition to annul.

But in any event, Your Honor. Let me ask you this. You made a number of

assertions that the letter

from the state was filled with inaccuracies.

Were those all of the inaccuracies that

you assert here, they were brought to the attention of the trial judge?

Yes, Your Honor. I did my best to draw out the inaccuracies. So

what happened was the probation officer did a report to the court

based on her investigation. And you have the letter, Your Honor, that she

the officer gave to the judge to consider. And I explained

to the court that this letter is full of inaccuracies that the court

really should not rely on. And I tried my best

to spell those out for the court. This is all through offers of proof?

How did this proceed? Were there witnesses who testified?

It was by offers of proof, Your Honor. It was by offers of proof.

But we've also attached the

exhibits. I can't recall if they were

before the court at the time or not, Your Honor. Yeah, it wasn't clear to me

whether they were given to the trial court or not. That's correct, Your Honor.

And I honestly can't recall, Judge, what the trial court

was that the documents relied upon. Do we know the

disposition of the Massachusetts arraignments?

There was a reference that they were transferred to the Newberry

Court jury session? That's correct, Your Honor. So

the letter that the officer wrote, she references 20 arraignments.

There weren't 20 arraignments. There were only 10 arraignments.

We attribute some error to the court as well, because these

Massachusetts convictions were annulled. So,

I'm not even sure the propriety of the Christmas circuit court relying

upon convictions that have already been. And were they convictions or pleas or

do we know? I believe they were pleas. Okay.

When you say that the Massachusetts ones were annulled, I think

you said in your brief maybe that they were sealed? I believe that.

Does that have the same effect as an annullment in New Hampshire?

Yes, Your Honor. That's my understanding. That's my understanding.

The second point is the court seemed to have gone out of its way

to find out why the statewide annullment wasn't

appropriate, but the court rather didn't seem

to consider factors in favor of annullment.

That he had lived a exemplary life for the past

24 years. That he started his own business as an electrician.

The court seemed to be looking for proof that

the failure to annull would interfere with certain

preferences. Starting a

business, wishing to adopt. Could the

court take notice that there would be interference? Of course.

I mean the court can take notice that if a person has this on their record, then

it's going to also come up when they do a background check.

It's going to come up on their FBI record when they apply for certain jobs.

He's an electrician by trade. So what he wants to do is he wants to be able to work for certain companies

that may or may not have government contracts that run a background

check. And this is prohibiting from doing that. It's also he applied to be a teacher

for a teaching position out of school. They did the background check and they said

thanks, but no thanks. We can't hire you based on what you have

24 years earlier. How old was he when these

convictions were entered? I believe that he was in, it was 24 years early, so

I believe he was in his early 20s.

Your light is on. Okay, thank you. Thank you. Thank you.

Good morning. Stephen Fuller representing

the State of New Hampshire in this appeal. Miss Holland, can I

just, as I'm thinking about this further, can I

just sort of follow up on this issue of the representation?

I mean, it, the, as I'm thinking about this, it sounds like

your opponent, you know, did conduct some kind of further investigation, but if I understood

what he was just saying now, it's that the public defender couldn't confirm

this, but maybe their records were, they didn't have records going back that far.

I guess I'm really asking

should the trial court have done more, handled this

more thoroughly, I guess maybe

to put it the way it did.

Well, I think the court has to look at what was given to the trial court,

the documentation, the proffers made

at the hearing, and the January hearing was granted

after an initial order came out when the defense did point out

that she was relying on erroneous information based

on the letter from the DOC. So

the court's way of handling that was to give him sort of a brand

new hearing after the first order so that the defense could clear up some of

these inconsistencies or some of these, some of this erroneous information.

The court in its conclusion in its second order did say

that there were 10 prior similar convictions from Massachusetts, not 20.

But there's nothing presented in this record on the

issue of whether, because it sounds like the defense is suggesting

that the court maybe should have recused itself if it was

his attorney back in 1993 or 1994, there's nothing on this record

that suggests that the trial court in this case had any

connection to the defendant back in 1994. If there is

evidence of that, then yes, that should be presented to the trial court.

But this record doesn't show anything. Well, but you know what, I guess what

I mean, for example,

if somebody came in before me when I was on

the Superior Court and said, you know, I think you represented

me, Judge, I would, you know, and I mean

if I was absolutely sure that that was wrong, I guess I wouldn't

say that on the record and wouldn't feel any problem with going forward.

But it sounded like from the transcript

that Judge Gardner wasn't really, well first of all it was a long time ago

and that Judge Gardner wasn't really sure that she didn't think so

but she wasn't really sure and didn't seem to explore it

any further. Well that's true, but she didn't have a lot

on this record. I mean I didn't

think that what the defendant was saying was

that she had given him bad advice or that she should have recused herself or anything

like that. It seems like everybody's memories here were almost very

non-immigrant. If it were true

that she had represented him in connection with the plea that was now being

sought to be annulled, would that,

should she sit on that case? No.

And if there's more evidence of that then absolutely

the defense should... You know, can I just ask one other question?

Correct me if I'm wrong, but was in connection with the annulment proceeding

was the original like guilty plea

acknowledgement form that kind of thing presented to the court?

I don't see that in the record. Because I mean I assume that maybe

that would be if there was a signature line

for counsel and it says Judge Gardner then that would

presumably answer the question. Absolutely, but

again the record, there's nothing like that in the record here. Mr. Fuller can you

clarify the state of the record in regard to the Massachusetts

convictions and were they annulled

and what role ultimately did they play

in the court's decision? Sure, there is a document in

the defendant's appendix showing that they were sealed I think in 2012.

Do you agree that's the same as being annulled?

That's functionally the same, yes. It functions the same as far as

employment applications and as far as the convictions

can still be used by for example law enforcement in courts when it comes to sentencing

and that kind of thing. So is it appropriate for the court

to take into account annulled convictions

in making its decision about whether to annul the

New Hampshire conviction? It is because

they're not invisible to the court. I mean they are annulled

to the point where he doesn't have to represent those convictions for certain purposes

and the records are sealed as far

as court records for the public. But

as far as deciding whether the New

Hampshire annullment would be in the interest of rehabilitation, would be in the interest of

the interest of justice, then yes the court can

take that into consideration. Especially because these 10 Massachusetts

convictions are for behavior very similar to the

New Hampshire conviction that he's asking to be annulled. Do we have cases on

that point? In other words I know the statute says, and I think

maybe we do have cases that say if somebody commits another crime

the sentencing court can certainly

consider the fact that they had prior convictions

even if they were annulled. Even if they were annulled, yes. But

trust me that that's different here. In other words

if Massachusetts has said these other convictions

are annulled, we think

that they shouldn't count. And now the person

sort of comes in for an annullment of the New

Hampshire conviction. It's not, I don't think we've ever said and it's not clear

to me that just because you could use it for

a minute a new crime that you can say

wouldn't in some sense, wouldn't that be

not giving full faith and credit to what had been done

in Massachusetts? In the words that you would, that a court here could say

well even though Massachusetts

has annulled this, you know, I'm

now going to consider this to be the reason that I'm not going to grant an

annullment here. I'm not sure whether that's right, whether you could or not, but

at least it strikes me as not being the same question as whether you could

use it if somebody was convicted of a new crime. Sure, and I don't think that

RSA 6015 is specific to this situation

it answers that question. But again annullments

even in New Hampshire annullments do not make

prior convictions and prior charges invisible for law enforcement reasons and for

judiciary. So

when Judge Gardner was asked to exercise her discretion based on what

was in front of her, yes, she should know that he had

ten other convictions for behavior very similar to the New Hampshire charge.

Thank you. Thank you. Alright

case submitted and court is in recess.
