This is case 2017-0697 in the matter of Mitchell Cohen and Marian Richards.

Good morning, Your Honors.

Good morning.

My name is Attorney Janet Dutcher and I represent Ms. Richards.

I will be reserving two minutes for rebuttal.

Your Honors, this case arises out of a divorce.

The parties were married in 2006.

They sold a home together in 2005.

I'm sorry, they each sold their two individual homes and began living together in 2005.

The divorce was filed in 2015.

The testimony at trial revealed that throughout pretty much the entire marriage, other than for a brief period of six weeks, the wife was unemployed outside the home.

She did run the family's finances, take care of the home, all the gardening, et cetera.

In addition, when they began dating, she was not employed.

So the court found that the husband, Dr. Cohen, was the only source of income.

The parties also agreed that Ms. Richards needed alimony and was entitled to alimony.

The only question was the amount and the length of period of time.

Unfortunately, in this case, the court declined for the parties to submit findings of facts and chose not to make any specific findings of facts.

When you say the court declined, which I took note of, could you not have still filed requests for findings of facts?

Although I was not trial counsel, I was advised that the court, by trial counsel, they requested of the court, what is your pleasure?

Yes.

And the court said it's unnecessary.

Okay.

Okay.

So, as trial counsel, I think you put yourself in a difficult position when you submit them anyways.

But no specific findings.

Is there something in the record that supports that?

The record was actually shut off at the end of trial testimony.

It did not go to the conclusion when the parties were speaking to the judge.

So, the transcript is void of that information.

I did speak with both my brother, Attorney Karen, who's here, and Ms. Richards, trial counsel, to obtain that information.

And I believe I did submit an affidavit.

So, that goes to your first issue in terms of findings sufficient to support the alimony award.

Yes.

And you're only questioning the amount, not the duration, ordered by the court.

No.

But first off, there were no findings issued.

Right.

There was a general calcui, I'm sorry, not a calcui, general statements made by the court in the order regarding things she considered and did not consider.

Right.

So, the issue goes to, one of our issues that we raised is how can you make a, how can I properly argue before this court regarding the amount.

The amount that was ultimately ordered was 17% of the, of Dr. Cohen's income.

It did not meet her expenses.

The expenses she listed on her financial were in excess of $10,000.

17% was a shortfall, there was a shortfall of over $3,200 per month of her expenses, even considering the job that she had at the time of the trial.

Well, can't we look at the party's financial affidavits when they were initially filed and when they were filed at the final hearing to come to a recognition of where the trial court made its findings?

Can we do that?

This court certainly can, but unfortunately, it's not clear even in looking at those.

Because when, if you were to look at the expenses, yes, she had purchased a home, she purchased a home because the marital home was about to be sold and she needed some place to live.

She purchased a home which was cheaper and a fixer-upper.

But if you look at the overall picture, the mortgage was substantially less than the marital home mortgage, although the cost of expenses and utilities was, was more.

She ended up saving overall in excess of $1,000 per month over what the normal expenses were when she was married and living in the marital home.

So you can't just look at one slice of the apple and say, this is the whole picture.

This is not their reasonable lifestyle.

Well, it is their reasonable lifestyle to expend X dollars.

Had she purchased a more, had she had the wherewithal to purchase a more expensive home, then she wouldn't have needed to make such expenses on repairs and utilities, but would have had a substantially higher mortgage.

So the, in overall picture, it saves in excess of, she saved in excess of $1,000 from what the parties were paying when they were married.

So the reasonable lifestyle is maintained.

It's impossible to tell in answering your question on the medical expenses, because once divorced, she cannot maintain herself on Dr. Cohen's insurance.

Yes.

So she obtained her own insurance.

Her own insurance is far less and has a $6,000 a year deductible.

And those arguments were made to the trial court.

Yes.

But your point is they aren't represented in the trial courts.

Findings.

All the court said is her medicals are for the future and therefore are speculative.

Isn't that based on her testimony?

Her testimony stated that these were her conditions.

Her testimony and her financial affidavit, which was submitted to the court as an exhibit, had a list of what her medical conditions were.

And she anticipated a couple of, a root canal that needed to be repaired?

Yes.

That she, she had cracked four teeth, needed two root canals, expected some surgery in the future, had therapy, and was undergoing monthly massages.

All that was testified to and listed on her financial.

But the trial court didn't have to accept that those were reasonable expenses.

That is correct.

The court could have said, no, those aren't reasonable expenses based on the fact that your joint family income is $30,000 a month.

They could have said, no, that's more than people who make $30,000 a month expend for medical expenses.

Unfortunately, it didn't make that finding.

But don't we have, isn't our standard of review, in other words, I know you, even if we accept that the court said, you know, it's not necessary to provide, no, it didn't prohibit either side from submitting requests for findings.

And isn't, where there were no findings, explicit findings, isn't our, the way we review that to say, well, could, on the evidence that was presented, could the trial court have reasonably come to this conclusion?

Well, first the statute says findings are mandatory.

It says the court shall.

And so the question is, in reality, can this court look at the evidence and from the evidence attempt to decipher?

Well, that takes this court.

I can attempt to decipher it also.

My brother attempted to decipher it also.

However, we come up with different math schedules.

You have to determine what math she did.

How did she come to what conclusion?

How did she reach 17% for a proper alimony figure?

And how did she determine which expenses should be excluded?

That is not obvious on the face of the documents.

Are you arguing that the 17% is also not supported for purposes of the calculation for the deferred compensation?

I'm arguing that the deferred, correct, because if you go back to just what is, but I'm arguing that the deferred comp is an asset.

Right.

And so, but yes, if you're going to pull it over.

But your lack of findings also relates to that number as well.

Yes.

And could you address why the deferred comp and the severance should be deemed property, not future income?

So, the severance and the deferred comp are, on the clear face of the statute, defined employment benefits.

The DCA, as I referred to it in my brief, that is no different than a pension plan.

Right.

But does, but you know, the thing I have difficulty understanding is don't, under the Hodgkin's formula, that's designed to cover like deferred, defined benefit pension plans generally.

Yes.

But isn't the whole purpose of the Hodgkin's formula because you can't really value a defined benefit one?

And so the, what Hodgkin's said is once the beneficiary begins to collect, then there's a formula under Hodgkin's for providing benefits to the spouse or the ex-spouse.

But I don't, I'm not aware of a case, and correct me if I'm wrong, that says that you can divide a pension or benefit like this and give the divorcing spouse the money now.

Oh, I'm not asking for the money now.

Okay.

I'm asking for a quadro.

Okay.

And so, but didn't the court give that?

No.

Didn't the court give a quadro of 17%?

No.

No.

Ordered it as alimony.

Ordered it as alimony.

Oh, sure.

But what, but I guess, I mean, what difference does it make whether it's.

Well, first off, it's 17%.

Okay.

That is not what the Hodgkin's formula is.

The Hodgkin's formula says you, you determine the marital coverage period and then divide that in half.

That's not 17%.

In addition, if it's alimony, it has the requirements.

Well, what would it, I'm sorry, what would it have been if it wasn't, if it wasn't 17%, what would be the amount?

It's 41% divided by two.

Okay.

You're saying that 17% is irrelevant, shouldn't have been taken into account for these two calculations, right?

Correct.

Okay.

Because it's 41% divided by two, actually, is what the Hodgkin's formula.

Okay.

And so, in addition, the problem with calling an alimony, wife needs to remain unmarried and alive.

Husband needs to remain unmarried and alive.

Well, husband can marry.

I'm sorry.

Yeah, I'm sorry.

Husband needs to remain alive.

However, the employment benefits provide that he can receive it even in his death if he names the wife as the beneficiary.

If there's a quadro, there is no requirement that the spouse remains alive.

Now, if the husband, such as if the husband never lives to his 65th birthday, he won't collect the retirement, but he will collect the life insurance, the death benefit.

So, in this case, they were designed so that there was a life insurance benefit of a million dollars and there was a retirement benefit of a million dollars if he remained employed until age 65.

What the counter of that was is in the employment benefits, there were some other things.

There was a 401k plan.

There was a severance.

The severance was if he left for any reason other than termination for cause.

He would get a designed amount of the severance.

That amount of the severance parties agreed to, the marital coverture period was $144.

If he left for any time, any period, you know, during that time before age 65, he would receive the $144.

But that's not a vested benefit.

I'm sorry?

That's not a vested benefit.

Yes, it is.

It's a designated benefit, but that's future income.

There is a potential he'd never get that.

The only reason he wouldn't get it is if he reached age 65 and then he would get the million dollars.

Right.

Or if he was terminated for cause.

So again, the wife gets her share if he gets his share.

It's similar to unvested stock options that the wife's entitled to have divided as an asset.

If they ever come to fruition, then this is the wife's share on them.

In addition, under those employment benefits, the judge, under the employment benefits contract, one of the employment benefits contracts was a 401.

The judge awarded that to the husband as an asset, but then chose to give the severance as an income.

I have one question before you go.

Can you tell me where was the Hodgkins argument made to the trial court?

I didn't see it in a motion to reconsider.

I don't know if it was argued to the trial court below, but I'm not sure it was.

Do you know?

I do know that it was argued.

I don't think they used the words Hodgkins, but I do know that it was argued to the trial court.

In addition, the parties had stipulated, my brother's brief states that the parties had stipulated to the Hodgkins formula in determining the $144 and the 41% as the marital coverture, period, as the marital coverture amount.

So there was a stipulation that reflected Hodgkins.

Thank you.

Thank you, counsel.

Mr. Garrett.

Thank you.

Good morning.

There are many things that have been said here that I feel compelled to address on the facts to make absolutely sure that the court is aware of the mechanisms of these two.

I'm dispensing with the alimony issue presently, if I may, and focusing on the deferred comp and the severance agreement.

At page 107 of the appendix, there was a trial memorandum that was filed at the commencement of trial that lays out, I believe, and opposing counsel did believe accurately, the terms of each of these documents.

And it also included, I'll call it a coverture, that led to the severance agreement sum of $144,000 being on the table for purposes of trial, and the number of 41% of the deferred comp being on the table for trial.

That was all in the trial memo, and it's not a long memo, but it's a factual recitation of these agreements.

And your argument, part of it, is that neither of these were marital assets.

It was a concession.

To be quite frank with you, Your Honor, as this case went forward and before trial, we had to make a decision whether or not this was income or assets internally.

We made that decision too.

And there's no question in our minds that it's income.

But incident to trial prep, we decided you'll see that there's a schedule on the severance agreement and a schedule on the deferred comp.

So we looked at the date of the marriage as against filing of the petition in 2015 and took out that proportion.

That's how we came to $144,000 being at issue for the severance and 41% of the deferred comp at issue for the deferred comp.

So that sort of took the math off the table, but you were still arguing that it was properly considered income rather than assets.

That is correct.

So the other focus that I would like you to have is that when we went to trial, you'll see our proposed order in the appendix as well.

What we did was there were four components of income of Dr. Cohen.

One was his base pay.

Two and three were something called on-call and supplemental from his employer.

And three was PMC Pinewood.

That's the second job that he carries.

That the total of those four sources of income on his financial affidavit, you'll find, is $27,285 a month.

Item numbers two, three, and four varied.

There was never something he could count on.

So we went to trial with the following proposal, which was 20% of the gross sum of his base.

That's alimony.

We called it base alimony.

Then we said 20% of the on-call and supplemental in Pinewood, to the extent he receives it, he'll pay it within 14 days.

That took care of the variance.

And then we picked a percentage for the severance if he ever receives it.

And we took a percentage of the deferred comp if he ever received it.

And we picked 10%.

Could it be argued that the...

As alimony, sorry.

Right, as alimony.

The base pay was factored by the employer in light of the deferred comp.

What separates the deferred comp piece of this from a 401k benefit or a pension benefit?

Well, that's a different question that I'm addressing presently.

Right.

Correct.

Can I just finish one point?

Go ahead.

Because I think I want to close that issue.

Sorry.

If you look at the court's decree of divorce in our proposed order, she essentially adopted

language, except what she did was, and she meaning a master, uh, referee love, instead of doing

20% of the base and 20% of the other three components and 10% of severance or deferred comp, she ordered

$4,700 a month blanket on the $27,000.

Because she, $4,700 bears against $27,865, 17%.

Then she ordered 17% of any severance received, 17% of any, um, deferred comp received.

So she doesn't state where that 17 comes from, 17% comes from, but in my mind it's pretty clear.

She just applied the same proportion to those numbers.

Can I just ask to clarify, is the $4,700, uh, a function of the $27,285, or, or if the

monthly income dropped?

I read it as a function of the $27, because all the, the decree states, specifically, it

simply says, she cites to his income, $27,000 monthly, and she indicates, quote, Mitchell shall

pay Mary an alimony pursuant to 458.19 as follows.

Husband shall pay wife a sum of $4,700 per month alimony commencing on and continuing until.

The next two provisions of her alimony order is severance alimony, deferred comp alimony.

So I have to conclude she's running it on $27,865.

Okay.

And how does that relate to the wife's need, demonstrated need?

Again, we're not treating the severance or deferred comp yet, but his, my answer is the

following.

Um, Attorney Beers here, who wrote the brief, was very detailed in, in laying out for you

the difference in two prior financial affidavits of, of, uh, Ms. Cohen.

And I won't belabor it, but if you take a look at it.

So you would argue that, not to cut you short, but you'd argue the $4,700 relates to her then-presented

financial affidavit?

Um, I, I think it, yes.

The answer is yes.

Responds to her in terms of need, right.

So how does a future severance alimony relate to future need?

Her present need?

Her present need.

How can you do that?

Because another component under 458.19 is the ability to pay.

So if you look at the financial affidavit, uh, in the appendix of my client, you're going

to find, you're familiar with the expense sheets in these cases.

You'll find three of them that we filed for Dr. Cohen under different hypotheticals.

One of them is called minimal.

We zero out vacations, 401k.

I mean, we zero a number.

Yeah, by the time that severance would, could be paid, maybe.

Maybe he's won the lottery.

I mean, how do we, how does the court determine future alimony based on facts today?

Well, you don't.

If you want to treat that severance as alimony, how do you relate it to what the party's situations

might be years from now when it gets paid out?

In my mind, if I am paid, because I think that's what the severance and the deferred comp agreements

really are.

They're just agreements to pay bonuses in years ahead.

So in my mind, if I have a base income of $100,000, and I'll probably get a bonus, but who knows,

and I won't know how much, then the court will base the alimony order based on the base income,

in my mind.

But if and to the extent I receive a bonus at the end of the year, when I go to trial, I will

usually, not always, argue, pay the same proportion against gross income of my base that your alimony

order applies, and apply that to the bonus.

So that way, my former spouse rises and falls with me, depending upon that bonus amount.

And that's how I regard the order of justice, I'm sorry, of referee love on that bonus, I'm sorry,

on that severance potential and the other.

So there's some uncertainty on your part with respect to what the order means as well?

I think the order's pretty clear.

Your question is, do I have an uncertainty as the intended methodology of the referee?

No.

Because I can see clearly that she applies the same percentage to potential severance and

deferred comp as she does against all income.

I'm sorry, in her order, she indicates that she considers the amount of the property awarded

to the wife as a future source of funding.

Are you saying that when we check these charts, maps, diagrams, and graphs, it will become apparent

to us that there were income-generating assets that were given to her as a part of this final decree?

There were significant assets in that sense.

That's my point.

In fact, there was, I believe I'm accurate in saying that it was almost $900,000 in assets

to Ms. Cohen.

And she had preserved, clearly, you recall the order talks about the fact that Ms. Cohen had

spent most of her time administering financials, especially her own, because she had those assets

in her name already.

In the meantime, for example, there was a comment made by Council that the former homestead

was sold.

The proceeds of that homestead are in an escrow account at zero interest, and that's been

true since it's been sold, because there has not been an agreement to release that $300,000.

I mean, that's awful, as far as I'm concerned.

It's just sitting there, doing nothing.

Although, in the past couple of months, it's probably a good idea.

Right.

Can I just ask you to clarify, in regard to the deferred comp and the severance,

do I understand correctly that the uncertainty that you've identified in drawing a parallel

with, well, you may get a bonus, so you might not get a bonus, the uncertainty in respect

to the severance and the deferred comp is not in the quantity, which is normally what you

would, the amount, which is normally what might be in play for a bonus, whether you get it

and the amount.

If you hear what the uncertainty is, we know what the amount will be, but we just don't

know whether it will actually happen.

Correct.

Do I understand correctly?

Yes.

But contrary to what my colleague has indicated, though, she said that the severance goes to

him unless he's terminated with cause or dies.

My answer is that's not quite true.

He can quit.

If he quits, SJ physicians, that severance is gone.

If he makes it through to 65, now we're talking about no more severance and the potential

for payout of the deferred comp arrangements.

But we want to also make clear that in this contractual arrangement between Dr. Cohen and SJ

physicians, he has no recourse for enforcement of any of this.

Comments about quadros for a severance and a deferred comp, that will never happen.

The deferred comp doesn't qualify as an asset at all.

It's just a contractual potential for receipt of money.

That's like saying, I'm going to quadro your future bonuses.

The deferred comp—

Well, you only need a quadro for tax purposes, but there could certainly be an order to divide

that as an asset.

Well, it wouldn't be by a qualified domestic relations order.

No.

That's a tax treatment.

Contrary to a council's characterization.

Right.

So, to me, I think the analysis is pretty simple.

Dr. Cohen has a contract for which future income is a potential.

The contract makes clear it's to incentivize him to keep working there.

It's a future allocation of income that he could benefit from.

He has no recourse against the employer except for cash flow and assets.

That's made clear in the document itself.

Before your time runs out, can you just explain to me why it makes sense to have the

41 percent and then the 17 percent applied to the 41 percent?

It does seem to me that that's sort of double discounting.

Maybe I don't understand it right, but—

No, no, that's a good—

It's in a trial memo, but let me answer it this way.

In the severance, we came down to the 144 at issue in the 144,000 fixed number.

In that, if you look at the appendix, you'll see the schedule of the severance agreement is

dollar sums increasing per year.

So we took date of marriage, filing date.

The difference, I think, was—

That's a marital portion.

—281 against 137, so the difference was 144.

So Council agreed that's the number—that's at issue here.

On the deferred comp, we did the same analysis of years, and it came up to—

and I footnoted that in the brief, the math on that—

that came up to 41 percent of the time period he was working towards this deferred comp.

So—

So why don't you take 41 percent and divide by two rather than 41 percent times 17 percent?

Because—

That's what I don't understand.

The language is in our proposed order, and the decree is consistent, meaning 41 percent

of the deferred comp is what's on the table.

So she might as well have said 41,000 a year, 17 percent of that number.

She applied the alimony to the, if I can use, coverture number of 41 percent of the total comp.

That's what the judge did.

Yes.

So how did she get to the 17 percent?

She doesn't state it.

That was the alimony number she used.

But $4,700 per month in alimony against this income of 27,865 is 17 percent.

So I think it's logical.

I know it's a reach.

It's a reach because we don't know, as a matter of fact.

Right.

But if this were using the Hodgkin's formula and a future pension payout,

she would just get 41 percent of it, wouldn't she?

No, she would get half of that.

I mean half of it, right.

So why does 17 percent make sense rather than half of it?

Well, I want to make crystal clear something that's now starting to worry me.

The application of Hodgkin's formula, as council wants to call it,

didn't come from referee love.

It came from council.

We're the ones that said, we agree that this proportion is applicable.

So I don't want the court to say the trial judge is applying the Hodgkin's formula

that's traditionally used for a pension asset to determine income available for alimony.

That's not what occurred.

She just adopted our proposed order that was in turn—

Technically, if this alimony award were being determined at the time of the payout,

the full 100 grand a year would be available as income to your client in determining whether

he could afford to pay the reasonable need of the recipient.

That's true.

Right.

So by focusing on the marital coverture portion, you were kind of limiting that future income.

That is correct.

The thought process was—

Your opponent might have been focusing on that as an asset.

So even at the time, you guys had different—

That's possible.

I can't speak for Attorney Cody who was very sharp and she knew exactly what she was doing

in there.

Yeah.

But the—you just commented upon something that's lost my mind.

I mean, I've lost it in my—

I do that all the time.

Yeah, I do it more often.

But the full amount in the future, right, if you were looking at this—

The thought was because this is a prospective potential future income, why credit that potential

future income 100% toward—because it wasn't—it didn't come about solely throughout the marriage.

Well, but you were discounting it because of its future unguaranteed nature.

You were discounting it because that was the portion allegedly earned during the marriage.

So it's—those are sort of two different things, but I understand.

I was completely prepared to answer questions from the court on the cases of Heinrich, Valance, and Halliday, but—

I'm sure you are, Mr. Karen, but your red light is on.

I see it.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Thank you.

Counsel?

Your Honors, just briefly.

Sure.

Because you're only going to give me two minutes.

The first thing I want to point out, as you've raised, is by future alimony is modifiable.

At the time when this money is going to be being paid out, Mr. Cohen will have retired.

He will not be earning his $27,000 a month plus because the severance happens if he quits.

My brother did misspeak.

If he quits his job, he will receive that $144,000 as a lump sum.

It's only if he goes to age 65 and then he gets the million dollars paid out over a 10-year period of $100,000 a year.

However, both are being treated as alimony, and he will have no income at that point in time.

It's subject to modification by both parties.

Therefore, it's impossible to predict what either one of them are going to be doing in the future,

let alone the restrictions it places on my client of having to remain unmarried to be able to receive something that should have been determined to be an asset.

The statute makes it abundantly clear.

The statute is clear on its face.

What is an asset?

We don't need to look to case law.

We don't need to look to anything else in determining.

Employment benefits are assets.

They're divided as assets.

Pension plans are divided as assets.

Let me just ask you this.

What would happen?

Mr. Karen points out that this is not exactly the same as a pension plan in terms of fiduciary obligations of whoever is running the pension plan.

What would happen, for example, suppose the court said,

Okay, I'm going to use the Hodgkin formula and I'm going to divide and your client gets a certain percentage.

Let's say half of 41%.

And then when the time comes, the medical practice has gone out of business and Mr. Cohen doesn't get any money.

Are you saying that your client gets it anyway?

Nope.

I'm saying she gets one half of 41% of whatever he receives.

It's very similar to when AT&T went out of business and their pension plans plummeted.

And so whatever was left within the pension plans, the two spouses shared the ups and the downs because the pension plans had been divided and each of theirs went up and down with, if it's in a stock market, they go up and down with the stock market.

And that would be no different under this court's order as alimony because 17% of zero is zero.

Correct.

But unlike that scenario, if that happens, there's no money.

There's no money to pay, Dr. Cohen.

That's correct.

But as was just pointed out by Justice McConey is that, you know, same with alimony.

If it's zero, it's zero.

17% of zero is zero.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Portion recess.

Thank you.
