Before we begin here today, I have an announcement to make.

Normally, as you know, the number two judge has to be quiet.

But this is not a normal day.

This is a very important day in the history of New Hampshire's

jurisprudence.

And I mean that, all 200-plus years of it.

For this day is the last day that Chief Justice Linda

Delanus will be sitting on the bench.

So 37 and a half years ago, she first sat on the bench.

And in those 37 and a half years, she

has done nothing but improve the delivery of judicial services

to every citizen in the state of New Hampshire.

And that is remarkable.

That's all I have to say.

Where are the tissues?

This is right here.

Thank you.

Oh, my goodness, look at that.

Supreme Court tissues.

Thank you, Justice Sicks.

And thank you all.

This is not a happy day for me.

And as some of you know, my official retirement day

isn't until April Fool's Day, which I like to think about.

But most of you don't know what goes on under the surface

of the ocean in what we do, where what you're seeing here

today is just the tip of the iceberg.

And there are 39 cases, which I have sat on,

which need to be worked out of the system.

And that takes time.

And so I have to stop sitting, so I'm not pushing the ice

up against the icebreaker and leaving a big mess at the end.

So the one thing I'll get to do on account of this not terribly

happy day is miss a few snow days of driving.

So I'll concentrate on that.

Council?

This is case 2017-0110.

Janet Belize et al. versus Brad Belize et al.

Good morning, may it please the court.

And Your Honor, thank you very much for your years of service.

Thank you.

This case before you is less about a access and road

discontinuance, and it's more about property rights.

My clients, the Carpenters and Brad Belize,

the son of the plaintiff's of Pelie,

own a piece of property of which discontinued way

over 50 years ago, was voted on by the town

and completely discontinued.

Now, 50 years later, after the plaintiff's of Pelie

owned all the land around and sold it off,

including selling off the parcel to my client

and releasing all of their interest therein,

now come back and seek to develop that lot

and trample on the property rights of my client.

Well, I just ask you, I mean, you say they sold it all off,

but they didn't sell off the lot, the back lot, right?

That's correct.

They sold it.

They owned land all around, Your Honor.

But I mean, would it be a reasonable construction

of what they did when they conveyed the property,

the front portion to your client?

Would it be a reasonable construction

that what they intended to do is cut themselves off

from having any access through that way

unless they said something specific about that?

Well, Your Honor, they still at the time

that they sold the lot to my client in 1997

owned the land around them.

So we don't know other than my client

believes the language and the deed,

though the plaintiff led you to believe

that it's just a statutory language.

Well, what does it mean if all interest therein?

Why can't my client rely that they're releasing any interest

they may have in the property that they sold them

because they have other alternatives?

They had other ways at the time.

And still to this day, which is in the appendix

at page 170, Your Honor, they sold off

all of this land around them.

But they did release all the interest they had

in the property that they sold their son.

They just retained an interest that was pertinent

to the property that they maintained.

If that's true, Your Honor, then if they release

all their interest therein, and my client

for almost 15 years owned the property undisturbed,

and now they come back and seek to develop that back lot,

what does that language mean?

That's the question is what is all other interest therein?

Is that the consent, which is a recorded public document

at the registry under 231.43 that allows

the release further of their rights,

not only in the deed itself, but under 231.43.

Now the plaintiffs will argue 231.43,

the consent is to the town.

We argue that it was the consent they gave

when they released all their interest

and included whatever right they had

to go along that discontinue.

Did the waiver that you're identifying refer to the statute?

What's that?

You're saying that the waiver or your opponents

arguing the waiver only applies to the town.

That's correct.

And did the waiver that you're asserting

reference the statute?

It did not.

It runs to the benefit of your client purportedly.

It does not.

It doesn't, it's not to the town.

It's a recorded public document.

The town has that document.

And the town assess my client for that area

that they now want to disturb with a driveway.

Can I just ask you, is there another,

are there any other properties that are, you know,

up further back behind your opponent's property?

Are there other properties?

In other words, is it, when this road existed

before it was discontinued, did it,

did it, you know, provide access to some property

that's behind your opponent's property?

It may have, it may have, Your Honor,

because there's land, there's land there.

Right.

So I mean, wouldn't that, in the words, isn't that,

you know, as I understand what the trial court,

the trial court's construction of the statute,

wouldn't that mean that those other people,

if whatever other land there is that's even further back,

they would have access to this road,

you know, despite your client, despite the fact

that your client owns the front portion.

And so if that's true, it seems like

it doesn't make any sense to say

that your opponent shouldn't have access.

That may have been true prior to the vote,

but the plaintiff's appellee bought all land around it.

Then they sold it all off and never reserved

any express easement over this land or to go to the others.

So I'm sorry, now I'm confused.

Are you saying that after the vote,

your opponent bought all the land,

so they're even land further away from the road

than the property they now own?

I can't say all the land, Your Honor.

They certainly bought a, if you think of it as a T,

which is what the court said, as it comes up

and then splits off and they have the back lot.

They bought all of that land.

Now there's other ways that have since come in

that developed other land.

Is this, so I understand you,

is this the parcel that's in the direction of Sharon Road,

the Sharon Road development and the cul-de-sac?

I'm looking at your page 170 on your appendix.

I'm sorry.

You have the Range Road out here

and you have Simpson Road here

and you have Sharon Road here.

This has now all since been developed

as a result of the sale of the land

by the Janet and Brad Belize.

Thank you.

After they purchased this lot

and after they sold a lot to my client,

that is the subject of this matter.

Well, let me ask Judge Lynn's question in a different way.

Would anyone on living on Sharon Road

or living on Canterbury Road have a claim of access

over this discontinued road?

I can't answer whether they have a claim.

There would be no need for them to use it

because they have a Class 5 road for their access

and the plaintiffs have other alternatives.

They have at least three other deed-

But the statute doesn't condition the right of access

to not having another access, does it?

It doesn't expressly, Your Honor,

but you read that in conjunction with the release

in the deed from the plaintiffs

to my client, Brad Belize, in their deed

where he released all other interest therein,

those two taken in conjunction for this specific case

prevents them from using that area.

The other issue we have is that we believe

that the court inappropriately granted summary judgment

when there were material facts in dispute

to prove the elements of adverse attention.

Can you just clarify the timeline?

Did your opponent acquire land

which is the subject of this litigation

after giving the waiver to your client?

I believe they acquired the vote was in 62.

They acquired the property that my client owns at 64.

Sometime before 97, they acquired the other land

and then in, I believe it's 2000, 2002,

they sold off the land that subsequently gets developed

around Sharon Avenue.

So they had other options in 1997

when they executed that deed

that said we release all interest therein.

So my client's thinking that he has a right to believe

that he has his properties

and not subject to anybody else.

So you may have just answered my question

but it's not clear in my mind.

Did they acquire land in regard to which

they're asserting rights after they executed

the deed to your client?

No, I believe it was before.

Okay.

And is the underlying deed to...

Oh, sorry.

It's all right.

I may have inadvertently thrown your rhythm off

when we began and I'm about to throw it off again

probably but I don't think you identified yourself

for the record.

I apologize, your honor.

No, it's not your fault

but some member of posterity might wonder who's talking.

So would you mind doing that now?

Yes, your honor.

Good morning.

My name is attorney Steve Clark

from Foreman Clark Park, Helen Kalinsky

and I represent Brad, Belize and the Carpenters.

Thank you.

Justice Hans-Marconi.

The underlying deed to the lot 600,

is that in the record?

The originating...

Yes, I believe it is, your honor.

Is there any reference to this road

or access way in that deed?

I believe there's a reference to Simpson Road.

There is a dispute that we had at the lower level

as to Goldenbrook Road

and Simpson's Road was what was discontinued.

There's a reference in the client,

my client's deed to Goldenbrook Road

but not to Simpson Road.

And 600, the reference was to Simpson Road.

I believe so.

Thanks.

And the discontinuance vote was Simpson Road.

Say that again.

The discontinuance vote was reference to Simpson Road.

That's correct, your honor.

On the adverse possession side,

if the first no trespass sign

was put up by the town or persons unknown,

can your clients rely on that

to establish the beginning

sort of of the timeframe for adverse possession?

I believe the Carpenter's can, your honor,

because it was put up

and then it was subsequently maintained by my client.

Now, partial summary judgment,

they moved that John Carpenter

and his deposition couldn't recall specifically the date

and he was instructed not to guess.

But in the affidavits filed

in opposing it,

along with the additional deposition testimony,

so they had a full record,

the issue was that he had maintained it through the 70s.

Now, the court made a determination

that just because it was removable,

that that somehow could defeat the adverse possession.

Well, there was no evidence in the record

that it was removed.

And even if it was removable,

when you do an adverse possession,

you put up a fence or a gate,

the gate can be opened.

But my clients, the Carpenter's side,

did maintain it.

Now, in the record from 97 forward

when Brad believes by the property.

But isn't there, you know,

I guess the thing I'm not sure I understand is the,

when the town discontinued the road,

the road was no longer available as a public road,

but the statute says that people that have a budding

property continue to have a right to use it.

So given that circumstance,

it's really not clear to me

how putting up a no trespassing sign is inconsistent with that.

I mean, couldn't you,

couldn't someone who has a right of access to the road say,

I'm great, I support having a no trespassing sign up there.

This isn't a public road.

I don't want anybody else driving up there,

but I still understand that I have the right

to use the road.

But I don't believe this court has decided

whether adverse possession can defeat those rights.

If somebody courtins that off for a period of 20 years.

No, I understand, but I get the mind's point

is different than that.

Even assuming that some action

could constitute adverse possession,

given the circumstances,

why is putting up a no trespassing sign

consistent with, you know,

showing that someone can't use the price,

someone who has a right of access for the statute

can't use it?

Wouldn't that be, wouldn't somebody who had that right

might very well support the no trespassing sign?

I don't want anybody else going up this road.

It's not a public road anymore.

Only I can use it.

But I would think that would put that person

on inquiry notice to say,

who put this no trespassing sign up?

Who put this barrier up?

Who put the structures in the road

or the discontinued roadway bed

that we offered as material facts to support

that actions were taken to obstruct it,

which was John Carpenter?

Well, what makes this road different from say,

Route 101 in Wilton?

In other words, it's a discontinued road,

which to my understanding means the town

doesn't have to think about it anymore.

But let's say someone owned property

on both sides of Route 101,

giving that person a right of access to the road,

are you saying that 20 years of no trespassing signs

would mean that the public could no longer travel

across Route 101?

Not in and of itself, but coupled with other acts,

such as the barrier itself.

In your scenario, I presume there's no barrier

other than no trespassing.

The elements usually require more overt acts.

And here you have the posting and maintaining

of the no trespassing sign,

the actual bar across the roadway.

The, the-

But the point is it's a road

that provides a statutory right,

and I'm trying to figure out

how assuming you have adverse possession,

that trumps the statute,

which is basically what you're asking us to decide.

I'm asking you to reverse and remand

on the issue of adverse possession

because the court, I don't think, clearly reached that.

We didn't get a chance to go to trial

and produce all of our evidence

as to whether one statute, 231.43,

and I believe it's 508 that deals with adverse possession,

one trumps the other.

And so that was not decided at the lower court.

Let's talk about that.

Why wouldn't the statutory right

trump any private right

acquired by virtue of adverse possession?

In other words, why wouldn't the statutory right

exist in perpetuity for butters of the road?

Would the court feel the same way

if Brad Belize had bought the property

and he had constructed his house on that roadway?

So it was clear to everybody they were on notice

that you could never go through there.

Wouldn't they, is the court then saying

that he did it at his own risk

in that after 20 years of adverse continuous use

that he hasn't cut off other people's rights?

That would be a bigger problem than we have now.

Well, just so you know, one of the ways that on here

that goes,

just let me get oriented.

I believe it's number one.

That's exactly what happened.

The built house.

There's never been a vote to discontinue

that portion of Simpson Road that goes out the Range Road.

And we argue that there are other alternatives to that,

but there is a house that's built right in the center

of what used to be that portion of Simpson Road.

I hope they have good title insurance.

Thank you, Council.

Thank you.

If it may please the court,

I'm David Sayward.

I represent Janet and Stanley Belize.

And your honor, being chronologically gifted myself,

I still remember the days that you were a trial judge.

And that was...

We're both getting old, aren't we?

And that I just want to make clear

that that was a really good service there too.

Thank you.

I just wanted to respond to a few things

that Council just said in order.

Therein, in a deed, means the property

that's being conveyed.

How could it mean anything else?

They happened to own another property.

So what?

Okay, that's number one.

Number two, the consent given has to be to the town,

it has to be to the entity that discontinued the road,

not to a butters.

Can I just ask, just to make sure it's clear,

when before the conveyance

to your opponent's clients.

Yes.

Am I understanding that your clients own the larger lot,

which included what was conveyed as one parcel?

No, I don't believe so.

I believe that the lot that they sold to their son

was a house lot.

And it was a separate lot.

In fact, I think if you look at that...

Oh, it was a separate lot of record,

even before it was sold.

Right, I believe it's lot 43 on 171,

and then there's lot 600 behind it.

So it was a house lot that they owned

and lived in from 64 to,

oh, I believe it was 98 or 99

when they sold it to their son.

Okay, okay.

So the consent, number one,

has to be to the entity that discontinued the road

and caused the situation, not to a butters.

Number two, the consent,

you can't read that into this deed.

It's a statutory form deed.

You would have to have,

if we postulate, which is not correct,

that you could give consent to neighbors or a butters,

it would have to be specific.

There's nothing in this deed that indicates any intent

to waive their rights to their back lot.

Why would they?

It just doesn't make any sense.

Now, there was a comment that they did not reserve

an easement when they deeded out some of the back land.

They didn't have to.

They had a statutory right.

There was a, the question was asked,

does the statute include necessity language?

The answer I just heard was no,

but there's a release in the deed that results in

them not having,

that believes is not having the right

to use the disputed area.

It appears that the answer was,

I acknowledged that there's no necessity language,

but I have another argument,

which is this argument that I've just dealt with,

that there was supposedly a release in the deed,

which just doesn't make any sense on a number of levels.

The acquisition of other land,

and all of what you just heard,

is totally irrelevant to the issue here.

Whether or not they owned other parcels

or anything else, it doesn't matter.

It's just a question of whether or not

the statute applies here, and it clearly does.

Are there other landowners who have frontage

on what used to be Simpson Road other than your clients?

I don't know.

Is it a road to nowhere?

Where does it go?

I believe it goes up towards the believes's house,

and then it takes a right hand turn,

and we took a view and walked it actually

with a trial judge.

It goes towards a street called Princeton Street,

and if you follow it all the way down,

you're in the backyard of some people

that live on Princeton Street.

So it goes up here, and goes right down to Princeton Street,

which is roughly parallel to the disputed area.

This sort of forms a T, or a one-sided T,

and goes down, as I say,

you're into people's backyards at that point.

Can I just ask you, how many linear feet

of Simpson Road is on the property owned by the sun?

I'm trying to remember this.

I think it might be something like three or 400 feet.

Well, Goldenbrook Extension Road goes up

to the end of the paved area.

If you drew a straight line,

that's where the old Simpson Road was,

and that is all forested now.

So they actually have a couple of hundred feet

on Goldenbrook Extension,

and my recollection is a couple hundred feet

on the old Simpson Road before it takes that T,

and that's where my client's property is up and back there.

All right, and there's only one no trespassing sign,

is that right?

Well, there was a note,

and I wanted to get to that for a minute.

In fact, the defendants admitted in depositions

that the town had put up the gate initially,

and that the sign that Mr. Carpenter says he maintained

was put up by the town.

That's not disputed.

He acknowledged that in his deposition

and sent the record.

There was a sign.

Is there anything in the record that says why?

Was it to avoid a public nuisance?

Yeah, exactly.

There's an affidavit of my clients that states,

and it was never, in fact,

Brad Belize alluded to it

because he remembers when it happened in his deposition.

Kids were going up and back there and lighting bonfires,

and so what the police, what the fire department did

is put up this chain or this board

with the no trespassing sign.

That was not directed at the butters.

It was their property.

It was directed at these kids.

So, excuse me.

I'm sorry.

Is it, so there's one gate

and the sign was erected by the town,

perhaps originally, but.

Well, it was right in the middle of the gate.

Okay, all right, so,

but there's one gate, right?

And one, and a sign on that gate.

So, if you're coming from your client's property

and traveling from your client's property down

Simpson Road towards the sun's property,

is there any no trespassing sign or gate

that you would encounter

before you got to the one that we're talking about?

I don't believe the gate is there anymore.

Well,

but you wouldn't see the no trespassing sign

because it's facing the other way.

It would have been on the other side.

Right, and you would have gone several hundred feet

into the property before you got to the gate

or the sign.

Is that right?

Well, it depends on which side you're coming from.

Right, if you're coming from your client's property.

Oh, if you come down from the lot,

it would be a couple hundred feet

until where the gate used to be.

The sign would have been on the other side

because remember what they were trying to do

is prevent people coming in from Range Road

over the paved road.

Well, but the effect of their argument

would be to prevent anybody

from coming from either direction.

Right?

I'm sorry, the argument of counsel?

Well, the effect of if they win,

there's just no rights to go across that road

no matter what direction you're coming from.

If they succeed in obtaining

adverse possession judgment in this case,

then they would own the property

and I think that's right.

And I'm just trying to establish

that if you were coming from your client's property,

trying to get access to a public road,

you're gonna traverse several hundred feet

of the son's property before you encounter a gate

and when you encounter the gate,

the sign won't even be pointing in your direction.

Is that right?

Now, at some point, to be fair here,

Mr. Carpenter claims that he put up

his own no trespassing sign,

but as you've seen exhaustively,

there were nine memos and pleadings

that were like memos below,

so this has all been beaten to death.

And his deposition excerpts are in the record,

he can't remember when he put it up.

When you're trying to claim adverse possession,

it's not a theory that's favored in the law.

You have to be able to sustain your burden

when you can't even remember when you started something.

It was one sign and we may not know when,

but do we know where?

Somewhere in the disputed area.

Somewhere in the disputed area.

Near where the old one was?

I'm told by counsel was on the post.

I have no reason to disbelieve that.

Can I ask, am I correct in understanding that

if you put aside this sort of discontinued road

for a second,

isn't it sort of a general rule that,

in our case law and maybe by statute,

that you can't acquire by adverse possession

rights in public property?

I believe it is.

The trial court did not resolve the issue

that we talked about a little bit during argument.

Can one statute affect Trump and other?

I liken this to a public street

where you don't use it for 20 years.

You're on the other side of town

and somebody says to you,

well, you've just lost your rights to adverse possession.

It's a statutory right and if the legislature meant

that you could lose it by some means,

they could have said it, but they didn't.

There's no case law on it,

but I don't see how you can lose a statute.

In other words, one way to look at two,

that the statutes, whatever the 231.43

would be to say that when it says,

even though a road is discontinued,

people on the road continue to have the right of access,

that that could in effect amount to a statement

that you can't overcome that right of access

by adverse possession.

That's my position.

I did not raise that issue on appeal

because I believe that it's so clear

that by their own testimony,

they can't establish the elements

that it wasn't worth taking on that issue,

but for what it's worth, I think that's correct.

We don't need to reach that issue.

No.

But if you feel you do your honor,

I hope you decided my favor right.

Well, in my town, there are dozens of miles

of discontinued roads

and most people use them as wood lots.

So one of the things that troubles me here

about your opponent's argument

is there are people who own wood lots

who live in California

and haven't been to their wood lots for 30 years,

but if we accept that their argument,

the right of those people might be extinguished

because they haven't been visiting their property.

Right, and I think that that's a concern.

When you have a statutory right,

it's a different type of right

than a typical property right.

So the question really is,

does the 20-year statute of limitations

for bringing a trespass action,

which is what adverse possession is based on, apply?

And my belief is it doesn't, it's our position.

And you would say if we don't have to reach

the statutory issue about the rights to the road,

there were insufficient indicia

to establish adverse possession.

And I hope I'm not beating a dead horse

because it's been exhaustively brief,

but basically two sides of the road.

Brad Belize acknowledges he was not even in the picture

until 1998, so clearly we don't have 20 years

of anything there.

All that John Carpenter did was maintain a sign

that wasn't his, and then at some unspecified time

put up his own no-protrespassing sign.

You have the burden to prove these things.

20 years continuous use.

When you can't recall when you started doing something,

you can't satisfy the burden.

There's really no more simple than that,

more complex than that.

So according to you, there were no facts in dispute

that the trial court needed to hear.

Right, in other words, when you took their testimony

from their affidavits in their deposition testimony,

if you believe that those are true

and construe all inferences in their favor,

they can't establish adverse possession.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Okay, submitted.

Counsel.
