This is case 2017-0115, Appeal of State Employees Association,

Service Employees International Union, local 1984.

Mr. Krupsky.

May it please the court.

Good morning.

My name is John Krupsky.

I'm with the law firm of Milner and Krupsky.

And I have the honor and privilege of representing the State Employees Association of New Hampshire.

And we are here today to ask you to correct legal errors

permitted by the Public Employee Labor Relations Board in the underlying matter.

The first legal error we're asking you to correct is that in spite of decades of precedent,

the PLRB erroneously failed to find that wages for

services performed by members of a bargaining unit for a public employer

does not constitute a mandatory subject of bargaining or even require negotiations between the partners.

I mean candidly, Mr. Krupsky, I tend to think that you're right on this.

I didn't, I'm going to ask, I'm going to have some questions for your opponent, but I just don't understand their argument.

My only question is, has the PLRB or we ever use the term bargaining unit work

to describe what is, when wages have to be bargained for or not?

I'm not familiar with it, but maybe we have.

No, Your Honor.

This court has not used the terminology bargaining unit work as is argued by opposing counsel

as a prerequisite for going through the tripartite test articulated.

So let's say you were a police officer's bargaining unit and

it was not specifically set out in your CBA that if you took time during your shift to clean your weapon,

you don't get paid for that because it's not specifically defined as bargaining unit work.

In other words, what can be cut out?

If bargaining unit work is the only kind of work that you're going to get paid for, how do we know precisely what that amounts?

We don't, and that's one of the problems that we articulated not only at the lower level but also in our appeal is

not only does the PLRB take it upon themselves to create this exception called bargaining unit work.

It provides no guidance as to how to apply that concept of bargaining unit work.

How far does that go?

Here, tutoring was a voluntary, I'll call it, a separate assignment, if you will.

So if any of these members taught piano lessons on the side or had some other second job,

where do we draw the line?

What's in their work?

Because not everybody tutors.

Sure, I think where the line is drawn is under the parameters of the statutory framework of the Public Employee Labor Relations Board.

You have to look to say, is the duties or requests being made by a public employer

to a member of a bargaining unit who is represented by an exclusive representative?

If it is, then that should be negotiated and is a mandatory subject to part of it.

If I'm understanding here, I want to make sure that I'm not under a fundamental misunderstanding, but as I understood from the briefs,

even now without bargaining about this, the state, the community college system is paying people for tutoring.

Absolutely, and the problem with that is that.

Because they're writing the check, it would seem to me this would be a completely different situation if the community college has said,

listen, you guys, faculty, you want to go out and tutor on the side?

Have a ball, do it, but you collect the money, you do, we're not involved in it, but that's not what's going on here.

It's even worse in this case, because in this case, this is a service provided solely to students that students aren't charged for beyond their regular tuition.

And this is requested by the community college system.

In other words, Mr. Employee, this person is having trouble with this course.

We'd like you to tutor.

What actually happens is people sign up to tutor or not to tutor.

They get recommended and the record will show that they're usually recommended by their department head that they can tutor.

So they go to the tutoring center and they have hours that are set.

And sometimes students will call up ahead of time and say, I'd like to reserve a spot or they walk in.

But the one undeniable fact, and this is also stated by the,

I'll say the witnesses for the system,

is that 99.9% of the material covered during tutoring

is work assignments handed out during classes.

If you're right, and the Public Employees Labor Relations Board is so radically wrong,

do you have any explanation for why it decided what it did?

Your Honor, I can only speculate.

Speculate.

And my speculation would be they wanted to reach an outcome and

the only way to reach that outcome was to create this artificial exception of bargaining unit work.

Another way to reach the outcome would be to ban tutoring.

We're not making a list, we're not giving these kids any extra help, have a nice day.

Once again, Your Honor, you asked for a speculation and my speculation is that they wanted to reach an outcome.

And based on the precedent that exists, not only in statute, but also in the common law, they couldn't reach that conclusion.

But isn't there a distinction because this was tutoring through the academic center for

excellence, not the community college itself?

Absolutely not.

ACE is part of the community college system,

which is governed by a board of trustees and a unified system.

Remember, Your Honor, this is a bargaining unit that comprises of several colleges from Nashua to Claremont to

Berlin, they all have different areas, they all have different departments,

but they're all under the CCSNH and ACE is also under CCSNH.

And you'll see this because when you look at the pay stubs, even for tutoring, and this is in the record,

is from CCSNH, it's one employer, they are a public employer as a matter of law and a matter of fact.

And in addition to that, the adjuncts would actually be curtailed or

could be curtailed on the amount of courses they could teach if they did tutoring because they counted the hours against them.

Mr. Krupp, let me ask you this, you use this phrase repeatedly in your brief about tutoring as merely an extension of their duties.

Is that, where does that phrase come from?

Is that your phrase or is that in our case law or the statute?

But it's in the case law where they say wages and compasses, and it's in the appeal of Berlin and some of the other cases that wages and

compass extra duty pay, and so from our perspective,

adjuncts are not brought on and brought to the university for the purpose of lecturing, they're brought to educate and teach.

And teaching, lecturing is merely a tool as is tutoring to educate a student.

It is merely an extension of the classroom to do tutoring.

Isn't this really, isn't this case, it seems to me it's controlled by appeal of Berlin.

I mean to me the relationship between instructing and

tutoring in largely as you say the same sort of subjects or

relating to the same subject matter is closer, if anything it's closer than the relationship between being a geography teacher and

coaching the football team, which was, I think, what was that issue in the appeal of Berlin, wasn't it?

These were people that wanted to bargain over what they get paid for being an athletic coach.

Absolutely, Your Honor, and we brief that that we believe the appeal of Berlin is controlling even more so

with tutoring than with extracurricular activities.

And it's interesting that, you bring up that subject because I would also like to point out to the court that

many of the issues raised by the PLRB in the appeal of Berlin,

which in the appeal of Berlin the court reversed the PLRB exist in this case.

For example, the PLRB in the appeal of Berlin argued that,

well, it's not in a job description or in the collective bargain agreement extracurricular activities.

That's the same reasoning used by the PLRB in this case saying, well,

tutoring is not in the collective bargain agreement and it's not in your job description.

Can I just ask one other question?

The only, you know, in trying to sort of figure out, as I think Justice Hicks was asking you,

what could have motivated the PLRB?

The only question that I had is, is there, is this a situation where it's sort of a problem of the bargaining unit?

And what I mean by that is, is the situation regarding tutoring such that, for example,

you know, it's really only a very small minority of the adjunct faculty that's actually doing the tutoring

and most of the people that are doing the tutoring are not members of the bargaining unit at all,

so that you might have an argument that maybe they can bargain over this,

but there needs to be a new bargaining unit, which is comprised differently than the one that you represent now.

I don't find that to be, I don't find that to be actually convincing.

And let me tell you why, Your Honor.

When you look at, they went over during the testimony, the number of people who were adjuncts teaching that summer,

and they had a list and it was taken off the email, and I believe of the six people teaching,

four of them were or were currently or were adjuncts.

One was actually a full-time professor and one was an assistant to one of the professors.

So the evidence also shows that the teaching is usually done by either adjuncts or full-time professors.

And I think it's, was laid out here in the record that the full-time professors also have their own bargaining unit.

So either way, when you're talking about bargaining unit work, well, is it the full-time professors bargaining unit work?

Is it the part-time adjuncts work?

Well, I'm not about the student.

It's services that are being performed that need to be compensated, which is a mandatory subject of bargaining.

Are the student peer tutors paid?

They are, there are limited, I believe that there was testimony that there were, there are student peers.

I believe they're paid, but there wasn't anything on the record on that, Your Honor.

They're not part of the unit, though, right?

They are not part of the unit.

So if the community college system thought that it would be good to sweep the snow off the cars of the students during the winter,

and they wanted to pay somebody to do that, would they have to negotiate about that?

Or could they just put an ad in the paper and say, we're looking for people to take the snow off the students' cars?

Well, I think that they could put an ad in the paper asking people to take the snow.

But if during collective negotiations, the union came forward in saying,

many of our adjuncts are now performing this service, we would like to negotiate it.

The PLRB would have to go through the tripartite test and say,

is this a mandatory permissive or a prohibited subject of bargaining?

And in this particular instance, not only did the PLRB say that it wasn't mandatory,

they went the other way and actually said by implications prohibited because you don't even have to discuss it.

It seems to me if the community colleges want to avoid bargaining over this,

I mean, isn't the way that they can do that is simply to say this isn't something we're going to pay for or control.

If students want to be tutored, fine.

Go make an arrangement with the individual instructors to tutor.

They'll get paid, they'll make their own arrangements, and we're not involved.

Presumably they could do, high school could do the same thing with snow removal, they could say, listen.

Well, if somebody wants to make arrangements to have their cars cleaned off in the school parking lot, fine.

We're not involved, we're not paying for it.

I agree, they absolutely have that right.

So are you saying that we don't need to reach the tripartite test in this case?

No, I think that anytime that we look at a subject matter of bargaining,

we do have to use the tripartite test that is articulated by this court

to the PLRB in determining the level of subject matter negotiations.

And I think that, a priori, it is a mandatory subject of bargaining,

because it satisfies all three elements, we've briefed that, and the court has consistently found.

But I also point out, Your Honor, that there's an obligation for

a public employer to negotiate the terms and conditions of employment with an exclusive representative.

And then when we go to the definition of terms and

conditions of employment under RSA 273A1 Roman numeral 11,

it begins with wages, there's nothing, wages and hours.

There is nothing more mandatory to bargaining found by this court and

every other court that's looked at it as wages as being a mandatory subject of bargaining.

The other issue that, I believe my four minute warning has gone on.

The other issue that we wanted to raise that we believe the PLRB aired and

is by violating the clear and unambiguous language of RSA 273A11 Roman numeral two.

I think you'll have to rely upon your brief for that argument since your time is up.

Thank you very much, Your Honor.

Good morning.

May it please the court.

My name is Joseph McConnell.

I'm here representing the Community College System of New Hampshire.

The PLRB properly concluded in this case that

the Community College System did not commit an unfair labor practice by refusing to bargain over the rate of pay for-

Can you distinguish this case from Berlin for me?

Why doesn't Berlin control this?

Sure, I'd be happy to and I would distinguish it in the same manner that the PLRB did.

They certainly knew about the Berlin case and they reviewed it carefully.

They cited it in support of their decision.

That's correct, Your Honor.

And so there were two aspects of the Berlin case that I think make it distinguishable from this case.

The first is that that was a unit of full time teachers that taught in Berlin.

And the question before the court was whether or not the school district or

the board, school board in that case, had to bargain over extracurricular activities such as sports coaching, etc.

Which were voluntary, right?

In other words, nobody had an obligation to be a football coach.

Absolutely, but the court recognized certain findings that were made in that case.

One of them in the Berlin case was that the extracurricular activities included the complete training of a child for citizenship and leadership.

So what the court was recognizing is part of being a school teacher is the complete education of the individual child.

And so tutoring is not part of that?

Well, tutoring wasn't the issue.

No, I understand.

But isn't it seems to me it's just so very clear that instructing somebody in the regular class and then offering them tutoring on the same subject later seems to me, if anything, to be much closer than teaching geography or chemistry or whatever, and then being the football coach.

Well, to finish up my analysis of Berlin, and then I'll turn to that question, in Berlin the second part that the court recognized was

that the extension of being a coach when you're responsible for the entire education, citizenship, and leadership of these students was an integral part of being in the bargaining unit in Berlin.

The integral part of your job was the whole ball of wax, was instructing the students in the classroom, was being part of their extracurricular activities.

And they looked at it as a question of whether or not it was an integral part of the job of the bargaining in members in that case.

I think the main distinction in this case is the nature of this bargaining unit.

And one of the justices asked about the bargaining unit work.

Is that a term that was ever used by this court previously?

And I'm not sure that it has been.

It's certainly a term that gets used in labor relations, the bargaining unit work.

Is it the jurisdiction of one bargaining unit versus another?

What's within the scope of this bargaining unit's work versus other work that might be completed?

What the board focused on, I think, properly and what's unique about this case is the scope of this bargaining unit is a part-time bargaining unit to teach specific classes when the individuals are engaged.

So what the board looked at and what they recognized, and it's reflected in the collective bargaining agreement, is adjuncts are responsible for teaching specific assigned courses and

making themselves available for students for consultation before or after class or by appointment.

And then they clearly identified as part-time faculty who teach variable number of credits in an academic year and serve in a non-benefit and instructional role.

But how does it, I guess, in other words, if the issue here for us was should part-time employees with, you know, maybe a sort of more amorphous than full-time employees sort of scope of working,

should they be able to collectively bargain, you know, maybe you have a good argument or you have a good argument on that.

But if these are, if they are bargaining, if that's a bargaining unit that the PLRB has recognized, then I have real trouble saying that they, how they shouldn't be able to bargain over tutoring.

Well, they recognized it within a certain scope. And it is unique that it's a part-time bargaining unit.

Part-time bargaining units are rare in general. They're certainly rare in higher education except in the adjunct faculty world.

But why should the rules be different just because they're part-time?

Well, they're not, but the part-time nature of the unit defines the scope of the work.

In Berlin, as you know, the court allowed that sometimes these coaches and whatnot aren't even faculty members at all.

Oh, as is the case with the tutors, certainly in this case, there are peer tutors as was brought up previously.

There are also other people that are community members who are teachers or just interested in education and they come in work.

But they don't, I'm sorry, no, no, no, go ahead, go ahead.

So I was going to say they don't, I mean, in the Berlin case, for example, I don't think the case said that just because there are non-full-time teachers, you know, volunteers, somebody in the community that loves football or whatever, that comes in and serves as a football coach,

I don't think that Berlin said that the union represents those people as such.

It's simply said that you do have to bargain with the faculty members who are going to do this and then presumably that the school district would give this offer to the same pay to people that weren't, but, you know, not because they're members of the bargaining unit.

Sure, this isn't a case about accretion to the bargaining unit, certainly.

And that's what that would be, whether or not if you're performing certain tasks, you're a covered person in the bargaining unit.

But I would focus the court's attention on what the PLRB, and again, this court defers the PLRB.

They are New Hampshire's experts in labor relations law, and experts in public employee labor relations law.

So the court does have to give them deference, and they also-

Well, why can't we read the city of Berlin case just as well as they can?

Certainly, Your Honor, as a matter of law, that is this court's job, and I don't mean to suggest otherwise, but I do think this court has historically, as most courts do with administrative agencies,

understand that they have a particular expertise in looking at the scope of a bargaining unit, defining bargaining units, and determining what are proper scopes of bargaining units of different types.

For instance, at the community college, there's a full time faculty bargaining unit, there's a staff unit that's made up professional staff and operational staff.

So the board has done that work before with the community colleges, with the state employees association.

In this case, what the board did is it defined a bargaining unit and said, this is a particular kind of bargaining unit.

It's a semester by semester, you get hired, you teach that particular course, you do the activities attendant to that particular course, and then you disengage.

And it is a semester by semester appointment that these faculty members are engaged in.

It's not a long term full time appointment, and that's critical to this case.

The nature of this unit is a limited part time unit.

It is not a broad based unit.

Was Attorney Krupsky correct that the tutoring hours count toward the part time hours?

No, I'm not sure that Attorney Krupsky said that, that's not true.

The individuals who decide to tutor, and some of them are adjunct faculty and some of them aren't,

work with the director of ACE, the Academic Center for Excellence at NHTI.

And they say, when are you available?

Can you fill in then?

Can you do it then?

We have drop-ins, we have schedules, they work it out with the individuals.

So it doesn't lessen their teaching hours.

That's absolutely right, it's got nothing to do with their teaching hours.

But isn't there a critical point here that the state, I mean, through the community colleges, the state is paying these people?

That's, if the state wasn't doing that, I could certainly understand, it would seem to me, it would be an entirely different situation.

It's certainly true that the community college system is paying these individuals to perform tutoring tasks.

I would draw the court's attention, the PLRB were arguing, certainly got it right here in their expertise.

But there was also a private arbitrator that looked at this issue under this contract.

It's in the record, the PLRB's record at page 118, who also looked at this issue.

Because the rate of pay changed for the NHTI tutors at one point during the course of this contract.

There was an arbitration that got brought forward, and they said, you can't unilaterally change the rate of pay.

You have to bargain over that.

And that arbitrator found it's not within the scope of this bargaining unit, it's not within the scope in the CCS and H1.

But isn't that a different question?

In other words, it seems to me that there really is no question that the current collective bargaining agreement doesn't include that.

But if I understand what we're really here about is, can they now sort of change that to bargain about?

Well, the arbitrator looked at the collective bargaining agreement.

But if it had been something like changing the rate of pay per course rate, or actually that aside.

The rate of pay for when they come in and prepare for classes, if they get extra pay to come in in the summer.

And that's something that's recognized that what the arbitrator would have done is saying, you can't unilaterally set that.

You've got an obligation to bargain.

It might not be in the collective bargaining agreement, but you have an obligation to bargain.

The arbitrator found, and the PLRB found, and what we're arguing to this court is, it's a horse of a different color.

The scope of this unit is defined by its terms, it's a part time unit, and it's only to teach courses.

Someone made an analogy to the snow removal issue.

Another example might be if the community college has hired someone to write copy for a brochure.

And said, you're a good writer, an English teacher, would you like to write copy for a brochure that we have?

I'd love to do that.

I would argue that's outside the scope of the bargaining unit.

They can engage, they can pay them whatever the market bears, they can give them a paycheck like anyone else.

But the union doesn't have a right to say, we're going to insist on bargaining with you over the rate.

I mean, you sort of try to draw this, this is really different.

I mean, could they then, could they form a new union?

Could the people that are hired to do the copying work that, as you described, to write copy, could they say, well, listen, there's enough of it.

There's more than 10 of us now, we want to form a new union?

Sure, so they could, and so there is, if you're greater than 50% part time as a staff member, you're eligible for an existing bargaining unit.

But that's a different labor relations question, right?

So do you fall into this bargaining unit or that bargaining unit in the work?

Or if you don't fall into any bargaining unit, are you eligible to organize a group that's got a community of interest that can then have, absolutely, that could very well happen.

So in other words, are you saying that the PELRB may have been all right on this?

But what Mr. Krupsky really needs to do now is to just file a new petition to start to form a new bargaining unit of tutors?

If he can get the cards, I mean, that's he's entitled to that.

If he can get, in other words, people to show interest, the sufficient showing of interest, there are rules that control that under the statute, under the PELRB regulation.

Why does the community college system provide tutoring services?

To assist students who need extra help.

It's an academic support service, although it's generally under the chief academic officer for each of the colleges.

It sits sort of to the side, it's not part of the departmental process for the most part, it's not part of-

Does the school find that it, do the schools find that it's beneficial to them?

Oh, I'm sure they do, and that's why they continue it, Your Honor, but I would suggest to the court that's not the relevant question.

Again, if I can, I know I don't have a lot of time left, I think the focus really has to be that the PELRB has defined a bargaining unit of adjunct faculty.

That unit is defined by certain parameters, the parameters of which are you teach certain courses, you do the certain things that are intended to teaching those courses, and that's the deal.

I mean, why, if your argument and the PELRB's decision is correct, then shouldn't the result in Berlin have been that the union was told, listen, you want to form a new union of football coaches or soccer coaches or whatever, have a ball, go ahead and do that, but these people are not part of that bargaining unit.

And again, I would, the language that the court used in the Berlin case was that, one, the nature of educating younger children for citizenship and leadership was a particular kind of relationship between the teachers and the bargaining unit and these children, number one.

And number two, that therefore it was an integral part of the job of bargaining unit members to engage in those extracurriculars when they did.

They were teachers in both sense, and the court said it was integral to the job that they were holding that they would be connected to the extracurricular activities.

Adjunct faculty are hired semester by semester to do particular coursework, they don't have an appointment in between, they come back and get appointed again on the next semester.

Teaching in the two-nearing center, while fulfilling and using their education and knowledge about the subject matters, is a different type of engagement.

It's fundamentally different from the engagement that defines the scope of this unit.

Can I ask you, am I correct in understanding that the bargaining unit that exists now for the adjunct faculty, you've got to have taught like five classes or something over two years or something like that.

So in other words, there is at least some, to that extent, there's some continuity.

I assume that for tutoring it could be the same, the members of the bargaining unit for tutoring would have to meet, under the existing bargaining unit, the people who were doing the tutoring would still have to be, have been adjunct faculties enough, or for long enough, to have been bargaining unit members.

Sure, but then I guess that, I think that might cut the other way your honor, if you think about it, in that the definition of the unit never considered whether or not the time, the amount of time someone is tutored makes them significantly connected to the institution enough to be a member of a collective bargaining unit.

And this court had a case, a Keene State College case, where it had to do with when it first recognized that adjunct faculty, formally recognized that adjunct faculty couldn't organize under the statute.

They changed its mind about ten years later and said they could, but said there had to be a greater connectedness to the institution, and that's what led to that.

The PLRB has never been asked to do that analysis vis-a-vis tutoring work.

It might say that it's a shorter time.

It might say you should be a tutor bargaining unit member from day one.

For that very reason is why they have the analysis that they did and defined the scope of an adjunct, part-time adjunct faculty unit.

They never engage in any such analysis for tutoring.

I will rely on my brief for the other section regarding the pay issue.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Case submitted, the court will take a recess.
