Just for scheduling purposes, we'll hear argument in the first two cases, then we'll take a brief recess, and then we'll hear argument in the last two.

This is case 2017-0361, state of New Hampshire versus Adrian Stilwell.

May it please the court.

Christopher Johnson on behalf of Adrian Stilwell, and I reserve one minute for a bottle.

The plan is to focus on the confrontation clause issue, touching the merits and time permitting harmless error.

With respect to the merits, I intend to address first point about Walsh's work,

second to point about Perlin's testimony, and third to point about the confrontation clause doctrine.

But I'm happy to take questions at any point.

Why isn't this case just like the Liu case in Washington?

Can you address why it's factually distinguishable or

why we should not follow the reasoning of the Supreme Court in Washington?

So, I guess I would have principally a jurisprudential distinction,

which is that this court should not follow that reasoning.

The Liu case rests in part or it arises out of an idea that there should be a disinterested scientist exception to the confrontation clause.

Five votes of the US Supreme Court have rejected that idea.

Liu offers, as I read it, a sort of slight modification, which is that there should be a disinterested scientist exception when

the disinterested scientist is not a witness against the defendant in the sense of being directly accusatory.

Five justices of the US Supreme Court have also rejected that view.

It is not jurisprudentially available to this court to follow that line of reasoning.

That's the principal problem as the very well-reasoned dissent in the Liu case talks about.

Five justices have voted against that.

Now, I can address, I think, why, to some extent, why that's a good idea,

but that is the simplest answer to that question.

Well, as Liu factually, it's not factually distinguishable.

There is a nuance in Liu, which is, I suppose, important to remark upon,

which is that in Liu, as I understand it, it was analysts from the same lab,

so that the non-testifying declarant was from the same lab as the testifying witness.

Should that matter?

It does in the case law, because there is this idea in the case law,

and again, bull coming, Melendez Diaz and Williams are the three US Supreme Court cases.

There's this idea, and in this court's jurisprudence as well,

that a supervisor or somebody who's associated with the testing can be the witness

of trial without raising confrontation clause problems if there was,

if they are sort of, if another analyst performed functions in the lab on that particular test.

Now, I will say, I think in Liu to be clear, the court there said that this,

the testifying analyst was not involved as a supervisor,

and so that court is not really relying, although they do mention it,

they're not really relying on that.

Mr. Johnson, if we, if I understand your point, and I think it's a good one,

but if this case were to go to the US Supreme Court,

and if the US Supreme Court were to vote the same way as it did in,

what is it, Williams, I think it's worth, I mean,

Justice Thomas would say, the conviction would be affirmed,

would it not, because Justice Thomas would say, this is not the kind of formality that triggers confrontation.

And so, I mean, I understand your point about the rationale of the sort of scientist exception, but, I mean,

it strikes me that in terms of what is the holding of the case,

we might say, well, four justices agreed that it's not,

that there is some kind of an exception, so to speak, for this, or it doesn't fall within Crawford.

And Thomas would say it's not formal enough so that it falls within Crawford.

So I think I would offer a couple of answers to that.

And one is I think this court should not, in its jurisprudence,

replicate the somewhat dysfunctional 414 split in the US Supreme Court.

That the court should look, I hear what you're saying, I understand that.

But that is not, I think, the way to read those votes.

What the court should look at is what principles have commanded a five vote majority there.

I also might say, and I'm not, you know, it's, you know, this court will just,

as of course it will, will have to read all the opinions in all those cases.

And it's a little hard to stand here in the short time that I have

and give you an extraordinarily nuanced discussion of the many separate opinions.

But I do think there is, in a sense, a more profound difference Justice Thomas has

with the Alito Breyer Roberts view than he has with the Sotomayor Kagan view,

four vote block.

And that is that Justice Thomas, the Alito Breyer Roberts view is that

this kind of person, a disinterested scientist,

when saying this kind of thing is just not subject to the confrontation clause.

But Thomas disagrees with that.

His disagreement with Kagan Sotomayor block is narrower in the sense that he says,

I think this kind of witness in this kind of statement is subject to the

confrontation clause.

I just think it's satisfied differently.

So I think that's an important nuance.

Well, let's take the nuances out of it for my benefit and look at it mechanically.

Wasn't this a witness who was looking himself at original material and

doing his own original work and doing, testifying about his own original analysis?

So I think there's a few different questions in there.

And I, so yes, this was a witness who added value.

I don't dispute that.

He did, he's not merely a conduit for Walsh's testimony of statements.

But I think there's this conception that raw data or

machine results are not subject to the confrontation clause.

Again, I think five justices of the US Supreme Court have disagreed with that.

And this court in McLeod said raw data can be testimonial.

BAC machine in bull coming or

the drug identification process in Melendez Diaz also involve machine.

So this is not like, it's just a computer printout, it's not testimonial.

Walsh's testimonial statements was that SWAB A is still well.

SWAB B is Smith, SWAB C is Young.

Implicit in that explicit statement is, I didn't mix up these samples,

I didn't cross contaminate, I used reliable methods.

So those are testimonial statements, that's what Walsh said.

Perlin, so it gets us to second.

So what does Perlin say?

He communicated those testimonial statements to the jury.

He couldn't have stated the conclusion he stated without them.

The conclusion he stated, of course, was still was DNA is on the gun,

Smith and Young's DNA is not on the gun.

He can't say that without saying, and communicating to the jury,

that this particular DNA profile is still Walsh.

This other one is Smith, this third one is Young's.

Those are, in that way, Perlin's testimony communicated Walsh's.

He had no independent way of verifying.

That's right, I mean Walsh did the lab work.

Perlin didn't do any lab work, he did computerized analysis.

So they had very separate functions, and the record is clear that Perlin didn't do lab work.

But under McLeod, can't his opinion be based on it admissible hearsay?

Yes, but here's the crucial thing.

So this case is not like McLeod in that sense, the mere reliance,

the idea that the experts can rely on without communicating the information they're relying on.

Don't disagree, that's what McLeod said.

Mere reliance would mean there's no mention of Walsh's input to the jury.

Just as in McLeod, it was an arson case.

And the idea was the witness there could get up on the witness stand and say,

it is my opinion that this fire was had an arson origin rather than accidental.

And I relied on fire burn patterns and some other stuff.

And he doesn't say what the other stuff is to the jury on direct.

Part of that other stuff was a police report with a testimonial assertion.

That is different because in this case, if Perlin were just to say to the jury

what he had done without saying what Walsh had done,

he would have said I received a mixture sample and

I received three individual samples, A, B, and C.

I can tell you that one of those three, A, is on the gun and B and C are not.

But as soon as he's adding the names to those labels, to those samples, to those DNA profiles.

But is that essentially a chain of custody attack?

I mean, it is part of, I would say no.

Because Walsh is, when Walsh says DNA profile with features XYZ is still well.

And ABC is Smith and EFG is young.

And he sends that to Perlin, and Perlin just accepts that and

says still well is DNA on the gun, he's using Walsh's assertions.

What do you say about the state's argument that this is all much to do about nothing?

Whether your client was a shooter or not doesn't make any difference.

I mean, isn't there really very strong evidence of a conspiracy here?

And isn't the law pretty clear that if there's a conspiracy, whether it's charged or not,

somebody who's a member of the conspiracy is under the Pinkerton Doctrine,

is substantively liable for any crime committed by any of the conspirators.

So who cares if it was your client?

No, I understand, and I addressed this in the reply brief.

What I would say there and would say again now is the question here is not

sufficiency of the evidence, granted there was sufficient evidence of an accomplice liability guilt for still well.

The question is harmless error.

The state bears a burden beyond a reasonable doubt.

They did not argue explicitly to the jury at any point in closing.

It doesn't even matter if still well is the shooter.

He's still guilty.

They didn't make that argument.

But was there an accomplice instruction?

Yes.

But I think to hold-

So what would the jury have thought the accomplice instruction was all about if it was something other than he didn't have to be the shooter?

No, I understand that.

But the point is this is not the kind of case where aid was required.

So it's three men seen on this video walking down a street.

One of them pulls out a gun and shoots the victim.

A jury could wonder legitimately, because accomplice liability requires not just the mental state but an act of aid.

What's the act of aid?

And when the state is in doubt of them.

There were a lot of them.

There may have been.

But when the state.

The orange jumpsuit.

I understand, but when the state doesn't argue that to the jury, it would be I think unprecedented for this court to say we find an error with respect to this theory.

But the state did argue to the jury, harmless beyond a reasonable doubt on the basis of a theory that although in the jury instructions was not even part of the state.

But isn't the evidence of all of the activity of sort of everybody that was involved was presented before the jury?

And so the jury hears this accomplice instruction.

Yes, I understand you're saying it wasn't argued, but couldn't the jury be saying exactly what we're asking around?

So what?

So does it really matter if you pull the trigger or not?

He was a member of the conspiracy.

I mean, well, two things.

I mean, one is being a member of conspiracy is not, because he was also charged and convicted with that and got a separate sentence.

But what I'm focusing principally on is the accomplice liability version of first degree murder.

Right, but under the Pinkerton Doctrine.

You're a conspirator.

You're liable for the substantive offense, right?

I mean, it's true, true, true.

But I, you know, I would fall back again that it's not because it's not the kind of case where I mean, if it were that easy to win this case, they would have argued it.

Mr. Johnson, to the extent that you're saying that Perlin had more than just raw data, don't you have the same problem that was fatal to the defendant's case in Dillboy?

No, because I think what I understand to be fatal to the defendant's case in Dillboy was a matter of the quality of the evidentiary record that came to this court, that it wasn't clear who had done what, which experts had done what pieces of this.

And so that it was possible that the testifying expert had actually replicated enough of the work of the non-testifying analyst that it, which is, in this case, is different.

Because it is crystal clear, no lab work done by Perlin and no computer analysis done by Walsh, so that the line demarcating the area of responsibility was, in that sense, much different.

So you take a position that Walsh's work was inculpatory to Dillboy?

Well, I think, yes, and I would also say, I think that if I'm understanding part of the unstated premise of the question is,

this is a whole witness against idea, you know, again, I don't think that should be the task.

I think that's the Washington state courts take away from the U.S. Supreme Court's cases, but that shouldn't be this court's take away.

And so it's, the analysis is not a witness against kind of analysis.

Thank you, Mr. Nelson.

May it please the court, Lisa Wolford, on behalf of the State of New Hampshire.

I'd like to start also with a point about the Confrontation Clause and Harmless Error.

This court held in McLeod that when an expert renders his own independent judgment as to the significance of others' testimonial statements,

the expert's opinion will be an original product that can be tested through cross-examination.

I disagree that this case is not McLeod it is.

You have answered the question of whether Perlin could testify with specificity about his DNA match conclusions,

which were based on his own independent judgment.

Well, his own independent judgment based on, I mean, he doesn't know whether the two that matched,

whether the match he made was actually the match of the defendant, except that somebody told him, this is the defendant's DNA.

Right, he doesn't know that independently.

That's right, but his opinion about the match was a straightforward application of his expertise.

That is what he was called to do, and in McLeod you said that the expert could testify about the critical issue in the case,

the critical issue that was presented to the expert for his resolution, there were a couple of experts actually,

so for their resolution based on their expertise, and that was how the fire started and where the fire started.

And you said that the expert could answer that critical question, and so the expert's testimony would have been,

the fire started on the couch and the fire was not an accident, but an incendiary act.

And so our position is that Perlin was entitled to

couch his conclusion in terms that attributed the DNA to the defendant.

Well, but isn't that really different?

I mean, isn't Mr. Johnson right that this really is different in the sense that what?

I mean, if the earlier expert mixed up the DNA,

in other words, he switched it and so it wasn't the defendant's DNA that was labeled wrong.

And now he gets it and he matches it up and he says, yep, this is,

there's no question he can testify about that, but suppose that it's wrong.

So, I mean, how does that get cross-examined?

If you were asked that question, how do you know it's that this is really my client's DNA?

And he was asked that question.

And his answer would be?

And his answer was that the data doesn't address those issues.

I will say that-

Now, why is that?

Because the samples were marked anonymously, or did they say?

No.

Well, and Jones and Smith.

He meant only, I think, it was apparent from the cross-examination.

He meant only that the raw data itself didn't tell him how the evidence was

handled, how accurate the testing was at NMS.

So his answer had to be, I don't know.

Yes.

And I don't have any idea.

That's correct.

And that's what this court said in McLeod should happen on cross-examination,

that the expert should be questioned about the basis,

if the defendant so chose, the basis for the expert's opinion.

And then could cross-examine about, for example, in McLeod,

the testimonial evidence were statements by a witness who was deceased.

That witness gave contrary and contradictory statements.

She first said that she fell asleep smoking and woke up to find her bed in

gulfed in flames, and she next said that she wouldn't have fallen asleep smoking

because it's not something she did before bedtime.

And that the couch was on fire when she woke up.

And so you said in McLeod that the defendant was entitled to

cross-examine about those things, that's what happened here.

Your opinion would not make sense if, as the defendant proposes,

the expert were allowed only to testify to some generic,

completely neutered statement, such as there was a match, dot, dot, dot.

It isn't what you said in McLeod.

You said that the expert could come to his own independent judgment as to the

significance of other's testimonial statements.

The significance, that is what Perlin did.

He testified that the NMS data was significant in that.

It showed the defendant's DNA, the DNA of the two co-defendants, and this mixed sample.

By the way, the jury knew, there was no surprise that it was the defendant's DNA or

the co-dependent's DNA, because those three samples were known.

And so it will never be a problem to introduce to the jury the fact that

known samples belong to certain people.

Yes, Wilfred, I want to just turn to the Lou case.

You spend quite a bit of time in your brief saying that it's factually the same thing,

and that we should adopt that reasoning.

Obviously, Mr. Johnson says it's factually distinguishable, and

we shouldn't adopt the reasoning.

Why is he wrong?

Lou calls for a test that the United States Supreme Court

in Bullcoming and this court in Dillboy has suggested should exist.

And that is, it's twofold, really, that the Confrontation Clause has special rules

for these types of ultimate conclusion experts.

And that the Confrontation Clause probably also has different rules for

evidence that is raw data, that is machine generated.

And that is, it's important that, that distinction is important.

So the qualification or characterization of raw data,

computer generated evidence is different.

It's different from the witness statement.

But that's not Mr. Johnson's complaint.

Mr. Johnson's complaint is that there was testimonial evidence to hook up

the raw data to the results that was not introduced at trial.

So, yes, but my point is that Lou calls for

a different result and a different test.

And so what Lou's fundamental premise is that, and

you essentially said this in McLeod, that the only witness,

expert witness whose testimony is the only expert

witness whose testimony matters for the purposes of Confrontation Clause is

the person who makes sense of the data.

The data made no sense without Perlin's testimony.

Walsh himself would not have been able to add anything

in terms of what the mixed sample meant, for example.

And so the data itself conveys nothing.

And in that regard, this court could adopt a set.

And this is, I'm actually combining the position that the court took in

Lou with what I believe is Justice Kagan's position as

the author of the dissent in Williams.

And that is that raw computer generated evidence can come in

through an independent conclusion, ultimate DNA match.

So is it your position that what we have here is just raw data?

That's not Mr. Johnson's view of what's come from Walsh.

You say it's just raw data, not raw data plus, and he says it's raw data plus.

I say that Perlin was entitled to state his ultimate conclusion and

to attribute his conclusion to the names involved.

And I think that if you agree with that position,

then harmless error is a foregone conclusion.

Doesn't matter what Walsh has done, doesn't matter what Walsh added to the process.

It does not matter if you adopt the theory that the only evidence which is subject to

Confrontation Clause prohibition is evidence which conveys a specific incriminating fact.

And so in Bullcoming and Melendez Diaz, for example,

that evidence was that toxicology analysis produced

a conclusion that the drug was cocaine or that the blood alcohol content was over the legal limit.

And those facts alone were significant to the state's prosecution.

They addressed elements of the offense.

The raw data here did not do that.

The raw data here was a mixed sample of which Walsh could make no sense.

And a translation of a DNA, we knew that the defendant and

his two co-defendants had provided DNA samples.

All Walsh did was use a machine to translate that biological material into digital data.

That's all it did.

Am I understanding correctly that you're saying that when Walsh finished his work on this,

he wouldn't have known whether he had incriminated anyone or no one.

That's right.

He didn't, he couldn't make any sense of it.

Is that the guts of your harmless error argument or is there more?

So, my harmless error argument is better if you accept the position that

Merlin could testify about his ultimate conclusion and attribute it to the names.

Because if that's the case and it doesn't matter what else he testified about,

he's given the most incriminating evidence that the state could have elicited with regard to the DNA.

If you don't accept that for harmless error purposes,

then our position is still that the state could have proved this case without the DNA evidence.

And in fact, my statement of facts is laid out excluding the DNA evidence because I think that that makes it all the more clear.

The fact of the matter is that Collier's testimony, the jailhouse snitches testimony, was unimpeachable and it was not impeached.

Ms. Wolfer, could you address Mr. Case's closing argument and

why we shouldn't address this the same way we addressed this, essentially the same argument in Dowdle 17 years ago?

So it's not Dowdle in that in Dowdle,

the prosecutor commented essentially on the defense attorney's character and

Merlin defense attorneys generally by saying and defendants generally by saying,

it's their job to lie to you, it's their job not to tell you the truth.

Here, the prosecutor did not do that, the prosecutor commented on the-

The prosecutor indicated that since the opening and through their closing,

the defense has attempted to obscure the truth.

Your job, unlike the defense team, is to find the truth.

So how is that in a misconduct?

Because the prosecutor linked those statements to the defense attorney's strategy.

What the defense did, amongst other things, but what the defense did consistently through trial and

then again in closing argument was to say the state had failed in its burden of proof because

the defense had neglected to do certain testing.

Blood span, things that-

Exactly, things that made absolutely no difference to the questions that issue in the case.

This wasn't a who, well, it was a who done it in terms of who pulled the trigger.

But it wasn't a who done it in terms of what actually happened, it wasn't how did this happen.

None of the types of so-called investigative failures that the defense harped on both through the course of trial and

cross-examination and in closing mattered, did not matter to the conclusion.

And so what the prosecutor did is link that argument.

They're distracting you with this other stuff that means not a jot to the issues in this case.

And that was fair, that was a fair response.

You have held repeatedly that a fair response is not error.

Besides that, it's a plain error argument and there simply is no way the defendant can meet all of the prongs.

And I make a quick point about Papillian's telephone statements and

the totem hearsay argument that the defense makes.

I didn't make this argument in my brief, but it occurred to me.

So the statement at issue is Papillon saying young didn't do it, he wasn't the shooter.

And the argument from the defense is that is hearsay within hearsay.

And so the statement against interest exemption doesn't cut it, you need something more.

There was no way, well first, it is possible that it was still well who told Papillian.

Papillian was not at the scene of the murder, but he did communicate with still well.

Isn't it a co-conspirator's statement?

I mean, isn't there lots of case law that says one conspirator telling another conspirator

how things have happened is a classic co-conspirator statement?

It could be that as well, which adds to my point that there was no way for the trial court to know.

Nobody could know how Papillon learned this information because he had a Fifth Amendment privilege.

And so this court can't find error even with regard to that statement.

The trial court couldn't have found error.

One of the arguments that the state makes as to the inherent trustworthiness of the circumstances surrounding Papillian's statement is that

it was spoken in native Creole, but I don't follow that.

I mean, that's his first language.

So why would that make it inherently trustworthy?

Well, I take your point, but and I don't know whether we knew, I'm sorry, I can't recall the record right now.

I don't know whether we knew that Papillian also spoke.

I also don't know whether his name is Papillian or Papillon, but in any event, I don't recall whether he also spoke English.

I think the record would support that contention.

And so it's merely a logical contention that someone who can speak another language that is not common parlance,

it's not in common usage in a place like the New Hampshire's, he was at the prison, knows that a good way to hide

incriminating evidence or statements is to speak that other language.

I see that my light is on if you have no further questions.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

One very briefly to make one point and just in response to the McLeod argument I think is to call to the court's attention what I take to be or

as a premise of my argument is three functionally identical scenarios.

So one is the classic scenario of bull coming where a certificate is put in evidence.

A second is the scenario where the certificate of the non-testifying analyst is not put in evidence, but

the testifying analyst speaks, you know, Walsh told me XYZ.

Those are the same thing.

And the third scenario which we have in this case which I argue to the court is yet again the same thing is not,

you can't evade the confrontation clause by not attributing or naming the out-of-court declarant.

So here's a certificate that says XYZ, Walsh told me XYZ or stating XYZ are the same thing when they come from the out-of-court declarant.

Would you address that?

So I would say what I said before which is the disinterested scientific evidence on the question of whether still what was a shooter.

This disinterested scientific evidence was very much more powerful than the testimony of credibility challenge co-defendants and a cellmate.

And on the question that I had a colloquial with Justice Lynn earlier about whether it matters because they could have convicted him even if he isn't a shooter.

I think the profoundly important point here is that's not the theory the state put to the jury and they could have.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Council to come forward.
