Good morning. This is case 2017-0542, the state of New Hampshire versus Robert Magoon.

May it please the court, Stephanie Hausman, on behalf of Robert Magoon.

The court aired in finding sufficient evidence that AH lacked the capacity to consent to sexual activity

and that Mr. Magoon knew or should have known that her disability rendered her incapable of consenting.

The state bore the burden to prove that AH diverged from the presumptive adult capable of consenting to sexual activity.

Their burden related to her capacity in general to consent to any sexual conduct.

Although the state could have charged lack of actual consent in this case, it did not do so.

The state can bear its burden through expert testimony, through the testimony of those who know the complainant

and can describe her abilities to comprehend and come to a decision.

And through the complainant's testimony herself about her understanding of sexual violence.

Are you suggesting that the jurors aren't able to draw an inference from the facts in the case as they were presented?

Well, I think the jurors can draw an inference, but it has to come from the evidence.

And so the evidence could come from an expert, it could come from those who know the complainant best

and it could come from observations or testimony from the complainant herself.

In this case, AH did testify, but the state did not inquire or talk to her about her understanding of sexual matters.

So they did not meet their burden in that way.

So you're arguing it has to be a specific understanding of the, or shown to be a specific understanding

or lack of understanding of the consequences of the activity?

This court has found that the state doesn't bear their burden by proving sexual naivete

because nobody has talked to the person about sexual matters.

Instead, the state can bear their burden by showing that the naivete results from an incapacity to comprehend these sorts of topics.

Does age equivalency satisfy the burden?

Sort of an equivalency of a mental age that's below the level?

That's an interesting question. There was no age equivalency testimony in this case,

either from an expert or from those who knew AH best.

Well, there was testimony that she was childlike.

There was testimony that her interests were childlike, such in the sense of she preferred Disney movies,

but she also had other interests such as going out to lunch with her friends, watching the news and weather.

So she wasn't described as mentally childlike just that some of her interests were childlike.

AH did testify about an incident with another disabled adult named Ben

that occurred at about the time of the actions she alleged regarding Mr. Magoon.

Ben made sexual advances to AH, but she said no and reported the incident to her treatment team the next day.

This court said in call that evidence of a contemporaneous ability to express lack of consent

cuts strongly against the state's case on lack of an ability to consent.

The court also heard from AH's mother and her aide,

neither described her as incapable of making important decisions.

Rather they described her as someone who liked to be independent,

but where that was limited by her physical limitations.

Not withstanding that a guardianship had been appointed.

Her mother testified that she had been appointed guardian.

She had sought that guardianship when AH was undergoing some serious surgery

and so she wanted to be able to make decisions, medical decisions for her in her recovery.

And the standard for guardianship is different than the standard that the state wore to prove here.

And so a guardianship may be granted because the person needs assistance

and caring for their daily needs or their medical issues.

And it wasn't terminated. The guardianship had not been terminated.

The guardianship had not been terminated

and the mother testified that every year AH received a letter from the court

and so was able to make the choice to have the guardianship terminated,

but didn't make that choice.

And she participated in sort of joint decision making.

AH did, with her mother.

Yes, when asked about important decisions such as where she lived,

the mother was focused on the fact that they made those decisions together

that AH was sort of driving the bus in terms of wanting to find a more independent living situation.

Yes, the mother conceded the guardianship gave her the legal ability to sign contracts

and make final decisions in that way,

but the mother didn't testify that AH was incapable of making those decisions

and in fact was a joint participant in that decision making process.

Other things that the mother and age testified about was that AH was a high school graduate.

She could read and write.

She expressed her own preferences and opinions

and she cared for her daily needs except where she was limited in her physical ability to do so.

AH's mother, who best understood AH's capacity,

described the possibility of a consensual sexual relationship

as something she had not yet discussed with her daughter

but that something she recognized could be a possibility for the future.

Should we also consider that your client knew of AH's placement in a facility

that sort of augments the person's developmental capabilities?

She wasn't placement officially but she did have a personal aide

and Mr. Magoon knew that because she aged her aide

and Mr. Magoon would have lunch together at the nursing home where AH volunteered.

That doesn't communicate.

So at the community center there was some support-ish function by the staff?

Not really. The arrangement was that AH wanted

or her parents wanted to have a place for her to go between when she was with her aide

and when her parents were out of work

and so they had agreed with the pines that AH could stay there for the hour or two between.

Were there any other teams, for example, though?

It wasn't a general school care?

No, it wasn't.

It wasn't a program designed for care for people with physical or mental disabilities

but it did suit AH.

She was familiar with it because she had been going there as a child.

It had a bathroom facility that she could use on her own

and so in that way it was an ideal situation.

But she was the only adult patron, a lot better work, correct?

I think it's true that she was the only adult who utilized the community center in that way.

There were programs for adults at the community center

but I think it's fair to say that she was the only adult who utilized the services in that way.

But one thing I wanted to say that goes both to the trial court's finding

and also to Mr. Magoon's knowledge.

What the witnesses testified about in terms of AH

really focused on her physical limitations

and those physical limitations had impact on her ability to communicate.

So she was hard to understand because of the structure of her skull.

She took longer to process information and to get out an answer.

That can be hard to interpret and to know when you're talking with her

the extent to what you're observing is the effect of a physical limitation

or reflects mental limitations as well.

AH's mother and her aide did not testify

that what was observable about her demeanor reflected her physical or her mental abilities.

And so the trial court based in part its decision on its observations of AH

those observations may have been impacted by the way she physically presented

because of her physical limitations.

Again, it's hard to know what Mr. Magoon understood about her mental capacity.

Does that differentiation require medical evidence

or is that something a fact finder can discern?

Differentiation between mental and physical disability.

I think in this particular case it was critical for the state to present evidence

from those who knew both AH's physical and mental limitations

to communicate what those mental limitations encompassed

and that did not happen in this case.

And there was no testimony about Mr. Magoon's interactions with AH

at the mother testified about like a volunteer day

and the aide testified about lunches at the nursing home.

There was no testimony about the extent of those conversations

whether her physical limitations were discussed

whether the conversation would have led Mr. Magoon to understand

that there were in addition to the physical limitations, mental limitations.

But he understood that she had a one-on-one support for her.

Yes.

After multiple lunches.

Yes.

So he engaged in conversations with the victim.

That's true.

But there's no testimony about the content or extent of those conversations.

Did he know that she believed in Santa Claus?

I don't know.

I don't know.

That testimony came out that she believed in Santa Claus

but her mother, I think it came from the mother and not the aide

that she did so because nobody had explained that Santa Claus didn't exist.

And so that was an example of some naivete

but naivete based on no conversation that had occurred about that.

Well, based on the victim's testimony,

we can infer that the defendant understood

that he was able to trick the victim into going to a room

by promising her food on more than one occasion.

Yes.

And she felt for something simple like that on more than one occasion.

Yes.

And we can infer that there's an understanding based on that.

I mean, I think that is circumstantial evidence

but it is on the scale of circumstantial evidence

there's only one inference where the state could have explored

it had the mother testified, had the aide testify.

The state didn't ask either the mother or the aide

about the content of the interactions in these other contexts.

And so the state, that one sort of slim read of circumstantial evidence

doesn't bear the state's burden to show that he knew

should have known that her disabilities rendered her incapable

of consenting to sexual activity.

Your red light is on.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Elizabeth Woodcock.

Thank you, Your Honor.

May it please the court.

Elizabeth Woodcock of the State of New Hampshire.

I just wanted to draw your attention to the closing argument

made by the Defense Council.

Let's first talk about the unreliability of the victim's claims.

The victim is a disabled woman, both physically and cognitively.

This is not all of hers or anybody's

and she appears to be well-meaning and likable

but it was extremely difficult to even understand what she was saying.

The lawyer continued,

the victim couldn't explain why telling the truth is important.

It was apparent.

But under state recall, that would not be enough

even if those words were accepted as a sort of admission.

No, that in and of itself would not be enough.

I think you're right, just as Hans Marconi,

but it was evident to the Defense Council

when he was making that argument

that the victim was impaired cognitively

and if it was evident to him, it was evident to the jury.

It was also evident to the court.

The other things that came out during the course of the trial

that the victim believed in Santa Claus

that she had childlike interests,

that she slept with stuffed animals,

that she'd never expressed any interest in them.

But to Ms. Hausmann's point,

was that communicated to the defendant at any point in time?

I think it's clear that the defendant understood this

for two different reasons.

The first is the direct evidence that he offered her a donut for sex.

I mean it wasn't Delay Mignon was a donut

to lure this disabled woman into having a relationship with him

but the second thing is that if it was apparent to Defense Council

during the course of the trial,

it had to be apparent to Mr. Marconi when he had lunch with her.

Again, we're talking about the degree of impairment

and there has to be evidence that that means sufficient

that the victim understood the consequences

and we're not just talking about an age equivalency

as we discussed earlier.

There needs to be a little more specificity

and the appearance of an impairment.

I think that the specificity is clear through the AIDS testimony

because she said that the victim had never expressed any interest in men,

that she was not interested in boys.

This was a woman who was 29 years old.

She wasn't interested in this.

She had childlike interests

and while certainly the prosecution

could have put someone on to discuss her impairment

and make it virtually put on an expert or somebody who had treated her,

it could have done that.

The evidence taken the light most favorable to the state,

which is what the standard is here,

demonstrates that the state and its burden with respect to that element

that the victim could not have been capable of forming

the mental state consent

and that it would have been clear to the defendant.

The other incident with the other young man at the center,

how do we evaluate that?

As an ability to understand and reject the behavior

or some type of confusion in the part of the victim?

Well, I think that the record is much less clear

on that particular incident than my colleague has represented.

The incident did take place.

The victim never testified that she told him no.

She told her aide they had a meeting about her mother

and her caretakers had a meeting.

It's not even clear to me that the victim was at the meeting,

although she may have been.

And then they decided, the group decided,

that she would not go back to the library.

And her testimony was what did you do in response

while I just didn't go back there?

It's not clear to me that that's her decision.

I've decided that having had this bad encounter

at the library, I'm not going back.

Or if this group of people said,

that's not a safe place for her and she can't be left alone.

Was it clear that the appellation of it being a bad encounter

arose from the victim?

She said in response, and I don't want to mislead the court,

but the response was something to be effective.

I just decided not to go back there.

And I wanted to point this out,

is that that's the way it appeared to me from the transcript,

that she understood things.

Bad thing happened at the library,

so I don't go back there.

A bad thing happened at the pines,

so I don't go back there.

I have no problem having lunch with Mr. Magoon at the nursing home

because she testified nothing bad for her.

If the court has no further questions,

I would ask that the case be submitted.

Case submitted.

Thank you both very much.

Court stands adjourned.
