This is case 2017-0329, state of New Hampshire versus Kimberly Brady.

May it please the court, Stephanie Hausman, on behalf of Kimberly Brady.

I have a point to make on each of the issues and one on the state's harmless error argument

and I have reserved one minute of my time.

But first, just to put the issues in context, the state's case rested on the

testimony of the man who repeatedly raped his nine-year-old daughter.

It was this man who claimed that Kimberly Brady participated in and encouraged his crimes.

The state did not call the victim to testify that her mother had any involvement in this abuse.

The first issue relates to the state's extensive use of leading questions.

Do you know why the defendant didn't call the victim?

I think as the victim's mother, I think she had considerations

that were apart from the issues related to the case.

It appeared from the record of bench conferences that the parties agreed

that the victim had said that the mother was not involved.

Okay, thank you, sorry to interrupt.

Royale Brady was as unsavory a witness as any party could have.

Not only had he committed despicable acts against his daughter, but he was a liar.

He lied for the first 70 pages of his police interview.

He lied when he denied what he had done.

He lied when he said that Kimberly had planted this idea in their daughter's head.

He lied when he claimed that he suffered from blackouts.

And he lied when he agreed that he, his wife, and his daughter were all responsible for his heinous acts.

And it wasn't until cross-examination that the jury learned the full extent of Royale Brady's lies.

So on redirect to try to get Royale back to a place where the jury could

believe what he had said about Kimberly, the prosecutor made him redundant

through the use of leading questions.

For two pages on the critical issue of whether Royale was worthy of belief,

the prosecutor made sure that Royale's only input was to affirm the prosecutor's testimony.

And this prevented the jury from evaluating the real witness, who was the only witness.

Was it more that dynamic, or was it the words used in the questioning?

Or was it just this dynamic of the witness affirming the prosecutor's statements?

Well, it was that dynamic, but it also allowed the prosecutor to summarize his prior statements

in the way that was most helpful to the prosecutor's case.

And that sort of gets to the state's point about harmless error,

that because the prosecutor could have asked essentially the same questions

through proper means that this error was harmless.

But the real question is, would Royale have answered or conveyed the same information

if left to his own devices?

And it was the trial prosecutor here who knew best what kind of witness Royale was,

who didn't trust him to answer the questions himself.

So there's no question that the substance of the testimony was admissible.

I think the substance of the testimony was admissible, but it prevented the jury

from evaluating one of the key issues in the case, which is, is Royale saying this

about Kimberly because it's the truth?

Or is Royale saying this about Kimberly because it gets him three years off his sentence

and it allows him to sort of share the pain of what he had done?

But he had already said all of these things.

He had testified to those things on direct, and then on cross the defense sets

out this picture of his police interview, where he's cycling through a series of stories,

each of which, you know, as he's cycling through, he takes more responsibility,

but each of which, according to the defense theory, was minimizing and contained lies.

And so the jury needed to understand or decide, is he testifying this way today

because he's following the script of what he told the police?

Presumably that argument could have been made to the jury or was made to the jury

in closing.

You know, you saw what the state did in order to try to rehabilitate this guy.

They wouldn't even let him testify.

They basically just let him around by his nose.

Yeah, and that's a way to say jury, you know, think about what evidence

there could have been, but the state is responsible for putting this evidence

on and they should, through their own witnesses, do it through non-leading questions.

And it, you know, we don't know.

The person who knew, maybe suspected the best, was the trial prosecutor.

Was Royal going to answer open-ended questions about his police interview

by quoting verbatim, which would support the defense theory

that he's just following the script to get his deal?

Would he have been so scared to answer about what he said to the police

because he wanted to get the exact wording, right,

that he's always asking to have his memory refreshed,

which also would have conveyed, could have conveyed to the jury

that he's just following a script instead of telling the truth about what happened.

And all of that was prevented through the use, the extensive use of leading questions.

On the second issue, the state does not explain why the victim's desire

to be adopted into a different family was relevant to Kimberley's testimonial motivation.

Was the hearsay objection timely?

On the second issue?

Yes.

Yes, it was.

It wasn't a, well, yes, it was a hearsay objection.

Relevance.

Yes, and it was a 401 and 403 argument as well.

So are you making a hearsay argument here, or is it just 403?

We're making a 401 and 403.

Here, the jury knew that Kimberley didn't currently have custody of her kids,

and they knew that a conviction could impact her ability to ever have custody of them again.

And so this evidence didn't add to that.

And it, more importantly, it injected into the trial

the victim's own judgment against her mother.

The victim, who's the most important person,

who the jury rightfully is most concerned about, but who they weren't hearing from.

Was there a limiting instruction, or did the defendant ask for a judge just say

that this isn't to be considered?

I mean, I think even though technically we're not talking about a hearsay objection at this point,

that would go towards the weight that the jury accorded the evidence.

Right, there was not a hears, there was not a limiting instruction given or requested.

Did you have a question?

I did, but keep going.

Okay, I just want to turn and say a quick thing about the harmless error argument.

The state must prove that the improperly admitted evidence was merely

accumulative and that the other evidence of guilt was overwhelming.

The evidence here was not overwhelming.

While Kimberley admitted that she had been present for one act and

failed to report Royals abuse, she contested his testimony that she participated in and

encouraged his crimes and she denied that she had a purpose to facilitate his acts.

The errors here went to the heart of the dispute by improperly bolstering

Royals testimony and by suggesting the victim's judgment.

What was the nature of the C-inter-evidence in her defense?

What was the nature of the C-inter-evidence?

Sure, so the defense admitted evidence about the sort of abusive nature of their

relationship, the control that he exhibited over her, her fear of him and

both Royal and Kimberley testified that she repeatedly told him that the abuse

must stop and so the evidence was that she was working on her own to try to

get it to stop but that she did not report it.

And was the jury advised that the parties agreed that the child did not

implicate the mother?

No, that did not come in and the jury did not know that.

Unless there are further questions.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Good morning, Your Honours.

Steven Fuller representing the state in this case.

On the first issue of the leading questions, the questions that the defense

objected to as leading were only questions having to do with whether

Royal had talked about certain subjects to the police in his police

statement in 2016.

It was two pages of transcript of rehabilitation against 40 pages plus

of transcript of cross-examination in which his credibility was attached.

Does the trial court say why he allowed it?

I don't think the trial court, when it overruled the objection, said so.

The state argued that all it wanted to do was talk about whether we talked

about certain subject matter, not get into the details of the subject

matter, not get into the details of the statements themselves.

The prosecutor thought that that was the easiest way to get through it.

So basically the questions were things like, in your police statement,

did you talk about conversations with the victim?

Did you talk about bleeding?

So your point is that he or she is not really putting words in the witness's

mouth?

No.

These are not classic leading questions in the way that the rules

of evidence treat them.

And there's no dispute.

The Royal Brady statement to the police, it's not disputed what he

told the police.

That means that it's there in black and white.

So what would the alternative way of admitting that evidence have been?

It would have been to go through the statements themselves.

And it would have been to say, did you tell the police, quote, unquote,

and to get into the nitty-gritty of the statements?

The prosecutor didn't want to do that.

But that would have been an admissible way to rehabilitate him,

especially after the attack on his credibility during cross-examination

when they talked about the jail calls and they talked about his motive

to lie against the defendant.

So if all he was doing was confirming

that he had spoken with the police about these topics,

but not the detail of the topic, how does that

rehabilitate his prior testimony?

I guess I'm asking, what's the point of that?

Back and forth.

That's a good question.

I suppose that it shows that you have to look at it in the context

of the response to the cross-examination.

During the cross-examination, Royal Brady's lies to the police,

as defense counsel pointed out, were brought up in several contexts.

He said that the defendant may have put this idea in the children's minds

that it was the victim's idea, all these other things that he later recanted.

In that context, all the prosecutor was doing was saying,

in your statements to the police, did you talk about these things,

which we have talked about on direct examination?

So all he's pretty much saying is, you said these things on direct

during your police statement, you told the police basically the same thing.

And that's it.

You're asking us to adopt the view of leading questions

that the California Supreme Court discusses in the Collins case?

Yes.

So they're leading, but they're not really leading questions

in a way that should cause concern?

True.

They're leading only in sort of the definitional sense of leading,

but they're not leading in the way that the rules of evidence

guard against leading questions.

When the witnesses being asked, did you talk about this in your previous statement?

And the witness says, yes, I did.

There's really no dispute.

The previous statement is there in black and white.

I mean, if there is a dispute between the witness's testimony

and the actual statement, then you can get into the nitty gritty

of the actual statement.

But here, it's not a leading question.

It's not a leading question simply to say, did you tell the police X

during your interview?

So you say that the previous statement was there in black and white,

but it wasn't there as an exhibit in front of the jury?

No.

No, but it's there.

I mean, the parties have the statement.

The witness knows what he said.

And certainly the attorneys know what he said to the police.

So if he knows what he said, then you could just say, well, what did you

say, rather than asking the leading question?

Absolutely.

And if there is an accuracy, as the defense points out,

that would be fodder for recross.

I mean, the defense counsel could say, on redirect, you said this.

Isn't it actually true that you said this?

And that also would have been fine.

So this mode of questioning would have prevented the defense

from having that option.

The defense always has that option if the premise of the question

is inaccurate or if they think that the answer is inaccurate.

But here by not getting into the details,

there would have been no opportunity for inconsistency.

That's true.

But as long as the questions aren't inaccurate,

then there's no ability to cross on.

You can cross on, I suppose, an accurate question,

but you're still going to get the same answer.

Was there recross examination here?

I think there may have been very briefly, very briefly.

What was the relevance of the statement about adoption?

During the defendant's statement to the police,

at the very end of the statement,

she talks about how her kids are her entire world

and how she doesn't want to lose her children

and how she's worried about losing her children.

That's in her statement to the police.

Was it before the jury?

Was it her statement in her testimony?

It was introduced during cross examination

as part of the state's impeachment.

The fact that their kids were her life.

Right.

So the statement, whether true or not,

whether she had heard a statement from the victim

that she wanted to be adopted out to another family,

would have had an effect on her.

And so the statement wasn't brought in as hearsay.

It doesn't matter if the statement's true or not.

It was brought in to show the effect on the defendant.

And what would the effect on the defendant's credibility

have been?

What's the logic between knowing that statement's

made and telling the truth or not at trial?

Because it would have fed her fear of losing her children.

It would have been another...

But wasn't that obvious to everyone in the courtroom?

What would have been obvious?

I'm sorry.

That her relationship with her children is at risk at best?

Yes, absolutely.

And so that's where the motive to lie,

that's where the bias comes from,

is obviously she wants to minimize her own guilt.

It just strikes me that the prosecutor was trying

to serve up the public defender

and issue an appeal that's completely unnecessary.

Not at all because if she's worried about losing

her children and she said so during her interview,

then the fact that one of the children said that

is just going to feed that fear.

It's going to be one more brick in that wall.

But at the same time, it improperly implies facts

that weren't presented to the jury,

i.e. child had not implicated the mother.

So isn't this really a backdoor way

of presenting facts to the jury

that this child may in fact hold something against the mother?

No, I disagree.

It doesn't imply any judgment

between the victim and the defendant.

What it, the more rational conclusion

is that when this victim lived in this home,

she was being sexually abused.

She was being sexually abused

exactly by her father for over the course of a year.

Every week.

But being adopted into a new family

means she's getting away from mom too.

So isn't there an improper inference there?

I don't think that is the,

I don't think that that's a necessary inference.

The necessary inference is that this is a household

where she was subjected to sexual abuse constantly

and she wants to get away from it.

I don't think that that's an unreasonable assumption.

And there was never any evidence that suggests

that she necessarily blames her mother over her father.

The jury was well aware.

Everybody agreed that it was her father

committing the sexual acts

and that it was her father who was the prime mover

in these sexual acts.

Not the defendant.

Thank you.

Thank you, council.

Ms. Hausman.

I just have a quick comment to address

Justice Bassett's question about the Collins case.

In that case, there's three important distinctions.

One, California law permits leading questions

to stimulate or revive a witness's recollection here.

Don't we?

Doesn't New Hampshire?

Oh, I think so.

But here there was no indication

that Royal Brady didn't remember

that portion of his police interview.

Second, California law allows a party,

even with its own witness,

when impeaching to use leading questions.

Here, this was an impeachment.

This was...

Revival.

Yes.

And finally, in Collins,

the prosecutor used direct quotes

from the witness's prior statement

unlike here where it's the prosecutor summarizing

in the way the prosecutor wants to convey the information

and just having the witness agree.

So if we were talking about direct quotes,

that would be less problematic from your perspective?

I think that there's no reason for the court

to adopt a special rule about when

questioning a witness abroad a prior statement.

But that is an important distinction

between this case and Collins.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

And counsel, I just want to thank you

for all your good work this year

and hope that you both enjoy the holiday season.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.
