This case is 2017-0721, Sandra Janvron v. Federal National Mortgage Association et al.

Good morning. May it please the court, my name is Peter Holland and I'm honored to be here representing Sandra Janvron today.

I'd like to reserve two minutes for rebuttal, if I may.

And my argument today is going to focus on a few issues. One, manifestation.

And I'm going to ask that you not overrule Richardson v. Sibley, which is the key case that talks about manifestation.

Number two, that we did plead equity in the petition and throughout the case.

So please don't ignore RSA 498.1 because foreclosure is equitable.

Number three, that we feel the court erred in applying the last clear chance doctrine and using negligence principles in a foreclosure case.

And lastly.

Well, isn't that related to the equitable issue though? I mean, isn't that, aren't they sort of interrelated?

We don't see that. By saying equity doesn't even apply, the trial court jumped right to a negligence standard.

And so we think that's, even if this court decided that some form of negligence might apply, it would be after we talk about equity and unclean hands.

And the last thing would be to not put the risk of loss on the victim under those negligence or last clear chance doctrine.

When we do have equity in a foreclosure and we do have what the court, as I'll get into, clearly found some pretty troubling facts which could cause one to say that that's unclean hands.

I thought it would be helpful if I just took the first few minutes because there's a lot of, to read about all the different versions and stuff.

I think I could walk the court very quickly through the iteration of the documents to, I think it would help focus if that's okay.

The first thing, and I see you don't have the appendices, but the appellee's appendix at page five has the actual mortgage in this case.

And you'll see at the bottom of the first paragraph it talks about Exhibit B as the limited power of attorney.

So attached to the mortgage that's now recorded is supposed to be a document titled Exhibit B.

Just so you know, the appendices are in here.

Right.

Right.

Okay.

And they're in here too.

Yes.

Okay.

So when you get to Plaintiff's Exhibit 3A, which is basically identical to three, it's just one copy was more legible.

Uh, 3A, the appendix at page 163, um, is kind of the first iteration of an attempt to defraud.

It does say Exhibit B at the top.

Um, it has Sandra Janverin's name spelled incorrectly.

It adds, uh, Gary Janverin.

Um, it's-

What's the date on that one?

Is that the 16th?

No.

This is the, this is the August 10th one.

This is the first attempt.

It's got the fax number from Ms. Warren, um, Janverin's spelled incorrectly.

And importantly, this is for a closing which was to take place on or about July 9th, 2007.

And this is already August?

Yes.

This is August 10th for a closing that was supposed to be, uh, more than a month earlier.

Um, the forged signature, uh, at the bottom again says Janverin's and Gary Janverin and it's been stipulated that those signatures are not genuine.

The other ones we're going to look at also says in the third paragraph, this power of attorney shall become effective immediately.

We then get to, um, the oath page and, um, Ms. Dumont, who was deposed in this case, says, that is not the page I witnessed and gave oath to.

Because as we can see, the name Gary Janverin was typed in after the fact and she very definitely testified, Gary Janverin never appeared.

Um, lastly, um, the...

Am I understanding correctly then that, I mean, what it would have, what would appear that happened here is that after your client signed some power of attorney documents,

the, uh, Ms. Warren doctored the, Ms. Warren took new documents, forged them and, and used the, the, the notary signature that had already been made.

Didn't, didn't forge that, but just used that to attach to the, to the new documents.

Yes, that's correct. With one caveat, she doctored the notary page as well.

Because on the notary page, uh, it has the name Gary Janverin added to it.

That's the doctoring to which you were referring?

That's the doctoring of the notary page.

And do you agree with the trial court that they're, they were all identical as to scope and all material aspects with respect to the forged POAs?

With exception of the, of the, the names?

No, we, we don't agree because the only genuine signature that exists in this case is a single page.

It's, um, exhibit 46, it's page 468 of the appendix.

And, uh, this is her signature, Ms. Janverin's signature.

It's dated August 16th for a power of attorney that says, again, shall become effective immediately.

The first page of this document has never been located, we don't know what it said, or the attached pages.

All through the trial, all through the discovery, it was like, why don't you guys produce the original?

It was never produced.

So what the other side tried to do, and I think what the court accepted was basically allowing a cut and paste of different versions of the document and saying, well, since we have one genuine signature page from August 16th, therefore it must go with the first page from August 10th.

I'm sorry to interrupt, and this may not be relevant at all, but I just need to know now, do any of these forged documents or legitimate ones purport to waive homestead rights of anyone?

Well, the mortgage does.

Yeah.

The POA will.

Right.

Yeah.

So, and that's in the opinion that, you know, well, what about the homestead?

And if this mortgage is valid, those are waived.

That's my understanding of the answer.

So the issue of whether a forged signature can waive a homestead right is not before us?

Or it might be?

It might be because, but we start a step back. A forged signature is a nullity. That's where we start, and wherever that may lead.

Did your client receive any of the proceeds of the loan ever?

No. I'd like to tell you a little bit about that. She got none, and that's in the court's opinion. She agreed to $40,000. The fraud was $100,000. She got zero.

There was like $6,000 taken off the top, $94,000 put into a bank account that her name was on, and the court said it's undisputed that all of the checks written off that account between like April and June amounting to that $94,000 were signed by Ms. Warren.

Our client got none.

The other important number, I think, two important numbers is that our client who makes $659 a month Social Security has paid, as of the date of the trial, $73,479.62.

That raises an interesting question. What are you seeking as relief here? Let's suppose that we said you win. What's the relief you want?

The relief is we want a remand to say that there is not a valid mortgage, that equity does apply, and—

You want your refund on your payments?

And the refund of the payments. Now, you know, there's the AmeriQuest case, and I've read other cases where a court in equity could say maybe there's an equitable lien or something like that, but $100,000 was loaned.

Everybody sitting here today agrees it was fraudulent, and the only person who was paid a nickel is the person who's the victim.

What would be, as an equitable remedy, what if we were to say we leave the parties exactly where they are? In other words, the mortgage is wiped out, but your client has paid $70,000, and she doesn't get that back.

Right.

Would that be an equitable resolution?

Well, equity is in the eyes of the beholder. I think what she agreed to was $40,000, so if you asked me what I think is fair, she was unsophisticated, duped, etc. She never agreed to $100,000, and so she paid—she borrowed $40,000, arguably—

But she has some liability here, right? I mean, it's not as if she's coming in with completely clean hands.

I don't know that I agree with that. I mean, her sin is that she's unsophisticated. She has a 10th grade education and never had borrowed any money before, and like a lot of mothers do and grandmothers, she said, yes, I will help you.

And I think it's no different than if anyone on this bench or I said, yeah, I'll help Roger, and then I do what I need to do. I sign the document, and then after the fact, the intervening event, he then goes and doctors it and forges signatures.

What about—but first, I mean, wouldn't we say that, you know, it's one thing to be sort of unsophisticated, and it's another thing not to even—not to read a document at all, and more importantly, when you now start getting letters from the bank, to just, you know, stash them away and not read them. That—

I understand that. I understand that, and that is not—those are not attractive facts.

But I also think that those facts come second to the Richardson versus Sibley, which is, let's look at the law. The law is there has to be a clear manifestation that her signature had to be delivered to the agent.

The agent had to accept it and acknowledge it. And what we have is forgeries, and there's some, you know, whatever she did or didn't do may or may not be attractive, but the bottom line law is that no valid power of attorney was ever transmitted or accepted, and what's sitting in the record today is a admitted forgery.

If we were to agree with you that the original loan was invalid, what do we do about the ratification of the loan and the forbearance agreements and the loan modification agreements?

Right. So our position is, number one, ratification does not appear in the court—lower court's decision. It was not really litigated there. There was talk about it pretrial.

But ratification is fully briefed in our briefings. I can give you the sites. It requires, again, full knowledge of what happened.

It needs to say, I understand there was a fraud. I understand there was a forgery. And notwithstanding that, I ratify it.

So it would seem to me that the ratification issue—if we were to say the loan's invalid, wouldn't the right thing be to send it back to the trial court to explore the ratification issue?

Because the court really didn't deal with that below. You guys argued it, but the court didn't decide that issue.

Yeah. I mean, I think that would be fair. But the fact is, ratification—the only thing she signed was a bunch of form documents they said that said,

you know, that I'll continue to make the payments under the existing mortgage. Well, if the existing mortgage is a nullity, you don't have much.

Right. But doesn't she have—I mean, but she signed those documents. Presumably the documents said that the mortgage was a $100,000 mortgage, right?

The document said that the note was $100,000. Right. So, I mean, that's the problem. She did sign those documents and didn't say, what are you talking about?

I don't have any mortgage. I don't owe any money. This is a complete fraud.

Okay. I would say that that is in dispute. She definitely signed them. I think she definitely did say, I don't know about this $100,000. That's not right. And on her very first call to the Harmon Law Office, they said, you have two choices. Give us the house or sign these documents.

So there would be an issue of duress or— Yes. And that's something that the trial court would have to figure out.

Yeah. I think arguably so. Yeah. And what's your argument that your equitable theory was adequately preserved below?

The petition says, petition inequity. I put it in our reply brief. I think it's all—

Is that it?

And the statute that says foreclosure is an equitable proceeding, we talked about it all through the whole thing. We talked about unclean hands. The court's decision, I think, stronger than a lot of decisions I've said. She said, by no stretch of the imagination could this be called good faith.

They ignored her. Their notes don't even record all the time she said, this is fraud, this is not me. She asks for the documents and they say, give us $150 to someone that earns, you know, $659 a month.

So it is an equitable proceeding. The Chase versus AmeriQuest case, I could read you the site on it, but it's in the briefs. There is no question, and there is no question that the petition was called petition inequity to, you know, restrain a foreclosure permanent.

And it was talked about all through the trial, and the court made specific factual findings on charitably what the court said could not be considered to be good faith.

And yet found for the bank, the financing bank, and then said, but the parties should settle. What does that mean?

I don't know what that means. I mean, and hopefully the homestead right, which I don't think there is a homestead right, and the parties should work in good faith to try.

We're all litigants here sitting at the table. We went to the mediation program. I don't know what it means. I mean,

I don't know.

Thank you.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you.

Good morning, Your Honors. Michael Tierney for the Federal National Mortgage Association, otherwise known as Fannie Mae, who's one of the two appellees for the bank.

I'm splitting my time with Patrick Volk, who represents the servicer of PNC Bank.

So just so the court understands, Fannie Mae purchased this loan in 2008. It didn't originate this loan. It didn't service this loan.

It's also very important for the court to understand that both in their brief as well as hear-or argument, the plaintiff said there's no dispute that this is a fraudulent mortgage.

There's absolutely a dispute. This mortgage was validly entered into. That has been the bank's position all along, and that is the trial court's finding.

Well, there's no dispute that Betts never received the original POA, right?

There is no finding that Betts found the original signature page that Ms. Jambran admitted that she signed.

So there's no document, either an original or a copy, of the signed POA that's legitimate in this case?

Correct.

Correct.

There's no copy of it in evidence in this case. Correct.

And that's true with respect to the second one she signed as well.

Correct. There were copies found in the basement after the fact.

There was the admission by Ms. Jambran that she actually went to the bank and signed it.

And there was also evidence from both notaries from the 10th and from the 16th in their journal that she went in and signed it.

Did the notaries explain to her what exactly she was signing, for example, that they point out that you're signing something for a $100,000 loan?

The testimony at the trial was that she was given something to sign with the first pages that she didn't bother looking at, that she had the opportunity to look at it, but she never bothered to look at it.

And the notaries didn't explain it to her?

No, there's no evidence that the notaries explained it to her.

And was there evidence that the things that were attached to what she was asked to sign at the time she was asked to sign them said mortgage for $100,000 as opposed to mortgage for $40,000?

There was evidence that the mortgage was for $100,000 that what she signed, including the documents that were found in the basement after the fact.

There was definitely a dispute as to what her perhaps intent was, but the $100,000 loan was entered into.

And it's very important for the court to remember the $100,000 loan was entered into, and then the funds were put into Ms. Jambran's account.

Okay?

Now Ms. Jambran disputes whether...

For the account that she shared with Ms. Warren, right?

Correct.

Ms. Jambran disputes whether when Ms. Warren then spent all $100,000 on whatever she spent the money on.

And there's 40 pages in the appendix that shows that it was 30-some-odd thousand for Ms. Warren's mortgage.

There was a new truck.

There was childcare for the grandchildren.

Okay?

There's a dispute whether that money was spent for whoever's benefit.

Okay?

But that dispute, okay, comes after all the relevant facts in this case.

The bank had provided a $100,000 loan that went into Ms. Jambran's account that she shared with Ms. Warren.

So I understand it wasn't your client, but how can a lender accept a power of attorney that's dated after the scheduled closing?

And it's effective immediately.

So how does that work?

So the trial court's decision, okay, said that the evidence was that she had gone in on the 10th and had signed a power of attorney authorizing Mr. Betts to act as her attorney in order to effectuate this mortgage.

And that arguably that after the fact one that was signed, that it's unclear why that after the fact one was even requested to be signed.

But that arguably was a ratification of what was already done.

But the trial court's decision didn't rely on the 16th one.

It relied on the undisputed fact that she had gone in and she had signed the power of attorney on the 10th.

The dispute was what her intent was in signing it.

Did she intend to only take out a mortgage for $40,000 or did she intend to take out a mortgage for $100,000?

But the valid, what you refer to as the valid POA signed on the 10th, that doesn't exist, right?

There's no physical copy of it in evidence, correct?

What's your response to Justice Bassett's question about ratification?

So there were five different opportunities for ratification.

The earlier ratifications, there is definitely some evidence that Ms. Jamfren perhaps did not sign the 2008 forbearance agreement, for example.

There's also some dispute as to in 2008 and 2009 whether she fully understood everything that she was signing.

But clearly by 2010 or by 2015 when she was already represented by trial counsel, she knew what she was signing.

She fully understood that there was an allegation that this wasn't based on her actual signature.

And yet she's still signing it.

Did anybody from your side, so to speak, take action against Ms. Warren?

In other words, she paid off, as I understand it, she paid off the mortgage on her house with part of the proceeds of this loan.

Correct.

Did anybody from your side try to take any action against her to put a lien on her house, that kind of thing?

Ms. Warren, actually, after this amount was paid on her house, she stopped paying the mortgage on her house and her house was foreclosed.

And I believe it was in 2016.

And then she, for how I can tell.

How about at some time between the time she paid off the mortgage with your money and the time that she was foreclosed on,

did anybody from your side take any action against her?

I'm not aware of there being any action taken by anybody on her side.

That would have some, wouldn't that, you know, to the extent that we're in equity here, wouldn't that have some,

wouldn't that go into the equitable mix that you, you know, you have evidence that you have a claim by the,

by your opponent that she's been defrauded, and yet the only thing that you do is to continue to pursue her as opposed to perhaps the fraudster.

With all due respect, Your Honor, I think that your recounting of the facts isn't 100% accurate.

We didn't continue to pursue, we continued to try to work with her in order to do loan modifications,

in order to try to help her out so that she could continue, you know, to repay that amount.

Instead, we were faced with, you know, an account looking for, you know, hundreds of thousands of dollars in Consumer Protection Act damages,

looking for attorney's fees to be paid.

I understand that Ms. Warren can't be found, that she's not an available person for reimbursement.

Is that right?

Correct.

She couldn't be found, and that was all the evidence that was given to us by the other side.

Yeah, she's the mother of Ms. Janvron's grandchildren.

Correct.

She's the mother of Ms. Janvron's grandchildren, and in the deposition as well as I believe in the trial testimony,

there was a request of both Ms. Janvron as well as Mr. Brightman, Ms. Janvron's son, and the father of Ms. Janvron's grandchildren,

and they both testified that they hadn't heard from Angela Warren in a long, long time.

Do you agree that Fannie Mae and PNC take, as assignees of the mortgage,

take subject to any defenses that are available to Janvron?

They purchase the mortgage, absolutely, and take that subject to whatever the mortgage may have with it.

If we were to decide that the original loan was invalid, then what do we do about ratification?

Do we send it back to the trial court because there really weren't findings on that?

Well, there was a specific finding as to the legitimacy of Ms. Janvron entering into the five opportunities for ratification,

I'll say, okay, and at least the 2015 one, that was undisputed.

It was disputed in 2009, and then 2008 it doesn't appear that she actually voluntarily entered into it.

When you say disputed, what do you mean?

So in 2009 there was a forbearance agreement, okay, where they had alleged that she didn't actually enter into it,

that that was a signature that wasn't genuine, but then during trial she admitted that it was her signature.

And so the trial court in its decision says the evidence is disputed as to 2009,

but you almost don't need to deal with the 2009 forbearance agreement, where there's a 2010 forbearance agreement,

and then there's a 2015 loan modification.

But if we were to send it back and the trial court were to look at those forbearance agreements,

duress would enter into the analysis, wouldn't it?

Whether this was freely entered into agreement?

I don't believe duress was argued on appeal.

I'm sure it would be something that would be argued if there was a remand.

Right.

Well, there really wasn't an issue to appeal because the trial court didn't get to that.

Right.

Yeah.

And to the extent there was duress, the later agreements when she had already been represented by trial counsel,

there's less of an argument for that.

Thank you, counsel.

May it please the court Patrick Volk for PNC Bank.

I will briefly just follow up on what my brother was discussing with respect to ratification.

The court may not have specifically ruled as to ratification, but in the court's decision,

the court specifically points out the language in the 2009 forbearance agreement,

the 2010 modification agreement, whereby Ms. Janvrin agreed to comply with the agreements and covenants in the note in mortgage.

Don't you view that as an invitation to examine the equities in the case?

Isn't she examining the equities?

Yes, she did, Your Honor.

And I would imagine that the court took that into consideration in weighing the equities in the case.

Absolutely.

But I would also point out with respect to this issue was one of the prayers for relief in the original petition

was that the court declare void all of these forbearance and loan modification agreements.

The court did not do so.

And on appeal, Ms. Janvrin took no exception to that and did not raise that issue on appeal that the court had erred

and not finding those agreements void.

So to the extent that was an issue, it's not an issue that was preserved and raised with this court.

Well, if the original mortgage is void, wouldn't the following forbearance agreements of that mortgage to that mortgage be void as well?

No, Your Honor.

And I would say they're voidable as opposed to void at the time.

And I would also say that she had an opportunity subsequently to say, no, I do agree.

And this is before any court has voided the note or mortgage prior to that.

And in all of these agreements, she is agreeing.

Now, I know there's some issue with the first couple as to whether she signed them or not.

But there was a loan modification agreement, a forbearance agreement, and a streamlined loan modification agreement.

When she was represented by counsel, by the way, where she agreed that the terms and obligations in the note and mortgage were valid.

So your position is that even if we were to decide that the original loan was invalid, that's immaterial because of these later signed agreements.

Absolutely.

And I believe that was the view of the trial court as well.

Now, the trial court didn't explicitly then take the findings, quoting the language of those agreements.

But I believe the trial court absolutely took it into consideration, and in doing so, declined to void those agreements.

And you're saying that that's not even an issue on appeal?

Absolutely, Your Honor.

It has not been based on appeal.

It was a prayer for relief that was not granted, and there was no error cited in this appeal, and the issue wasn't raised.

And it's not before this court, I believe.

I also wanted to bring up the equity argument as well.

I know you touched on it a bit with my brother, but equity absolutely was raised in the original petition because there was a temporary restraining order sought, there was injunctive release sought, a permanent injunction, and a preliminary injunction.

Absolutely, that's an equitable act by the court in granting that, and a TRO was granted.

But in order to get the injunctive equitable relief sought, there then had to be the finding that the note and mortgage were void.

The only basis given in the petition for that is that Betts wasn't authorized.

So, I think what the court is pointing out when it discusses the prayer for equitable relief is that, yes, you sought an injunction.

That is equitable relief, absolutely.

But you did not cite as a basis for voiding the note and mortgage equitable grounds.

The only grounds cited to void the note and mortgage were that the authority for Betts wasn't there.

And it wasn't there, was it?

Why was it there?

Your position is that he did have...

Absolutely, Your Honor.

And one thing that hasn't been mentioned was, yes, the court found that in all material respects,

the limited powers of attorney that were executed before a notary on two separate occasions at the bank,

by Ms. Janver, were in all material respects, the same.

How could the court do that?

They didn't have this other document.

The court had a series of documents put before it.

The court also had the testimony of Ms. Janver, where she admitted that in all material respects,

the document that she signed, the limited power of attorney that she signed,

was exactly the same as the one recorded except for the addition of Gary Janver's name.

But she said she didn't read it.

That's what she told the court.

Right.

She said she didn't look at the first page.

Right.

But she...

Could she know they were identical?

Well, Your Honor, her testimony was called into question a number of times in the court.

Fair enough.

She said her memory, she had memory problems.

But the court, in various respects, did not find Ms. Janver's testimony credible.

But the court certainly was entitled to accept admission by Ms. Janver,

that in all material respects, in fact, there were no differences between what she signed

before a notary and the limited power of attorney that was recorded,

the only difference being Gary Janver's name was added and her signature was rewritten, essentially.

What would a reasonable practitioner or reasonable bank negotiator make of the fact that Gary's

signature was added subsequent to the original signing?

Well, there's no evidence that Elon was aware that his signature was added after the original signing.

Are you speaking to the...

Somebody must have been aware of it.

Ms. Warren was aware of it, certainly.

I think Ms. Warren was the only one aware of it, in fact.

And, you know, speaking to whether Mr. Betts was authorized, we have actual express manifestation by Ms. Janver

of what she wanted him to do.

Very clear in the limited power of attorney...

Wasn't it a $40,000 loan?

There was no evidence that there was ever a limited power of attorney that had a $40,000 loan.

And this is a finding by the court based on all the evidence put before the court.

No, but isn't that what she wanted? That's what she expected she was giving the power of attorney for, isn't it?

That was her testimony.

And it's consistent with the mortgage that was paid off for Ms. Warren.

Not the mortgage, but the...

I'm not sure that...

Pass-to amount.

I'm sorry, Your Honor.

I'm not sure there was any evidence that Ms. Janver was aware of how much money was needed to pay off the mortgage on Ms. Warren's property.

My point was that Ms. Warren was behind $30,000 and change.

Apparently, yeah.

Close to that.

That's what the bank record showed.

Exactly.

So whether she...

We don't know whether she thought it was $40,000 or not.

But she agreed to make the loan.

She knew it was for the benefit of her grandchildren and two of her own children that were living in the Warren household.

And she testified, and it's in the record, that that was one of the primary reasons she agreed to do it.

Is there any evidence in the record as to how many cents on the dollar your client or Fannie Mae paid for the mortgage here?

It's in the...

I'm not sure if it's in the record.

Was it substantially discounted?

It's in the record or not.

But it would have been...

Typically, it would be dollar for dollar.

Dollar to dollar, you said?

Typically.

I'm not saying I recall that exactly.

But it's in the record somewhere?

I would imagine it's on the assignment, but I'm not sure the assignment has it in there.

Why isn't...

If we're to sort of do equity here, why wouldn't one equitable solution be to simply say we're gonna...

There was plenty of sort of negligence to go around here or lack of diligence.

We'll leave the parties right where they are.

We'll cancel the mortgage.

Ms. Janfern has paid $70,000 already for what she thought was a $40,000 loan, and leave the parties where they are.

Well, canceling the mortgage and the note is not leaving the parties where they are.

Where the parties are is there is a valid note in mortgage, and the mortgage is subject to foreclosure.

It's been in default for a long time.

So we would not be preserving the status quo.

And on the equity situation, you know, I believe this court would have to find that the trial court's finding that the equities weighed in favor of the defendants to be unsustainable on the record.

And I just don't believe that's the case.

I mean, Ms. Janfern provided Ms. Warren everything she needed to take this loan.

She put her name in a bank account.

She provided her social security number.

She went to the bank twice signing limited powers of attorney.

And by the way, the log book that she had to sign for each of the notaries said right next to her signature limited power of attorney.

And she was defrauded.

She put her faith in someone and then she was defrauded.

You'd agree with that, wouldn't you?

I would not agree with that, Your Honor.

And I've heard counsel say that, that it's indisputed that she was defrauded, that this was a fraudulent loan.

I don't believe that's established at all.

All we have is Ms. Janfern saying she didn't know it was for $100,000.

She intended to make the loan.

And one of her first comments when she spoke with the bank, or counsel for the bank, was that, well, it wasn't supposed to be for that amount.

You know, first thing was that there was no loan.

It wasn't supposed to be for that amount.

Now, whether she did or didn't realize it was $100,000, it's in the document.

She's obligated to read it.

She is deemed to have read it and understood it and agreed to it.

So...

Well, you know what?

Can I just ask her?

Do we know that the document she actually signed said it was for $100,000?

Do we know that?

Or is it only later documents that bear the forgeries that show that the mortgage was $100,000?

Well, when the court asked, do we know, based on all the evidence at trial, certainly we argued that, and based on all the evidence at trial, and including the testimony...

Well, no, no, no, what I mean, what I'm really sort of asking you is, is there a document that, is there a document that Ms. Janfern says, yes, this is my signature.

I agree that this is my signature.

Maybe the one that was found in the, you know, in Ms. Warren's house.

Yes, I agree that this is my signature.

And that that is part of a document that says, loan for $100,000.

Look, two things.

Yes, there is a signature page with her signature on it.

And one that was notarized by...

First mortgage?

You mean the first power of attorney?

You mean the first power of attorney?

Right.

Yeah.

Yes.

I believe it's the first power of attorney.

The 2010.

Okay.

We also have Ms. Janfern, she was shown the complete limited power of attorney that says $100,000.

And she was asked, is this any different, an unsigned version of it.

Is this any different than the recorded limited power of attorney, which says $100,000, that

she was also shown?

She looked at both documents and under oath testified that the only difference between the two, between

what she signed and these documents was the addition of the Gary Janvern's name on the signature

page and on the notary page, and her name was re-signed.

So we have that.

The trial court had that.

It's in the record.

And I think it's very important.

All right.

Thank you, Councillor.

Thank you.

Councillor, if you want to use your...

Yes.

Go ahead.

So I'm reminded of that saying, a friend of mine likes to say that if what he just said

is true, he's got a great case.

There is nowhere in the record you will find that she said page one, which says $100,000,

that she saw that.

Quite the opposite.

The only thing she says that there's a signature page, that's on page two, the numbers, the

$100,000, the additional...

Well, but of course she says she didn't read anything.

So we don't really...

She didn't read it?

We don't know exactly what she saw.

We don't know.

She says at one place it was folded over, at another place she didn't read it.

So to say that there's anywhere in the record where she says, yes, this is it, this two-page

or three-page document is it, you won't find that in the record.

She'll say, that's my signature on the ones I showed you earlier.

You won't find that.

What she said at trial, you know, one of my favorite questions was, do you have your eyes closed

while you read?

I mean, she was really put under some pretty withering cross-examination for a 10th grade

education, not intelligent person from a trained lawyer.

What she signed was the signature page.

And we don't know what the first page was.

Sure, she said, I didn't read it.

We have many different versions of it, July 7th, August 10th, August 13th.

And if that makes her guilty of ignorance, she's guilty of ignorance.

I would point out that, you know, a confidence job is you put your confidence in someone.

And she's guilty of trusting her, you know, Ms. Warren.

There is no copy anywhere that you will find of a legitimate POA that is complete that says $100,000

standard Jandran.

You will not find it.

It was never communicated to Betts.

There's no evidence anywhere that she signed a document that said $100,000 on the front.

There's evidence that says I didn't read it.

But there's no evidence that says it was on the front.

Nothing communicated to Betts.

If I could just say, in closing...

Is there any document anywhere that has a figure of $40,000 on it?

Not that's been found.

Now, another thing a confidence person does, and I think we could all agree that Angela Warren was a pretty bad careless criminal, but they destroy evidence.

I don't know what was on it.

She said she didn't read it.

But just because we have $100,000 ones that she didn't look at doesn't mean there's not a $40,000 one out there.

Don't overthrow Richardson.

We've talked about that, the equitable.

And I just want to point out, because it hasn't been said, this is a 2007 mortgage.

What was happening then?

The height of mortgage fraud.

Internet loans.

I mean, Fannie Mae's own guidelines say don't do these things.

Don't do verbal employment.

Don't do internet loans.

They can't even do them anymore.

And is there any surprise?

Why did they institute those?

Because of all the fraud problems.

This case is a poster child.

They had all of the tools to avoid it.

Okay?

They have underwriting.

Their people actually said, yes, the signature looks like a fraud.

It looks like a forgery.

And we didn't hire a forensic document examiner.

And the sworn testimony.

Well, when they found out, when they said those things, like it looks like a fraud.

That was after the mortgage had already been granted, right?

Correct.

In 2012, after they said they would charge her $150 for the file, then after Mr. Stein got

involved and they mailed it, he immediately said, this is not her signature.

And the sworn testimony from both PNC and Fannie Mae is, we didn't hire a document examiner,

and we never would, never have.

PNC lied to Fannie Mae.

They didn't say anything about the signature discrepancies in their report.

They said it looks like she's involved in it.

Do you agree that your client had an attorney for, to represent, representing her when she

signed that modification agreement?

The?

2012, 2015?

No.

I don't think she signed anything after 2012.

When she got a lawyer, she never signed anything else.

So, you know, who bears the risk of loss here?

The bank that has an underwriting department that literally willfully turned a blind eye to

known forgery.

They said, I think this is forgery, but I'm not going to hire a handwriting expert.

So, again, I think we need to keep that in mind.

I think the remedy is reverse it and remand it with instructions to set aside this mortgage

and to do equity, grant the petition due equity.

Thank you very much.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

The court stands in recess.

All right.
