Just for scheduling purposes, we'll hear the Libri case first, then we will take a brief

recess, and then we will do the next two cases, then take another recess, and then finally

the last two.

This is case 2017-0265, State of New Hampshire, versus Owen Libri.

May it please the Court. Christopher Johnson, on behalf of Owen Libri, I've reserved one

minute for rebuttal. I plan to focus this morning on the failure of the defense to

offer a defense to the mental state element, and speak to three features of the claim that

mark this as a meritorious claim in contrast to the common run of ineffective assistance

claims.

First, that the lawyers had the raw material out of which to construct a defense. Second,

that they entirely failed to communicate that defense to the jury. And third, that they

had no reasonable strategy to do this. It was based on a misunderstanding of law

as a result of which chances for acquittal were greatly reduced. I'm happy to take the

Court's questions.

To begin, they had available. Here's my question. Do we analyze this solely with respect to

this claim or to the entire trial strategy?

I think you analyze it with respect to this claim. A counsel has an obligation to present

a defense or to have a strategy for a trial.

So are you saying that in order to provide effective assistance to counsel, a defense attorney

needs to reference each element of every offense in both its opening and its closing?

No, absolutely not. And please understand what the defense lawyer's obligation is to

have a strategy and to execute that strategy reasonably. These lawyers, as shown by their

post-conviction testimony, they recognized that the mental state element was a place

where they wanted to stake their defense. The problem was they totally failed to execute

that theory.

But here's, I guess, where I have a problem. The defense theory was that there was no

penetration. That just never happened. And that there was no intent to have penetration

right from the beginning.

That second part is not something they communicated to the jury. What they said to the jury

and very, very clearly, two issues in this case, consent and whether penetration happened.

And that's what they said to the jury. They could have said and should have said three

issues, consent, whether he intended penetration and whether penetration happened.

But you emphasize in your brief that he should have sort of said, well, there was

no penetration. I mean, there was no intent to have penetration at the time of the computer

use.

Right.

That, if the theory is there was never penetration at all, isn't it, I could easily see a defense

attorney saying, well, wait a minute, if I now sort of say to the jury, what is going

to be to my argument to the jury, well, even if you've heard evidence that there

was penetration, well, he didn't really intend it at the time he had the computer

use. Isn't that something that the jury might say, wait a minute, you know?

Sure, sure. So two points about that. I mean, if that is what the defense lawyers had said

in this case, this would be a different argument. But that is not what they said their

theory was. They did not say we were concerned about alternative defenses. And my goodness,

they ran an alternative defense. They had, I mean, penetration would be a complete

defense to the AFSAs, too. And so if you're going to, if you're worried about

running alternative defenses, that's your defense. But they ran an alternative

defense. There was consent. And by the way, penetration also, you know, those two

points are already alternative theories. And so what they did was they utterly

failed to present a defense focused on this mental state. And here's the

problem. So penetration is not a defense to the computer use felony.

Penetration could not happen. And you're still guilty of the felony.

And the second point is the state's case as to penetration was vastly stronger than

its case as to intent at the time the messages were sent.

Well, I mean, isn't this whole sort of, you know, senior salute? I mean, the even

the victim's testimony was that she understood from the beginning that

this was that penetration of some kind was likely one of the things that

was going to happen. No, what she said was her testimony was when she first got

the messages, this is her testimony, I thought we might kiss. That's not

penetration. Well, but, but before, I mean, at some point before they actually

had, didn't she say as well, there might be some, there might be some

digital or sure. Sure. Sure. And she said, you know, later on, she said

she sort of was prepared to do certain kinds of penetration. Point is

though, her intent is not what the issue. No, but isn't the fact that

I mean, doesn't that sort of, you know, doesn't the fact that even she

understood what was likely to happen sort of suggest that the whole senior

salute that this was well known on the campus what everybody was talking

about? Well, but I mean, that's the state's theory. Fine. They're entitled

to their theory. This is not a sufficiency claim. The defense had

substantial evidence to attack that theory. There was the suggestion

that his pre-encounter statements could be viewed as adolescent male

bravado. The words that he used prior to the encounter could be or ambiguous

slang vocabulary that didn't designate a particular sexual penetration.

And to be sure, the state is entitled to argue, sure they did. But

the question here is, was there a genuine issue for the jury?

Well, but that's, but that's the question. I mean, is it how, I mean,

you know, how, when the terms that are used, you know, slay her pork, all

that, I mean, sure, you can make an argument that that that, you know,

it meant something else. But precisely, precisely, and that's that argument

should have been made. And isn't Defense Counsel entitled to protect

his own integrity and credibility before the jury? So you have to pick

your arguments the one thing. But look, they picked the weakest

argument to make is look at the evidence that penetration happened.

But they prevailed.

F.P. No, no, no, they did not on the misdemeanor. It's not on the question

of whether penetration actually happened.

They prevailed on the FSAs.

Yeah, they prevailed on the FSAs, but they did not prevail on the

question of whether penetration happened. F.P.'s testimony was that

it happened. She's not in a position to say what Labry's intent was

when he sent the messages. There was the scientific evidence and

his DNA in her underwear. There's nothing like that for his intent

when he sent the messages. There's the conversations after the

encounter where they're discussing birth control devices. That's a tough

evidence for the defense to overcome on the question of penetration.

It doesn't prove what his intent was. I recognize that whether

penetration happened is circumstantial evidence of an intent.

But it is also possible that a jury could find that the intent

to penetrate arose in the heat of the moment in the Lindsay

building and was not a part of what he intended when he sent the

messages.

But doesn't that, to make that argument, doesn't that undercut

the basic theory that there was no penetration because he would

have had to be saying in effect, well, he didn't have that

intent at the time.

So two points again is, I mean, they were already sort of doing

that when they're having an alternative theory as consent

because they're saying there was no penetration and if there was

whatever there was was consented to. So we're already in an

alternative defense mode. And secondly, and crucially, that's not

what the lawyers said. The state doesn't hear get to invent an

hypothetical alternative strategy that they could have been

pursuing. And if they had been pursuing, it would have

justified this performance. They have to live with the

strategy these lawyers articulated. And they said we

were fighting all of the charges. And why would you

prioritize the misdemeanors above the computer use felony

anyways? That doesn't make any sense. And that's not what

they were doing. Their strategy was based on this

misunderstanding that they didn't need to defend this

point about intent that winning these other two points

consent and penetration wasn't there. But what wasn't the

part of the defense that they're I mean, as you pointed

out before, that there really was that these these

original, you know, the lead up to this what led to the

encounter was not was not intended to have to involve a

sexual encounter. I mean, there was evidence of precisely

presented by the defense right about that. Right. The only

thing that you're saying that defense didn't say was we

they presented this evidence of we didn't have we didn't

intend to have penetration, but they didn't sort of hone

in on and that's a crucial, crucial point for the for the

computer use statute. But the evidence itself was there.

Exactly. But what's the jury to think when a lawyer tells

them there's only two questions I want you to answer? Was it

consensual? And did penetration happened? The jury is going to

say they come to the computer use felony and their

deliberations. Consent doesn't matter for this. So they

said, Well, the only question we've been told to ask

ourselves is whether penetration happened. And wow,

that's where the state. Well, what about the course

instructions to the jury, though, on what the elements of the

computer offense were? Sure, sure. But I mean, it isn't clear

enough from those instructions that there's nothing wrong

with the instructions. But the lawyer should have said in

closing argument and in opening at any point, they should

have not rather than totally ignoring the charge, they

should have said, I want you to think about consent. I

want you to think about what the intent was when those

messages were sent, because that's crucial to this

computer use felony. That's a moment in time you must focus

on. And I want you to think about what happened in the

Lindsey building. There is no, you know, it doesn't cut

against the other strategy to say to interject that

intermediate point. And if you don't interject it and you

tell the jury, the only two things you need to ask

yourself is consent and penetration. Those are

the only two things the jury is going to ask

itself. And when they get the penetration, they

confront the state's evidence is much stronger than it

would have been on the moment of intent. Because it has

all this other stuff that wasn't present for the

intent. And they're going to convict. And again, I'm

not saying that this is, you know, all I have to do to

prevail here is to show that this was a genuine issue

that jury should have been asked to decide. And

because they were not asked to decide it, they

didn't decide it. We don't know what they would

have thought about intent at the moment the

message.

Well, and you have to show prejudice, right? I

mean, you have to show a reasonable probability of

a different result. So it's the Brady materiality

standard. It's not a high standard in that sense.

It's confidence in the verdict undermined. And my

answer to that is absolutely yes. When the

crucial question is not asked to the jury, we

don't know what they would have decided. Our

confidence in their verdict is undermined.

So you believe that the, I guess, strategic

consideration or your position is the strategic

consideration of waiting till post-verdict to

raise the computer crime charge with the judge

in terms of the penalty that feeds in or is

consistent with your argument. Yes, right. It shows

that they misunderstood the law. That post-verdict

motion shows that what they understood the law

to be is this arrangement of ultimate

verdicts is not lawful. We won consent. You

have to give us the felony, too. And here's

our argument why. They're wrong about that.

They misunderstood the law. But it explains why

they totally ignored this. Not one word to the

jury about this charge. One wouldn't know.

They didn't mention any of the charges in either

the opening and closing. They didn't focus on that,

man. No, but they focused. I mean, they focused

on credibility and consent. Right. And penetration

and whether it happened. Right. But they

certainly used these email messages to their

benefit. Right. So it's not like they ignored

the messages. No, true. No. But my point is

the, you know, yes, the evidence was there

to be used. The problem was they just didn't

use it for this charge. Well, I mean, so what

you're really saying, the evidence was there

to be used and was presented to the jury. The

instructions to the jury focused the jury on

the elements of the offense. And what you're

really saying is, well, they didn't make a

proper opening statement or closing argument

because they didn't hone the jury in on.

Right. I mean, don't we sort of assume that

juries follow the court's instructions? Right.

And look carefully at those instructions. And

it's, the page is 1108 and 1110 of the, it just

read the statute. And the crucial piece of

the instruction is, you know, the defendant

has to seduce, solicit, lure and ties to engage

in sexual penetration. The jury could, and hearing

the defense argument and hearing the prosecutors

argument for that matter, the jury's

going to think, we find an intent to

penetrate, eventually, in the Lindsay

Building because there was, we find

penetration. We find that he sent these

messages, he invited her to the senior

salute. They could put those together with

that, but not at the same time. And the

lawyer needed to say, you need, when you

hear that instruction, and there would be

no objection, because this is a proper

statement of the law, when you hear this

instruction, you should pay attention to

this point in time where the messages are

sent. That's the crucial point in time.

Isn't that just a better argument as

opposed to, you know, an unreasonable

defense? No. I mean, I think what we have

here is an argument and no argument. I mean,

they just didn't tell the jury what they

needed to tell the jury. It would be

different if they'd sort of conveyed

this, but somewhat inarticulately. Well,

they did. I think, didn't they talk

about these messages as two high school

kids flirting and logistical email

communications? Right. That's a subtle

argument. I grant you that, but it's

there. I mean, if it's there, it's

far too subtle to expect a jury to

pick it up. When you also tell them

there's only two things you need to ask

yourself. Did penetration happen in the

Lindsey building and was it consensual?

I mean, those are the only two things

the jury's going to ask itself when the

lawyer is telling them. Those are the

only two things you should ask. I see

my time is up. Thank you. Thank you.

Good morning and may it please the court.

My name is Sean Locke and I represent

the state of New Hampshire, which asks

that this court affirm the defendant's

convictions. And I'd like to begin

with a line that the defense

council just used in his argument.

They picked the weakest argument to

make. That takes the issues completely

out of the context of the case that the

jury was faced with. The time of trial

the defendant was facing three

aggravated felonious sexual assault

charges. Had he been convicted of those,

he would have faced 30 to 60 years in

prison, along with a lifetime

registration requirement. So same

question. Do we analyze this issue in

the context of the single charge or

in the entire trial strategy? So if I'm

understanding the way what you're

phrasing or the kind of intent here of

the question, you have to look at an

ineffective assistance claim in the

context of the what's going on in the

entire trial. So everything that the

defendant is facing, every strategic

choice the defense council has to

make in terms of whether or not if

this court were to decide to, for

example, reverse the trial court's

decision, whether or not if there was a

retrial, would it be just on the

felonious, the felony charge or the all

the misdemeanor charges as well? The

only issues addressed by the defendant

in this appeal relate to the felony

charge. But I'm not, honestly I'm not

aware of case law where that kind of

fine distinction has been drawn. So I

can't. Isn't that really hindsight?

Armchair quarterbacking? If you're

going to focus after the fact on one

charge as opposed to the entire case?

Exactly. And I think that's part of the

issue here is that the argument being

constructed here now on appeal in this

and effective assistance claim is looking

at what would have been, what can

essentially can be done now that if

there were a retrial all that would

be the most serious charge would be

the computer use charge and not the

three AFSA charges. If you look and

compare the defendants closing and

opening statements to the states

closing and opening statements you find

that the state also did not spend a

significant amount of time discussing

the computer use charge. So what you're

usually saying is that in terms of the

sort of package of charges that the

defendant faced the defense actually

was quite successful. Correct. There was

an acquittal on the most serious

charges which tends to suggest that

they were effective in their cross

examination of the victim that the

jury didn't believe the idea that

this was a factually

non-consensual encounter. Correct.

Correct. And that was the strategy and

that was the focus of both the state's

opening and closing statements and the

defendants. The focus was the AFSA charge.

This was in a situation where the

state spent half of its argument

discussing computer use and the intent

at the time emails were sent. They

spent in the opening five lines of

their opening statement basically saying

this is the charge these are the

elements. They spent another five

lines in their closing statement

saying this was the charge these were

the elements the Facebook and

communications and emails support

this conviction. What the defendant

is essentially saying is that just

as Donvin points out you have to go

through every single you have to do a

rote recitation of every element and

the facts that support or cut against

that element in order to provide

effective assistance of counsel. You

know if and if all it takes is a

single line saying the defendant

never intended this when he sent

those emails I failed to see where

the prejudice arises here. This

wasn't you know if that's all it takes

to absolve counsel of ineffectiveness

how that creates prejudice in the

sense that they basically say okay

but if he didn't do it I just don't

see where the prejudice arises here. I

would draw the comparison here too. If in

fact counsel was wrong in thinking

that the computer charge falls with

the aggravated felonious sexual

assault charges then does that line

take on higher meaning? But I would it

could but I would point the court to the

trial attorney's testimony they did they

both recognize that the defendant could

be convicted of the computer charge

even if acquitted of the AFSA and the

misdemeanor sexual assault because it

stands as a whole separate offense

with a separate offense with a

separate intent. They viewed it as

highly likely however that if the

defendant was acquitted of the sexual

assault charges then he would likely

be acquitted highly likely to be

acquitted of the computer use charge

for the reason that the intent whether

or not sexual penetration occurred very

informative of his intent at the time

he sent those communications. And I

would kind of draw a comparison here in

terms of how the latitude a defense

attorney has in structuring closing and

opening argument and focusing on the

most serious charges to essentially

what we're doing right now an appeal

and an appeal you end up with a

notice of appeal that could contain and

believe in this case close to a

dozen claims of error. It is the duty of

defense counsel to pick the strongest and

most serious claims and bring those to

this court's attention just like in a case

where there are multiple charges it

is the duty of defense counsel to the

best of their ability with the

limited time they have in an opening

and closing argument in this case leave

counsel had about 45 minutes and they

used almost the entirety if not all

of that time in addressing these

claims to address the most serious

claims and present a strategy that

addresses the most serious claims

turning like a one point in your brief

you you make the argument that it

would been it could have been dangerous

for defense counsel to address a

computer crime because it could lead to

admissions and can explain that to

me and I think some of this comes

from the trial courts order when the

defense counsel had raised multiple

other theories defense the defendant

could have raised in terms of jury

nullification and selective

prosecution and then it involves

those types of arguments would involve

making admissions that this conduct

occurred and that the jury should

disregard the charge itself but even I

think as justice Lynn points out you

kind of start playing with this

double-edged sword where you say

penetration never occurred you know

for you know this was never

basically the victim is testified to

never happened but even if it did

happen

he didn't intend it to happen at

the time and you're leaving the

jury sitting there with a question

and as defense counsel has pointed out

you know defense counselor the trial

counsel

already presented alternative theories

you know there was no force there was

no surprise used

and there was no penetration now we're

going to introduce a third alternative

that says

well and even if there was

penetration it wasn't intended at

the time

um the communications were sent

you're starting you you run the

risk of basically confusing the jury

and having them sit there and say

well what you know how much we

believe the defendant who had just

testified the day before closing

argument occurred

and gave from what um

at least the way counsel presented in

both the hearings

both the hearing and closing statement

fairly compelling testimony he was

not shaken by

cross-examination

I mean am I correct that that to the

extent that your opponent was arguing

that that that somehow the trial

counsel was under

a sort of a legal

misimpression

that that a conviction on one

on the on the felony

AFSA charges

or not or an acquittal on those would

sort of automatically

mean that there would be no conviction

on the computer

I mean that legally that couldn't be

true or the cases or the charges

would not be have been submitted

to the jury separately

I mean I can't imagine if that that

even if there was just a compromise

verdict

there's always a possible going to be

a possibility that the jury is

going to

arrive at some decision that you

know doesn't

might not logically follow but

would still be legal

correct

and I think the where that line of

kind of reasoning comes in the

defendant's brief comes from attorney

rank or its testimony

she testifies that defense counsel

came to her afterwards and expressed

kind of surprise that he could be

convicted of the computer use charge

having been acquitted of the AFSA charges

both or actually all three members

of the two members of the trial

team actually present

at court every day and then there

was an associate that assisted them

in their office in Boston

testified that they understood

that conviction for the computer use

charge could still arise even if the

defendant had been acquitted of the

AFSA and misdemeanor sexual assault

charges

I would posit that while attorney

rank or its testimony is obviously

evidence to be considered it has low

probative value and low and minimal

credibility given the conflict

that swirls around attorney rank

or its participation in these

ineffective assistance of counsel

proceedings

um she wrote the complaint

she tailored the complaint to the

issue she thought was present and then

testifies on the defendant's behalf

think the trial court gave minimal

weight to her her her testimony

when compared to the testimony of the

trial attorneys

the court has no further questions

on this matter

I'll turn it over to attorney Johnson

for rebuttal

Mr. Johnson

yeah briefly two quick points

first point in response to your

question about hindsight

it would be a totally reasonable

choice for a lawyer to say

we don't care about the lesser

charges we're just fighting the AFSAs

and I wouldn't be here with this

argument if that's what these lawyers

had said

it'd be kind of an Anaya sort of

situation where they're just letting

some things go

that is not what they said their

strategy was

see it's not hindsight

they had a strategy to fight all of

them

the problem was they failed to fight

one of the ones they said they

thought they were going to fight

and secondly on this question of

misunderstanding in rank courts

it's not j rank court's testimony

it is lead counsel's testimony at

the post conviction hearing that

embodies this misunderstanding

because they said they thought

these two points

these the penetration actual

penetration and consent covered

this third charge

I mean that's what they said

but I mean but were they saying

that legal

in other words if they really

thought that one sort of

necessarily depended on it

wouldn't there be something in

that they would have asked for

jury instructions on that

I mean that

maybe they should have

but I mean again I mean these are

lawyers who are not understanding

the law on this point

so you know I'm not there

it is not a coherent

presentation of the law

and so yeah maybe they should

have but they didn't

thank you

thank you

okay submitted the court will

take a brief reset

all right
