This is case 2017-0530, appeal of Evelyn Clark Smith.

Counsel.

You may proceed.

May it please the Court.

My name is Gary Snyder, and I'm here today on behalf of Evelyn Clark Smith, a terminated

State employee.

I'd like to invite the Court to please ask questions at any time during my presentation.

We're here today because the Personnel Appeals Board aired when it determined that

Ms. Clark Smith was properly terminated pursuant to Personnel Rule 1002.08c1.

That rule allows the State to terminate an employee when the employee has received letters

of discipline for, when the employee has received three letters of discipline for the same or

substantially similar conduct.

The PAB reasoned that it was able to, that the termination was proper because the all three

of the letters and the conduct they're in violated the same policy, the professionalism

and ethics policy for the agency.

The case of Murdoch states that it's the underlying conduct that must be considered,

not merely the rule violated, and when the PAB made its termination without considering

underlying conduct, it violated that rule.

Is it clear that we're dealing with the three strikes rule as opposed to the one offense

that can cause immediate termination?

So, in my opinion, yes.

The Personnel Appeals Board does, in its total decision, make a reference to what is

Personnel Rule 1002.08b7, which allows for termination and without prior discipline

in situations of egregious conduct.

But the Personnel Appeals Board made a decision as to that rule.

It cited it, but if you read the discussion in the order, it never references it,

and it's about two and a half pages of discussion purely about Personnel Rule 1002.08c1,

which has to do with the three strike rule.

So the, I guess, it's finding a fact.

I think it's under the finding a fact section or ruling of law section.

It's just a citation without meaning in the order.

I honestly would have to be able to speculate, I mean, to figure out what it is

the PAB intended by that.

I would expect for the PAB if they had intended the issued an order on that

on an independent basis.

And first off, the State never made the argument.

It's not in the letter itself that it was, she was terminated for that reason.

And then the PAB itself could have very easily said, even in a one line sentence

after it did all of its exclamation for why the three strike rule was upheld

in a one line sentence, it could have said we further find that the conduct

in the third letter was sufficiently egregious to warrant termination

under Personnel Rule 1002.08b7.

It failed to do so.

I would also say that if it had intended to issue an independent order

under that Personnel Rule that it should have done a better job at saying that

because certainly my predecessor did not mention any appeal.

I certainly might have read the order, did not read it that way

to mean that they had found an independent finding of any kind.

So if we're back to the three strikes rule, then the different provisions

under O4b, so you've got, as you outlined them, the first letters

under Section 3 and 4, the second letter under Section 8 and 11,

and the third one under Section 9.

So those, your argument is, are different.

While it may be under the same umbrella rule, those are different conduct.

Yes, in Murdoch, that was what the court reasoned,

is at least one of the things to consider.

It broke down the various categories, and it said basically

that even if you can fit everything into one category,

as the State argued then and it argues now,

that if you can fit better into another category, then it should.

In this case, the first letter of warning is purely about unauthorized

absences.

Why doesn't that relate to professionalism and ethics?

Well, because there are several categories,

and what the court had reasoned was that if you were to,

it's possible you make the argument that it does,

but if you're able to put everything into that one basket,

then it renders superfluous all of the other categories.

So what's the second letter?

What's the conduct for the second letter?

The second letter had to do with not following a directive of our supervisor.

Ms. Evelyn Quarchmith wanted to bring a youth to a job interview,

and the supervisor wanted it to be rescheduled.

In that discussion, Ms. Quarchmith used some inappropriate language

toward her supervisor, and then also in the letter,

but it is a separate issue, is on a separate occasion,

Ms. Quarchmith was supervising to youths who were using her iPads

at her direction, and she wasn't supervising them closely enough,

and they were able to use Instagram, which I suppose is a violation of their policy.

And what's the third?

The third had to do with...

Ms. Quarchmith came across a youth who was acting out,

and the counselor was already dealing with the youth,

but Ms. Quarchmith decided she would try to help out,

and she inserted herself into the situation,

and during her course of conduct, she used an inappropriate word,

and ultimately the child became more agitated and had to be restrained.

So one has to do with authorized absences,

and then the second one has to do with not following the order of the supervisor

and not properly supervising one of the students or two of the students,

and then the third has to do with using poor judgment in a situation

where a student was acting out.

So the underlying conduct of all three of these letters is...

at best, maybe two and three are similar,

but I would say that certainly one is disparate from both two and three.

So can the board rely on the policy at all?

The ethics policy that's posted?

The board can certainly rely on the ethics policy in sight to it,

but it's not able to get around the three-strike rule parameters

that the underlying conduct has to be the same.

I don't think that there is necessarily an argument that the policies were violated,

but it's not enough, and the legislature certainly made their intent clear

by the creation of the other provision,

which is a person over 1,002.08c2,

which allows for termination of an employee after five letters

for similar or disparate conduct.

So it's not that the PAB or the state could never issue discipline

or terminate a person for broad violations of the policy,

but they had to wait until they had five letters.

They only had three.

Another point I would like to bring up is that if we were to accept

this broad interpretation by the state and the PAB,

who would render sub-techn C2 completely moot?

Because as I've shown, these are completely different underlying conducts,

but yet she's being terminated after three letters of warning.

That provides no meaningful distinction for C2.

There has to be something different between the two.

They will be rendering Section C2 completely moot.

You don't have to use all your time.

The only other thing I'd like to mention while I still have a second

is that the state has made a very similar argument to Murdoch

based upon that everything could fit into one category under Section 11

that everything violates policy,

and the Court again in Murdoch said that just because it can't fit

under one policy doesn't mean that it has to.

It doesn't mean that you can't just ignore the rest.

Is there any conduct?

Can you give me an example of some discipline worthy conduct

that wouldn't fit under the policy?

I can't.

I think that every single thing that a person could do wrong

would fit under that policy.

The policy is working pages long.

It encompasses all federal and state law.

It talks about dress code.

It talks about sexual harassment.

It talks about treatment to co-workers' treatment to clients.

It really does cover everything under the sun.

I think that you can stretch every single bit of misconduct

by any individual to be perceived as unprofessional.

In some way, shape, or form.

Even with the author as absences,

the employer tied in the presence

of work performance that was related to that.

But it was, of course, because of the unauthorized absence.

Because there was no other absence and no work got done that day

and meetings were missed and work was not completed.

So it all ties back to the unauthorized absence.

So it's not a separate issue as the state has just tried

to make it appear.

So if the employee were doing something on work time

that wasn't part of his or her job,

that could then be related to work performance

or lack thereof work performance is what you're saying.

Either missing work or doing something during work

that's not part of the job would be wasting time,

if you will, or not performing under the policy.

As the state has equated that.

Okay.

I see my time.

Thank you very much.

Thank you, council.

Attorney Neville.

Good morning.

May it please the court.

My name is Heather Neville.

I represent the New Hampshire Department of Health

and Human Services in this case.

And Azure, where this case is about an agency's ability

to dismiss an employee who consistently violates

this administrative rules and policies

following notice of unsatisfactory conduct.

I'd be happy to take questions at any time.

Why don't we start with Judge Hans Marconi's question.

Is the citation of 1002.08 b7 simply an empty gesture

by the board?

No.

It was referenced in the decision under the issues of law.

It wasn't elaborated on as much as the three-structure out

as we're calling it.

But each letter of warning contained a reference to 1002.04 b11,

which talks about violation of a posted state agency policy

or procedure, which is this policy that we're talking about.

So the fact that the conduct fit within the specific subsection,

which is one page of the 14-page document,

it was referenced so the employee had noticed

in each one of the letters of warning.

So you're saying that the board ruled each of the three

warnings rose to the level of immediate dismissal?

Standing alone?

Standing alone either one of the prior two could have,

but the employee was certainly on notice of that issue.

And then the board did find that that appropriate section

of the rule was violated.

And that wasn't appealed here.

So that argument related to those issues is waived.

There was two independent bases, as you pointed out,

for the upholding of the dismissal.

Only one was raised on appeal here.

And without raising that second independent ground for dismissal,

we feel strongly the appellant cannot meet her burden

of demonstrating the first letter.

So the first warning letter for missing work?

Well, it wasn't just for missing work.

It did include unauthorized taking of two days of work

after her supervisor specifically told her

she wasn't authorized for that.

That first letter of warning is in a certified record

at page 62 if you'd like to refer to it.

It also talks about missing the meeting,

which was somewhat glossed over,

but there was a meeting scheduled with the Salvation Army,

a community partner, and individuals coming in

to help youth build their resumes.

Originally, the appellant canceled the meeting

and rescheduled it for a day that then she took off

in violation of the supervisor's directive

and didn't make arrangements to have anyone else meet

that community partner to have the resumes

and the youth be worked with, resumes built.

It also referred back to prior notification of counsel

from under a prior supervisor,

and it specifically referenced this policy

that we're talking about saying that these actions

put DCYF the agency in a negative light

and were certainly unprofessional.

So that could have resulted in one strike in your route?

Yes.

So if we move to the appellant frequently citing

the appeal of Murdoch, as this court is aware,

the rules have been amended since the appeal of Murdoch,

making the conduct much broader.

First, the rules of last aid agencies

to issue the letters of warning, as you've pointed on,

for violating any posted or published agency policy

or procedure under 1002.04B11.

And again, the one section of the ethics policy

that we're talking about,

the professionalism policy that we're talking about,

is section 2C that's found at certified record page 19.

So all three letters of warning

fits squarely into that framework,

that one subsection that takes roughly one page of the policy.

Second, the rules now allow for dismissal

based on two prior letters of warning,

not only for the same, but for similar

or substantially similar conduct or offenses.

You'd agree with me that the agency

could have made that little more clear

in those warning letters?

Respectfully, I think it was clear.

If you look at those warning letters,

it does refer to the 1002.04B11,

which very clearly says that an appointing authority

may issue a written warning to an employee

for unsatisfactory work performance or conduct,

including but not limited to section 11,

is violation of a posted or published

state agency policy or procedure

or law administrative rule applicable to the agency.

So that was specifically.

The body of the letter is talking about this,

and it relates to your work performance,

and this is strike one.

Well, that first letter of warning

contained a corrective action plan,

and one of the first identified points

was sit down with your supervisor,

review this policy to the situation.

The second letter of warning, again,

references the same specific subsection,

so not the whole 14-page document,

but the one page, and says,

we had this conversation with you a month earlier.

You clearly understood the policy,

and you chose not to answer when we asked you

whether conduct was consistent

or in violation of this policy.

So essentially the amendments

to the rules subsequent to Murdoch

create such a broad scope

or a broader scope of conduct.

The rules that issue in Murdoch

are not what we're dealing with here today.

The inclusion of substantially similar now

includes conduct that contains the essence

or bears resemblance to

or has like characteristics to prior conduct.

And what are the like characteristics

that unify these three events?

One is the agency in a negative light.

And I can go through the facts.

I know opposing counsel has already touched on them.

They're in the certified record,

but we feel strongly that the unprofessionalism

demonstrated putting the agency

in a negative light three documented times

was sufficient to issue.

So is there any misconduct

that would fit under that umbrella

that you can think of?

Well, under, we're talking about

the specific subsection, section 2C.

So yes, the policy is broad.

I'm using your position for personal gain

or for political advancement.

Wouldn't that be unprofessional

and cast the agency in a negative light?

I would have to speculate on the conduct.

I personally feel very strongly

that we're talking about this one subsection

that her conduct

fits squarely under

in the three different strikes.

But again, you don't have to reach

the three strikes you're out

because there's an independent basis

for upholding the dismissal

Does it make any difference

what type of agency we're dealing with?

Not necessarily.

The policy we're speaking about is DCYF's policy.

But the rules that we're talking about,

the personnel rules, would apply

to all state agencies

as far as section

1,002.04 and 08.

Well, I'm

using about whether an agency such as this one,

which is arguably

in a very delicate position

very much in the limelight,

has greater requirements

for professionalism and ethics

than perhaps

another agency. Maybe I'm wrong?

I wouldn't disagree with you, Your Honor.

The rules do apply to more than just this agency,

but this agency, certainly the behavior demonstrated,

is unprofessional

in escalating youth.

She did

end up taking the youth in the second letter of warning

to the job interview with her personal friend

and then some 20 days later it's documented

she then showed up late to work

causing that youth much anxiety

and agitation.

So the behavior we feel

is specific to this agency

with this policy. The rules are applicable

to broader agencies, but her behavior

was specific to what was happening

at the Sunino Youth Services Center.

So then what is Murdoch

guiding us or guiding

the agency to do in distinguishing

conduct?

So I think it is looking

to the underlying conduct, but subsequent

to Murdoch, the rules

were amended

to allow the broader

substantially similar

conduct to fit into that

aspect.

So you think Murdoch might have been subject to a one strike rule?

Mr. Murdoch, I mean.

That's hard for me to say

because Mr. Murdoch I believe had, it was three strikes.

We're talking about a different subsection

for the letters of warning that allows the

one strike you're out and then the reason for dismissal.

So

no, the rules were amended subsequent to Murdoch

he wouldn't have been subject to the same.

So what is the purpose of rule 1001.08

B2 now?

Why even have it?

C2?

With the five letters?

Yeah.

You can look to that

if it is conduct that doesn't fall under

in our situation the same subsection.

It's certainly, we don't believe

in validating the legitimate

prior section which is

C1 with substantially similar

conduct.

It does still have to have like

characteristics for it to work for the three strikes

you're out.

So we don't feel it and but validates it

and one doesn't invalidate the other we have

to take both independently.

And then five

strikes can be

again, is there anything

that wouldn't fit under this umbrella?

I'm struggling.

So again, I think

not to go back to my last

but we're talking about one specific subsection

of the policy.

So there are other sections of this

14-page document.

I could speculate about

any behavior. Again, the political gain

in appropriate conduct with a child at this

agency that wouldn't fall under

this particular subset.

Again, section 2C

that she was required

to read in her first letter of warning

to the supervisor as it was applicable to the situation.

Our brief

on page 13 details the letters

and then refers to them within the certified

record. You can see they're rather extensive

but her behavior

certainly falls in the

unprofessional category.

And again, there's the independent

basis that hasn't been appealed that we can fall

back on. Well, it hasn't been appealed

because no one was aware of it. Well, they were aware

of it. They referenced that the appellant

argued it in her motion for reconsideration

on page 169 of the certified record.

So it was certainly

addressed prior to this appeal

and then not in the notice of appeal

or in the brief.

And not in the

response, the board's response

to the motion for reconsideration, not specifically.

I believe that it was just a denial.

Thank you, council. Thank you.
