Good morning.

Good morning.

And just for scheduling purposes, we'll hear the first two arguments, then we'll take a

recess and then hear the last two.

This is Case 2017, 0414, State of New Hampshire v. Gregory M. Bruno.

May it please the court.

Christopher Johnson, on behalf of Gregory Bruno, the issue in this appeal is the propriety

of the jointer of 35 separate charges in a single trial.

There's two fundamental arguments.

First, that there was a right to sever because the charges were unrelated.

And second, even if related, discretionary severance was appropriate because of

unfair prejudice.

My plan this morning is first to address a kind of theoretical problem in

jointer law generally.

Second, to address the relatedness argument and third to address the

unfair prejudice.

But I'm happy to take questions at any time.

How would you carve them up?

Well, I think there's a variety of ways potentially to do it.

So in the defense's pleadings, there were seven trials that were envisioned,

which involved the invasion of privacy as one, and then there was the

Anselone house fire and some related charges.

There was combined the self-storage fire and the Anthony Lane fire.

There was the Bruno dog event.

There were charges, sort of the anonymous text threats.

And I think there was a seventh one that's maybe just escaped my memory.

So that would be one way.

I mean, I think even-

So that would be seven trials?

That would be seven.

And I think it's on page 19 or 20 of the defense brief as quotes the trial

lawyer's suggestion of that version.

But again, I'd say I think there could have been more than one

ways to do it, depending on whether the theory was common plan

or logically and factually related.

But this gets to my first point about the theoretical problem I see

in the law of jointer generally.

First is that there is a great risk of circular reasoning.

It's easy to fall into a trap where the premise determines your conclusion.

So for example, the whole debate about is this one plan or two plans

or one two-part plan kind of depends on where you end up will depend on where you start.

Describe the two that you're talking about.

So the two-plan version of what happened here was that the first plan,

the goal of it was to target AA for suffering, to put it bluntly.

And the second plan was to evade responsibility for the crimes involved in the first.

So would that include the solicitation charges?

And so some crimes could fit within either or both.

And so I agree.

So solicitation, for example, the post-arrest events,

I think is what you're referring to.

If those inmates actually went and targeted the Anzalon house for the graffiti

or the fire, that would both target that family but also tend to try

to evade responsibility because he had an alibi being in jail.

Right. So that would be admissible.

So some could be, yeah, no, there's no question that the evidence, you know,

that I'm not saying this divides so neatly that there's no piece of evidence

that would be admissible in both, you know, in more than one trial.

So your position is that if the court would not have aired if it had two trials,

you don't need to have seven in order not to air.

I think there would have been a way to have two, which would be that.

You say the plan here, there's two plans.

And the reason to get to the test for common schema plan,

as this court has described in the past, is mutually dependent stages.

And so the thing that makes those two plans different is that you,

you know, a perpetrator could succeed it either while failing at the other.

So you could succeed in targeting that family for suffering while not getting away with it.

Alternatively, you could sort of succeed in sort of concealing responsibility

while not very successfully targeting them for suffering,

if sort of some of the other crimes.

Wouldn't you have to include the crime that you were trying to conceal

responsibility for in that second trial?

That's right. I think it's certainly true that at a trial on the plan

to evade responsibility, no doubt, some of the evidence of the background

motive would come in. So, yes. But the difference is you,

all of it wouldn't have to come in.

Aren't you really just saying that this many charges, 35, 75 witnesses,

this long of a trial just is overwhelming for the jury?

That's certainly a part of it. I think that's a key part of the

alternative discretionary severance. So even if they're related,

you have to set it up.

Isn't that, I mean, that, you know, it is unusual for a state trial.

But isn't this, I mean, this is in federal court, this would happen,

this would be a, you know, a relatively run-of-the-mill trial in

federal court, or maybe that's an overstatement. But it would be,

but it would be not at all unusual.

I recognize that there are many federal trials where there's lots

of counts, but it's not just the number of counts.

It's the sort of diversity of...

Well, but isn't there, you know, for example, isn't a common

statement in federal, for example, there's almost always a conspiracy

to count. So isn't it common language that, you know, the fact

that there's some change in the plan along the way doesn't make

any difference? It's really for the jury to decide, is this one,

was this one conspiracy or two or whatever?

No, I agree. I mean, it's an abstract proposition.

I'm not, you know, I'm not staking my flag on the claim

that a plan can't evolve. But this is where I think gets

to the solution to the theoretical problem that joined

your law poses and the problem partly is this circular

reasoning, but it's also we have these factors that are not

and maybe inevitably are not very well defined.

So, for example, temporal and spatial relationship is one

of the factors for logically and factually related.

Well, how close in space and time is close enough

and how far apart is too far?

It depends upon the elevation of your view from 50,000 feet.

It's easy. If you get closer to ground, it's more difficult.

Well, yeah, I mean, I think there would be at the outlier

some very clear ones, but my point is just that the boundary

of these factors in close cases is not clear.

And so I don't think this is a theoretical problem

that doesn't have a solution.

The solution is you have to look at the underlying

policies and principles that motivate this jointer

and severance law and fundamentally there too,

there's efficiency, we're trying to achieve efficiency

and there's fairness. The concern about jointer

is always that in multiple charges,

there's this risk of cross contamination

where the jury is going to, there's a risk that the jury

will end up adopting improper lines of reasoning

just because of all of the different kinds of information

they receive.

And my fundamental point on this theoretical problem

is that given that tension between efficiency

and fairness, the ultimate outcome has to be fairness.

I mean.

Sure, I understand that, but didn't the jury appear

to get it here because we have a number of acquittals, right?

True, true.

I mean, I guess what I could say is,

but we don't know how many acquittals we would have had

if this case had been divided into the different trials

in the way that I'm arguing.

And so yes, I think there were some.

There were some, but I don't think that proves

that the jury could overcome this risk of cross contamination

and sort of avert its eyes in places,

for example.

Wasn't it evidence that they weren't just overcome

with emotion and just said, this is a bad guy,

we're gonna convict him on everything?

Well, they, true.

I mean, they didn't convict him on everything.

But again, I think these are matters of degree.

And so, I mean, for example, this particularly

inflammatory feature of the injuries to the animals

wouldn't have had to come into every single trial

if you'd divided these trials in these ways.

And that is the kind of a thing.

So maybe they don't convict him of insurance fraud,

but, and they don't even convict him.

I admit of all of the animal cruelty charges.

But just seeing the detail and seeing the later

animal cruelty charges on the trial of the, you know.

Well, just the fact that we're sitting here

parsing through all these charges,

isn't that all the more reason to defer to the trial court?

This is, you've conceded, they're outliers,

but then there's this gray area in the middle.

And isn't that precisely why we defer to a trial court?

It can be.

I think when this court defers to trial courts,

it's one of two things is going on.

And one thing is there's a sense of factual findings

are being made in credibility.

And that's not what's happening here.

This is a pretrial, there's no credibility judgment.

The other, the second time where appellate courts

properly defer to trial courts is when there's a sense,

and I think this is what you're getting at,

is the law, the boundaries of the doctrines

are a little fuzzy and there's a range

of correct answers.

And so my point is, yes, there's a range of correct answers,

but one trial for 35 charges is not in that range.

It could have been seven, maybe it could have even been two.

But didn't you say it could have been two?

But maybe, but it couldn't have been one.

Because even within the two theory

would give a real well-described principle distinguishing,

what are we doing at this particular trial

and what comes in evidence?

What about the state's argument

that even if you bifurcated or divided this

into two or three or four trials under 404b,

a lot of this is gonna come in anyway?

True, and again, I accept that, but not all of it.

And there's a degree of prejudice

that comes in in the level of detail.

So for example, at the trial on the self-storage

and Anthony Lane house fires,

jury doesn't really need to hear necessarily

about the planet fitness car fire.

And they will certainly need to hear something

at all these trials about the sort of romantic relationship

and its breakup that lay behind all of this,

but they don't need to hear everything

about that relationship at all of the trials.

Attorney Johnson, you're still maintaining your argument

or the argument that was made below

that the defendant would have testified

on one or more of these charges, but not others?

I mean, I think that the state makes a fair point

that it was not clearly articulated how, I grant that.

But I mean, the other thing what we see,

I think when you look at this trial,

it's not very clear what line of defense

the defense really had.

It was sort of just a reasonable doubt.

And strength of evidence of guilt

is not a factor in Severance Law, Joinder Law.

I think we can't really know for sure

what the defense would have been

if these trials had been divided

into well-defined subsets.

But convincing showing wasn't made below.

You acknowledge that.

True, true.

What about your argument and your brief

that you say the trial court relied only on 20a1c

and that we have to review the applicability

of 20a1b, and I don't follow that.

Okay, so, I mean, there's two different,

I mean, a1b and a1c are two different theories

of relatedness.

Either one of them can support the court's finding.

Either one of them would be sufficient.

As I read the trial court's order on this point,

it focused principally on,

I forget which it's a1c or a1b,

but it focused on, I think it was

a common steamer plan, c.

And so it didn't really,

it's ruling didn't rest on logically and factually related.

But there was enough discussion of that

that it felt prudent to me to address it in my brief.

But if we agree with the trial court on c,

then we don't have to address b.

That's right, no, that's right.

I mean, either, if.

Either will sustain the court's.

That's right, right.

I mean, I have to prevail on both.

Another problem with Joinder is that if we sent this back

and had seven trials or two trials,

your client might actually receive more time in prison.

That's true, that's true.

But, I mean, our point is this was not a fair trial

and from the defense perspective, we would hope

maybe there's fewer convictions

if they were tried in more manageable subsets.

So is the standard that if we should find

one of these charges should not have been joined?

You get to new trial and everything?

Right, so my understanding of the law on this

is that with respect to the relatedness argument,

offenses are either related or they're not.

And if they're not, there's an absolute right to severance.

And if there's an absolute right to severance,

that's a structural error.

And so, and the state hasn't argued harmless error

in any event, but I don't think they could

because under that it's a structural error.

I think all of them have to be reversed.

I think the trial court prevented that argument

and it's ruling below.

Right, well, and then, yeah.

But on the second argument is if I don't prevail

on the relatedness then the court then reaches

not withstanding relatedness should they have been

severed in discretion, then unfair prejudice

is part of the analysis and in a way

that it's not on the relatedness.

And I imagine you could come out with reversing some

but not others on the prejudice analysis.

And what was the unfair prejudice?

So my point here is again, it's the number of charges

involved risk of propensity inferences,

a risk of confusion and particularly

of inflaming the passions of the jury given

that sort of some of these charges are not very,

you know, thank heavens, for example,

the late brush fires didn't do much damage to anybody.

There's a trial sort of focused on that

where the injuries to the animals or to the people

is not a central feature of the evidence.

It's just a different.

If this had been, but let's assume

that there had been two people charged here.

This had been charged as a conspiracy.

One conspiracy, all this is part of a single conspiracy.

What, I mean, the state would have been able

to get that conspiracy.

You couldn't have, ahead of time,

gotten the ruling that, well,

it's not really one conspiracy, right?

I mean, if the state had enough,

if the state said we want to submit this to the jury

and a jury can find that this is one conspiracy,

they would have been entitled to do that, wouldn't they?

I think that's right.

I think that's sort of a unique feature

of conspiracy law and that's why a person

can be punished separately for conspiring

to do the act and doing the act

is that the agreement of multiple people

is so dangerous to good order

that the rules are different.

But, well, but wouldn't it, I mean, does it,

I mean, I'd grant you, in some respects, I agree with you,

but doesn't it logically, wouldn't it?

I mean, that would mean that, you know, presumably,

again, I draw the federal court analogy,

if this was a conspiracy, chances are,

unless there was a Bruton problem or something,

all the conspirers would be tried together

and so you'd have this big charge

with a courtroom full of people as defendants

and chances are it would go forward that way.

Would it not?

And so, why, I mean, if anything,

this is because there's only one defendant,

it's somewhat less sort of gigantic.

True, true, but I mean, I think it's, again,

still I would say that, you know,

there might also be a discussion in the conspiracy case

and here, like, you would sever

if there are different conspiracies

that may involve the same people,

but they're different in, I would say,

say unrelated conspiracies.

They don't get to try,

maybe all the defendants are in each trial,

but they're known, all the charges are not in each trial.

I see that my time is up.

Ask the court to reverse, thank you.

Good morning and may it please the court.

My name is Sean Locke and I represent

the State of New Hampshire,

which asks that this court affirm the defendant's convictions

because the trial court sustainably exercised

its discretion when it denied the defendant's request

to sever the offenses into seven different trials.

The charge defenses had a logical

and factual connection as the trial court concluded

but were also part of a common schema plan

and it was not. So that's all we look at

is whether the trial court exercised its discretion

in a reasonable way?

Yes, the standard of review on joint issues

is the unsustainable exercise of discretion standard.

I think that gets to the point

just as Bassett was making earlier,

looking at this, the reason why it's sustainable

is that, or unsustainable,

whether it's sustainable or unsustainable

is looking at the various factors

that need to be considered here.

They're not, this isn't a rigid kind of line drawing test.

Even the five factors

under the logical and factual connection analysis,

these are guidelines.

They're not necessarily the entire body

of what the trial court may consider

and they're not, no one is dispositive.

So if the court is gonna try to adopt a heightened standard here

they're gonna have to be very rigid lines

that need to be drawn that's going to strip

the trial court of looking at the facts

of a particular case to make determinations

that this court on appellate review

doesn't necessarily have the luxury

of being able to do it.

Do you agree with the defense

that if we find that one of the charges

is not related for jointer purposes

that the defendant gets a new trial?

I disagree because the defense in this case

made a very specific argument

that this case needed to be separate

into seven different trials.

To now argue that if only one charge

needed to be severed out

and that would result,

and that would necessitate severing the case

into another trial.

Well the defense proposed seven separate trials

but wasn't standing firm

on that particular grouping of charges.

But I think that the way they framed the argument

is they put it before the trial court

for its consideration to be severed

into seven different trials.

I don't know.

They'd be happy with something less than that

or a different grouping.

That's clear from the record I think.

Okay, but I think and if that's the conclusion

the court draws then it could look and say

if it would have to look to see

whether or not there was prejudicial

if the one charge that was retained

or two charges that were retained

I would unfairly prejudice the outcome of the case.

It's not enough to say necessarily

that if one charge,

this court would have done differently

or any one of the justices on this court

would have had one charge severed off

into a separate trial.

That's not necessarily enough.

It still has to determine whether or not keeping that charge

was an unsustainable exercise of discretion.

Turning from there.

So can you tell me how is the planet fitness

arson charge related to the invasion of privacy

against day A?

How are those two charges related?

The connection here between all of the charges

is the fact that from the outset

the defendant's primary goal was to harass

and intimidate the victim here,

the primary victim here, AA.

As part of that goal,

he has also concealed his identity.

He has posed from the outset as an anonymous third party

or trying to pose as a friend of AA or something like that.

There was some evidence regarding creating

kind of fake Instagram accounts

that would suggest there were people who knew AA.

But to conceal his identity,

part of the concealment there is,

are these kind of random,

what seemingly randomly randomized attacks,

which include the fire at planet fitness.

Again, a third party that has no connection.

That has no connection.

But same thing with some of the brush fires here.

These people weren't connected.

I mean, it sounds like they lived in the neighborhood,

but they did not.

They weren't necessarily connected as friends or socially

within the defendant or AA.

The issue, though, is that by making it look like

a series of randomized arson attacks,

it deflects attention from the defendant.

It deflects his connection to the...

To the arson, but not to AA.

The targeted attacks on AA.

Because it looks like this is just a series

of random arsons in the neighborhood.

It's not this part of this concerted plan

or his concerted plan to attack AA.

And so that's where all these,

particularly the arson at planet fitness,

but any of these brush fires, they all tie in

because it's a way to kind of,

almost again, to support this contention

that the defendant had put forward

or was trying to put forward,

that these were anonymized.

This was an anonymized attack.

It wasn't him doing this behavior.

And was it necessary to add in the burglary charges

at the Anzalone House?

At the Anthony Lane House?

The burglary charges are directly related

to the arson charges in the sense that

the crime being committed during the burglary was arson.

So that they're directly connected to those charges.

It's not, you know, if those charges,

if the arson charges in the Anzalone House

were properly joined,

then the burglary charges by necessity.

Similar to the conspiracy argument,

just as Lynn was discussing earlier,

that would have to come in in that context.

You agree with Mr. Johnson that if there's error,

it's structural error?

There is case law from this court

that joined or issues can be harmless error,

so it's not necessarily structural error.

But you haven't argued harmless error.

We haven't argued harmless error

because we would have to show harmless error

with respect to all 28 charges.

So if there's error, it's, we reverse.

If there's error, if this court were to conclude

that the trial court's unsustainably exercised

its discretion in severing the charges, then yes.

Without a prejudice analysis.

There would need to be a prejudice analysis.

The court would have to determine

that the outcome here prejudice the defendant.

So if the charge here was de minimis

or if this court were to look at it and say,

let's sever off the, just for sake of argument,

sever off the planet fitness charge.

If this court would have concluded

that some of that evidence would have come in

to the other trials in this case,

then it's gonna be hard to say

that this would have been prejudicial

to the defendant's case,

and it would not be able to reverse.

But isn't that at odds with the concept

of it being structural error?

Well, I guess that's my point

is that it's not necessarily structural error.

I wanted to highlight one thing,

because the defendant makes much of the animal abuse

or the animal cruelty charges in this case.

And I would point out, the defendant was acquitted

on three of the animal cruelty charges here.

So it's not clear how, for example,

keeping those charges in the trial here

so inflamed the jury that they lost sight of reason.

I mean, three of the charges he was acquitted on

were of those specific charges.

It wasn't a situation where there were convictions

on all of those and all the other more serious charges.

There was a mix of charges here,

in which he was acquitted.

Well, the defense argues also

that the space and time here is a lot wider

than what we encountered in Brown,

which only lasted three weeks or so.

But it seems to me the evidence is

that a lot of the arson charges were closely...

Right, together, right?

And so preparation for this,

I brought in a timeline here

to keep track of everything.

But the attacks on AA begin in approximately October

of the, I think it was 2015.

Then the arson occurs in January of that year

and you have kind of basically from January

through early May, a series of arsons

and kind of attempted arsons

and other attacks that go on during this period.

Over the top of all of that that connects these things,

it connects these charges,

is the kind of harassment campaign against AA.

He is sending anonymous messages to AA, her family,

her friends, himself, his family members,

threatening them, threatening himself.

He's committed crimes, I mean,

in addition to feeding the razor blades to his family pet,

he set fire to his father's truck

or I think it was his father's truck on their property

the evening before the arson at AA's home occurs.

So this is all between October and May?

This is all between October and May

when he gets arrested.

Once he's arrested, the targeted campaign

against AA simply ends.

But the harassment of AA doesn't end.

He's able to steal a phone from a corrections officer

while he's incarcerated

and sends in anonymous threats

to local police threatening AA and his family.

And then while this joined or issue

was being argued before the trial court,

he solicits inmates in the house of corrections

who are about to be released to go forward

and continue the campaign of harassment against AA.

All with both of these, these later incidents

remain connected because they further the plan

of evading detection.

His plan here, if these threats are still coming in

while he's incarcerated or attacks are occurring

against AA while he's incarcerated or his family,

it looks less like that he's the person

doing these things.

It looks like there really is a third party out there

who is the leader of this and launching these attacks

and it wasn't him.

And so it gives him that kind of deniability

that he could carry with him into trial

if he were to present a case.

So you acknowledge, these are really

highly unusual circumstances.

We're not gonna try to create new law with this case, right?

And it's sense that you don't see this type of crime,

this kind of crime spree on a regular basis.

I would acknowledge that this isn't a common occurrence.

I mean, most I think in the few years I've done this,

most of the cases I've seen on appeal

are a handful of charges that are brought together,

but I think that goes,

and I wanna kind of emphasize the point

just as Lynn was getting at earlier,

whereas if there was a conspiracy charge,

if he had worked with another here,

all of these arguments would be gone.

We wouldn't be arguing about whether or not

it would be prejudicial.

These charges would all be joined

for a single trial and this issue wouldn't exist.

So it certainly raises some significant doubts

in my mind as to whether or not

there can really be that significant prejudice

if all that needed to exist here

was a conspiracy charge to keep everything together.

Can you clarify the state's position

as to how a 404B analysis fits in

with the join-dure analysis?

It seems you've addressed it in different ways

in your brief.

Right, and so it depends on how this,

I think the issue is depends on

which factor this court is looking at.

So looking at the logically and factually connected,

whether or not their charges

are logically and factually connected,

the standard here is a little different from 404B

because it creates a lower threshold.

The factors that are being considered here

are very different from the 404B analysis.

Think where the 404B analysis comes into play here

is in two places in terms of,

as kind of a framework for looking at the issues,

not necessarily as the standard for the issues,

is looking at one, the duplication of law in this case.

So looking at the duplication of law,

404B issue is gonna come up,

let's assume the seven trials

the defendant requested are what we had.

The 404B issue is gonna come up

in every single one of those trials

because there's going to be issues of identity,

intent, motive that other charges

that may not be the subject of the trial in that case

are going to help illuminate

that are going to assist the jury in going forward.

But the 404B analysis, I believe,

also comes into the question of interests of justice

and that's where the trial court may

in its discretion and in the interest of justice

sever the charges.

And that's where this court has looked to rule 404B

for guidance and can look to 404B for guidance.

So depending on which particular aspect

of the analysis we're looking at 404B

plays a different role and so in one

it's more kind of informative in the sense

that 404B issue is going to be relevant

in the sense that they're gonna come up

in every single one of these trials.

In another context, 404B is kind of gonna be a framework

or is this turning into certainly a propensity trial

that would suggest that in the interest of justice

the charges should have been severed

or are there sufficient or there's non-prepensive purposes?

Every one of the charges in this case

could be propensity charges.

Correct, but the issue with 404B

isn't necessarily that the evidence is propensity.

It's the issue is does it have a non-propensity purpose

or in this case is the relation here so connected

that severing the charges out into multiple trials

doesn't make sense and wouldn't be in the interest

of justice in this case because at the end of the day

we have to look at the fact that

if we're severing the charges into multiple trials

we have, let's say, again,

let's go with the seven that were suggested.

A young woman who is victimized by this defendant

who would have to testify in seven different trials.

A lead investigator who's going to have to testify

in seven different trials.

Forensics experts who are gonna have to testify

in seven different trials because the computer evidence

is critical to identifying the defendant here.

I mean, he used websites to anonymize his identity

and so tracing that information back to him,

giving the background on why these attacks occurred

and what prompted this is gonna force the AAA,

her family and friends to have to testify

at all of these trials and so that, you know,

some of that is what is going to inform this analysis

and whether or not it was in the best interest of justice

but it doesn't necessarily mean that the sole purpose

for joining the charges is a propensity purpose.

There are non-propensity reasons

for keeping them together.

And if the court has no further questions

then I'd ask the case be submitted.

Thank you, Councilor.

Case submitted.
