This is case 2017-0056 in the matter of Don Rebe and David DiRazzo.

May it please the court.

My name is Tanya Sponey and I represent the appellate Don Rebe.

In this case, Mr. Nazaro sold two businesses and a homie inherited.

Miss Rebe did allege in her petition that the two businesses were sold and

he had income which should be considered for child support purposes.

Prior to the final hearing in this matter via Emotion and Limne,

the court ruled that the home he also inherited and liquidated can be considered

as far as his income at the final hearing.

Are we, should it matter that these assets were,

I think, inherited before the prior child support order?

It should not, because at that point there was no money that stemmed from these assets.

So the sale happened after the prior.

Correct.

And was there any evidence presented to the trial court of their value at the time they were inherited?

Like any kind of a state inventory or?

I don't believe so, Your Honor.

No, I'm sorry, go ahead.

Should that matter?

Does the basis of that property matter?

Should it matter to our legal analysis?

And was the basis stepped up?

At the time of inheritance, the basis is stepped up.

So how should that affect our analysis here?

I think that that's actually really important.

I think what matters to this court is the value at the time.

Mr. Nazarro didn't, he didn't contribute any of his own money towards these assets.

No, but what, but here's the thing, I guess, suppose that what happened is this.

He inherited this house.

Yes.

Right?

And at the time of the, that you say the, at the time of the hearing in question,

he had the house.

Is that income?

At the time of the original hearing, Your Honor?

I just want to ask you something.

At the time of the, at the time you're saying that the court should have considered the value of the house.

If I can just clarify, what happened was he inherited a home and sold it and used the proceeds to buy a new home, which is mortgage free.

Okay.

So, so when he, so all right, I guess what I'm really asking is if, if suppose he hadn't sold it, suppose he continued to have it right up till today.

Could the value of the house be considered his income?

At that point, it wouldn't be disposable income, Your Honor, so I think it would be premature to consider that.

But why, why, where does it say anything in the child support guidelines about disposable?

That, that term is not used in the, I mean, what I'm really getting at is this, is if the house itself, if it was still owned by him, would not have been income.

And I don't think it would have been.

It would have been an asset.

The fact that he converts that asset from bricks and mortar into dollars, doesn't, how does that change it from an asset into income?

Well, I guess it's the, to jump to the Leroc decision, which was cited by both briefs, it's, it's, I want to use the term a windfall.

Same thing, he converted property to money and he's living off of that money.

Isn't the, but I mean, isn't wouldn't, isn't the important thing whether he had a gain on it?

In other words, if he, if he inherited a house, let's just say that was worth $100,000 and he still owned it.

And you would say that's not income, that's just an asset and it can't be counted for child support purposes.

If he turned, if he sells it for the, you know, the next day for the very same price, $100,000, that was what it was worth on the day he inherited it.

And that's what he sold it for.

But now he's got $100,000 in cash.

Why should that be income?

Because I, I see it, Your Honor, and I'd ask this court to view it, it to be equivalent to life insurance.

That is something that he was given.

It was vested to him upon the death of the, of the-

Would it matter if the house were awarded to him in a divorce, awarded to either party?

And then two years later, they sell that asset that's awarded to them in the divorce or a painting or-

No.

Then is that income?

No, Your Honor, I'm not asking this court to find that.

Why not?

Because-

Why is, why is the inheritance different?

Because in a divorce there's property settlement and both parties attributed to the acquisition of, of everything.

So the trial court or by agreement, they would be awarded certain assets.

That's not in this case.

In this case, it was, it was a gain that he received.

But that's his problem.

I mean, what, what if it wasn't a gain?

Suppose that this house was worth, the stepped up basis of the house was $100,000 on the day of inheritance.

And, and he sold it for $90,000.

Under your theory, we would say, well, it's these, even though he lost $10,000, we would say, well, he's got $90,000 in cash now.

That's income.

Your Honor, I would, I do, I do say that.

And more importantly, in this case, though, there's also two businesses to consider.

So he inherited two businesses, which he also liquidated.

And he has those funds, which the court did.

But did you, let me ask you this, just to sort of close the circle on this.

Did you introduce any evidence or try to introduce any evidence of a gain?

In other words, what, that there was a difference in value from the time of inheritance of either the businesses or the house to the time he sold it.

That he made, that he would have had to report a capital gain, for example.

I was not trial counsel, Your Honor, but in reading the transcripts, there was just expert testimony on both sides.

And that there was no capital gains, I believe, presented to the trial.

Well, let me just ask you this question.

You would agree that if I gave a gift to Mr. Nazaro, that would not be income, correct?

Correct, based on this court's prior decision, yes.

And why should it be any different for an inheritance than a gift?

And you said earlier, you said it was given to him through inheritance.

Why shouldn't we think about it the same way as a gift?

Because, Your Honor, the court rationalized that gifts are not included for child support purposes,

because there's no obligation to continue to give, and that would be unfair for it to be considered.

But this is akin to life insurance.

It was a vested interest upon the death of the grantor or the insured.

And that's the exact same thing as an inheritance.

It passed by will to him.

He can't, there's no obligation, he's not going to take it back, he's deceased.

So that's why it's different than a gift.

Thank you.

The court has no other questions.

Thank you.

Good morning, May it please the court?

My name is Stephen Shadala, and I represent David Nazaro.

I think the easiest way for the court to dispose of this case is not to get into splitting hairs

in terms of whether this is akin to life insurance, annuity, a lottery winning, there just was no gain here.

There was no gain here, this is inherited property.

I think your questions recognize that this is inherited property.

And that's a different concept than what was in Maves and Moore or Woosley or

any of the other cases that this course has decided.

And because it's inherited property, the stepped up basis rules apply.

Mr. Nazaro inherited the property in 2009, as counsel suggested to you,

they did not raise at the first proceeding any gain or any income that he was deriving from it.

And in the second proceeding, they tried to obtain child support from the proceeds,

not the gain that he got when he converted it from an asset into cash.

So was there any evidence before the court about the basis and

the gain, the amount of either of those?

Yes, in the lower court that we tried, the second proceeding, not the one in 2014,

we had the testimony of Richard Maloney, who was a forensic expert.

He testified as to the basis that the basis, and as the court knows,

stepped up basis means on the date of death, his basis is the value of the property at that time.

There was testimonies to the value of that property.

That basis was higher than the sale prices of the assets.

So when he sold it, it was no gain.

So there was no capital gain in regard to any of these assets?

There were no capital gains with regard to any of the assets at all.

There were proceeds, and as I think one of the questions suggested,

if he inherited something for $100,000 and he sold it for 90,

there would be proceeds of $90,000.

But there wouldn't be any income for child support.

Do you agree that the income that is generated by the proceeds is income for child support purposes?

If there was income generated from the proceeds, then that would be income under RSA 450.

Some of these properties are worth hundreds of thousands of dollars,

so they're liquidated and they go into some investment, a bank account or stocks.

The dividends or the interest would be includeable in income for child support purposes, right?

Absolutely, and in fact, one of the assets that he inherited was an IRA and

the income was recognized by the court as income for child support purposes.

But the asset itself, because it was gifted in inheritance in our view,

is not part of the child support calculation of income unless there's a gain.

And in this case, it was no gain.

How do other states deal with this issue?

Do they equate an inheritance with a gift?

Most states do not unless their child support statute talks about gifts.

And in this case, in our case, in our state, we don't talk about gifts in our child support statute.

So under the clear reading of the statute, I would say it's not something that should be included for child support purposes.

And an inheritance isn't a sort of contractual right that can be changed up to the point of death, right, a beneficial designation.

Yes, and under the Fulton decision of this court, the court said gifts are not to be included in the child support calculation.

Because gifts, there's no enforceable right to it, and an inheritance is the same thing.

We don't have a case that says that, right?

I mean, this is a case of first impression as it were, is that right?

Yes, and the court may want to refer it to the full court for purposes of a full opinion that will guide marital lawyers.

But the closest case that we have is the Fulton case, which talks about a gift.

And we argued in the lower court, and Judge Intracaso agreed with us, that an inheritance is a gift.

And there's enough case law that I've cited on page 15 of my brief to suggest that this court views inheritances as gifts.

But again, whether it's included in the statute or not, in our view,

we don't necessarily need to reach that decision, because it just was no gain.

He sold these assets for less than a stepped up basis.

So there's no gain.

What was there, were there conflicting expert opinions as to whether there was gain or not?

Or was Mr. Maloney's testimony uncontroverted?

There was another expert, Mr. Maloney, this court may be familiar with Mr. Maloney.

I mean, he was in the Maves and Moores decision and other decisions.

He used an expert who conflated the Maves and Moores decision with the Woosley decision,

which I don't think Judge Intracaso recognized, because in Woosley, we're talking about how you generate,

how you determine income from a capital gain ongoing operation.

This is not an ongoing operation.

These were sales of inherited property.

So I don't think the lower court placed a whole lot of faith in the expert that was Dr.

I've got the trial court order here, and we all have it.

The trial court doesn't talk about basis or capital gain, does it?

My recollection is the trial court found there was no gain.

There was no, there's no profit for purposes of income.

Okay, thank you.

And are you aware in the example of property awarded in the divorce that is then later sold,

how is that treated?

Again, I've been doing this a long time.

My experience is under that situation, that would not be included for purposes of an income analysis

for child support unless there was a capital gain or unless those proceeds,

as Justice Bassett suggested, were dumped in an account and it was generating income.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Thank you.
