This is case 20180013 in the matter of Haley St. Pierre and Adam Thatcher.

Good morning. May it please the court. My name is Peter Decato. I represent Adam Thatcher.

I'm grateful to the court that you've given us this time to argue the issues.

I think this is appropriate that it's come to this level.

Before I begin to talk about the law, I want to talk about the ramifications of a case like this.

This court addressed it in in Ray Genren. I'd like to just quote from it.

In that case, the court said that certainty and finality are particularly important in paternity determinations

because stability and continuity of support, both emotional and financial, are essential to a child's welfare.

I did add a quote, and that said, if a certain person has acted as the parent and bonded with the child,

the child should not be required to suffer the potentially damaging trauma that may come from being told

that the father she has known all of her life is not in fact her father.

I don't need to tell you that my client Adam Thatcher has been devastated by the events in this case,

and I don't need to tell you that because Mr. Santar and Ms. St. Pierre now misses Santar, they addressed it in the transcript.

So Mrs. Santar testified at page 35 of the transcript. I understand that it's very difficult.

I can't imagine, but at the same time, if we're thinking about Marley and her best interest, and then she went on...

Well, if somebody is going to petition the court to rescind paternity, why can't the biological mother do that?

You seem to argue in your brief that because your client isn't challenging his own paternity, there's no cause of action here.

Yes. Well, thank you for the question. The statute, I think, needs to be construed.

The RSA-5C, I think it's 28, the first part of it talks about the authority of a parent or a guardian to rescind an affidavit.

And then as it goes on, it never mentions a putative father that pops up.

And so I went to court law here as to how you can shrew a statute.

Now it's clear, the first section of the statute, that it's the parent or a guardian that has the authority has standing, but nothing is said about this father that pops up.

But didn't the biological mother here challenge paternity by way of petitioning a court of competent jurisdiction, and doesn't the statute allow her to do that?

Well, this is one of the points we've raised in our brief. What the mother did is she filed a petition to change court order.

Nobody ever filed a petition to disestablish paternity.

Well, they didn't file a pleading by that name, but she was looking to get your client's name off the birth certificate.

Isn't that close enough?

That appears to be what she was trying to do. And I think interestingly, she understood the bond between Miley and her father.

And she never tried to get Mr. Thatcher out of Miley's life.

But didn't everybody know that in the litigation the paternity affidavit was at issue and whether it was either a product of mistake or fraud?

Well, I would think so. Your Honor, I brought to the litigants' attention and to the court's attention many times, several times, maybe as many as four times, that we weren't going about it properly.

If you look at the record, I was telling them that we shouldn't be proceeding on a petition to change court order.

That we should know and understand if you're going to attack this affidavit, we should have noticed what is it about the affidavit that's incorrect.

Now, the court on its own did decide that either, I think she said, Mr. Thatcher and Ms. St. Pierre at the time created a mistake of fact.

Together, they made a mistake of fact that had an impact on Mr. Santos.

One of the points I'm raising in my brief, if you look at the testimony, there was no mistake as to who the father was.

So you're saying that Mr. Thatcher knew he wasn't the father when he signed the affidavit?

No, I'm not saying that at all. In fact, I would say the opposite. I would say Mr. Thatcher knew, felt very confident that he was the father.

But he was wrong about that.

Well, with respect to that birth certificate, I mean that blood test, it was really never litigated.

What happened is they appended it to a pleading.

This court has said in many cases that if they had asked the court for permission to take a blood test, I'm thinking, I think of Watts and McRae,

that the court wouldn't have given permission because they would have found it irrelevant because Miley had a father.

But this situation is considerably different. In other words, we have a blood test here now, which it appears really is undisputed that it establishes that Mr. Thatcher is not the father.

I mean, what would we do? The custody is at least for a substantial part of the time with the mother of the child.

There's nothing to prevent the mother from having testing done of the child and there's nothing to prevent her husband from having testing done

so that a comparison can be made as to whether the husband is the father of the child.

It seems like we now know that and so it's...

I read the quotes from Jenron because we know that when you have that blood test and if it proves somebody else might be the father,

harm as a matter of policy, there is trauma that is caused to the child

and there certainly is harm that's caused to that father who believed he was the father, who loved that child.

And so as a matter of policy, in some of your cases, you've said, we don't want that blood test.

Don't have that blood test. Now they attached...

Should it matter that Jenron was interpreting a Massachusetts statute that establishes more than a presumption of parenting

or biological parenting but is a conclusive statutory determination, the affidavit of paternity?

I understand. In fact, I think this is the first time this court is looking at an issue of this sort.

We had Inray, Jenron, and the last case, which is about a year ago, I'm looking for the...

Yeah, Neil into Julio.

So, New Hampshire hasn't really decided this issue, but as a matter of policy, I invite the court to say the same thing

and to understand how traumatic it is for a father who believes he's the father to be uprooted.

In fact, I would go a step and tell you, I'm very proud that my client has hung in there and has brought it to this level

and I think fathers like him need some clarity.

Incidentally, I did look for a case like Mr. Thatcher's and I can't find one.

What normally happens is a father is a father for a period of time,

watch 15 years, McCray eight years, and all of a sudden the blood test pops up

and he learns he's not the father.

He petitions the disestablished paternity because he no longer wants to pay child support.

That's not my client.

My client made a promise to his daughter that he would fight to remain her father.

So what would you do with the biological father?

Given the fact that, as I understand it, your client conceded the fact that Mr. Santa is the biological father.

What rights should we provide him?

I believe he's not the legal father.

I do recognize, though, that he's a biological father.

I would flip it.

What happened with the court, the lower court, they...

So you'd make him a step parent?

Well, I don't disagree that he may be the legal father.

We didn't litigate that issue, but let's assume that he is and let's say we acknowledge it.

He should have visitation.

The legal father is, and I still think is, Mr. Thatcher.

No one has filed a petition to disestablish paternity.

Incidentally, I really want to tell the court about this mistake, if I may.

In the record, Ms. St. Pierre, she's now Ms. Santa.

She testified that the beginning of her last period was January 16, 2013.

Biology tells us that 14 days later, she ovulates.

And for the next five to seven days, it would be February 1st through the 6th or 7th, she could get pregnant.

The testimony in this case was that Adam had intercourse with Mrs. Santa on February 1 and February 3.

What the testimony was was that Mrs. Santa and Colby Santa said they had intercourse on February 9th or 10th during a fishing...

But you know, I guess I'm having trouble understanding why any of that is important.

I mean, isn't it undisputed that biologically Mr. Santa is the father?

So, I mean, the details of like, who had intercourse with who, why does that matter?

We know that he's the father.

No, because at the time of the signing of the affidavit, given the evidence that Mrs. Santa had then Ms. St. Pierre,

and doing the calculations that she made, she was certain that Adam Thatcher was the father.

Adam Thatcher was certain that he was the father.

But doesn't that reinforce the idea that they were mistaken?

I mean, they may have acted in complete good faith, but in fact they were mistaken, weren't they?

Because Mr. Thatcher is not the father.

But the policy of the courts that have dealt with these kinds of issues, they don't go there.

They recognize it's a matter of policy.

So, let me just ask you this. What about from the perspective of Mr. Santa?

There really is no question in terms of knowledge that he acted in good faith, right?

I mean, there's nobody claiming that he knew all along that he was really the father.

So now we know that he is the father.

Should we say that you and it seems like he acted relatively timely?

I mean, maybe he could have acted somewhat more timely, but this isn't like 10 years went by.

There was a conversation when Ms. Santar became pregnant,

and I'm not sure the trial court clearly tells us that she understood it.

She called Mr. Santar and she told him she was pregnant.

They had a conversation and Ms. Santar told him, I believe that it's Mr. Thatcher.

Mr. Santar had the right then to ask for blood death, DNA test, and he did not.

He waved his right to determine then if he was the father.

He could have asked for a test, but he did not.

Isn't that significant?

What he did is he said, I'm going to block you from my cell phone.

We won't have any more conversation.

I'm going to let her be raised by her father.

Did you do that at your client's request?

Your client told him to stay away, not to have any contact with her, right?

I think he did what any man who was married would say to somebody

he found out, I'm sorry, they weren't married at the time,

but he did what any man would say, who had a girlfriend he loved

and found out she had intercourse with somebody else,

not to be in touch with her again.

So what he did, I think, I hope, you'll understand is understandable.

That's what he said.

I really sort of understand where you're coming from,

but doesn't the situation change here in that,

eventually Mr. Santel and now Mrs. Santel get together?

And now, I guess, the thing I have the problem with is

if the issue here was there was no blood test done

and Mr. Santel was now saying,

should I be able to get a blood test?

Okay, maybe I sort of see your argument, but that's not the situation.

The blood test was done, we now know who the biological father is.

Doesn't that change the situation?

I don't believe it's going to be good law for you.

You have to deal with two situations.

Whatever you decide, understand, there's a number of men out there

who know that currently they probably can't disestablish their paternity

because states, many of them want him to continue to pay child support

and they can't get their paternity disestablished.

But if you say, well, the exception is the man who wants to remain the parent

is going to have his paternity disestablished.

That just seems to me to be a peculiar...

Is the custodial arrangement satisfactory to all of the parties at present?

I'm sorry, Judge?

Is the custodial arrangement and visitation arrangement

satisfactory to all of the parties?

Has it been?

Yes.

No.

It has not been.

They moved to Florida.

Is it before the court today?

It is not before the court.

It is an issue that still percolates in the family court.

Well, it sounds to me, every time you mention the word policy,

Mr. Decado, I get nervous.

It sounds to me like maybe a remand is in order.

How do you respond to that?

What I'm asking for is a reversal on the law.

I believe Adam is the legal father.

I do think a remand is in order for a parenting plan.

I was going to say what we ended up with is visitation.

Mr. Thatcher is not part of a parenting plan.

If it was a parenting plan, I think it would have a little more meat to it.

But I would have seen the parenting plan between Mr. Thatcher and Mrs. Santar

and visitation for Mr. Santar.

Understand if they are married...

As a stepparent visitation, right?

A stepparent.

As long as Mr. Santar is with Mrs. Santar,

then when the child is with her, the child is with him as well,

if something happens to their relationship,

then Mr. Santar would have visitation to be worked out by the family court.

Is there any relevance of in Ray Madeline B?

Is there any relevance to that case?

Should we pay attention to that case at all?

Well, I know there's a long list of cases that you might pay attention to.

I know the broader rule and that line of cases.

But in Ray Madeline B, you had a non-biological same-sex parent

who established her parenting rights.

Right. I should just share this with you because I thought it was a good comment.

I have an office manager who adopted a daughter.

And she's the one that said to me that you don't need to be a biological parent to be a parent.

And of course, as society changes and we see different kinds of arrangements,

that is literally true.

I know I've been involved in a number of adoptions and it's pure joy.

It's the greatest thrill, I think, for a lawyer to be involved in an adoption.

Adam would said that he loved Miley when she was in the womb.

And then he met her at birth and still loves it to this date.

So I don't think you have to be a biological.

I do think that a remand is necessary, Chief Justice.

But I really think it's, I think what would be appropriate policy is you shouldn't be able to disestablish paternity

without asking to do so.

And regardless, in this particular case, I don't think it's good policy to disestablish paternity

because you have those other fathers who are going to want equal treatment.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Awesome.

Good morning, Justices.

May it please the Court.

My name is Jay Markel.

I represent the appellee in this matter.

I guess briefly, the Court's decision below should be affirmed.

The weight of the evidence certainly establishes a solid and sound basis for its decision, number one.

So I don't believe, I think as this Court has pointed out before, it doesn't re-weigh evidence.

And maybe it would have decided differently, but as long as the Court could have decided below as it did.

And there's a certainly inadequate factual and legal basis for the way it's decided.

What was the Court's source for determining that she could rescind paternity based on fraud, duress, or a mistake in fact?

Well, it's not in any New Hampshire statute, is it?

That's correct.

However, as I read it, I believe 490D, which gives equity jurisdiction over paternity, matters of paternity, and so on,

that the Court acted certainly within its equity powers to be able to do so.

It was certainly, I think as we pointed out in the brief, you know, equity jurisdiction as even as this Court pointed out in Neal,

was that what the Court should do in good conscience what ought to be done.

And since in terms of equity, since courts need to create fashion individual remedies for individual cases,

we think that the Court acted properly.

I hope I've answered that question.

Well, Gendron has that language, but that was in reliance on a Massachusetts acknowledgement, right?

Correct.

But Gendron also was a full, as we read it, was also a full faith and credit argument for a Massachusetts judgment.

So in Massachusetts, where I practice, also operates on a very different basis.

Here, what we're talking about an affidavit of paternity operates as a legal effect of establishing paternity without any further action.

But that doesn't make it an irrebuttable presumption.

It's not a judgment under...

Correct.

It's not a judgment, as I understand the law.

But in Massachusetts and Vermont...

It may be a judgment.

It may be a judgment.

Correct.

I don't practice...

Your argument is that if it were a judgment, it would somehow contravene federal statute?

Well, the argument would be...

Okay, well the argument here is that, please forgive me if I'm not precise,

but I believe it's 42 U.S.C.666, I think it's L, as we cited in our brief.

And that stands for the...

And that is part of an overall federal comprehensive scheme that allows a putative father,

which Mr. Santos certainly is and was, a reasonable opportunity to challenge paternity.

But that's a child support enforcement, right?

But it's also paternity.

So in other words, and we're...

I need to avoid paying child support.

Isn't that the context?

Okay.

Well, it's for child support enforcement, but also if paternity is a driving factor,

I'm not aware of any legislation.

What would be the...

I mean, aside from enforcing child support and some funding string to the states

that they will lose federal funding,

what would be the authority of the federal government to decide what paternity

requirements should apply in the states?

I mean, isn't that like a little beyond their authority?

Understandable, your honor.

I would say that it's probably...

That's conditioned on block grants as I understand the law.

Okay.

So in other words, the state of New Hampshire for paternity

and child support enforcement purposes, it's my understanding,

receives block grants federally to aid it to do so.

So in other words, if somebody is going to challenge paternity,

that they should be offered a reasonable opportunity to do so.

So under the totality of the circumstances, as was already,

I think, was suggested to by Chief Justice Lynn,

that they acted reasonably timely.

He acted when he realized that the child was probably his,

got a blood test, and the party's divorced in July of 2015,

if I remember correctly, and I understand that Mrs. Santa

filed her petition to change the court order,

I think, in October of 2015.

So she acted with reasonable promptness.

Why didn't you file a motion to rescind paternity

or challenge the athlete?

Well, I can't argue...

I can't address that directly, except because I was not

representing her at the time.

But I can suggest that courts look to the substance

of a transaction rather than the form.

So in other words, and I think that's what

effectively happened here.

What's your pro say?

I don't recall, I don't believe so.

I believe she might have been at the time.

I don't recall.

So can I just ask, as a practical matter,

suppose that the result of the litigation was

that Mr. Thatcher remained the father

on the birth certificate and all that.

And your client had the rights as being married

to Mrs. Santa at the right time with the child

and all that, the move to Florida was appalled

and Mr. Santa and Mrs. Santa are living together

and they have primary custody of the child.

How is your client harmed by that?

Okay, I'm just trying to get that question.

How is she harmed?

I know, how is he harmed if he is not listed

on the birth certificate as the father?

But he has all the other things that he has now.

How is he harmed in a substantial way by that?

Okay, well, then I guess one would have to look at it

and say that birth records and listing it as a father

are necessary to conduct ordinary course of business

in many cases.

I'm just suggesting here that where proof of paternity

would be necessary, a birth certificate would show it.

So inheritance rights, for example.

One thing?

That would be sure.

You would have issues.

We go on in our brief a little beyond that

where we talk about what happens if you have dual paternity.

There may be issues of pre-termitted children.

There may be other things where these things are official

records and necessary proofs where that may become

important such as getting a passport just as a thought

if you had to prove who the paternity and the father was.

Well, with that, but I mean with those things,

I guess it's somewhat hard for me to understand

how it would matter if somebody, if there was a father

on the birth certificate that was in the case of Mr. Thatcher

and was sort of the legally recognized father,

how would that interfere with somebody

getting a passport or something like that?

Well, I'm just thinking if you might need a birth certificate

for a child, for example, I can't say I know this

for absolute certainty, but I would think that

if you were getting a passport for a child,

you might need some record of who's applying for the passport,

who's the father, who's the mother of the passport office,

might require it, for example.

Right, would require the legal parents to be supportive

of the application.

There's two different names, they're not going to get the passport.

Why isn't Mr. St. Pierre a party to this case?

I believe he intervened below and that's where he was heard.

You don't represent Mr. Sandhill, do you?

No, I do not.

The other things that we bring out here,

I think a lot of what we heard as we pointed out

in our brief requires legislative action

and changes to the statute.

And it's really kind of funny because right now

if I remember correctly, House Bill 583 is being

heard today across town and that has to do

with potential changes to RSA 461A.

So I think a lot of what Mr. Thatcher would like to see happen

would be basically social policy,

which would be, I think I respectfully point out,

the province of the legislature to be able to give

statutory guidance to courts to be able to help

to decide these issues.

Seems here to fore we've been averse to upending

and affidavit of paternity.

Sorry?

We've been averse to upending and affidavit of paternity

here to fore.

So why would we not follow that policy

until the legislature addresses the issue?

Well, a couple of reasons.

First, once again, is that rescission

of an affidavit of paternity, as the court did,

okay, I think Mr. Thatcher would be part

and parcel of equity jurisdiction.

I think it's pretty well settled law in the cases

that I've read that this court has addressed

that the courts do have broad equitable authority

to do what's right.

And I believe that is under RSA 490D and its subparts.

So if it has broad equity powers to be able to do

what's right and create the individual solutions

that are necessary to be able to say,

well, I'm going to give you standing as a putative father,

okay, because you have some sort of right

to be able to challenge it,

but I'm not going to give you the rights of a father,

even if you are the father,

seems to be a contradiction in terms.

So what I suggest is that that is something

that should be resolved by the legislature

if in fact it's a contradiction

between conflicting statutes.

But there are no conflicting statutes here.

Well, if you have RSA C5,

okay, and then when I say conflicting,

okay, conflicting decisions, okay,

or statutes, because if you have equity jurisdiction

under RSA 490D and then you have another statute

over here which says something else

but doesn't exclude anybody else,

then I think you probably have a conflict.

So the court I think here is doing what it thinks is right.

And there seems to be an adequate factual and legal basis

for how the court acted.

And so I'm respectfully suggesting

that the court's decision be affirmed.

Thank you, counsel.

Okay, submitted and the court will take a brief recess.
