And not to put any undue pressure on them, but you're about to see two of our finest appellate litigators.

Yeah.

I'm glad I'm here.

I assumed as much.

This is case 2018, 0647, State of New Hampshire versus McGell, Francisco Perez.

Good morning.

Is the court ready?

Oh, no.

Yes.

Would you pull the microphone toward you, though?

Oh, sure.

Thank you.

Thank you very much, counsel.

May it please the court.

I'm Donna Brown, and I represent Mr. Perez.

I wanted to start off by talking about two cases that are cited in the state's brief.

State versus Smalley, which is an Oregon case, and State versus Zuniga, which is a Colorado case.

And in those cases, they found that the odor of marijuana was relevant to the totality of the circumstances.

In both cases, there was evidence that the odor of marijuana was heavy, was strong, and consistent with a large amount of marijuana.

And the reason that's important, in both of those states, these decisions were post-decriminalization.

I almost want to say that Oregon was post-legalization.

Well, I mean, it's always illegal in certain amounts, but in smaller amounts, it was post-legalization.

And these cases, and in fact, all of the cases that are cited here are consistent with the defendant's position.

And the defendant's position is that post-either decriminalization or legalization, the odor of marijuana, is relevant, but not dispositive of whether or not the police either have the cause to search or probable cause or cause to extend a motor vehicle stop.

And do you read the trial court's order as finding that the order was dispositive?

That, I read it again last night.

Obviously, I think the court's order gives greatest weight to the odor of marijuana.

But the actual language, I think it was either on page 11 or 12 where the trial judge starts talking about marijuana odor, there is the language of the odor of marijuana in conjunction with the other factors.

But previous to that, the judge had given very little weight to the other factors and took the position that Mr. Perez took, which is these other factors have both innocent and criminal implications.

And so it's hard. It's certainly clear as the judge gave the greatest weight to the odor of marijuana.

But where we disagree is the judge seemed to interpret the cases that the odor of marijuana is sort of a carte blanche.

If you've got that, you're good. You can extend the search as long as you want. You can search the car.

The judge reads Livingston as odor of marijuana gives the police free reign.

And Livingston doesn't say that.

That's not exactly what happened here. So while the judge may have been expansive in her language, that's not really what this particular situation, how it unfolded.

Correct. So how it unfolded in this case was it was there's no dispute that the stop was proper, the stop was for motor vehicle fences.

There's no dispute on that.

And then what happens is the trooper comes to the passenger side of the car, smells an odor of marijuana.

He says that it's either fresh, but then he says he can't really remember.

So it's not a very descriptive odor as it is in a lot of these other cases.

And then he notices other things.

And that's kind of what we were going with. Justice Dunnevin's question is how much weight to give to those other things.

Do those other things like the cell phones and the rental car get extra weight because now there's the odor.

Time of day, all those things.

Right.

And that's a really good point that I wanted to get to because as I said, we agree that the odor of marijuana is still relevant and it just goes into the totality test.

Where we disagree with the judge is that in the state's brief is this equation, this equating odor of marijuana with presence of marijuana.

And one of the cases cited by the state, which is the ZULO, Z-U-L-L-O, which is from Vermont, which I think is very supportive of the defendant's position,

says no, that doesn't mean the odor of marijuana does not mean the presence of marijuana.

And in fact, we kind of know that from this case because there's no evidence that marijuana was found.

And that Law Review article that I cited says that could mean a lot of things.

But isn't it reasonable, for example, I spilled a bottle of Scotch in the back of my car.

I get stopped for a headlight out and there's an odor of Scotch.

Isn't it reasonable that the police officer might think I'd been drinking?

Absolutely.

And that's the defendant's position, too, that if he, like in the Livingston case where there's, like, especially if there's other things like

bloodshot eyes and maybe some impaired driving, but even if they smell a really strong odor of alcohol, we agree.

But if the officer comes up to your car and smells a really strong odor of Scotch and says, did you pay your taxes this year?

Then we're off topic.

Now this isn't as far off topic as that and I agree with that.

But if the officer sees those things and starts asking, ma'am, I smell a really strong odor of alcohol and where have you been?

Where have you been?

How much did you have to drink?

I notice maybe your eyes are bloodshot or they're not bloodshot or whatever.

So is the focus here on the questioning that happened after the stop was, let's say, expanded?

Exactly.

Or are we focused on the moment at which, and I have another question, the traffic stop concluded and that wasn't the end of the stop?

Well, I think both.

Because there are two different points in time.

And that's what we see.

And do we know, so here's my other question, when the rental car agreement and the license were returned in that time continuum?

We do know that the registration and license were not returned after the trooper gave a warning.

So at page 40 of the transcript, trooper says, I told him I'm only giving him a warning for the motor vehicle stuff.

And that resolved that.

And the trooper admits he didn't really focus on that at all anyway in his questioning.

So at that point he retained the license and the rental agreement?

It's somewhat vague, but the defense attorney asked at page 64 at that point after you told him that he was just going to get a warning, did you still have the license and registration?

And he said, I think so.

So the trooper was a little vague on that, but it sounded like he still had the license and registration at that point.

And so to go back to your question, there's two parts of this.

And it is complicated.

And one part is, when does he resolve the issue of what he stopped?

And I would argue that that's the point.

And I think I'm supported in that by both State v. Moral, which is cited in the state's brief.

Also the US v. Hernandez, which is the federal district court case, I cited in my brief.

To drive the point home, the traffic stop stopped?

Exactly.

Or at least he did whatever investigation he was going to do about that, which was not much.

The reason for the stop-stop.

But then the question, going back to yours, was like, well, then did some new thing pop up that now gives him reason to extend this.

Now we're in McKinnon v. Zander's land of how he can extend that.

And to go back to your question, if he had asked about the marijuana, just like asking about the spilled scotch, I don't think we would have a case here.

I think that if he had attended to that and asked about that.

Does he have to ask?

Or can he start observing?

Or can he ask sort of other questions first?

You know, keep it late, where are you going?

Does he have to ask that question, pointed question first?

You know, that goes back to the question I was rereading Moral, which didn't resolve that issue of how, how on mission does the officer have to be?

And I don't think we have to resolve that today because he wasn't, he was on a mission, which was a different mission than asking.

I would say he was quite on mission.

He was quite on mission, which was investigating drug trafficking.

And so he, but he didn't ask any questions about the odor of marijuana.

And again, that goes back to that argument I was making is odor of marijuana does not equal drug trafficking.

I mean, it might be some small Venn diagram of the little bit of overlap there, but they don't equate.

And that's the problem that if he had asked about it, just like I might give the example in my brief of that safety officer in Livingston,

who stops for, he was a commercial vehicle and he's doing a routine inspection and he smells the marijuana and he asks about the marijuana,

which he should, especially with the bloodshot eye.

Do we know how long the stop lasted?

That was not asked by trial counsel.

If you go through everything though, I mean, it's got to be a certain period of time because he's, he's going to the passenger side.

He's asking them briefly about where they're coming and going from.

Then he goes back and he's running a check for warrants and he's running a license check.

Then he comes back over to the driver's side, which I want to point out that you mentioned he still smelled marijuana.

When he was over there, he didn't say he didn't smell marijuana, but he didn't mention that.

So he goes back to the driver's side, gets the driver out, talked to the driver about where he's going from,

talks about his criminal record, has that conversation.

Then he goes back over to the passenger, asks her what, you know, where you've been going, where you're coming from.

And then after that, I think he goes back to the driver and then they have that conversation about consenting

and whether he would agree to the search.

So, I mean, that's got to take a certain amount of time.

Is there an issue with the consent, not to take you off track, but is there an issue?

Doesn't the consent sort of moot what happened ahead of time?

Well, it doesn't under State v. Height.

I was going to say State v. Hex, but it was State v. Height.

Do we have to evaluate that? Do we have to evaluate the consent to search separately?

Well, under State v. Height, what we're saying is it's coming long after this search was impermissibly extended.

And so where the officer has gone off track of what, you know, either the thing that he stopped the car for

or the new thing that he, you know, has suspicion about.

And one more question in this hypothetical world.

So the officer says, hey, I smell marijuana, what gives?

And the occupants say, we don't smell anything.

Right.

So now what?

Does he still have reasonable suspicion?

Well, you know, in reality, would this particular trooper have believed that?

Probably not.

But we don't know that.

And that's not how we have to analyze this.

That he still has that obligation to ask about it, just like the officer in Livingston asked about it.

He's questioning in the response there, too, really bear on sort of the objective factors that we look at.

It does, because in some of the cases cited in the State's brief from other jurisdictions, the Zulu case,

I will give an example.

In the Commonwealth v. Cruz case, in both of those cases, when asked those questions, the driver said,

I think in the Cruz case, he said it was the day before that he had smoked it.

And then in the Zulu case, I think the driver said it two or three days earlier.

Now, these drivers could say, in a way, that's very credible and believable.

Like, oh, here's a picture of me, and it's painted on my photo that I was at this party,

and here's a picture of me smoking bomb with my friends.

Then he could give a credible, believable reason, and the trooper could say, I believe you.

Well, let me just ask you this before your time runs out.

There's much in the briefing about the fact that possession of small amounts of marijuana

has been decriminalized, and that doesn't seem to be the way you're arguing the case now,

that that ought to make a difference in our analysis, and that comes up in Zulu and in Cruz,

but it seems like everybody agrees here that the smell of marijuana is a relevant,

if not dispositive factor, and where does decriminalization fit in that?

And it does, because instead of being an all or nothing thing like, okay,

before it was a carte blanche, you get to search, and now it's completely irrelevant.

We're not arguing that.

But where it comes in is it's just a factor in the totality of the cases,

so that the trooper has to factor that in.

And here he is on 95 North, a couple of minutes from a state that has legalized marijuana usage,

and so he's got to think about it.

So the analysis would be different if the defendant were pulled over and conquered?

Well, Laconia, some place that's an hour from the border,

but it doesn't mean either one of those things are dispositive,

but it's something that he has to take into consideration,

and that it's just as possible that this couple could have stopped

at a social gathering in Massachusetts, and maybe the woman smoked some marijuana,

and she had it smelling, it was on her person.

They got in the car and drove to New Hampshire going wherever they were going.

Nothing illegal about that.

And it's just the same as all those factors in the Hernandez case.

They have innocent and non-innocent.

So what we're saying is it still can be factored in,

but the officer now has to account for that.

He didn't know how to account for, there may be a legal explanation,

and a non-legal explanation.

And going back to Justice's question, if he'd asked about that,

he may have got an answer he didn't like or he didn't believe,

but at least he would have been on mission like the officer in the Livingston case

where he was asking about the odor as opposed to things arguably not about the odor.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you.

Mr. Locke.

Good morning, and may it please the court.

My name is Sean Locke, and I represent the State of New Hampshire,

which asks that this court affirm the defendant's convictions

because the trial court correctly concluded that Trooper Artega had a reasonable and articulable suspicion

that the defendant was transporting drugs at the time the trooper expanded the scope of the stop

to inquire about drugs in the car.

Do you acknowledge the point at which it was expanded?

So in what sense do you mean?

When does the state acknowledge that it was expanded?

At what point?

So the stop was certainly expanded probably at the point that he asked the individual out of the car.

If not, certainly when he starts inquiring about drugs as well,

that's the stop expands there.

I would agree with Justice Hans Marconi that there are a couple of points,

maybe where the stop kind of expands a little bit and then expands a little bit more

as he goes through this process and continues the investigation.

So is it your argument that the odor of marijuana is dispositive?

I think the case law from other jurisdictions certainly supports that.

Certainly not Massachusetts, though.

Massachusetts does not, although the majority was heavily criticized by the dissent

in that case for misapplying the standards, but it's also since Cruz,

every jurisdiction, I mean these other cases from other jurisdictions cite Cruz

and say we disagree with that.

How many judges were on the dissent?

I cannot recall off the top of my head.

I think it may have just been one, but since Cruz,

I think all the cases I have cited in my brief are cases post-Cruz

and every single one has said that the odor of marijuana is,

at the very least, a factor.

Don't they say it's a factor? It's not dispositive.

Well, I would point to the Colorado, Illinois in the case from the Virgin Islands,

the only thing that was present was the odor of marijuana.

There weren't the other factors that were present in this case.

So in those cases, that was the only thing the court was considering,

was the officer detected an odor of marijuana

and then expanded the scope of the stop, and in the Colorado case specifically,

that was a standard under probable cause.

Here we're talking about a lower standard of reasonable and articulable suspicion.

Certainly the odor of marijuana coming from a car, whether fresh or burnt,

gives the officer reasonable suspicion that there may be drugs in the car,

specifically marijuana.

Is it a different suspicion if it's fresh or burnt?

Is that something the officer has to mean?

Here he wasn't clear. Does it matter?

I think certainly it may, depending on what the investigation is,

the presence of burnt marijuana would certainly maybe

lead to maybe more of a look at driving while impaired or something of that nature.

But I think it could also be an indication that there's still fresh marijuana in the car as well

if burnt marijuana is present.

Certainly if the smell is fresh marijuana,

then that's an indication that fresh marijuana is in the car.

To defense counsel's point about, you know, they may have come from a state,

you know, Massachusetts, where marijuana is legal.

I think that emphasizes the significance of still being on,

an officer being on guard for the detection of marijuana,

because just as much as they could have consumed it in Massachusetts

and been driving the odor was still on their person,

they could have bought marijuana in Massachusetts and brought it into New Hampshire,

brought it to be used at some event or wherever they were going

in New Hampshire at the time.

So it's certainly, and that is not a legal act in New Hampshire.

I mean, it may be, depending on the quantity, decriminalized,

but it's not a lawful act.

And it doesn't end the officer's inquiry in that point.

That's the same thing that these other jurisdictions have recognized,

is that decriminalization is not synonymous with legalization.

It does not mean you were allowed to have marijuana on your person.

But it's not evidence of criminal conduct.

It's evidence of infractionary conduct perhaps.

Depending on the quantity.

But there still may be other, I mean, there could have been,

but where the odor is enough that the officer detects it,

he could have believed that there was more, had reasonable suspicion

that there was more than, I believe the amount is three-quarters of an ounce

present in the car to create enough of an odor

that he would detect it outside the car.

So that certainly...

Aren't you leading to a speculative ground

if you are trying to extrapolate the degree or type of odor

into an amount?

I would, and I'm not saying this is the case,

but again, we're talking about reasonable, articulable suspicion,

the lowest standards in criminal law.

I was referring to the state's burden of proof at the suppression hearing.

So can you maybe elaborate just a little unclear?

Yeah, I wonder if that isn't nothing but speculative evidence.

Everyone seems to agree it's a factor,

but it strikes me that it's a speculative factor

that someone might have more than three-quarters of an ounce of marijuana

just because there's an odor.

And that's, and correct, and no one should say, you know,

I don't think the party's really speculated about this at trial,

but even with decriminalization,

it doesn't mean the person, it's still contraband.

So the officer would have the authority to question the individual

about the presence of marijuana,

and certainly he could have been more specific in the question

if he was detecting the odor of marijuana,

but marijuana is still a drug at the end of the day,

asking about drugs in the car

falls within the scope of searching,

asking about the odor of marijuana.

And as he testifies, he testifies at the hearing and explains,

if, you know, I've had, you know, individuals,

or if this was before this incident or after this,

where they lied about the presence of marijuana

even though I could smell it,

and so certainly if I had asked and said,

you know, is there marijuana in the car,

and they said no, the odor here

would have suggested to me that they're probably not telling the truth.

Same thing if they, with Justice Hans-Marconi's example,

there's a heavy odor of Scotch coming from the car.

You know, it may be very true that a bottle was spilled,

but I think that's going to dispel an officer's reasonable

and articulable suspicion

that there may have been driving or consumption of alcohol

while the person was in the car.

And if there is less than three-quarters of an ounce of marijuana,

it can still be forfeited, confiscated.

It's supposed to be forfeited.

And of violation or a citation issued.

Correct.

And it's supposed to be forfeited in those contexts.

And it wouldn't, certainly if the officer had probable cause,

it wouldn't stop the officer from getting a search warrant

because a search warrant for the marijuana

allows for the search and seizure of contraband.

It's not just evidence of criminal conduct.

And it makes no difference to the fact that there was no marijuana

in this car or on either one of these occupants.

No.

And in that, I mean, and there may be, you know,

simpler where there may be an explanation,

there may be an explanation where, you know,

that there had been marijuana in the car,

they had been smoking it earlier,

but it still gave the issue is

whether or not the officer had reasonable and articulable suspicion

to expand the scope of the stop at that point.

And certainly the presence of the odor gave him that suspicion

that there were drugs in the car,

which expands to this point that the officer asks the,

if it's the driver, the passenger first,

but I think it's the driver,

whether or not there were drugs present in the car

and to inquire about where they were going

and getting that he...

This is after he gets them out of the car though, right?

This is after he gets them out of the car, yes.

And he still has his license and rental agreement on?

As defense counsel pointed out,

it's still unclear he does.

I think at the time he asked them out of the car,

he was going to return it and ask them

if he would step out of the car at this point.

And the defendant agrees.

What's interesting in that interaction he has with the defendant

while they're outside the car is that

before any discussion of searching the car comes up at all,

the defendant volunteers to allow the officer to search his car.

And how is that suspicious?

I think the way the officer interpreted it

is that it's almost like deflection.

It's at a point of,

look, I'm completely compliant with you

and I don't have anything to hide,

so go ahead and search the car.

The same trooper that testified

that having your hands at a 10 o'clock and 2 o'clock

on the steering wheel was also suspicious.

That's not in the context of this case.

Right, different case, but same officer.

It is, but it's not this case

and that's not what he testified to in this case

and so it's not relevant to this case.

Understood.

What is it about having multiple cell phones in a car

that gives rise to reasonable, articulable suspicion?

As he explained during the hearing

that it's common in drug trafficking

for drug traffickers to have what he called a burner phone.

So it's an extra phone that they use to communicate with the phone.

Were these burner phones?

There's no evidence in terms of there was nothing present

in the record terms of what the phones were

or even any information about who they ultimately belong to.

But we do know the trooper had multiple cell phones.

He did.

And the point here isn't that

when you're looking at reasonable, articulable suspicion

or looking at the McKinnon and Andrews standard,

it's not that it's not knockout.

It's not that there's an innocent explanation

for every piece of conduct.

So we have an innocent explanation here, here, here, and here.

Therefore, you can't consider those factors,

which is kind of what the trial court did here.

But if and when this officer stops me

and my wife traveling on Route 95,

they're going to find multiple cell phones

in the front seat.

And they may.

And like I said, there can be

innocent explanations at the time,

but you look at the totality of the circumstances.

You look at everything added together.

The fact of the matter is they had multiple cell phones.

They were driving a rental car.

There was extreme hesitancy on the part of the female passenger

to get the rental agreement from the glove box.

I mean, the officer had to ask,

sorry, the officer asked the defendant to produce it.

The defendant told the female passenger to get to open the glove box

to get it out and give it to the officer.

She hesitated and waited before the driver told her a second time

to open the glove box at which point she opened the glove box

and gave him the rental agreement.

Whose name was on the rental agreement?

I do not recall the record reflects that.

And it was late at night, right?

I don't think it does.

Yeah, I don't think it does.

And it was late at night.

We were talking about 10.40 at night.

Trooper testified that the defendant

was more nervous than normal.

Yes, I think his exact words were he was shaking so much

that he actually had to focus to take his driver's license from him.

So meaning I assume more normal than other people.

Right.

More nervous than other people.

Right.

More nervous than this individual was normally.

But being nervous is not suspicious.

Everybody's nervous when they're pulled over by a trooper?

It can.

Certainly some people can be.

But to be so nervous to the point where you're shaking

as you're handing your driver's license to the extent

that the officer has to kind of specifically focus

to take the license from you, certainly extraordinary,

an extraordinary degree of nervousness

on the part of an individual who, you know,

obviously was not engaged in this in conduct,

but had they simply been engaged in this in conduct,

would be, certainly would raise, kind of,

heighten my kind of raise in red flag.

And as the officer assesses the reasonableness

or the suspiciousness of that behavior,

does race come into the picture or not?

It certainly doesn't in any of the evidence presented

to the trial court.

And so there was no questioning or any discussion

of the driver's race or the passenger's race at the time.

At least not that I can recall.

The ultimate consent to search, not the first blurt it out,

but the ultimate consent.

Again, doesn't that sort of obviate some of these questions?

Do we have to analyze that consent in the context

of the point in time when the stop was expanded?

Well, the officer unlawfully expanded the scope of the stop.

It doesn't matter if the defendant consented to the search

subsequently, correct?

Right, and I would be inclined to agree with that.

I believe that's essentially what moral was,

was the scope expanded and the person ultimately consented

and that consent was kind of obviated

by the fact that the scope should not have been expanded.

So as long as the scope has been properly expanded

at the different intervals, the consent to search remains

valid.

If there was a point where this court were to conclude

that the officer exceeded the scope of whatever

he had reasonable suspicion to a question about at the time,

then the ultimate consent would likely be invalid.

And the state's position is that the questioning

by the officer was maybe not as pointed as the defendant

might have liked at this point in time,

but was within the realm of the related questioning?

So is there any obligation for the officer to pursue

a line of questioning to either dispel or confirm his suspicions?

Well, he does.

He asks them if there are drugs in the car.

Well, this is after he gets out of the car.

We don't even know how long the stop lasted,

but when he got to that point, my point is,

if he smells marijuana, does he get to ask about tax returns?

Does he get to ask about their travels in the last month?

Does he get to ask about their citizenship?

Well, he doesn't ask any of those things.

He asks them about where they were coming from

and where they were going and how they knew each other.

And I think part of that is another piece of the consideration here

is that he didn't even know there was a passenger in the car

until he stops them because the female's seat had been so far

reclined that she wasn't visible as they drove by.

But the issue here, these are fairly innocuous questions,

and certainly if his suspicion is that they may have drugs

and they may be traveling with drugs in the car,

understanding where they're coming from and where they're going

are questions that could dispel that.

And certainly if they had told consistent stories

and both said they were coming from the same place,

they had known each other even for the same amount of time.

The defendant said he had known the female passenger for about a year

and she said she had met him a few weeks ago.

And the male passenger said they were coming from Providence

and the female passenger said Manchester.

I mean, there's dramatic inconsistencies

in what they had told the officers in terms of what they were doing

and part of, especially where there wasn't a second officer present,

part of that I think asking the individual,

the driver out of the car is to separate them

so she doesn't hear the answers he's giving him

as he's trying to dispel his suspicion

so she can't parrot them back when he asks her the same questions.

At what point was he trying to dispel his suspicion?

Didn't he testify that he was suspicious

as soon as he saw the car on the highway?

He certainly said that he was suspicious of the car

at the time he saw it on the highway.

And that's why he chose to follow them

and that's why they performed the...

And he saw the traffic violations and performed some traffic stop.

But at the point where we're expanding and starting an investigation

or looking to determine whether or not there are drugs present in the car,

that comes from specific factors that were present in the car itself

and in his interactions with the defendant and the passenger

that supports the expansion of that stop.

So it's not simply...

While there's a line from seeing them when they pass them on the highway,

every step as we move along through this process is justified

and supported by a reasonable articulable suspicion

as he expands the stop going forward.

So how should the decriminalization of possession

of small amounts of marijuana impact our analysis of this?

So I don't think it has a significant impact on the analysis of this

in part for two reasons.

First, decriminalization, as I've said in all the courts that have considered this,

is not legalization.

And decriminalization still, marijuana remains contraband

even in a decriminalized quantity.

And the statute itself, the law itself,

requires the seizure or forfeiture of decriminalized quantities

of marijuana for destruction ultimately.

There might be a period of litigation in between

but it ultimately leads to the destruction of the marijuana.

It doesn't mean I just give you a ticket and you go on your merry way

with your marijuana in hand.

Unless you have a medical card.

Unless you have a medical card, at which point you could present that.

And then I think the second piece is the decriminalization doesn't...

Again, it's not legalization.

It doesn't allow certain quantities of marijuana to remain illegal.

The sale of marijuana remains illegal in New Hampshire.

And certainly consuming marijuana and driving remains illegal in New Hampshire.

So there are bases at this point that courts and other jurisdictions

have recognized that justify expanding the scope.

Thank you, council.

You had two... You reserved two.

I did reserve two minutes. Thank you.

I want to address a couple of issues.

One is the state mentions the cell phones and the rental agreements

in combination with the odor of marijuana to expand the scope.

I would put those in the same category.

Did he ask about the rental agreement?

Did he ask about why do you have two cell phones?

You know, it's just all these things that the officer comes to the hearing,

the suppression hearing and talks about where the basis for the expansion,

he doesn't ask about any of them.

And that is the problem with this.

And this is why this case is different from all these other cases.

I do want to speak briefly about the state said that

the only thing in the Colorado and the Virgin Island cases was the odor of marijuana.

In the Colorado case, it was the heavy odor of raw marijuana.

When you read that case, you see that there are...

These troopers are looking at basically black market marijuana

because it's certain amounts are legal in Colorado.

And that's what that stop is about in Colorado.

So yes, technically it's an only odor of marijuana case,

but it's a very heavy odor of marijuana.

The case from the Virgin Islands is very unique and different.

I've never been to the Virgin Islands,

but the facts of this case are basically a car is driving by

and a police officer says,

I smell marijuana coming out of that car. Stop it.

I mean, those are the facts of the case.

And we don't dispute that the odor of marijuana,

if that were to happen somewhere in New Hampshire,

certainly wouldn't happen in the winter probably,

but maybe in the summer,

but if that were to happen,

we would agree that the officer could stop that car

and inquire, is the person impaired.

And in fact, that's what they said in that...

I think it's Hanagita,

but in the Virgin Island case, they said

he could investigate for DWI,

which is what I've said earlier in our Livingston case says,

the state also argued that the odor of marijuana,

even though it may be legalized in Massachusetts

and may be decriminalized in New Hampshire,

would give the officer grounds to ask about marijuana

or ask about drugs.

The officer didn't do that in this case,

or when he asked about the drugs,

he did it post when the stop had terminated

or the reason for the traffic violation had terminated.

So then that puts us back into state v. height

and the consent is coming post illegal expansion.

Thank you.

Thank you, counsel.

Case submitted.

Stand in recess.
