This is case 2018-0490 Mark Domenico versus Centennial Estates Cooperative, Inc.

Good morning, Your Honours.

Good morning.

Robert Shepherd representing the Appellant Defendant Centennial Estates Cooperative.

I do want to spend a minute just to explain what the Cooperative is.

Centennial Estates is a consumer cooperative that was formed by the tenets of the former

Weber Mobile Home Park in Derry, and they purchased the park.

There are presently, I believe, 57 members of 57 lots within the community.

Each member is an owner of this cooperative.

Centennial Estates is called Centennial Estates because it was the 100th resident-owned community

in the state of New Hampshire.

There are now more than 125 resident-owned communities in the state of New Hampshire.

And these are all mobile home parks or manufactured housing communities.

The park that was purchased is described on a plan, a 1966 plan, recorded at Plan 900

in the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds.

The case that's before you was a claim by Mr. Domenico, who is a member of the cooperative,

that the cooperative interfered with his quiet enjoyment of his lot.

It's not a case where Mr. Domenico claims that the cooperative interfered

with his quiet enjoyment of his home.

Mr. Domenico purchased a 1986 mobile home unit in 2012 with $3,600.

It is located on lot 26, Wayne Drive, within the cooperative.

Mr. Domenico claimed that the cooperative interfered with his quiet enjoyment to the use of the entire lot

when it started to renovate the lot next door to it, the adjacent lot to it.

Did Mr. Domenico allege a landlord-tenant relationship with the cooperative?

He did not necessarily allege that.

It was not a 540A case brought pursuant to the statute 540A,

which is a typical interference case brought by a tenant against the landlord.

So he did not specifically allege that.

What he alleged was that he had a leasehold right to the entirety of his lot

and that the landlord, who is the cooperative, which he was part of,

came in and entered on to his lot without his permission

and started to renovate the lot or to improve the lot next door to it

so it could accommodate a new mobile home.

Are the cooperatives' rights spelled out in the lease, rights of access?

So it's an interesting question and that's what the case is about.

Is there a lease here or not?

The court found that there was a lease

by looking at a combination of documents,

one being the member occupancy agreement,

another being the rules of the community,

and the other being the bylaws of the community.

So the member occupancy agreement is the closest document to a lease that we have.

And the member occupancy agreement, which you have,

does specify that its 26-wayne drive is the lot.

It does specify the term, which is perpetual.

And the reason why it's perpetual is because the whole intent here

is that this property will remain in perpetuity

as a manufactured housing community owned by the cooperative.

Does the agreement define lot?

The agreement does not define the lot.

None of the documents define the lot.

Statutes don't define the lot.

That's the whole basic problem that we have in this case.

So do you find an ambiguous term then?

The lot is definitely an ambiguous term.

But when you take it in the context of mobile homes in general,

we don't find it to be ambiguous.

The purpose of the occupancy agreement,

the purpose of any lease agreement in a manufactured housing community

is to allow somebody to place their mobile home,

manufactured housing unit on the lot,

and to live in an unfettered condition in that home,

to have access to that home,

and to be able to have the use of the area surrounding it.

It doesn't necessarily define the entire lot.

They can park their car there.

They can park their car there?

They can build a shed and store stuff there.

They can.

They can put up a volleyball net?

If the rules permit it, yes.

Can they put up a fence?

Can they put up a fence?

Do not allow a perimeter fence.

They allow a decorative fence to be put up

with the permission from the board of directors.

It states it specifically in the community rules.

But the issue here, what the court found

is that Mr. Domenico had a lease hold right

to the entirety of lot 30 on plan 900.

There's many problems with that finding from the court.

Number one, plan 900 is a 1966 plan

that showed 47 lots.

There are currently 58 lots in this community.

There's no plan that shows the 58 lots.

The town of Derry doesn't acknowledge

that this plan is controlling.

And the town of Derry had no issue

with the cooperative developing the lot

next to Mr. Domenico's lot.

So that's problem number one, relying on plan 900

where there was no expert witness,

no surveyor to say that plan 900 is accurate

or even depicts Mr. Domenico's lot was an error by the court.

Well, Mr. Domenico doesn't claim

that nobody has a right to develop the lot next door.

He's just complaining about what's been done to his lot.

He complains that's right.

He complains that you can develop the lot next door

but you have to have my permission to come on to my lot

to do anything that affects the lot next door

or affects my lot.

Did the cooperative put any evidence in indicating

why it had to take the vegetation down,

remove the trees?

Was there any purpose to that work?

I believe it did.

I think the evidence was that the vegetation

which was basically brush had to be taken down

was to bring in fill so that a septic system

could be installed on the adjacent lot.

Also, there needed to be a utility trench.

Prior to this utility trench being put in,

the unit that was there and taken away

from this adjacent lot, the electrical line

just ran on the ground, on top of the ground.

So now they were required by the town of Derry

to put a utility trench in.

So is your position that the cooperative,

if it decided to do so, could split Mr. Domenico's lot

in half and put another mobile home

on the other half of his lot?

If they could get the permission from the town of Derry

which would probably be unlikely,

but yes, it's our position that the cooperative

can define the boundaries of the lot.

The situation though also that I want to point out

to the court, if there are leases out there,

for instance, farmers will lease a field

so that they can hay the field

or people will lease a tract of land to wood it.

In that situation, there are specific rights

that are granted to the land.

In this situation, the court found that

Mr. Domenico had a right to privacy,

that he had a right to have a buffer on his property.

The court found that he had a right

to what the court described as a bucolic view.

The court found that he had a right

to this vegetative buffer,

but there's nothing that states that

in any of the documents anywhere.

There's no lease agreement that says

you're leasing lot 30,

and by the way, you have a right to a view.

But if you lease my house

and then I come in and say,

well, you're leasing my house,

but I'm going to park my car in the driveway

and I'm going to take down these two trees

in the front yard during the term of your lease.

What stops me from doing that?

So I think in that situation,

if somebody parked the car in your driveway

and it interfered with the use of the property

by the tenant, that would be a violation.

The tenant could go 540A to the district court

and get an order.

So here, the construction truck

staging on the plaintiff's property.

Isn't that the same thing?

It's not because the allowed parking for Mr. Domenico

was down low where his house was.

Up above, he was not allowed to park there.

He parked there without the permission

of the cooperative

and he had ample parking down below.

But the issue that I'd like to make,

the analogy of the point,

if you rent a single family house,

think of it that way on a lot,

on an individual lot.

Say it's a ranch-style house,

so it's akin to a mobile home.

Typically, the lease is just going to say

what the rent is, what the term is,

that you have the use of the house and that's it.

If the landlord comes in who owns the property

and starts taking down trees

because the landlord wants to,

that's not a violation of the lease.

Just like this is not a violation of any lease agreement.

The landlord can do that,

provided that the action of the landlord

does not interfere with the quiet enjoyment of the home.

And it's important to point out in this case

there was never an allegation by Mr. Domenico

that any of the work done by the cooperative

interfered with his quiet enjoyment of his home.

He always had access to the home.

The utilities to his home were never cut off.

He had septic, he had water.

So there was never any allegation of that.

The allegation was that he had a view out of his bedroom

of bushes and trees that was removed.

And then, because that was removed,

there was a dirt pile that was put in

to put in a septic system.

That's his allegation.

And there's no law to support the court's finding

that he had a right to such a view.

Can you address the trespass aspect of the claim,

either trespassing on the lot and or the water trespass?

Yes, I can.

As far as the water goes,

that really is a non-issue before the court

because there never was a finding

that there was any problem with water.

The cooperative did put a berm up as noted by the court order

and there's been no complaint since then.

If there was a continuing water problem,

it absolutely is the cooperative's responsibility

to take care of it.

The cooperative had an annual meeting,

which Mr. Domenico as a member could attend,

but he did not attend

because he had an illness or an illness in the family.

And at the cooperative annual meeting,

they talked about developing lot 27 right next to him.

So that would have been noticed.

I did concede, I believe in my brief,

or at least before the trial court,

that the cooperative could have handled this better.

There could have been better communication,

letting him know that, you know,

we're going to be coming on your lot,

we're going to be doing this work.

They didn't do that.

And that is a situation where the cooperative

could have handled it better.

So what's the basis for Attorney Shulman finding

that your client had no right under the lease

to deforest and regrade your Mr. Domenico's lot?

There's no basis.

There's absolutely no basis.

The rules of the community say that the cooperative

can for infrastructure purposes

come on to somebody's lot and do work.

There is absolutely no basis for Judge Shulman to say that.

Why could they have staged, I mean,

they can come on to do the work.

Why can't they park the construction vehicles

somewhere else?

Well, the testimony...

Or that part of doing the work?

The testimony was that particular area of the lot.

And again, we don't acknowledge that that lot

is owned by Mr. Domenico.

It's not.

It's owned by everybody, including him,

the whole cooperative.

But that particular area had been used as a staging area

for other work within the community as well.

And is there any allegation that the construction

took an overly long period of time

and disturbed Mr. Domenico?

No.

And in fact, the allegation is that most of the construction

occurred when he was away.

He was away tending to an ill father at the time.

So there was no such allegation.

Does Mr. Domenico have any rights superior

to other residents of the mobile home park

to the cartilage around his mobile home?

Or is it just the absolute footprint of the mobile home?

It's not.

It certainly...

The rules of the community say that other members

should not be on other people's lots,

which is undefined, without permission.

And in fact, he has sort of responsibility for upkeep

and is liable for damages or injuries

that occur on his lot.

And that's according to the rules.

But the issue that the trial court did is they expanded it.

The trial court said, kept talking about the entirety of the lot

and nowhere do you find that phrase

entirety of the lot in the rules.

So you get all of the responsibilities,

the liability, the upkeep,

but then none of the advantages

because everybody else can just come into the property

or the homeowners association can come in

and just start bulldozing?

Everybody else can't just come into the property

because the rules prohibit that without his permission.

But the home, not the homeowners association,

the cooperative through the board of directors

should have provided notice for him

before they came on to the property.

They did not.

But yes, they can come on the property.

If there's a tree that needs to be taken down,

they can come on to the property without permission.

He doesn't own the property.

He owns the house.

So they can come in and pave everything around his mobile home?

Theoretically, they could.

I don't know that the town of Derry would give them a permit

to do that.

But the issue at hand, though, Judge,

is the people who are neighbors,

the cooperative, can't enter his house.

His house is the real estate.

The law defines...

The interesting thing for me is the liability.

If kids were playing on this construction equipment

and got hurt,

would we be looking at a fight

between the cooperatives insurer

and this gentleman's insurer?

I don't think so.

I think it would have been the cooperatives insurer

and the contractors insurer.

Is the cooperative bound by good faith and fair dealing

with its members?

Yes, it is.

So have the trial court found a violation of that tenant?

And wouldn't that be a basis for damage?

It could, but the court did not.

The court did not find any bad faith.

Bad faith wasn't alleged in this case.

There was no bad faith allegation in this case at all.

And in fact, that goes to the attorney's fees claim.

We made a claim for attorney's fees because the rules,

the other documents that the court cited,

the agency agreement, the bylaws,

say that the cooperative gets reimbursed

as attorney's fees.

That's not here on appeal, though, is it?

Yes, it is.

Yes.

That's the final issue that was brought by the appellee.

And just briefly,

so the court ruled nobody gets attorney's fees.

The cooperative doesn't get it.

The court wasn't convinced that these bylaws and rules

allow the cooperative to get attorney's fees in this case.

And then the plaintiff, Mr. Domenico,

brought a claim claiming that he did not have to bring...

bring this action for such an easy claim

and wanted attorney's fees.

Later, in his brief,

he's now expanded that to an attorney's fees claim

under the Consumer Protection Statute

by way of 540A,

which was not pled in the court,

clearly indicated that it was not pled.

So the point of the matter is the issue at hand

is what is a lease?

And in this situation,

there is no lease that grants,

Mr. Domenico, any extra rights.

Doesn't grant him a right to a view.

Doesn't grant him a right to a vegetative buffer.

And yes, the cooperative can come in and take that view,

whatever the view is, away.

It's interesting to note in the motion to reconsider

the decision made by the court,

the court kind of backed off its finding,

where in its finding in the original decision,

the court said that he had a bucolic view.

And then the court backs off it to say that

at the same time,

plaintiff is one of 57 lots

in a densely populated manufactured housing park.

It is not an arboretum

and it would be inequitable to force the cooperative association

to plant fully grown hodwood trees

and otherwise unreasonable expense

in restoring the status quo ante.

That gets to the whole other issue of remediation.

So the court ordered the cooperative

to remediate this lot

to the tune of $10,000.

The court has no authority to order that.

You're ordering a property owner

to remediate their own property.

Your light's on.

Thank you, Judge.

Thank you.

Good morning and may it please the court.

My name is David Stomatis, a partner on Michael's and McKay,

and I'm here on behalf of Mark Domenico.

And I'm happy to take questions at any time.

Where were the trees?

The trees were on the property,

were in between the property located at 26 Wayne Drive

and the property located at 27 Wayne Drive.

Who owns the property where the trees were?

It was on Mr.

Domenico's lot.

We would claim that it was on Mr. Domenico's lot.

And that gets to the point that Attorney Shepard

has brought up this morning that

this is a question of lease interpretation.

That the court has found that,

the trial court has found that

the lease provided by the cooperative

was such that it was the rules,

the member occupancy agreement,

and the bylaws.

And the key section of this lease

is Article 1 of the member occupancy agreement,

which notes that the premises is 26 Wayne Drive.

And it defines it as a lot.

But lot is then not further defined.

Lot 30 is also located in Mr. Domenico's

warranty deed for his

manufactured housing unit.

Specifically references the home located at Lot 30.

But it also references the deed indicates that

the association or the cooperative rather

owns the property around it, correct?

Absolutely.

Mr. Domenico has not contested that

the cooperative owns that land

once he vacates his lease.

It's a question of tenancy.

He owns it temporarily

through the bounds of Lot 30.

That the boundaries of Lot 30

haven't changed in any subsequent deed

or any GIS map that was provided at trial.

That on every map that was presented

to the trial court,

what is Lot 30 or 26 Wayne Drive

is of the exact same boundaries.

And that those boundaries were marked

and that those boundaries were taped.

Again, Mr. Domenico testified at trial

that they were taken down by the cooperative

when the work was being done,

that they were present when he bought the property.

Those included stone walls,

as well as a metal marker on one of the edges.

Is there a property tax bill for Lot 30 or Lot 26?

I believe that there is

and I believe that the cooperative pays that

and then expounds it to each owner

and 158th percentage

or 157th percentage.

As we discussed at least itself

is giving it to all rights

to the mobile home owner

to the extent that Mr. Domenico

is required to mow the lawn,

keep the lot tidy,

give any property that's put on the property

like a shed because EBO

has to be affirmed with the cooperative first.

He can't just put it up.

He has to confirm that that's on your lot.

So what extent is that lot?

How would the cooperative otherwise determine

what his lot is if he has to first go and say,

it's on my lot?

Can you dispute that the work that was conducted

was necessary to develop the adjacent lot?

The work that we dispute

to the extent that it was done.

There's no question that the cooperative

has the absolute right to do necessary work

to improve its lots.

We're not contesting that.

What we're contesting is

and what the trial court pointed out

is the extent that the work was done.

They dug an electrical trench

and put in a new septic system.

I believe that was the extent of the two...

Was there any other access point

to the adjacent lot?

Of course there was.

Yes, there's a road that goes right along

the other side of it.

The 27 Wayne Drive is not landlocked

surrounded by other properties.

It comes right off of the road itself.

So was there, I mean, in terms of

the lay of the land,

was there other convenient or possible access?

Does it somehow cut off from the road

or could they have access from the road?

They could have access, Your Honor.

And there's no...

The issue that was before the court

was whether or not that work that was done

and it wasn't clarified at trial

that the work that the cooperative had done

was as necessary as it went.

In fact, the trial court pointed out

why couldn't they have put in a retaining wall

instead of putting in 12 feet of dirt

or I believe it's 6 feet of dirt,

a massive amount and clear cut

the entire back part of this land,

which it wasn't just brush.

It was full grown trees as well as bushes,

as well as any of the other seedlings

or other properties or other trees

that are located there.

And to come to the point that

the cooperative encroached

on that lot in bad faith,

and that's what the trial court had found,

is that there is a covenant quiet enjoyment

and that the lease provides

the covenant of good faith and fair dealing.

Is that in the lease itself?

No, it's not.

But that it's naturally a part of

what these two individuals were dealing with

to individual parties were dealing with

and entering their lease.

Did your client raise the quiet enjoyment issue

in those terms in his complaint?

He raised it...

The way the complaint started was

as a request for...

It was a petition for declaratory

and injunctive relief.

Did not cite particularly to any statute.

We did request a quiet enjoyment

which was clarified over time,

but we didn't cite to the statute itself.

You can see that.

And there was a trespass claim, correct?

Am I correct?

Well, the way we constructed that claim

in terms of trespasses is that

it's a trespass on his leasehold,

that you're providing him something

and they own the property

and perpetuity, yes.

But he has to have, and according to his lease,

this lot and when the cooperative does work,

it comes on to trespass upon that property

when it's not necessary work

or it goes beyond the extent that's in good faith.

How can somebody trespass

when you're entering your own property?

The reason that it's trespass here

is that was the basis from which

that we were trying to provide a court

to provide damages beyond equitable relief

because the court can within its equitable relief

under Matolo through injunctive relief

issue any equitable relief at once.

Mr. Duminico certainly does not own that property

if he were to end his lease,

that it's owned by the cooperative.

We agree 100%, but the work that they did

is damaging to the nature of his leasehold.

This court has always recognized

that a tenant has a right to the possession

of the land on a temporary basis

as well as the subject to use of the things on the property

and the things that were on the property were trees,

brushes, bushes, brush that was located behind

and between these two properties

and that provided him privacy.

So his right to a bucolic view

is what was trespassed upon,

that temporary right that was provided to him.

Is a view actually something that can

or deprivation of a view be considered

a violation of the quiet enjoyment?

Does that fit?

Don't you have to have sort of an interference

with a use versus just a view?

Under many cases in this court,

Adams echo Crowley, it requires that the tenant

lost beneficial use of enjoyment of the property.

And I'd point the court-

Right, through actual partial eviction, for example.

Yes, but it doesn't actually have to mean

actual partial eviction, it can just mean

a beneficial use or enjoyment.

And that would-

So what use was your client deprived of?

Yes.

That use was the back part of his lot

which was so altered to remove the privacy

and other area that he put on record

at the trial court that he enjoyed on,

it was as he described his getaway.

This was, he can no longer use that as his getaway.

There's nothing there for him to enjoy privacy.

So if I rented property from Justice Hicks

up in his hometown of Colbrook

and I had this beautiful view of Canada

and he decided to put up a fence

because his neighbors were complaining,

then I'd have a claim against him

for loss of use or loss of enjoyment of use, quiet enjoyment?

In the case where the client has a perpetual lease,

we would say that you do, yes.

Because if you're losing what you rented the property for,

Mr. Domenico clearly stated at trial

that he walked to this property,

he saw the nature of this lot,

believed that upon looking upon his lease

that he was entitled to this lot,

of this type and quality, that he would have it.

And he would state that the cooperative

does has a right to do the necessary work.

So for the example I would provide that

if those trees were found to be an invasive species,

for example, that those species

could be taken out by the cooperative

if it's required by law or some other right property.

And Mr. Domenico would have no claim for it,

even if it provided him that right,

because there's some other reasonable cause

that's bringing the cooperative to do that action.

If it's done...

So the loss of quiet enjoyment depends on

whether the activity is lawful or agreed to?

As within the bounds of the lease that they have, yes.

The lease allows the cooperative to come on the property

to repair, to make repairs

and to develop adjacent lots, right?

Absolutely.

But again, what's built into that

and what the trial court found

was that that's done in good faith.

That the nature of our con,

that the contract between these two parties

has to be done in good faith.

Of course it can take down trees

if the trees are dead, dying,

or creating a bug infestation issues with other properties.

To say, we're going to clear cut this land

to put in a septic system,

but not tell the trial court why we're going to do it that way

and say that, well, that was just reasonable

because we own the land isn't sufficient enough.

It's depriving the tenant a right

to which he believed that he had.

It's equivalent to, well, we're going to brick up your window

at an apartment just because we feel like it

because that's our property and we can do it.

Given the fact that

the suit wasn't brought under 540A

and the provision and the rules

about no attorney's fees,

why should your client be awarded attorney's fees?

And also given the deference

that we accord to the trial court.

Understood. Yes, there's two reasons for that.

That a client enjoyment claim

can only be brought under 540A too

and our position was that

it didn't need to be explicitly cited

to while there is case law that says that that's the case,

I would point the court to

Gilman v. County of Cheshire,

which is 126 New Hampshire 545,

where the party in that case

never specifically cited to RSA 27553

seeking wages,

sick wages after he was deceased.

Now, the only way he was ever going to get those wages back

was under that statute,

the plaintiff never cited to that statute,

yet the court awarded attorney's fees anyway

and this court held that

it made sense for the court to do that

because there was no other relief

way they could get that relief but under that statute.

And for the same reason,

we've pled for quiet enjoyment,

there's no other statute that provides that relief.

So, in requesting attorney's fees,

we were saying attorney's fees

for breach of quiet enjoyment.

We did not cite specifically to 540A too

because we didn't believe that we had to do so.

And going back to the bad faith section of it

in Harkim v. Adams,

the court is specifically,

we have pled that there was an attorney's fees

that could be awarded under Harkim v. Adams

and the trial court said that this was a good faith dispute

and so therefore no attorney's fees under that basis.

So you're not arguing that that's wrong?

We are arguing that that's wrong.

Okay. Why is that wrong?

Yes.

And we are arguing that that's wrong

because that the court is saying at the trial

that in its judgment that the lease is unambiguous.

It specifically finds that this lease is unambiguous,

that this lot was leased to him,

that it is a clear right

and that the actions then were in,

and I would agree that the trial court

never uses the word bad faith,

but it says not in good faith

there's no medium faith.

There's either good faith or bad faith.

But the trial court says this case involved

a good faith dispute concerning the scope of the lease hold.

How can we find bad faith there?

I would concede that there's a good faith dispute

between the nature of the lease hold.

I would concede that ground, Your Honor.

Now the cooperative is alleged that they were entitled

to attorney's fees at trial. Is that right?

They did, yes.

Is that issue on appeal here?

Do not believe it as we are the only party

that requested our community to reconsider.

I want to clarify that.

Going to the last part, I see that I'm running out of time,

is about the discretionary decision

by the trial court to reduce the amount of remediation

down to $10,000 when the undisputed evidence

at trial was that the remediation would cost

somewhere between $38,000 and $29,000.

Well, the trial court didn't have to accept that testimony,

even if it was undisputed, right?

It certainly didn't have to accept that testimony, Your Honor,

but it notes that that was the case,

that that was the testimony provided by the witness

that was there at the hearing as well as the exhibits presented,

that that was what remediation would cost

and then said that remediation is necessary.

So in so doing, the trial court needs to come up

with an objective basis for which it's downward deviating

from $30,000 to $10,000.

In establishing the scope of the lease,

are those questions of fact that we owe deference

to the trial court's determination,

or can we look at those documents ourselves?

I believe that this court owes the trial court

deference in that way.

It is a fact that the court found

that that makes up the nature of the lease.

I don't believe that there is a legal argument presented

other than to say that the court found no legal.

But isn't an interpretation of contracts

a question of law, isn't it?

Absolutely, absolutely is.

But I think that in this instance,

the fact that there are three documents

that make up one lease is a fact that the court found.

Interpretation of those three documents

is certainly a question for this court.

It's a question of law.

How can we get behind the trial court's weighing here?

He says, yeah, your client proved $30,000

to bring it to the status quo ante.

Then he says, well, but that would be a huge burden

and I will factor that in.

And so I think $10,000 is the right balance here.

How do we get behind that?

I don't think you can.

There's no way that there's no objective basis

that the court came up with $10,000.

And the trial court's original judgment

said that that'll be partial remediation.

Well, no one has made an argument

at trial for partial remediation.

There was no evidence presented that that would...

But the court has the power to balance the equities

saying that this would be very harsh

on the other cooperative residents.

That's what the court said.

It absolutely has the ability to balance those equities.

I do not deny that, but it's the objective basis to do that.

Yes, there is this issue with rent as $555 for each tenant.

There's no disagreement on that.

You see that my light's on, so I'll finish this point.

There's no disagreement on that.

But the issue is that there has to be an objective basis

for this court to downward deviate that much.

It's taking out two-thirds and basically rewarding

the cooperative for their behavior,

saying that, well, the cooperative behaved badly,

but we're going to reduce their recovery

provided to my client.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you.
