This is case 2018-0310, Appeal of Estate of William Quinn.

Good morning. May it please the court. My name is Mark Wiseman. I represent Linda Quinn and the estate of William Quinn.

The Compensation Appeals Board of the Department of Labor in this case denied death benefits to Linda Quinn following the death of William Quinn, who succumbed to an overdose at age 62.

And I'd like to talk about two specific issues in this case today.

The first issue I'd like to address is an issue of statutory construction.

And then the second issue is the proper application of uncontroverted medical evidence.

As for the statutory construction issue, and this is a case about statutory construction,

the Compensation Appeals Board found that Mr. Quinn's fault barred the claim for death benefits.

The fault statute in this case is RSA 281-A14, which says that a carrier is not liable for an injury caused by intoxication or serious and willful misconduct.

We contend that the term injury in that statute applies to the original industrial accident, the original work-related event.

And that the death is merely a consequence thereof.

Exactly, Your Honor, that's right.

Mr. Wiseman, do you agree that the CAB found that the death was a suicide?

No, I don't believe that they found it was a suicide, no.

If they found it was, if we read that order as concluding that the CAB found it to be a suicide, can you prevail?

I believe I can, Your Honor.

I believe I can, because the statute dealing with intentional harm to oneself is Section 2, 281-A-2.

And that's not what we're dealing with here.

We're dealing with a case where we're talking about, and the Compensation Appeals Board found that this was a case of woeful misconduct.

They did not reach the issue of whether it was a suicide.

Now, if you have a death case under Section 26, the issue is whether the death resulted from the injury.

And if, and this isn't a case I briefed, but I believe that there are cases like this out there,

that if there is a suicide, then that still would be compensable under New Hampshire law.

I believe that's true, but that's not our case, Your Honor.

That is not our case.

I think there are cases that go both ways around the country in terms of whether suicide is compensable under workers' comp statutes,

often depending on the language of the statute.

Our court has never addressed that.

The court has not addressed that, and I understand that there are people at the Department of Labor in the hallways

talking about cases like that that may be coming up.

And I'm not, that's not our case, Your Honor.

This was not a suicide.

There was no finding that there was a suicide.

But the CAB found that it was an independent intervening cause, right?

They did.

And you're not equating that to a suicide?

No, they don't say, they don't say that it's intentional.

They don't say that he was intentionally trying to harm himself.

What they're saying is that his conduct was illegal, it was dangerous, it was willful, is what they were saying.

Is there any medical evidence to support their position?

Is there evidence to support the position that this was an intervening cause?

No, no, no, and there is not.

There is evidence that Mr. Quinn succumbed to a combination of the oxycodone that he ingested, as well as heroin that he ingested.

But he would have died from the ingestion of either one independently, correct?

That's correct.

That's exactly what one of their experts concluded, that the ingestion of oxycodone was a contributing factor toward his death.

And wasn't there, no, I'm sorry, wasn't there also evidence, though, that there were other stress-inducing, for lack of a better term, situations in his life closer in time to the death than the ankle injury?

I mean, wasn't there family stressors?

Pardon?

Family stressors.

Family stressors.

Family stressors.

And the report from our expert, Dr. Savage, specifically talks about these additional stressors.

And she is the only provider in this case, only expert in this case, who rendered an opinion on that issue at all.

And she concluded that notwithstanding these additional stressors in his life, Mr. Quinn would not have succumbed to his addiction, would not necessarily.

But you seem to say, if I'm understanding correctly, that the board was essentially required to accept that.

Why couldn't, I mean, don't, isn't it basically analog, a fact-finder doesn't have to believe any testimony, whether it's expert or anybody else.

They can think and say, I don't believe this.

They can certainly reject an expert opinion, Your Honor.

And what they're not permitted to do, however, is to substitute their own lay opinion, which is what they did in this case, which is impermissible.

The lay opinion about whether or not this is dangerous conduct that somehow breaks the chain of causation.

They could have, they certainly could have presented another medical opinion.

They probably could have come forward with an expert who would say that the pain from the original work injury, even though it was severe, did not lead to the addiction.

And the addiction did not lead to the fatal overdose.

They could have done that.

And then the board would have had the opportunity to weigh the various medical evidence that was in front of them.

In this case, they didn't do that.

Well, part of that was in front of them, because didn't the carrier approve the treatment for the addiction?

They did.

As being related, causally related.

They did.

They paid for the medical treatment at the Silver Hill Hospital and earlier treatment to try to treat Mr. Quinn's addiction, which was apparent to everybody.

So couldn't the board then find that there was an intervening circumstance when Mr. Quinn was weaned off his opiates?

As a result of the treatment that the carrier paid for.

Well, they may have been able to at least analyze that issue if they had a contrary medical opinion, which they did not have.

And I think it's important to actually look at the decision from the Compensation Appeals Board, because what it does is it spends a lot of time talking about Section 14, which is the false section, and Section 2, which is the definition of injury.

When they do that, they go on to say that, and this is the dealing with the intervening incident.

What they do is they say that, let me get the actual quote.

I'm not disappointed, but here.

This is kind of page 35 of our brief, excuse me, page 36.

It says, in viewing the statutory definitions cited above, we find that the actions of misconduct to the claimant is an independent intervening cause.

The statutory definitions cited above are the Section 14 that I talked about, the false section, and Section 2, which is the definition of injury.

The Compensation Appeals Board frames this as an issue involving statutory construction.

It focuses on Section 14, and it focuses on Section 2.

But they have two independent bases for their decision.

One is the statutory basis, and then in their conclusion, they say further, after talking about the statutory analysis, they say further,

we find that the claimant's death was not causally related to the work injury.

So isn't that a separate, independent basis for their decision?

They say that, though, but they expand upon that earlier, and that's when they're talking about reviewing these statutory definitions.

We reach the conclusion that the chain of causation has been broken.

So we believe that they're improperly reviewing the statute, improperly applying the statute,

and then also substituting their own lay opinion when there is uncontroverted medical evidence.

And I would say that the primary mistake they make in terms of statutory construction is when they analyze the fault under Section 14.

The false statute under Section 14 originally refers to and discusses what happened at the time of the original injury.

That's what is always litigated in these cases.

In other words, was the individual intoxicated at the time of the industrial accident?

Are there blood tests? Are there urine tests?

Well, you know, I mean, it seems to me your statutory construction argument seems to me you want to really have it both ways.

You want to say that injury only applies to the original injury, and the fault provision.

It only sort of applies to the original injury, not something that happens later.

Right.

But sort of for that purpose, but then you want to say the original injury was caused by, I'm sorry, the death was caused by the original injury.

And so we want, I mean, I have difficulty in understanding how you can have it both ways.

We want to say that the injury, excuse me, the death results from the injury, which is the triggering language in Section 26, which is the death statute.

And that's exactly the chain of circumstances that Dr. Savage addresses in her report.

She gets you from the original injury and the prescription of the narcotic medication to the addiction, to the opioid use disorder, to the overdose and the resulting death.

And as I mentioned, her opinion is the only opinion on that issue.

Again, does your argument depend on it being an accidental overdose?

Does the success of your argument depend on it being an accidental overdose?

I'm not sure that it does, Your Honor, but in this case, there's no evidence that this was not an accidental overdose.

I don't want to reach beyond to cases that I haven't analyzed, Your Honor.

I haven't had, in my practice, a suicide case.

I haven't reviewed that particular issue.

But it would turn on, it would turn on the definition in Section 2 of intentional, language to the effect, intentional, I act to harm oneself.

Is the determination as to whether a death was an accidental overdose or a suicide an issue of fact to which we defer to the CAB?

I would say that it is, in one sense, an issue of fact, but it would be based upon a proper analysis of what the experts say regarding this issue.

And I'll say that the death certificate, which is included in our appendix material, the medical examiner determined this to be an accidental death.

And, in fact, when the Compensation Appeals Board does the weighing that they do of competing medical evidence, they talk about Dr. Savage, and then they talk about Dr. Thomas Andrew.

Dr. Thomas Andrew is the medical examiner who says that this was an accidental death, and it was caused by a combination of oxycodone and heroin.

And since the oxycodone was part of the treatment, can the heroin alone sever causation?

I don't believe it does, Your Honor.

Not in the words of, and I'll read them, Your Honor.

We have a lengthy opinion from Dr. Savage, which begins at page 109 of our appendix.

And at the very last paragraph, next to the last paragraph, it goes on to say, he had likely used a significantly higher dose of oxycodone than prescribed, there's evidence to this effect, that he had crushed his oxycodone, et cetera, and that he had used heroin along with his oxycodone.

These are consistent with the progression from therapeutic opioid use consequent to his injury to the development of severe opioid use disorder or addiction consequent to his therapeutic opioid use.

And she concludes in this lengthy report that it is highly unlikely that Mr. Quinn would have developed an opioid use disorder or died of an opioid overdose were it not for severe chronic pain and associated long-term use of opioids that were a consequence of the work-related accident in 2012.

That's the medical opinion that we have.

And one quick point before I run out of time here is when I talk about the misreading of the statute by the Compensation Appeals Board, I'm referring to the portion of Section 2 where they use the words or resulting death to indicate that the injury is broader than just the original injury.

The words or resulting death in Section 2 of the statute refer only and modify the term occupational disease.

It's clear from the statute that that's what's going on.

It talks about injury or death causing arising out of the course of the scope of employment, which means that if you die on the job due to an industrial accident, it's a covered claim.

And then a comma, and then it says, or occupational disease or resulting death.

Or resulting death modifies occupational disease.

This is not an occupational disease.

Mr. Quinn did not have an occupational disease.

Nobody has argued that he did.

So that's a fundamental, we would argue, misreading of the statute and a basis for the opinion.

The best case for the carrier, it seems to us, would be that this is an ambiguity in the statute, whether or not the term injury is intended to mean only the original incident, or whether it can also mean some later conduct.

And, of course, under New Hampshire law, if you've got an ambiguity, and one reading of that ambiguity would favor the injured worker, the broad remedial purposes of the statute mean that you are supposed to resolve that ambiguity in favor of the injured worker in this particular case.

That's an appeal of Gambus, among other cases, 158 New Hampshire, 646.

And, of course, the legislature could clarify this particular issue if they chose to do so.

But they haven't.

Also, your light, just, your light is on.

Oh.

Right.

I'm sorry.

Based upon all of these factors, and the briefs, there's been extensive briefing in this case.

You even have in your package the written closing arguments that we were forced to submit at the Compensation Appeals Board because we ran out of time.

These arguments have been developed, and based upon this, I would request that you reverse the decision of the Compensation Appeals Board and award death benefits in this case.

Thank you.

Thank you, counsel.

May it please the court.

My name is John Schulte.

I'm here from the law office of John Schulte.

With me today is an associate with my office, Brandon Chase, who assisted on the brief.

To get right into this, if this is not a set of circumstances that arise to the level of an intervening cause, then really nothing is.

There are many workers' compensation cases that discuss an intervening cause.

It can be a substance of an injury.

It doesn't have to be a suicide.

Here, does your argument hang on the heroin as opposed to the prescribed medication?

It does not, because the prescribed medication, this is not a case of an accidental overdose.

This is not a case in which someone combined prescribed medication in the amount prescribed and a combination of medications result in a death.

The CAB seemed to focus solely on the heroin.

I would submit they found both.

So, this is reading from the claimant submitted a motion for reconsideration to the CAB, arguing strongly Dr. Savage's point.

And the CAB wrote that the combined effect of two intentional acts by the claimant resulting in his death heightens the degree of serious and willful misconduct, breaking any chain of causation.

And they're talking about the illegal possession of heroin and illegal use of heroin, as well as using the oxycodone in a manner not prescribed.

Would you agree that this is one of the worst trimelioral fractures you have ever seen?

I don't have extensive trimelioral fracture experience.

It may very well be.

Is there any medical opinion that you provided that these results were not natural consequences of that injury and the ensuing pain?

How does a 62-year-old man become addicted to heroin if he's not in pain?

Reading through the history, Mr. Quinn had a history of depression.

He had a history of childhood abuse.

Even Dr. Savage notes he may have been prone to abuse.

I think he had some treatment for depression or other episodes long before the worker's comp injury.

So, nobody knows where he ended up having the heroin.

But what the CAB found was, based on the evidence, they looked at the evidence in this case,

and this is something this court defers to their review of the evidence and facts they found.

He was found with crushed oxycodone and a straw.

He was found with a black pill box and another straw.

Empty pill bottles.

A pill bottle of oxycodone with 70 missing from 120 prescription of oxycodone.

He was found with a lethal dose of oxycodone in his system.

He was found with...

But that was after his addiction was already approved as being work-related, part of this same injury.

And he was...

It wasn't just a logical progression and doesn't...

I mean, don't you take the claimant as they are?

Is there no application of the HL skull rule in worker's comp?

No, this isn't...

I would respectfully disagree, Your Honor.

This is not the case in which someone had no control over their actions.

And Dr. Savage doesn't say that.

He was to a point where he was met with an uncontrollable impulse to take this action.

Her opinion never says that.

Her opinion is essentially but for causation.

It says but for his injury, he would not have ended up in a room four years later overdosing on medication, including heroin.

Well, the carrier, your client, paid for his treatment?

Yes.

For the opioid use.

Is that acknowledgment, then, that it was causally related to the original injury?

His...

He very well became dependent.

He became dependent on narcotics.

That is very different, however, from overdosing on narcotics.

The carriers are not taking on the burden.

We pay for someone.

They actually pay to try to help him wean himself off of narcotics.

It would be a strange result to have the carrier's decision to help someone pay for a 30-day inpatient stay to help wean them off narcotics,

for that somehow to come back and turn a case of intentional acts resulting in an overdose being the responsibility of the carrier.

How is that strange?

Because it's really severing the personal responsibility of Mr. Quinn.

The board found that he intentionally took heroin, he intentionally, even Dr. Savage agrees,

he intentionally used oxycodone in a non-prescribed manner, most likely used a straw to either inhale it or to inject it.

He violated his prescription.

The carrier is typically responsible for the injury of someone and the treatment of someone,

not for things that go beyond and outside their treatment.

This is when your client first paid for some treatment for his addiction,

was that done sort of, for lack of a better term, voluntarily on the part of your client,

or was that the result of an order by the labor department?

That was voluntary.

That was voluntary.

So, okay.

The carrier sought to have his opioid addiction reviews produced for a couple of reasons.

It's typically, one, because it's better for someone to live without being addicted to opioids, and two...

So, I suppose that you would say if that ends up being used against your client on a causation issue,

then the lesson that your client will learn from this is never, ever agree to provide any, voluntarily,

any kind of treatment, even for a short time, because it will come back to haunt you.

Well, that's correct.

And with respect to the employee fault section under RSA 281A14,

I would take exception to the claimant's characterization of this only existing at the time of the injury.

So, even if you were to find that there's causation here and disagree with the board's finding that the intentional acts

resulting in the overdose broke the chain of causation, then we're looking at section 14 in employee fault.

This meets the exact definition of employee fault under section 14.

We have intoxication, both with heroin and a legal drug.

We have...

But not in connection with the injury itself?

No.

And the legislation...

I would submit that the statute, section 14, evidences a broad legislative intent

to preclude employees for collecting benefits that result from intoxication and serious willful misconduct.

And it does...

There's nothing...

Two reasons.

First, the statute uses the term any, and they refer to any injury.

They talk about, in part, the intoxication or misconduct does not have to be the primary reason for the injury.

It doesn't...

It has to only affect it in part.

And finally, there is no time limiter in the statute.

The claimant is essentially asking you to write language into the statute, saying it only exists on the date of original injury.

How does the CATE case fit into your argument in terms of misconduct?

I think the CATE case is additional support for our argument.

The CATE case existed before this version of RSA 281-A.

The CATE case has never been overruled by another case.

It's not explicitly overruled by statute.

The CATE case essentially is an example of post-stative injury, can misconduct rise to the level that further benefits will be terminated?

Now, the benefits are not terminated in the CATE case, but it still had that sort of ruling or principle at play.

But that would seem to indicate here that that would give further support to the idea that RSA 281-A14 applies after the date of injury.

And again, the claimant really has to have a convoluted reasoning, confusing and convoluted, to get to the position that it only applies on the date of injury.

Well, and yet it's interesting under A14 that the provision as to intoxication shall not apply if the employer knew the employee was intoxicated.

Right.

So here, the employer would have known of the addiction.

They would not.

To the injury.

Right.

But they would not have known of the heroin use, in part.

They would not have known of the addiction.

They would not have known that he was abusing the prescription.

There's no way the employer would know he's doing anything other than following the doctor's orders.

Except that he was.

The employer would have known he was, he had gone through a rehab program.

Right.

But that was part of, he went through a rehab program even though he was following doctor's orders for narcotic prescriptions.

The employer would never have known that he was deviating from the doctor's orders.

And how does this intentional misuse square up with the accidental death notation on the death certificate?

The, I would submit that's a different type of access, I mean, are the terms defined?

Well, I would suppose that's accidental as not opposed to homicide.

I don't think that's the analysis that the, that's being done on the death certificate.

This is not a homicide.

This is not a death that's going to be investigated by the authorities.

Um, or a suicide or a suicide.

We had everything but a suicide note, but we don't have to rely on this being a suicide.

The compensation appeals board based on the evidence in, found that these were intentional acts.

The intentional acts are the serious willful misconduct.

What, whether he intended to kill himself or put himself in a coma or hurt himself,

doesn't escape the fact that he engaged in intentional acts of ingesting lethal dosages of two different products.

And your argument is serious and willful misconduct applies at any time.

Yes.

Not at the time of injury.

Not in the course of employment.

I mean, during the employment phase.

Right.

The claimant's position essentially, and they said this in their reply brief, is that death is not an injury.

On page five, they said, Mr. Quinn's death does not fall within the scope of, um, section 14 because it is not an injury.

On page six, they just.

So if it's not an injury, how is it compensable?

That's not, that's, that's, that's the thing I have difficulty understanding.

That, and their argument needs to go there to somehow create this distinction and say in section two,

it only exists on the day of the injury or section 14 only exists on the day of the injury.

Um, they have to go there and they did, but the workers' comp statute does not compensate employees for non-injuries.

Um, and the idea is somehow that the death is not part of the injury.

Well, isn't the argument, I mean, to be fair, isn't it, that's not the initial injury?

The death is not the initial injury, which is what's addressed by A14.

And I don't think that's what's addressed by A14.

I know that's their argument, but that happens all the time in workers' comp.

The initial injury often changes and knee sprain becomes a total knee replacement.

It's still considered and described and called the injury.

A back sprain becomes a herniation.

It's still the injury.

It's not something else.

But you agree that a kind of death benefit would be provided even though somebody doesn't die directly from the injury.

Right, uh, right.

And a death benefit, we need the death benefit section because the benefits are defined differently than if the employees alive.

And so it's defining the death benefit is really designed to, um, make sure we have that analysis at the time of death.

Was this part of the work injury?

And two, defines the widow's benefits and the benefits for children in the event of death.

If Mr. Quinn died of an accidental overdose during the time he was in the rehab facility, would that have been compensable?

Very likely it would have.

If he was following the doctor's orders and because of a combination of medications due to his admission in the hospital, that would be, that would be similar to dying in the operating room.

Yes.

That is different than what happened here and that would be compensable.

And what is the importance of the illegality of the heroin here?

I don't follow that.

Well, as the compensation billboard said, it enhanced the willful misconduct.

Um, and under the, um, intoxication statute, they go back to the definition of a narcotic, um, in addition to alcohol, and it's an illegal drug.

So it just traces back to the statute indicating heroin is illegal.

Um, so it, it, it's an illegal drug, and then the opioid is a prescription drug, but it abused and taken in a non-prescribed manner in an excessive dose.

Is, is the conclusion or the finding of the CAB that the action and misconduct of the claimant is an independent intervening clause that breaks the causal chain, is that a conclusion of law, or is that a factual finding to which we owe deference?

Um, the conclusion that there's an, um, independent, um, intentional act is a factual finding.

Um, and I guess the legal conclusion, there is an aspect of a legal conclusion to applying it to the law of, they have to, the, the board has to make the determination.

They know that an intervening cause will terminate benefits.

They have to make the determination.

Does this intentional act rise to that level?

But it's a legal conclusion.

You do agree with that.

Yes.

That's a legal conclusion.

It's not necessarily a medical conclusion, and doctor, they specifically found that Dr. Savage, um, they wrote in terms of this conclusion, the factual conclusion,

an independent intervening cause, um, no medical report contradicts our conclusion that Mr. Quinn's illegal possession of heroin followed by his intentional ingestion of heroin in the amount that could have independently caused his death, um, did cause or substantially contribute to his death.

Um, so they, um, so they, they address that kind of idea of, um, um, does Dr. Savage, um, address their point, or does Dr. Savage's opinion undercut their point that we have intentional acts that act as an intervening cause.

And Dr. Savage doesn't address an intervening cause.

Dr. Savage just says, again, it's but for causation, but for the injury, he wouldn't have ended up where he did, as I read her report.

Um, and that really is not the role of the doctor to make the determination, is this an intervening cause or not?

Um, it's the role of the board.

They make that determination all the time.

They apply laws to facts all the time.

Um, the, I guess the doctor could make determinations as to the nature of the injury, the extent of the injury, um, the cause of an injury.

Um, whether a particular fact pattern, we have here a fact pattern, arises to the level of an intervening cause, would be squarely within the parameters of something that the CAB should be performing.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you.

Case submitted, and the court will take a brief recess.

Thank you.

All right.
