One.

Matter before the court is state of New Hampshire versus Elizabeth Seibel. It is case number 20180336.

The state of New Hampshire is represented by attorney Brandon Garad and Ms. Seibel is represented by attorney Thomas Barnard.

Mr. Barnard, you have reserved one minute, but you may proceed when you are ready.

Thank you, Your Honor. Thomas Barnard on behalf of Elizabeth Seibel is the court just noted I have reserved one minute for rebuttal.

I'm going to make two points this afternoon. First, the variant of financial exploitation at issue here only applies to acts committed in the defendant's capacity as a fiduciary.

And second, regarding the theft charges, the evidence was insufficient to prove that Elizabeth knew that assets did not authorize the expenditures.

Regarding the financial exploitation charge, the proposition that the variant only applies to acts committed in a fiduciary duty or in a fiduciary capacity is confirmed by the structure of the statute and other statutes.

RSA 6373, the theft statute already prohibits taking another person's property without their authorization.

And paragraph 1b of the financial exploitation statute already prohibits taking an elderly, disabled or impaired adult's property with his or her consent, but through undue influence or the like.

The variant at issue here paragraph 1a2 is designed to apply to a narrow circumstance, the misuse of a fiduciary power.

And by definition, a person can only misuse a fiduciary power by exercising that fiduciary power.

The state's proposed construction here would lead to absurd results.

Owners of property often designate as fiduciaries, family members or close friends. Those are exactly the types of individuals that the owners may wish to give a gift to.

But under the state's construction, combined with this court's recent holding in Foley, it would almost always be illegal for a fiduciary to accept a gift from the owner of the property.

Even if that gift were authorized, Foley establishes that it's not the owner's authorization that matters.

It's whether the instrument creating the fiduciary duty authorized the gift.

So even if the owner fully authorizes a gift, that doesn't mean that the fiduciary can accept it.

And you're saying, Mr. Barnard here, are you saying that the document that created the fiduciary capacity was not one pursuant to which the defendant acted?

Exactly.

Why can't the original fiduciary relationship go beyond the particular transaction at issue?

Well, because if the mere existence of a document that creates a fiduciary duty means that the fiduciary can never use the owner's property for the fiduciary's own benefit, then it means that the fiduciary can never accept a gift from the owner.

If the owner says, I want to give you $100 check for your birthday or for Christmas, the fiduciary has to say no. I can't accept that.

I understand that you today are authorizing that gift, but we have a fiduciary duty and the document that created that fiduciary duty does not authorize me to accept gifts.

And under State v. Foley, the owner's authorization doesn't matter.

So this provision were construed to apply to transactions that take place independently from the fiduciary power or the instrument that creates those fiduciary powers, then it would essentially be a blanket ban on any fiduciary's accepting gifts.

I'm having a little difficulty and then I'll be quiet. To me, the fact that the defendant had the authority to withdraw at will, and in fact did draw at will, establishes a common law fiduciary relationship.

Are you saying the statute doesn't reach that?

Right, so I have two responses to that. First, it's not an argument that the state makes. The state is very clear in its brief that regarding the fiduciary duty, it is relying only on the special power of attorney.

And second, in gag me, this court held that a person can commit theft from a joint bank account. The mere fact that it's a joint bank account doesn't mean that doesn't mean that that every withdrawal is authorized.

And that's certainly and that's certainly correct. But the court did not hold that a joint bank account creates a fiduciary duty.

And in fact, I'm not aware of any court holding that the mere existence of a joint bank account means that there is a fiduciary duty.

Turning to the theft charge, the evidence was insufficient to show that Elizabeth knew that SS did not authorize the expenditures.

The evidence here we can see clearly showed that SS was the victim of a theft, and it clearly showed that Andrew was the perpetrator of the theft. Andrew committed numerous acts indicative of his guilt.

It was Andrew who convinced a notary public to notarize a document purportedly signed by SS and a witness, even though SS and the witness were not present.

It was Andrew who falsely told a realtor that SS could not attend closing on the house because she was ill.

It was Andrew who falsely told SS that her CDs were redeemed to satisfy a non-existent lawsuit.

It was Andrew who became angry when he learned that SS saw a lawyer.

And it was Andrew who falsely told SS's lawyer that SS suffered from Alzheimer's disease and dementia.

That might be the case, but is it reasonable to conclude that the defendant believed that SS authorized her to spend all of her savings given that she was an elderly woman, a widower, and had no other source of income?

We don't know whether, I mean, we know that it was all of SS's savings.

We don't know from the evidence whether Elizabeth knew that the funds at issue represented all of SS's savings.

And for all we knew, for all we know, Andrew may have told Elizabeth, you know, this is just a fraction of my mother's assets.

She has other assets. This is, you know, this is the assets that she has to give away and she wants to give them away to us.

Is there any direct or circumstantial evidence in the record demonstrating that Andrew deceived the defendant into believing just that?

Or is it just inferences?

It's a hypothesis and it's a hypothesis that is based on the evidence.

And the rule for circumstantial evidence is that to prove guilt, circumstantial evidence must exclude all reasonable hypotheses.

And Andrew has demonstrated himself based on the evidence here as somebody who is willing to deceive his own mother.

There's somebody who is willing to steal tens of thousands of dollars from his own mother.

So it's not a stretch to believe that Andrew would also be willing to deceive his wife.

It's also reasonable to conclude that he and his wife acted in concert, doesn't it?

That may be a reasonable conclusion as well.

But to be sufficient to meet the proof beyond a reasonable doubt standard, it's not enough that a conclusion consistent with guilt is reasonable.

The evidence has to exclude all conclusions consistent with innocence.

So if there are conclusions with guilt that are reasonable and conclusions with innocence that are reasonable, then by definition, the circumstantial evidence is insufficient.

The evidence here was consistent with the conclusion that Elizabeth was not aware that SS did not authorize the expenditure of funds here.

Even though the mother just told her that she didn't believe that she'd spent money on fixing up the house,

and she didn't believe that it was reasonable to share an account with them.

So the record is ambiguous on that point.

So SS testified that when she learned that there was a joint account,

she had these thoughts and these beliefs that it was unwise to commingle finances.

But the record is not clear that she expressed those thoughts or those beliefs.

And particularly that she expressed them in Elizabeth's presence.

Didn't she express the fact that she didn't believe that they should purchase the house in her present because it needed too much money to renovate?

I don't recall whether the evidence is clear that she expressed that.

I mean, it's certainly clear that she believed that, but I don't recall whether she expressly testified that she expressed that belief in Elizabeth's presence.

And even if she did, it doesn't foreclose the possibility that Andrew later told Elizabeth that his mother had a change of heart or changed her mind.

I assume that SS testified that she did not authorize the defendant to make any withdrawals, is that correct?

That is correct.

And she testified that the defendant refused to provide her with the bank account records?

Well, there's some ambiguity there too.

She testified that she asked, quote, them for the bank account records and that quote, they were reluctant to give her the bank account records.

But if you look at the entirety of her testimony, it's clear that SS conceived of Andrew and Elizabeth as a single unit and often referred to the acts of one in the plural using this plural pronoun.

There was one occasion in particular that makes this clear where SS testifies that they got the mail and she says this three times.

They always got the mail.

And finally, the prosecutor says, when you keep saying they got the mail, who are you talking about? Andrew or Elizabeth?

And SS's response is, well, one or the other, I don't know.

Right, so this is the sense in which SS is using the term they.

And it creates this ambiguity as to whether she's talking about Andrew or Elizabeth.

And in light of that ambiguity, the evidence here is insufficient to show that Elizabeth knew that SS did not authorize the transactions.

Now to pick this up in the record, but was Andrew charged?

He was not.

He was not charged.

And that's one mystery that has always existed in this case as to why he wasn't charged, given the strength of the evidence against him.

Well, perhaps SS didn't want to testify against her own son.

That's probably at the top of the list of possibilities.

Was Elizabeth present for the conversation or was there one where SS expressed her concern that her limited funds might not last for the duration of her life?

I don't recall SS testifying that she expressed that concern either to Andrew or to Elizabeth.

So that was a concern that came out at trial?

It was.

I mean, it appears that SS was not aware of the theft that Andrew was committing until her funds were almost completely depleted.

So by the time she realized what was going on, it would have been more than a concern.

It would have been, you know, we're at the end of the road here.

I don't have any money.

So there was nothing early on when she, after her husband died, when she was paying for her condo where there was any discussion among the family members that she might not be able to meet her bills going forward for a long time.

I don't recall any testimony like that from the record.

If the court has no further questions.

That's the six.

You're muted.

Never get sold.

I'm glad I was muted because of what I uttered under my breath.

You still have one minute.

Mr. Barnard and now Mr. God, please for the state.

Good afternoon, may it please the court branding her out for the state of New Hampshire.

My intent is to use my time today to talk about the financial exploitation charge.

However, I'm happy to accept questions on that charge or either of the theft charges at any point.

The plain meaning of RSA 631 nine one a two is that a person that holds a fiduciary obligation to an elderly adult is subject to a fiduciary responsibility anytime they take or use the property that is the subject of the instrument that establishes that

financial obligation and will be in violation of the statute.

If they use that property for their own purposes, or for the purposes of anyone other than the elderly person, and that such action was not specifically authorized by the document that establishes that fiduciary obligation.

That include accepting a gift as Mr. Barnard has pointed out.

It would not your honor. In fact, it specifically prohibits a fiduciary from making gifts to themselves.

But there's a clear distinction between fiduciary's ability to without the authorization of the elderly person use their authority to make a gift to themselves versus a competent adult who is otherwise has a person who is a fiduciary that looks out for their

rights is still free to make their own decisions their own gifts their own choices with their money.

Any decisions they want. In fact, if the decision comes from the elderly adult. I'm going to decide to give Elizabeth Seibel a gift.

Elizabeth Seibel hasn't acted at all. There's no prohibition against accepting gifts that were made by knowing intelligent and competent.

But if Elizabeth has to write the check. Does she have to get the elderly adults gift intention in writing.

Probably not in writing as long as the elderly adult is competent to make the gift to Elizabeth and say I want to do this.

I want to give you a birthday present. However, you know, maybe my arthritis is acting up. I need you to write the check as you're in your capacity as a fiduciary.

That would certainly not violate the statute because the elderly person has not made the decision. It's the fiduciary has not made the decision.

It's the elderly person who's made the decision to make the gift to the fiduciary.

Distilled to its essence.

Attorney Barnett would say, assuming, even assuming that there might have been some thefts here, there was no surviving instrument which imposed a fiduciary obligation upon the defendant, which she violated.

How do you respond.

There certainly was a surviving interest. In fact, from the moment the special power of attorney was signed and became active.

The defendant was under an obligation anytime she used SS's property SS's money, or any of SS's financial resources without SS's authorization to use those resources those property in accordance with the terms of the power of attorney.

And in the best interest of SS and not make gifts to herself.

The power of attorney was created and had a very limited authorization to use funds only for the purchase of a piece of real estate, but also continued throughout the ownership of that real estate as it specifically authorized the defendant to sell mortgage or do anything

that needed to be done with the real estate after it was purchased so for the duration of the time that SS owned that real estate.

The defendant, because it was never specifically revoked has an active valid power of attorney that is recognized in law and has the ability under that power of attorney to use SS's funds without her authorization.

And accordingly anytime she does just that she's subject to a fiduciary obligation to act as a prudent person would in managing finances, and to not make gifts to herself, or others, and less specifically authorized by the document which she was not in this case.

What about the transactions that occurred prior to that special power of attorney.

So she charged with those as well as the staff charges.

Those, everything that occurred prior to, it's not the existence of the power of attorney but the date that the financial exploitation came into effect which was January 1, 2015.

No transactions before that were part of the financial exploitation of another adult charge.

And if the special and if the special power of attorney was invalid because of the way it was executed.

Does the fiduciary duty disappear.

Well, that is a very interesting question. However, I don't think there is an argument that it is invalid in this case, the document was presented to SS and as SS testified at trial.

She probably did not pay enough attention to it but she did see this document and she did sign.

And then became SS's grant of authority to the defendant to act in her capacity, according to that instrument and up until it was revoked, which it never was until after all of this was uncovered.

So the notarization irregularity didn't affect its validity.

I don't believe so.

In fact, I'm sure this evidence that the defendant relied upon at trial to point the finger at Andrew.

The notarization.

Yes, certainly, you know, Andrew was responsible for the false notarization but I do not believe at that time.

The law in the state of New Hampshire required a valid notarization in order for a power of attorney to be valid under the laws of the state of New Hampshire I believe that has since changed.

But at the time of the conduct in this case, I do not believe that was the law in the state of New Hampshire. Also, there was no argument raised at trial for any point that the power of attorney was not valid.

So do I understand your position on the financial exploitation charge that the special power of attorney that was talks about the purchase of the property in Conway was continuing.

And if it wasn't continuing, then a charge wouldn't hold up is that right, but it's your position that because of the language about selling or mortgaging that it does continue.

If the power of attorney was structured in a way where the grant of authority was limited to ISS give to Elizabeth Seibel the ability to use my money to purchase this real estate.

And there was no no further language no further expansion no other powers that were given to Elizabeth by that document that once the real estate was purchased I think the power of attorney would be concluded there would be no more authority for it.

But that wasn't the case here and this specifically included provisions that anticipated Elizabeth being able to continue to use that authority throughout the duration of SS ownership of this home.

I mean, it does seem to be arguably internally consistent because the way you read the document as long as it has to do with the property the language about purchasing is sort of superfluous.

That that is probably correct.

The document was drafted at a time where it was anticipated that the first thing that was going to happen was the purchase. So there was language that specifically covered that.

There was no testimony at trial about what thought went into what language but it clearly made it so that the defendant could purchase and could do anything whatsoever that SS mayor could do in regard to that purchase and also including any and all things whether

or not a new rated or not, which SS shall consider advantageous or proper in connections with my affairs concerning this real estate. So again, you know my affairs concerning this real estate.

In addition to the language that allows the mortgage or the sale of the property I think it's clear that this was a power of attorney that existed throughout SS ownership of this property.

Today the defendant is asking the court to read into the statute or requirement that would limit the statute's applicability, only two circumstances where the fiduciary needed to rely on the power of attorney in order to access the funds that are in question.

Specifically in this case, the defendant took the money from a joint bank account. The defendant argues that because she could access those funds without relying on the power of attorney and did so in her personal capacity.

That there was no fiduciary duty that applied at the time she accessed those funds, but such a reading is clearly inconsistent with the court's rules regarding statutory interpretation, as well as the play language of the statute as well as the

legislature's expressed intent regarding how the statute was going to be interpreted.

Specifically, the legislature made a statement of intent in this case, which was that it was the purpose of quote the purpose was to send a clear message to the public.

The financial exploitation of the elderly disabled or impaired adults shall not be tolerated. And the provisions of this act shall be liberally construed to ensure the person's engaging in these unlawful acts be held criminally liable.

So there's an express intention that these provisions of this act are going to be construed liberally.

The plain language of the statute makes no distinction between property that could be accessed in a personal capacity versus property that could only be accessed in the capacity of fiduciary.

To read that sort of language into the statute would be to add language of the legislature did not see 50 include.

This would be specifically contrary to this court's precedent regarding how to engage in statutory interpretation questions, which is exactly what the court is being asked to do today as the scope of the term breach of fiduciary obligation in the statute has not been explored before.

Mr. Gerard, with respect to the theft charges, we accept Mr. Barnard's argument that the evidence of the defendant's knowledge is circumstantial.

Can you point any evidence in the record, excluding the possibility that Andrew deceived the defendant into believing that SS authorized the activity on our accounts?

Absolutely, your honor. I will start with the first check theft charge, which was from the account that ended in 9487.

Assuming that the court accepts that was a circumstantial case.

SS specifically had a conversation with testified that she had a conversation with both Andrew and Elizabeth, where she confronted them about the fact that they had been added to this joint account.

During that conversation, she specifically testified that Elizabeth said that it would make it easier if they were on the accounts so that they could pay bills.

That was Elizabeth's understanding, Andrew's understanding, and SS's understanding about why they were on this account.

As SS testified, she never authorized either of them to use any of the money for any other purpose.

So the defendant knew that Elizabeth's understanding of Elizabeth's understanding of why she was on SS's account in the first place was limited to the ability to help her pay bills.

So that's where it starts.

If you then turn to her conduct throughout this process, it's completely inconsistent with Andrew being the only bad actor and Elizabeth simply being a pawn in his game.

Specifically, the defendant was told that SS thought purchasing this house was a terrible idea when SS believed that it was the defendant and Andrew who were going to be purchasing it.

She testified that she told them, this is a mistake. This requires too much work.

You're making a mistake in buying this home.

So the possibility that in the short time between that conversation and a few months later when SS signs the mortgage for SS that she reasonably believed that SS had done a complete 180 and had decided that despite those concerns,

she was actually now fine, not only with them purchasing it, but with her financing 100% of the bill is simply not a reasonable conclusion.

Does the state agree that this is a circumstantial evidence case?

I do not. I think there are numerous occasions, as I pointed out in my brief, where there is direct evidence that the defendant was attempting to deceive SS, which I believe is manifested most clearly in SS,

specifically testifying that she asked Elizabeth to see copies of her bank accounts and the defendant's response was, everything is all right, you don't need to see them.

And that was a response directly in response to a question of how Elizabeth responded when you asked to see your accounts.

So the defendant made an intentional decision to try to dissuade SS from seeing her accounts because she didn't want her to see the conduct that was going on on these accounts.

I believe that is direct evidence of her knowledge that these were not authorized transactions.

Is there any other direct evidence?

I believe there is your honor.

Sorry.

Well, I think that may be the, I'll rely on my brief. I can't remember exactly if there is any other direct evidence in this case, but I believe that the direct evidence that I've testified to as well as what's in the brief combined with the overwhelming

circumstantial evidence that is also, you know, part articulated in my brief shows that there is no other reasonable conclusion.

And that's the key is the state doesn't have to disprove any possible conclusion is any reasonable conclusion other than guilt.

And in this case, based on both the direct and the circumstantial evidence, I do not think it is reasonable.

I see my time as I may have finished answer your question.

Yes, please do.

Based on both the direct and the circumstantial evidence in this case, even if the court finds that it was not a mixed case that the court finds it's purely circumstantial, all of the evidence in this case and

Excludes any other possibility other than that Elizabeth Seibel knew that the defendant that knew that SS did not authorize any of these transactions and was making deliberate efforts to conceal the content.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

And I do have two quick points.

The state argues that even if a fiduciary relationship exists under its construction, a gift is permission permissible if the decision to give the gift comes from the elderly adult.

But that argument is directly contrary to this court's holding in state be fully.

The court was very clear that the linchpin of liability under this variant is whether authorization exists in the document creating the fiduciary duty, not whether the owner in fact authorizes the gift.

The state makes an argument about the purpose of the financial exploitation argument.

I want to be clear.

I'm not arguing that if a transaction occurs outside a fiduciary power, then the defendant can never be held criminally responsible.

What I'm arguing is that unlike financial transactions that occur as an exercise of a fiduciary power, the linchpin, if it occurs outside of a fiduciary power is whether the owner authorized the transaction.

If the owner did not, then that's theft.

And here, Elizabeth was convicted of theft.

Although we have an argument about the sufficiency of that evidence, we don't argue that that's legally impossible under a statutory construction.

Thank you.

Thank you both, counsel.

Case is submitted.

The court is in recess.

Thank you.

Thank you.
