This is case 2018-0711, David Levoie versus the Peninsula Insurance Companies.

Good morning.

Mr. Murphy.

May it please the court, my name is Francis Murphy and together with John Gillan we represent

the plaintiff appellant, David Levoie.

David Levoie is entitled to coverage under the terms of the Peninsula Insurance Company

because he was vehicle-oriented at the time he was injured.

Why do we say he was vehicle-oriented?

David was injured when engaged in the process of fetching a tire from the insured vehicle

as part of a work-related errand that brought him to Hampton Beach on that day in May 2017.

He was physically oriented toward the vehicle as he crossed in the direction of the vehicle

on a crosswalk.

His conscious attention was oriented toward the truck and the work-related task of delivering

the tire to a customer who was walking behind him in the crosswalk.

His work entailed a business transaction that was essential to the use of the insured

vehicle.

He was a short distance from the insured vehicle when injured.

How close was he?

The court found it was a short distance in the record as estimated at 10 yards.

The last four pages of the joint appendix have photos, including one on page 54 which sort

of sets the scene and there are two crosswalks in the photo.

I want to make sure we're all on the same page, so to speak, about which crosswalk.

The photo is taken from the perspective of L Street, which entities into Ashwood Avenue.

The crosswalk in question is the one from the goat restaurant which is on the right side

of the photograph, diagonally crossing Ashwood Avenue, not the one that's crossing at Elston.

He's left the goat restaurant, he's in the crosswalk, crossing across Ashwood Avenue

and the vehicle is a building with a green awning and to the left of that green awning

in this picture, which is from the street view of Google Earth, is a business with a

green awning, to the left of that there is a Jeep Cherokee and the record indicates that

he was across from the Greek, his vehicle was, across from the Jeep Cherokee on Johnson

Avenue.

You emphasized throughout your brief that this was a work related mission he was

on essentially and why should that matter to us?

I could see if you were making a workers comp argument that would matter to us, but why

is it relevant to what we're thinking about here?

One of the considerations is that under the vehicle orientation test and the courts coming

to terms with the term occupying, insured term, is the question of whether the claim

that was engaged in a transaction essential to the use of the insured vehicle.

I've inserted the word business use because it's a business vehicle under a garage policy.

So I think because it's a business transaction and this was a work related errand, he's going

to the truck to pick up a tire that belongs to the customer who's walking behind him

and he's oriented in the direction physically of the vehicle and his intention is directed

at the vehicle to get the tire.

Is there a dispute that is a business transaction between you and the carrier?

Is that a dispute?

No, it's not a dispute.

So it's just about what occupying means?

Correct.

So the tire is irrelevant really, isn't it?

If he was going to the car, it doesn't matter if he was going to the car to get his Kleenex,

that shouldn't matter in our analysis.

I think that's correct.

Again, I wanted to make sure that we satisfied the prong of the test that he was engaged

in a transaction essential to the business, essential to the use of the insured vehicle.

Are you saying that a garage policy would be construed more broadly than a personal auto

policy?

No, I do not believe so.

It's the same term occupying.

Does a garage policy contemplate sort of more vehicle oriented activity than perhaps a personal

auto insurance policy?

Well, certainly business related, the business named Dave's Garage and the nature of the

business, auto repairing and towing.

And this was an auto repair related task he was on.

So it's certainly within the confines of the intended use of a vehicle under the garage

policy.

And if your client were setting up a tow job, for example, he could be in a similar

distance from the vehicle.

Correct.

One could imagine that for certain.

And you'd be making the same argument if your client had already delivered the

tire to the customer before he went to dinner.

Yes.

Right?

So, yes, he could have actually physically delivered the tire and then returned to his

truck and the evidence is he wasn't going to go home with the truck.

He was going to go back to the garage and then go home.

So his work day had not ended.

Can you clarify for me?

Is there an issue here about whether he was an insured under the policy?

He's not the named insured.

Right.

But it seems to me he's an insured.

That doesn't seem to be where the action is here.

He's an insured if he was occupying the vehicle.

Okay.

So that's an additional insured.

Okay.

So it all turns on this occupying notion.

The trial court in its ruling that Mr. LaVoy was not occupying the vehicle said he was

disconnected from the vehicle.

And I think that's an irrelevant consideration.

He asked himself, the court asked itself, was he connected or disconnected?

He said he was disconnected.

Again, that's not part of any prior cases about whether he's connected or disconnected.

It's whether he's vehicle oriented and engaged in a transaction essential to the vehicle.

So would he be vehicle oriented as he was standing up in the restaurant to leave to

head for his car even before he leaves the restaurant?

Isn't he still as vehicle oriented then as he is going across the crosswalk?

Arguably yes.

But clearly when he left the restaurant and he leaves the curb and he's in the crosswalk

with the firm destination in mind of the vehicle, he's vehicle oriented.

But he had, I guess under sort of employee, employer law, he had a detour from his work

errand.

His work errand was deliver the tire, he took a break to go inside the restaurant

to meet with the customer.

The detour ended and he left the restaurant, crosswalked, headed towards the vehicle

and struck down, stepped away from the curb.

Had you just turned into a divine argument that your client testified that his

deposition that he was in the crosswalk and therefore he was crosswalk oriented

instead of vehicle oriented?

He testified that he was not immediately getting into the vehicle because he was

using the common meaning of getting into.

This is a defined technical term with sub-definitions which includes two

present participants getting in or getting out.

And getting in is, well, getting out was subject of the D'Amore's case.

And in the D'Amore's case, you talked about it being a process of moving away

from the vehicle.

Now if we're going to have a harmonious interpretation with the D'Amore's

case, we should consider getting in as a process.

And when is that process is when the person becomes vehicle oriented and

he's engaged in a transaction, essential to, in my words, the business

transaction of the vehicle.

And he was engaged in that process to get to the...

Do you almost need sort of an intervening event or attention

diverter to stop that process?

Yes, I think so.

But if it's truly incidental, I think his attention is not directed off

the transaction.

But if he did another detour, he saw someone down the street and decided

at the glad hand, well, we're getting a distance away.

So if someone goes to the Patriots' Game and you have to park miles away

from the stadium there and walk, so as soon as the game's over and you

start walking out of the stadium and walk two miles to your vehicle,

any accident there would be vehicle oriented and fall within this

policy language according to your argument, right?

Yes.

In the broadest way, there is no proximity prong adopted in the Hampshire.

Other courts have adopted a proximity prong.

Here, we see he's close to the vehicle.

We don't get to that hypothetical situation where he's two parking

lots away at the Patriots' Station.

But I think that that's an interesting analogy.

I'd like to draw the attention to another one, school bus.

If we have a school bus on the other side of Ashworth Avenue from

the Goat, the child steps into the crosswalk en route to the bus.

He, she is getting into the bus just like in the

obverse situation, she was getting off the bus under the D'Amour

analysis, if she was getting off the bus into the crosswalk,

she's still getting out of the insured vehicle till she's

reached the safety of the sidewalk.

So the sidewalk is the end point in the D'Amour analysis.

In the D'Amour analysis.

And there are school bus cases.

And so here you argue the truck is, well, being seated in the

truck is the end point.

Is the end point.

Then that's in the improng of the definition of occupying.

And the beginning point on the getting in is stepping off

the curb.

I think that's clear.

That's the clear demarcation.

But as Justice Bassett suggested, it could even

been when he got up off the table with the intention

of going out the door, out the sidewalk.

At that point he's mentally engaged with the business

strategy.

It would seem that if the policy were intended to cover the

situations you're talking about, it could say headed to the

vehicle or going to the vehicle.

But it doesn't say that.

This term occupying has been the subject of litigation for

decades.

And the vehicle orientation test has been used for

decades.

And it has within it some built-in ambiguities.

The Des Moines case has said so many coverage cases bear on some

fine distinctions.

I don't think we're in a fine distinction here.

We're in a pretty clear situation where he's walking towards

the vehicle.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Council?

Good morning.

I am Kevin Devine and I am here proudly representing the

Peninsula Insurance Company.

Justice Bassett, you hit the nail on the head.

You said, isn't the issue easy and short?

And under the uniform New Hampshire uninsured motorist

endorsement on this policy, which was approved by the

New Hampshire Labor Insurance Department decades ago and used

in all garage policies, he was not uninsured on the date of

his accident because it was not occupying as defined in the

policy.

The vehicle.

So, but New Hampshire doesn't require that the insured have

contact with the vehicle?

Absolutely not.

It requires vehicle orientation, Justice Donovan.

So if the plaintiff were reaching for the handle when

he was run down, would he be vehicle oriented at that point?

Absolutely.

Absolutely.

There's case law around the country on that.

But one thing opposing council has argued here is that the

vehicle orientation standard in New Hampshire focuses on, and

he outquote, the transactional foundation.

In fact, New Hampshire Supreme Court has rejected that

argument.

It says New Hampshire does not follow a transactional rule

of other states, the handful it do.

So this is not a workers' compensation case, this is not a

divorce case.

I don't understand the analogies that are argued here, but I

will say this.

The only issue was, was he vehicle oriented?

Now in his own deposition, it's in the joint appendix at

page 28, the transcript, I asked, had you activated the

remote starter before you got hit?

He answered, I don't even know if it has one.

As I says, I don't drive that truck very often.

Question, where were the keys to the truck when you were hit?

Answer in my pocket.

If he had activated the starter, would that be a

different case?

I think it would, Your Honor, because if you're going across

walk, now mind you, he had another curb to get to, a

sidewalk to go down, had to cross Johnson Avenue.

So it wasn't that close to his vehicle.

Ten yards, you agree it's ten yards?

No one's measured it.

He estimated that in his petition, when I asked him that

in his deposition, he said, I have no idea.

So if his keys were in his hand, would that be a

different case?

It gets closer.

I mean, obviously, when the age of remote starters, I

don't have them, but my son's do.

My son's have a lot of cool stuff.

Reincarnation works, I want to come back as my son's.

But arguably, in the age of technology, if you walk out of

your house, your car's in the parking lot, and you remote

start it, and you walk towards it, you have good

argument to your vehicle oriented.

But that wasn't the answer.

That's why I asked the question, because I didn't

want to get hijacked by a remote starter argument.

My very next question.

Knowing the tires in the truck, isn't that a proxy

maybe for a remote starter?

That there's a thing in the truck that the person's

going after?

I disagree with that, Your Honor.

And the reason I disagree is because that falls right

into the trap of New Hampshire.

Why didn't the aperture, as he asked in his brief,

why didn't the aperture to adopt the transactional analysis

that we have expressly rejected recently?

Do you think a garage policy is contemplated to be

broader than an individual auto policy in terms of the

activities?

Again, if there's a towing situation going on, the

operator could be 10 yards, 12 yards, 15 yards from the

vehicle and be vehicle oriented.

A towing situation is an actual, you're still vehicle

oriented when you're in a towing operation.

You have to get off your truck, hook up the car,

you're about to tow.

You're obviously occupying that truck the entire time

you're in that process.

It's connected by a chain.

And there's case law to support that here in New

Hampshire as well.

But 3GJX cases often are assigned based on the fact

that the law is well settled on the issue presented.

I submit the law is well settled in this case.

I asked in the deposition, where were you looking when

you got hit?

And he answered, I imagine I was looking at the sidewalk

in front of me that I was almost a step on.

I don't know.

When you're in the crosswalk, where do you look?

You're in the crosswalk.

You're looking at the crosswalk.

I looked to make sure there were no cars coming at the time

and there were not any.

And there was other people in the crosswalk.

End of quote.

The definition, sorry, of occupying

means in, upon, getting in, on, out, or off.

What's upon mean?

There's a case in New Hampshire on that where the woman was

leaning on the trunk of the vehicle when it was hit.

And this court held that she was upon the vehicle

because her body was in contact with it.

So that's what upon means.

Instead of getting in or on, so getting on

is different from upon.

Certainly.

In the case of a pickup truck, even though it's

illegal in New Hampshire, it's not uncommon

to see a pack of kids riding in the back of a pickup truck.

There's certainly upon it and in it.

But here, the who is insured is narrowly

construed because it is a garage policy.

So it covers so many vehicles that they

have to limit how many people will be insured

for uninsured motorists.

You remember that uninsured motorist

premiums are very low, but the coverage limits are very high.

And that's true in a garage policy

as well as your personal auto policy.

So because there's so many vehicles

on the lots in these garage policies,

the insured, these garage policies,

they have to do it that way.

There's nothing to prevent.

There was nothing here to prevent Mr. Lavoie

from asking his insurance agent when he got this policy

to add him as a personal, additional insured.

And he would have been insured.

But that would cover him for any garage-related activity

regardless of where he was.

Correct.

I've seen those policies.

It's very common.

I don't know why his agent didn't do that.

But the evidence shows this was not just the first time.

This was a renewal of prior policies with the peninsula.

They were all written on the same forms.

So if he was a named insured, we wouldn't be here.

Correct.

But because the name insured was a corporation,

the policy specifically says in the UM endorsement,

if the name insured is a corporation,

the only people personally covered for UM

are individuals occupying an insured vehicle.

I submit that this case is completely controlled

by prior precedent.

The D'Amour versus Amika case and the Miller

versus Amika case are right on point.

In D'Amour, the court held that once the woman left

her vehicle, shut the door with her arms full of the grocery

bags, and took two steps of her vehicle

before slipping on ice, she had severed her relation,

her orientation with that vehicle,

and therefore was not occupying it

and was not getting out of it.

She had completed the task of getting out

once she shut the door, this court held.

Identically, when he shut the door and locked his pickup

truck and then walked two walks and across the street

to the go, he had severed his relationship

with that truck, not to be reunited until he was

once again vehicle oriented.

It was argued that he was looking at the truck

when it was hit.

That's directly contradicted by the deposition testimony

I just read to you.

I am willing to answer any other questions you have,

but I think this case is very well settled on.

I'm willing to submit on my brief at this point.

Thank you, counsel.

It was the Cookeham case that attorney Devine referencing

was upon, yes.

Thank you very much.
