Good morning again, good morning.

Before I forget, let me just note that just basket is disqualified from the second case, New England Backflow versus Gagney.

And now we will hear the matter of state of New Hampshire versus Papillon.

This is case 2018-0355, state of New Hampshire versus Paulson Papillon.

May it please the court?

I'm Kelly Dab, I represent Mr. Papillon in this appeal.

I'd like to start by talking about page 29 of the state's briefcase in which they quote the trial testimony of Julie Miranda.

And the testimony in question is the statement, and he told me, quote, you can do just what I'm going to do.

All I need is $1,000, and my boy will take care of it.

And no snitch, no case, or nobody, no case, or something like that.

I'm going to read the same statement without the other crime evidence.

And he told me, you can do just what I'm going to do.

No snitch, no case, or nobody, no case, or something like that.

And I'm going to ask the court to consider that at the point this testimony came in, the juries heard a day of testimony about the death of Mr. Pittman.

They've heard Mr. Young testify extensively about how Mr. Papillon believed that Pittman was a snitch in his case, and that by killing him it would end his case.

Why isn't the reference to my boys will take care of it, a reference to what he's going to do in the future?

Because this is all I need is $1,000 and my boy will take care of it.

You see what I'm saying?

He's saying my boy will take care of it, he's soliciting her money.

He's not saying, it's not a reference to what he's intending to do allegedly, right?

He's saying, you just do what I'm, so I guess the question is why is my boy will take care of it?

He's not saying I paid $1,000 to my boy, and he's going to take care of the snitch in my case.

He's saying, if you give me $1,000.

Without the $1,000 reference, the statement my boys will take care of it could link to his own plan.

Well, you can do just what I'm going to do is what he said.

Yes, right.

He's saying, you can buy, if you're having a problem, you can buy the same car I'm going to buy.

And he says, all I need is the $1,000, so he's soliciting money, and my boy will take care of it.

So that's a separate instance.

He's soliciting $1,000 to have his boy take care of it that has nothing to do with what he's going to do.

The place where it becomes an omission is when he says, you can do what I'm going to do.

And that may be vague, but then if you put in no snitch, no case, or no body, no case,

it's clear what we're talking about, especially after you've had young testify that Mr.

Paplon solicited the murder of Pittman because he thought he was a snitch, and he thought it would be a case.

Is that alternative or that resolution proposed to the trial court?

No, he objected on 404b grounds, and then there was a request, and that was denied.

And then there was a 404b request in the case in present.

But in terms of what I'm saying here at the court, and what was argued was that's 404b evidence.

That was what was presented to the court.

Our argument is 404b evidence.

There's an argument made by the state that this statement is inextricably connected with the rest of it.

And so it's not subject to 404b.

They cite the Wells case in New Hampshire, which dealt with an ANFSA, where there was a sexual assault,

and there was testimony from a victim that there was digital penetration prior to truck conduct.

And the court said, no, no, no, that's all part of the same criminal conduct.

So it's not going to be part of 404b.

They do talk about the Commonwealth versus Jackson case, which I think is a 1981 case out of Massachusetts,

which was a serial killer.

And the statement in that case was, this is in reference to dead bodies.

Said the one they found in New Hampshire, that wasn't mine.

And so the context of that in the case was that he was acknowledging that he had killed five people.

And the court in the Commonwealth court said there's no, basically there's no way to take that statement

and take out the fact that he's not just confessing to the one act.

He's confessing to multiple homicide.

Was there a harmless error analysis in that case?

They actually, no, in that case, they said, I mean, the issue in that case was they said that this is not going to be 404b,

because there's no way to modify the statement to take out the 404b case.

Because, you know, he said I killed, you know, basically saying I killed all of them.

What do you do with that?

You can't sanitize that.

So I think that was the basis for the 404b.

And then I think they did do the analysis, you know, they did look at prejudice versus probative and

this type of thing.

Who needs to present the modification option?

Well, the issue was the objection was made on 404b and it is 404b.

The state wants to say, well, this is inextricably connected to the rest of it.

I think that's then there's, it's not.

I mean, I would say if you look at this and you read it in the context that the jury would have it, it's not.

So it's 404b evidence.

So it shouldn't have come in.

And I mean, the remedy would have been to strike it or to change it.

But the court denied the objection.

The court could have said, well, ignore the part about all I need or something like that to fix it.

In terms of harmless error, I would like to talk about harmless error here.

I don't, I know the state argues, and I think the state, it seems as if you can see the 404,

if it's 404b, that 404b issue comes because I don't see that address here.

But the harmless error issue is, this is a case alleging that Mr.

Papalon solicited, you know, basically had, it was a first degree murder case that he asked

these people to kill Pittman and that they killed Pittman and that he was the leader of this whole thing.

And so when you start to put in propensity evidence, I mean, in other words,

if you can prove that case directly by, you know, you have young, you have these other people testifying.

But when you get into trying to say that, basically he's running a commercial

Pittman service for snitches in, you know, the city of Manchester.

And so definitely, you know, this guy's doing this.

Then of course, why wouldn't he kill the snitches in his own case?

He's, you know, wants to kill all these other snitches.

Does it have the same, does it have the same impact on both of his convictions?

What charges?

I think if prejudice is, I think there's prejudice in both cases.

And I think that there's not harmless, I mean, I think it's a 404B issue, the court erred.

And I don't believe it's a harmless error, especially where you have a mixed verdict and you have the competing testimony.

Given the amount of the other evidence, why is it reversible error?

Because I think it goes to the main issue in the case.

I mean, there's other evidence, but the question is we don't know what the jury based the decision on.

Although I would like to, I can transition in terms of that.

There's another piece, I'm not sure that this was brought out as well as I'd like it.

But in terms of the second degree murder charge, the law in this case,

the state in the case of Anthony said that you can't plan a reckless act.

Under New Hampshire there's 6268, I believe is the accomplice liability statute.

And there's the first provision that Roman numeral 3 makes

accomplice liability based on with the purpose of promoting a crime.

And so that's a purposeful thing.

There's a paragraph 4 that says notwithstanding the requirements of a purpose as set forth in paragraph 3A,

when causing a particular result is an element of an offense, an accomplice in the conduct causing such result.

He's an accomplice if he acts with that kind of culpability.

And I think the problem with the sufficiency question, and I want to bring this out because it goes to this issue of whether it's harmless or not,

I think the question of the sufficiency here is Mr. Papillon's not an accomplice in conduct.

He's not the shooter, he's not present at the scene of the crime when it takes place.

There's evidence that he may have texted people, but there's no evidence of what those texts were, any content of the communication?

Isn't there evidence that he provided the firearm?

The firearm, the testimony from Young, which was the witness that had the agreement with the state that the state relied on,

stated that the gun was provided to the, that he left the gun in the house.

But that was for purposes of self-defense because they were running a drug dealing operation there and they're concerned for their security.

And that was a testimony not of still well, but Young, the state's witness.

So I'm not sure, I mean, if you leave the gun, you're gone on your table at home.

Someone burglarizes your house, takes your gun that you've secured unsafely, and then shoots somebody.

I don't know that that's sufficient to make you a suspect.

But there was evidence that he told the guys he wanted this done.

Isn't that enough?

That's what I'm saying is that he's not an accomplice in conduct.

If he says that that goes to, if he was convicted of a first degree murder charge,

which he couldn't have been, but wasn't, then that would definitely constitute evidence of that.

But when you're not an accomplice of conduct, you're limited to a man's ray of purposefulness.

And so that goes, in a certain sense, this goes to the harmless error.

No, I'm not sure that it would be harmless error with regard to the second degree assault because I don't think there were sufficient facts

based on the way the accomplice statute's written.

I also point out, and this was not in the brief, but if you look at Roman 6 in the accomplice statute,

it states that unless otherwise provided a person's not an accomplice, in B says,

the offense is so defined that his conduct is inevitably incident to its commission.

And I would say with a reckless murder, a purposeful intent is always going to be incident to the commission of a reckless crime.

And there's case law, this court backed away from the Donahue business,

but those are in context of an accomplice in conduct.

So if you are standing outside the liquor store watching, and there's a murder,

you can be a accomplice liability because now you're part of the conduct.

And I think that's the problem here is that there's evidence of purposefulness, but

that isn't going to get you to a second degree case.

Mr. Doud, I'd like to ask you about the first issue, the waiver right to council.

Certainly.

I'm having trouble following the argument that the statements made by the prosecutor in closing

should inform our thinking on whether the waiver was knowing and intelligent.

Okay, I want to address that in terms of one of the issues is, well,

one of the words that was used as an idiot is what, he called him not a,

he said he was not a complete idiot.

The term idiot, in terms of psychology, in the old days,

it's not used in psychology anymore, that meant a person with an IQ of like under 30,

or mental age of three.

And so if you have one side of the state saying this person is close to a mental

age of three, and then they're supposed to be representing themselves in the court,

I think that opens some question about what is this, you know,

if someone has an IQ of 30, they're probably not going to be.

Well, I think the term idiot is used much more loosely than that.

Well, I think that was the connection is you can't on one hand be saying,

well, this person is, you know, has.

I'm not sure he was arguing to the jury that he has an IQ of 30.

He just did some stupid things.

Well, that's why I'm saying, that's why I'm saying in terms of the connection,

is this court has said that there's an obligation to vigilantly monitor

what's going on.

Right, but this isn't an Edward situation involving a defendant that

had been, you know, redeemed and competent previously and committed.

No, no, there's no, there's no, I do, I did say in my brief,

I think the question though is, it's not, he doesn't even ask the defendant

if he's literate, you can read and write English, you know,

if you can read the newspaper or any of those kinds of, I mean,

he asked him if he's on drugs.

But the defendant had a cocky with the trial court and chamber's

expertise, right?

Yes, and you guys, that's part of the record here.

That's been provided as part of the record and that's provided to the state.

I think that's pages for, it's like, I think it's somewhere like 410,

420 or so in terms of the transcript.

But the main pieces with the colloquial is there was no mention of the

obligation for direct examination.

And Loewe said you have to know the rules of procedure, you know,

to explain to the couple on what happens if you don't follow the

rules of procedure, you know, in terms of what can happen.

But he was telling him a lot of bad stuff can happen and this is a

really tough choice you're making with a lot of bad consequences that

can flow from it.

He made that pretty clear.

He did not provide specifics.

He did make the sports analogy overwhelmingly that, you know,

you're trying to play the giants with some guys you met on the street,

you know, during junior high type of arguments.

But he didn't go systematically through that.

It's a very brief colloquial and the discussion in chambers that

the camera portion is very brief.

You argue, you fault the trial court for not inquiring into the

defense, education, training, legal experience, or mental health.

But where's the requirement that that happened?

I think that that would be part of trying to understand whether it's

a valid decision.

We've never said you have to do those things.

I think that would be part of determining.

I think it's a, I think there's a real question if somebody does,

is not literate, then is this, you know, the court said we're not

going to have a different standard for competency.

But I think there's a question in terms of the factual predicate

of whether they're competent or not.

If someone's illiterate or has major learning disabilities

or anything else, I think that's important not just for the competency

thing, but there may be a disabilities type concern.

There may have to be accommodations to accommodate the person,

the same way you would have to accommodate a lawyer that had

limitations.

But after two days of trial and the ex parte colloquy,

and it followed on once the state returned with the state making

efforts, I think, that the judge make sure that your client

understood what he was doing.

So there was quite a bit of back and forth.

Can't the trial judge draw those conclusions

from the interaction he has with your client?

This is an appeal.

And I'm saying, I think that it would make sense in this case,

particularly look at how this plays out, especially in the midst

of trial, this is going in a homicide where the judges remind

him that of the penalties, the criminal penalties

that he might face, if he's convicted.

That wasn't part of the colloquy.

I know this court in heart mentioned that as part of Judge

Groff's colloquy as part of it.

I don't think this court has said, this is a good colloquy.

You don't need a colloquy.

The court's been all over.

And so part of this is looking for guidance

from the court of what actually, should there

be a colloquy and what actually do you have to say?

Because this is pretty brief compared to other.

There was a colloquy.

Do we have to find prejudice?

I think if there wasn't an adequate, yeah.

I believe that if there is not a knowing voluntary favor,

that would be prejudicial.

Well, it's a prejudice in the outcome.

I mean, your client actually got an acquittal

on a first degree murder charge.

Might have played all of them, who knows?

With Richard, I'm not sure.

So I've got the red light, but I'm happy to stay and talk.

I want to be fair to the other five.

May it please the court?

Peter, hanging on behalf of the state,

and I'll take questions at any time.

On the second issue.

Yes.

Are you really arguing it's not a 404-B issue?

I am arguing that it's not a 404-B issue.

It was a mission made by the defendant.

But what about the inexorably intertwined argument?

It seems very different than Wells.

And Wells had talked about that that's not a 404-B.

Right.

It is part of an admission.

And here, it was an admission to the defendant's agreement

to and solicitation of others to kill and inform it,

which under the circumstance in which it was made,

was clear or could be reasonably inferred

was the victim in the charged crime.

It's a statement of culpability in those charged crimes.

So to the extent that it was referenced

to another proposed victim, then is that admissible?

It is.

It's still part of an admission.

That's not 404-B. That's 403, right?

It would be 403, of course.

So are we on the same page that this is or is not

a 404-B violation?

It's not a 404-B violation.

How is it inextricably intertwined with the crime

he's on trial for?

In getting back to your honor, I'd

akin this to a statement, for example,

I'm having them do what they did to Hinckley.

Well, what did they do to Hinckley?

If it was they beat Hinckley up, then that's not

an admission of the crime of murder.

If what they had done before, in another case,

was they murdered Hinckley, then that

would be inextricably intertwined and give the admission

the proper, appropriate value.

And that goes to the counsel suggested

excising the statement.

If you did that as suggested by counsel, which was not

suggested to the trial court, if you excise that,

it leaves the rest of the statement critically ambiguous

to do what to the informant, to beat the informant up,

to threaten the informant, to pay him off.

And all those were a part of the defense in the case.

And if you left that critically ambiguous,

that would destroy the unculpatory nature

of the statement that was made by the defendant

shortly before the victims fell.

So because of all this, it was an admission.

It was not 404-B. It was not, for example, a threat.

It was an admission, direct culpability

to the charged conspiracy, as well as to the charged murder

as an accessory, which is what Mr. Papalon was charged with.

And you say it's intertwined with this victim's death,

not another victim's death.

Correct.

Well, he did offer money to his co-conspirators

for the murder.

But he did.

And the financial aspect of this statement

also is what's inextricably intertwined with what makes

it inculatory in an admission in this particular case.

So it's not government-

But the part where he's talking about this victim,

Patterson, or what-

Mr. Pittman?

Pittman, right.

I get that.

That's an admission.

But what I have difficulty following

is how it's an admission in regard

to another potential victim and another potential murder.

And why isn't that propensity evident?

And that's when I rely on Wells.

And I also rely on this case, this court's case in Nightingale.

That admission also involves admission or statements

to another crime does not make it 404b.

It's still an admission to the charged crime.

Well, Wells, I think that had to do with AFSA

and digital penetration, as opposed to intercourse.

In a sequence of temporarily related events.

And with respect to Wells, we didn't

rely in our brief on the factual connection

between this case and Wells, but the analysis that

was used by the court in Wells.

In terms of a factual comparison,

that would be Commonwealth versus Jackson,

which is the Massachusetts case, as well as in Nightingale.

And in Nightingale, the charge

was sale of oxycodone.

But the statement at issue was,

well, I don't have cocaine, but I have oxycodone.

Well, the statement that I don't have cocaine

is evidence of another crime.

But it's inextricably intertwined with the admission

that the defendant in Nightingale did make, which

related to the sale of oxycodone.

So using the analysis in Wells that when something

is inextricably intertwined with an admission

or with respect to the charged crimes, that's not 404b.

It's extrinsic evidence to the crime.

How can we be sure that Mr. Papillon's decision

to represent himself was a non-intelligent and voluntary

act?

It's our argument that it clearly was,

and the judge did not abuse his discretion

and allow Mr. Papillon to self-representation.

Based upon what?

Based on the entirety of the colloquia

that the judge had with Mr. Papillon.

The defendant's claim of error focuses on that colloquy.

And the issue isn't whether more could have been

said during a colloquy.

That could be frankly said of any colloquy

that more should have been said or could have been said.

The trial judge addressed here essential issues with the defendant.

He discussed in plain and direct language

with Mr. Papillon various pitfalls of self-representation

and also the various trial functions

that Mr. Papillon would have to undertake

if he engaged in self-representation.

No more was required by this court's decision in Davis

or any other of this court's decision.

Is there anything in the record about other contact

between the judge and this defendant

that might cut out their way in terms of whether the trial

judge committed an abusive discretion?

I would say after the fact, the defendant's conduct

which the judge was able to observe firsthand

can inform the decision of a knowing and voluntary waiver.

And the case law supports that.

And David supports that as well.

With respect to that, the defendant effectively

questioned his own witnesses.

He cross-examined the state's witnesses.

And he also raised objections.

For example, issue number two on appeal.

That was the defendant, Mr. Papillon,

who raised that 404B objection.

So he had interaction with the court

in terms of being able to interact with witnesses,

being able to raise legal objections

and also argue the basis of the objection.

For the 404B, he did raise two of the 404B prong

that the state has to establish 404B issue.

So he did have intellect that was readily observed

during the trial that he undertook by himself.

You note that the defendant argues here

that the burden falls on the state

to prove that he knowingly and voluntarily

waived his right to counsel.

And then you say it's an issue

that this court has not addressed.

You say we don't need to address it here.

But what is, we might not agree with that.

So what is the standard that you think should apply?

Who's got the burden?

It's a fundamental constitutional right.

And typically with respect to fundamental constitutional

right, the burden is on the state.

So if I was pressed on that issue,

it hasn't been fully briefed.

I'd say that it'd probably fall on the state.

But even if the state had the burden in this case,

it would clearly be met, given the colloquy

that was made between Mr. Papillon and the judge.

The judge also has in mind

that Mr. Papillon has a constitutional right

to represent himself.

Even if it's an unwise choice,

he has that absolute constitutional right

that was made clear to him

both by the judge and by his counsel during that court.

Back to the 404B issue,

the part of the statement that the defendant's arguing

should not have been admitted.

Are you saying that was provided for context,

i.e. to define what the rest of the statement

intended to convey?

And if so, then aren't confronted with State v. Davidson

that without a limiting instruction,

that leaves the jury to sort of use it for any purpose

whatsoever, not limited to the purpose

for which it was intended.

I haven't reviewed the Davidson case,

so I don't know if that requires the court

to give a suesfonte lemming instruction,

but in this case, none was requested by Mr. Papillon.

But in any event, going back to your question,

it does provide context.

For example, my boys will take care of it.

The context here was that this statement was made

just after Mr. Papillon had been in the company

of two of the charged co-conspirators,

including the trigger man who was shot and killed

Mr. Pittman, so that provided necessary context

as well as this happened just a short period

before Mr. Pittman was shot and killed.

So this was the necessary context

that showed that the statement was in fact an admission

as to the charged crimes of conspiracy

as well as the homicide.

If it were error, can you walk me through

how that might be harmless in each of the charges

on which he was convicted?

First, aside from all the other evidence

of Mr. Papillon's guilt,

I have a difficult time understanding

how the jurors would believe

the prejudicial part of the statement

and not believe the probative part of the statement.

So the jurors agreed with the statement,

they agreed with the statement

that Mr. Papillon had his boys commit this murder.

So the prejudicial part of the statement,

how does that add prejudice to the admission

that the jurors would have credited?

Does that make sense to the argument

that I'm trying to articulate?

I don't see how the jurors would be able to parse out

and credit the apparently prejudicial portion

but not credit the probative portion.

Willing to go out and hire bunches of people to kill.

He has an informant killing ring.

But he did do with respect to Mr. Pittman,

which was the probative value of the statement at issue.

So I have a difficult time envisioning

how the jurors would have the irreparably prejudiced

by one portion and not credit the other portion

which goes directly to Mr. Papillon's guilt.

Aside from that, you did have a wealth of information

of Mr. Papillon's involvement in the conspiracy

with the other three as well as his solicitation

and assessorial liability with respect to the murder.

You had not only eyewitness testimony

as to statements between Mr. Papillon and the others,

you had one of the charged conspirators

who testified at trial against Mr. Papillon.

You also had objective evidence in terms

of the various text messages that were sent

between Mr. Papillon and the actual triggermen,

including text messages and phone calls

between just those two and just the minutes

before the shooting and murder

and minutes after the murder.

And then immediately thereafter,

you have Mr. Papillon meeting up with the gunman

and the other co-conspirators and Mr. Papillon

bringing the gunman and one of the co-conspirators

out of the state.

So that is among the evidence that you have

of Mr. Papillon's guilt and in addition to that,

you also had the recorded statements

between Mr. Papillon and his sister

in which they spoke Haitian Creole,

a trial had an interpreter who talked

about what the import of those statements

which included Mr. Papillon admitting

that he had somebody else killed

and snitch on his case, Mr. Pitman.

So you have a wealth of information

aside from this single statement from a single witness

that implicated Mr. Papillon

in not only a conspiracy to kill Mr. Pitman

for which Mr. Papillon had a clear and powerful motive

to see harm come to Mr. Pitman,

but also exocereal liability in connection

with the actual shooting of Mr. Pitman that occurred.

So for all those reasons, the state would argue

that any error in the mission of that portion

of the defendants and contrary statement would be harmless.

With respect to the defendants' arguments

as to legal sufficiency, I believe those are adequately

addressed in the brief unless your honors

have any questions as to the legal sufficiency issues

or any further questions, the state relies on its brief

and asks that you affirm the judgment of conviction.

Thank you.

Thank you, Captain.

Case submitted.
