This is case 2018-0096, state of New Hampshire versus Jonathan J. Martin.

Good morning, Your Honours. May I please the Court? My name is Stephen Fuller and I represent the state in this state's appeal.

In this case, the trial court granted the defendant a new trial after a verdict of guilty on an AFSA based on its view that certain testimony, which was unobjective to

violated this court's holdings in State v. Cressy and Cressy's progeny. The court found that not only was the failure to object ineffective under the first prong, but it was also prejudicial under the second prong and thus granted the defendant a new trial.

Which presumably means the court would have granted the objection?

It does. However, even if there had been an objection, the testimony that we're talking about from Dr. Gladstone did not violate this court's holding in Cressy.

I understand your argument. I'm not sure that I agree with it, but here's what I don't understand. What is, as I understand it, the doctor testified that here are the symptoms of significance, quote-unquote, right?

Yes.

Symptoms of significance of what? Isn't it obvious that the symptoms of significance are symptoms of significance that she was sexually assaulted? Otherwise, what's the relevance? Symptoms of significance of what? That she likes chocolate cake?

No, the significant symptoms are the symptoms that she came in and reported to Dr. Gladstone.

And she testified about those convictions herself, right?

Yes, the victim did testify about these symptoms herself.

So what did Gladstone add?

She did not add her own opinion about what these symptoms signify.

She is male, actually.

She was reporting, well, she was reporting what the victim reported to her.

And why is that relevant? I mean, it seems to me that pretty clearly what, this was a, he said she said case, and the state knew that that's a tough case.

So they wanted to bring in somebody else to make it, not just he said she said, but here's this expert who believes the victim.

That's really what, that was the only purpose of symptoms of significance, wasn't it?

What are they significant to if it's not through a sexual assault?

Well, there are actually two points there.

The first is whether it's relevant to the victim's credibility.

And as the state argued, it was, because your honor is correct, this was a strict credibility case, the issue was consent.

Nobody, nobody's contested whether the sex had happened, the issue was consent.

How did Gladstone's testimony bear on consent?

If the victim was still under, still had these symptoms, both physical and emotional, three weeks after the event.

The defendant didn't dispute the fact that she had these symptoms, did he?

Yes, the victim, I'm sorry, the defendant's theory was that she had made up the story because she was worried about losing her job.

Right, but he did.

Because she had been discovered by her coworkers.

But he didn't question the fact that she had these symptoms.

There was no issue about whether or not she was depressed or losing sleep or losing weight.

Those questions weren't asked of the, of the, the victim, right?

The, the symptoms were not contested, if that's your, your honor's question.

It wasn't the interpretation of the symptoms that were at issue, whether it was embarrassment over being discovered or a result of being assaulted.

Correct, because if she is still feeling these symptoms three weeks, three weeks after the event, then, then a person who is simply worried about losing her job is not going to still have these symptoms three weeks after the event.

Well, first of all, well, first of all, did the, did the doctor actually testify to that?

No.

No, but, but isn't, I mean, it doesn't really, doesn't, so, so how do we know that?

So what is, again, the, you know, I keep getting back to what, what is the relevance of it?

Isn't, because it seems to me, isn't the, to the extent you want to say that, to the extent that what you're saying is the doctor was offering relevant evidence that she still had these symptoms and therefore that is, that means that she really was assaulted.

That she was, she, her, she was being credible when she said she was.

Isn't that exactly what Kressie said?

We, we don't, we don't accept that that's reliable evidence that you, that, that an expert can say, you know, I know because the, the victim has this symptom and this symptom and this symptom, that that means that they really were assaulted.

I thought that that's what Kressie said you couldn't do.

Stafie Kressie was a, was a very different case.

Dr. Gladstone did not interpret the victim's symptoms.

Dr. Gladstone did not, was not the victim's counselor, did not administer any kind of psychological tests.

She did not describe the symptoms in any way except to, to tell the jury what the victim reported.

And that they were symptoms of significance and so if they, if she, if you say she didn't try to interpret them then what was the relevance of it? Why?

But in Stafie Kressie, the expert witnesses here testified to counseling that the, that interviews with the, with the child victims.

I think the chief point, I think the chief point is that this is Kressie Light with a straight face.

It's, it's not Kressie, it's not Kressie at all because in Kressie after all of these indicia, after these interviews, after the art therapy, an expert who had treated the children came into the courtroom and said, these are, these symptoms are consistent with someone

who has been sexually abused.

Which, which the, and that, isn't that just a proxy for symptoms of significance? That's, that's what symptoms of significance means.

Isn't it? These are, these are symptoms that are consistent with somebody who's been abused.

Isn't that, I mean, isn't that, you know, isn't that really what, what the, what the term symptoms of significance means?

No, because even if Dr. Gladstone thought that, she didn't testify to it.

She did not.

Oh, I'm sorry.

Sorry, but if you look at also safety colons and safety loose, the other, the other cases that, that the trial court relied on.

All of these cases had to do with psychological or physical testing of the children and then an expert coming in and, and interpreting the symptoms, interpreting the results of the, of the art therapy, of the drawings

and telling the jury what it all meant.

Your position here is she was just reporting.

She was reporting what she was told and what she observed.

That's your position.

Yes.

Yes.

And that that was in fact cumulative of other evidence that came in on the same point.

It was cumulative of the victim's own testimony after her own symptoms.

And it was cumulative of the other testimony by her coworkers and by the EMT regarding her emotional state on the day.

It shouldn't come in.

It's cumulative.

It shouldn't come in.

Isn't your argument that it wasn't prejudicial?

It's not really your better argument.

Well, if it's, if it's cumulative, then it, then it's also harmless and harmlessness does not make out an ineffective assistance claim.

Is that a factual question or a legal one?

The prejudice in this instance.

Whether it's.

Who's in a better position to figure that out, us or the trial court?

The trial court, the court who observed the witnesses, observed the entire trial.

And observed the jury.

And, and if the, and observed the jury, and if the issue is credibility, then the trial court was there watching the witnesses testify.

And judge, I'm, I'm, excuse me, Judge Mangonis was the trial judge.

Is that correct?

I believe.

I mean, I know, I know he did.

Yes, he was.

Yeah.

But he was, so he was, he observed all this.

So we owe him particular deference.

On witness credibility?

Yes.

On whether this, this testimony violates Cressy at all?

No.

Right.

But on whether this prejudice the case and whether the, the impact of this issue on the jury.

He was there.

He was watching all the witnesses.

He was watching the jury.

Doesn't that mean we give it particular deference on, particularly on prejudice?

Some, but I think this court can also look at the, the, all of the evidence.

I mean, prejudice is about the totality of, of all the evidence.

This is in a harmless argument.

And.

You're not saying that the evidence was overwhelming against the defendant, are you?

We don't make a harmless, we don't make a harmless argument.

However, the prejudice prong for ineffective assistance is particularly high.

It's not simply trial of prejudice.

The prejudice for ineffective assistance means that the court has to have.

Our confidence in the, in the verdict is undermined.

I think that's the standard.

Yes.

That's not that high.

Is it?

It is.

Ineffective assistance is a very high standard.

Isn't, I mean, isn't the problem here is not simply that, you know, the, the expert

witness sort of repeated what the victim had said.

That if, you know, if this was, well, police officer at least it would be a little

bit, maybe, you know, there would be, you'd say, well, the jury could have thought

the police officer had it sort of enhanced credibility because he was a

police officer, but probably less than an expert.

But, but it's the fact that this is an expert who it's, it's not just anybody

repeating what the victim has already testified to.

It's an expert and presumably, you know, isn't, I mean, isn't the real danger

here that the, you know, that the jury is going to say, well, this

expert wouldn't have come in here and said these things if the expert

believed it was all baloney.

I mean, presumably the experts got some, you know, integrity, et cetera,

et cetera.

And so we, you know, if the expert came in here and was willing to testify

to this, it must be true.

Except that with respect to these symptoms, this expert did not give

an opinion.

I mean, other than to say that they're significant.

That's an opinion, isn't it?

Well, the symptoms of significance were the symptoms that the victim

reported.

And of course, anyone going in to see a doctor is going to report the

symptoms that they find significant.

Right.

That included both physical and emotional symptoms.

The fact that she was having trouble concentrating.

The fact that she was doing, that her grades were falling.

But also the fact that she had certain physical symptoms that she

was worried about.

Right.

So the issue of STDs.

I believe in your, in your brief, you argue that, that, that

points are relevant because the victim didn't have any, any such

STDs, right?

It was no evidence that she had.

So, so why did the state introduce the fact that Dr. Gladstone

examined this, this victim to determine whether or not she had

any STDs?

What was the purpose of that?

The, the testimony was, I mean, the defendant makes an argument

that, that he wanted to bring in other, other sexual encounters

to explain, to explain certain irritation, certain, certain

physical symptoms.

The testimony was, however, from both Dr. Gladstone and from

Nurse Ruiz, that, that was more likely an effect of the

medication that she had been given.

And so there was no suggestion in, in the evidence that, that

this irritation was a result of the assault.

Right.

And the victim testified to that, right?

The victim testified to it.

Dr. Gladstone testified to it.

Nurse Ruiz testified to it.

So, given the fact that the victim testified to it, why

did Dr. Gladstone have to testify to it?

What was the purpose of putting the expert on the stand

to testify about something that did not exist?

If it's cumulative, the question then is, is it ineffective to

not to object to it?

It's not ineffective assistance.

If it's evidence that's admissible, it's not ineffective

assistance to fail to object to it.

But there's no strategic reason for allowing this in, right?

You can't, there's no strategic basis for not

objecting to the evidence, is there?

I mean, Dr. Gladstone's testimony or the, Dr.

Gladstone's testimony was proffered to show that, that her,

that the allegation of fabrication probably wasn't true.

The fact that she didn't want to lose her job.

But, but why is that?

On that point, it, it wasn't admissible because, as

your Honor pointed out, credibility was everything in this

case.

But why was that, I mean, it seems to me that, that

unless you sort of accept the idea that the expert, that an

expert can really opine about this, which I thought that's

exactly what Cressy said you couldn't, why is it, it's not

obvious to me that somebody couldn't have all of those

same symptoms three weeks after if, if what had happened

is the, the, the victim had falsely accused her

boyfriend or her ex-boyfriend of doing these things and now

understood that this had, that this had turned into a

criminal prosecution and, you know, all these things were

going to happen.

I mean, maybe that would be, would be a reason that would

explain this.

And, and I guess I thought that that's the whole point of

Cressy is that to have an expert come in and say, well,

this means these, doing all of these things which might

mean this or might mean that really mean that the, the

person's telling the truth, I thought that's what Cressy

said, we don't accept that as being reliable.

Cressy was about the, the expert giving their opinion

based on a list of symptoms and a list of factors.

Dr. Gladstone did not give an opinion.

She did not connect the factors, the symptoms to

anything.

Right.

And that's the reason why Defense Council didn't

object because there was an alternative explanation.

Yes.

For these symptoms.

And, and if the, and if your honor's theory is correct,

that's fodder for argument, but that doesn't make the

evidence inadmissible.

I mean, then the parties can argue about the

significance of the symptoms on.

But let me listen, let me ask you this.

Could, are you saying that suppose that the, the

victim told one of her friends, you know,

everything's told her, one of her friends,

everything that she had, that she testified to.

Could the friend come in and say, you know,

she told me, she told me all these things?

Wouldn't that be hearsay?

I mean, you know, if they weren't, if they weren't

offering, if the defendant hadn't been cross-examined

on some prior inconsistent statement, let's assume

that that didn't happen.

Could the state just bring in, you know,

three of her friends?

She said the same thing that she's just testified

to, three of her friends.

Could those three friends come in and say,

oh yeah, she told me, just what she told you,

ladies and gentlemen, on the witnessing?

Wouldn't that, wouldn't it be obvious that she couldn't,

they couldn't do that, because it would all be hearsay?

And so the only reason the expert gets to do it

is the expert is really offering an opinion.

But, but she wasn't offering an opinion.

The, the importance was the victim's reporting

of the symptoms three weeks later.

Whether she actually, whether Dr. Gladstone

made any conclusions based on those symptoms,

she never testified to that.

But we'd have a different case if the language

symptoms of significance wasn't used.

I mean that seems to be the problem here.

Well, that, that, that is the phrase that,

that the defendant seems to latch onto

here and in the motion for new trial.

But the question is whether the evidence

itself violates Cressy.

And if you compare this evidence to what was found

to be unreliable in Cressy, this is not Cressy.

This is not a Cressy case.

So you say it turns on the underlying symptoms,

not the fact that the witness said

symptoms of significance.

Yes.

You're directing our attention there.

Don't get distracted by the symptoms

of significance language.

Exactly.

Exactly.

The question is whether Dr. Gladstone's testimony

was admissible.

And here it does not violate Cressy.

Thank you.

Thank you, counsel.

Brown?

May it please the court.

I'm Donna Brown and I represent Jonathan Martin.

I want to start off by talking about the,

one of the main points I think of the state's argument,

which is whether Dr. Gladstone's testimony

was an opinion or not.

And we did talk a lot about the symptoms of significance.

And obviously the court is aware of that phrase.

But that was not the only time that Dr. Gladstone

used the word symptoms.

Because after she talked about all of the symptoms

that we've discussed here,

at the end of her testimony,

and I believe it's on page 164,

Dr. Gladstone said that,

and I quote,

because of the persistence of her symptoms,

despite several weeks having passed,

and inferred in that is several weeks having passed

since the alleged sexual assault,

Dr. Gladstone referred

the alleged victim to counseling.

So what Dr. Gladstone is doing there

is saying these symptoms are important,

and she's already said that by saying they're significant,

but that there's some importance to the fact

that they're still there three weeks later,

which also answers the question.

So that is an opinion,

even though the word opinion isn't used,

that is a medical diagnosis.

And also too, there's many other things

that show that this was opinion.

Dr. Gladstone was referred,

the alleged victim was referred to her

for a medical evaluation

that was said in the testimony

at page 160,

that she reviewed medical records

in preparation for meeting

with the alleged victim.

Am I correct?

I mean, I assume this is true.

I assume that when the state called Dr. Gladstone,

the first thing is they went through her resume

that she had all these degrees

and lots of experience,

and she was a wonderful,

wonderful, qualified expert.

I would say beyond qualified.

I mean, she went to Columbia Medical School.

She teaches at Dartmouth.

She is, and in fact,

when she was describing her expertise

and what she does is that

most of the other physicians in the state,

when they have a case involving

an allegation of sexual abuse,

she's the go-to person

that they refer the case to.

And that's well known in the defense bars.

Absolutely, Your Honor.

So she's not, you know,

I was looking at this court,

I think it was like the day after we filed a brief

on this case, the side of the Wilbur case,

which was an ineffectiveness case,

but it was mixed because there was also this issue

of the improper characterization of some evidence.

But in that case,

it was, I think, a child protective service worker

who had given opinions

about the emotional condition

of the alleged victim.

And for that reason and other reasons,

this is so much more damaging

because of the preeminence

of Dr. Gladstone

in terms of her expertise

in this area.

But you do agree it is different than Cressy.

I do agree,

and I think factually

it's different from Cressy

and even Collins.

And I think the difference

is in kind,

it was in degree as opposed to kind

because, you know,

there was not the connecting of the dots.

What happened in Cressy is consistent with.

And loose,

loose is a little bit different because in loose

it was much more of the

what's the word I'm looking for,

of, there was like,

it was like picture interpretation

and whether that's even valid.

You know, I think that was a lot of what loose was about.

And Collins, it was definitely the connecting

of the dots. She's got PTSD

and this is the missing link and all of that.

So it is different

and we admit that.

What we're saying is because of the unique

factors in this case

and the language

that Dr. Gladstone used

it's still consistent with those cases.

And one of the reasons is

you know, you can't

separate out all these cases of like

well, here's the facts of Cressy

and here's the facts of Collins.

One thing that runs to all of these

cases and even Wilbur

and also I would add McCrae in there

is that this court

has always said

that you can talk about general

characteristics, say delayed reporting

or child abuse accommodation syndrome

if the child reports late

but you can never make it specific

to the alleged victim.

Well, to the extent

that all of those cases talk about

what the expert can't

testify about is things that

are kind of counter-intuitive

which typically comes in when

there's been delayed reporting.

There was no delayed reporting

here. Absolutely.

It happened immediately.

And I don't think the state's even arguing

that the child abuse accommodation

comes in here. I was just using

that as an example.

There's nothing counter, it strikes me

that there's nothing counter-intuitive

that needed to be

explained by an expert.

Right, no. And the other thing

that's important here too to go against

the state's argument is they're saying

well, this was cumulative

because there are all these other people

that were saying she was emotional.

No one said she was emotional three weeks later.

All of these people who were saying

that late hours

or into the early morning hours of that

day, of the 26th into the morning of the

27th, that she was upset. She was

crying. And that was very consistent

with the defense argument. I mean

here is this young woman who's caught

in a car with her ex-boyfriend

in the parking lot where she works. She's discovered

and in the testimony was that

the person, the

target worker who just discovered her

recognized her and

saw that he knew her as

an employee.

And in fact I think one of them testified,

my name is Kevin Curran, that she probably

would have lost her job but for

this. And she did

not dispute the fact that that was

right on her mind that she would lose her job.

Attorney Brown, can you address

a prejudice prong to this argument?

It's my understanding the state didn't reference

Dr. Gladstone in its closing argument.

It did not. And neither did the defense

which is important because

before there was this argument

that the defense

thought it wasn't counter to their

theory. And that

reason for that is they could easily explain it

as being consistent with and

they didn't do that in closing. Right.

Consistent with a false report. Right.

They didn't pursue that. Right. They did not pursue it

in closing and did cross

with Dr. Gladstone maybe because

they didn't want to know the answer.

Her answers to that question.

But they didn't deal

with it in closing.

Dr. I mean, judgment

onus's order deals with it. I think

he spends two or three pages somewhere around

18 to 20 on this.

And what he says is that

after the defendant

testified,

he says the defendant gave a plausible

gave plausible testimony

to his innocence. And he felt

that

after both the complainant

and the defendant had testified

was even

put a gun either way depending

on what who the jurors believed

and that Dr.

Gladstone's testimony

impermissibly tip those

scales. And he also went on to say too

he couldn't think of any reason

why her testimony was even relevant.

And so

that prejudice prong

as judgment

onus watching this trial, seeing

both of these people testify,

he felt that the scales

were even after

Mr. Martin

had testified, which also goes to

your question too. You look at both

of the states and the defense's

closing arguments, they were both

laser focused on the defendant's testimony.

The state wanted to say, hey, forget

what he said here at

the trial and look at what he said to the police

and the defense was trying

to rehabilitate and say look at what

he said here. And I think that might

also explain why they didn't go back to

Gladstone. But I do want to point

out this whole rebuttal

thing that somehow

this testimony is

rebuttal to the defendant's

theory that she was lying, afraid

of losing her job. There's no merit

to that because the state did talk about

Dr. Gladstone in their opening

at page 12. And

at page 12, the state said

that about a week after

the alleged victim did her CAC

interview, she undergoes yet another

medical exam with Dr.

Wendy Gladstone. And the reason for

this exam is to make sure she doesn't

have any sexually transmitted diseases,

make sure she's okay.

Continuing with the state's opening,

she has some other concerning

symptoms such as weight loss,

sleeplessness, fear

and seeing the defendant.

The state can't argue that this was

rebuttal testimony when

they talked about it in their opening. They also

gave, you know, flashing

red lights to the defense to say

like oh, we're going to talk about

these behavioral characteristics that

are clearly not admissible

under Cressy and on the other line of

case. So Gladstone had just come in and said

these are the symptoms that I observed or

she told me about.

That's it. That's a different case with

her. The symptoms I think is still problematic.

I think if Dr.

Gladstone, you know, and I see this

in a lot of cases, say you have an

emergency room doctor and the

alleged victim goes to the emergency room

and she recounts her story. And then

the state calls the ER doctor

as under the medical exception

to say what she said

there. And that comes in as a

hearsay exception, but the doctor

isn't giving any gloss to it. The doctor

is just saying this is what she said

to the doctor or gave her the

rape kit or whatever.

I don't think that would run afoul

of Cressy. The problem here

I think just... Even in the context

of the doctor's specialty?

Well, if the doctor

or you know, these days more

likely it's a same nurse, but there

especially is to collect evidence and

not to have

to look more like psychological symptoms.

I think where the state

here certified

this expert in the area of

treatment of

people who are suspected...

So this expert would have a tough time

saying anything that you'd accept

because of her...

Well, first of all, let's just say if

there was something that

had been said to this expert that

was relevant and they

wanted to get that in, they didn't even have

to qualify her as an expert.

They say she was

a physician and she interviewed her

and what did she say about X?

And that's it. And leave off

all of the other things

that was done here, but

then I think that would

not be problematic if it was just

a way to get in a statement that was

relevant. But that's not

what happened here. The other thing

that I wanted to say about this

rebuttal argument, so first of all I think

it doesn't hold any weight because of that.

But the other thing is if you really boil down

the state's argument, what they're saying

is we weren't offering Dr. Gladstone's

testimony

to prove that the alleged victim

was telling the truth.

We were offering Dr. Gladstone's

testimony to prove that the

alleged victim wasn't lying.

They're the same thing.

And that's why I think that

rebuttal argument, and there was no doors open.

It wasn't like, you know, the defendant had

made some argument that, hey, why doesn't she

still have these symptoms three weeks later?

That would be a different case.

That is another problem

with their case.

Finally, the

trial council should have

been

unnoticed that this was impermissible because

page 162 and 163

he did make an objection,

a hearsay objection,

which was kind of, as I said

I would have thought

that the one

objection that was impermissible here

is hearsay because it's a doctor

and it would have come in under the medical exception.

But he says

he didn't want Dr. Gladstone

to be repeating what the alleged victim

had said, and then to quote

attorney Goulden, he said

he wanted Dr. Gladstone to, quote,

move on to the diagnosis.

So attorney Goulden

knew the diagnosis

was coming

and it was.

It just didn't use the word diagnosis.

Dr. Gladstone didn't use the word opinion,

she did give opinions.

She did give diagnosis

and it was prejudicial to the defendant

because as

Judge Manganus said

this was

an even case and this

impermissibly tipped the scale

and therefore it was prejudicial

to Mr. John.

What should we do about the issue that Judge Manganus didn't

reach involving the failure to give notice?

Yeah.

The more I think about that

I might be wise for this court

to, if this court does

affirm the order

and remand

to let the trial judge deal with that issue

because there may be other things that

play into that.

I still feel that that was ineffective

and not filing notice on that issue

but

I think that it may be best

to, if the case does get remanded

to leave that

to, it will be a new trial judge now

as Judge Manganus is retired.

Nothing further.

Thank you. Thank you.

Case submitted and the court stands in recess.

Thank you.
