This is Case 2018-0047, Wayne Sabato v. the Federal National Mortgage Association.

Good morning. May it please the court. My name is Robert Shepherd. I'm with the firm of

Smith-Weiss Shepherd in Nashua, and I represent the plaintiff, Wayne Sabato, in this matter.

And this is a case involving the homestead right of Mr. Sabato. And that's our position

that the Superior Court made an era of law when it reduced the $120,000 homestead right by

the outstanding amount of a second mortgage, where the second mortgage came after and secondary

to a first mortgage and secondary to the homestead right.

But vis-a-vis the second, he waived his homestead right, correct?

He did.

He waived his homestead right vis-a-vis the second, which only applies to the second

mortgage. It does not apply to what was prior to the second mortgage. So he had

an outstanding homestead right. And recognizing in our state, we don't have to register our

homestead right. In the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, you have to register your homestead right.

So how do you determine if there's an outstanding homestead right when you give a second mortgage?

So your client filed his petition after the foreclosure sale. Is that right?

Yes, it is.

At that point in time, did your client have an ownership interest in the property?

Did not.

So don't we need an ownership interest as well as occupancy for a homestead right

to be effective?

I don't believe you do. I think RSA 480 colon 3 small a talks about the fact that the husband

or the wife of an owner continues to have a homestead right provided they occupy it and

it's for their lifetime. So you don't have to have an ownership interest. You don't

have to file this before the foreclosure. That homestead right remains outstanding.

And it remains outstanding because as I was going to say, when you do a title examination

and you're giving a second mortgage, you should be able to find out whether the homestead right

is outstanding or not. You should examine that first mortgage, which any prudent title

examiner would have done.

And here Fannie Mae had the first mortgage. They owned the first mortgage, right?

They did.

They did.

So how would they, so what would you, what would you envision then what if the, if

you're right, why does, what would somebody do who wanted to make a second mortgage?

What would, what would they, what would they have to do that have to do a title examination?

No, no, no. So they do the title examination, right? They find out that there was no waiver

of the homestead right as to the first mortgage. Now what do they do?

They have to go to Mr. Sabato and, and say to him and his wife that we're not going

to grant the second mortgage unless you waive your homestead right, correct the

record for the first mortgage. And they'd have to sign a, have it, so they have

something. So in other words, they'd have what you're saying is they would have

to, the waiver would that they executed for the second mortgage would have to say

this applies to the first mortgage also.

You could do that. Yeah, I agree. You could do that. Normally, however, being in a,

in a firm that has done a lot of title work over the last 35 years, normally

when we find something like this, we would correct the record by recording

an individual waiver of homestead as it applies to that first mortgage.

So it's the same thing, by the way, Your Honor, if you're doing a second

mortgage, you do a title examination, you find that there's a lien, there's

a lien on record from Home Depot or someplace like that. If you give your

second mortgage, you're giving it in jeopardy. You're giving it subject to

that lien, just like you're giving the second mortgage subject to the

outstanding. Sure, but I guess the thing I don't understand is why isn't the,

the, at least as to the amount of the second mortgage, haven't you waived

as to that amount? You have waived it to that amount as it applies to the

second mortgage, but not as it applies to the outstanding homestead right.

So in other words, if there, if everything occurred. So if you, but if you,

but there's only one, you don't get a separate homestead right as to each

mortgage. There's only one homestead right, right? So if you, if you was,

if you use up, let's say $50,000 of the, of the homestead right on the

second mortgage, why isn't the trial court right that, that the only

thing that's left is the difference between that $50,920?

Well, first of all, there's no case law to support that position whatsoever.

There's never been any case law in this state that says that your

homestead right gets reduced by a second mortgage if you failed to

waive it on a first mortgage. So that second mortgage is subject to the

first mortgage. And no, it doesn't get reduced.

Is there any case law in support of your position?

No, there is not. There is not. Thank you, Judge Hicks.

But isn't, why isn't the right result here that, yes, you waive the mortgage,

you waive the homestead right to the extent of the value of the second

mortgage? And I'm just, let's say it's $50,000 just to make it easy.

Right. Now there's, so now there's $70,000 of homestead right left.

Right. That wasn't waived as to the first

mortgage so that when you foreclose on the second

mortgage, you do that subject to the first mortgage, right?

So that the fight is really between, in other words, the second

mortgagee, if they want to own the property, they have to,

instead of writing one check to the first mortgagee for whatever

that amount is, they write two checks. One to the homestead

holder for the difference between, for the $70,000 difference

under my example, and the rest, the balance goes to the first mortgagee.

I disagree. They would write two checks, one for $120,000 for the full homestead

amount because it has not been waived and it is outstanding.

It is basically a lien on the property. But then under your theory,

there's a, there every, for every indebtedness, the homestead right applies separately.

So it's, so it's $120,000, is there any case law that

supports that proposition? I think it's the statute is clear.

So, you know, the statute is an ancient statute. I'm not sure it envisioned

first, second, third, fourth mortgages. I'm not sure it did.

It certainly envisioned a first mortgage where, if you didn't waive your

homestead right, you preserve it 100%. And so that

first mortgage and that non-waived homestead right is outstanding.

So for instance, if this second mortgage had been $150,000,

as opposed to, in this case, it was $65,000,

and he didn't waive his homestead right on the first, the outcome of this

case would be that he has no homestead right, and they could simply foreclose.

And furthermore, the outcome in this case would

further go if they're out. Why is that unfair? If you've waived your homestead

right for $150,000 mortgage, why is it unfair that you have,

that you've given it up? Because this mortgage holder

has a duty to do a title examination to see if there are any

liens on the property or any encumperances on the property.

An outstanding homestead right not waived on a first mortgage

is an outstanding lien or encumbrance on the property.

That's why it's not fair. In addition to the first mortgage?

Yes. Absolutely. In addition to the first mortgage, it absolutely is.

So a property that's valued at $150,000, gets a first mortgage for $100,000,

there's a lien on that property for $220,000. Correct. If the

homestead right had not been properly waived, as it had not in this case.

And it's not set off by, in any way, by the second mortgage.

That's the... No, it is not set off by the second mortgage. And frankly,

like I said, in other states, they record the homestead right

in order to assert it. Commonwealth of Massachusetts,

you have to record your homestead right. But New Hampshire doesn't require that.

But isn't the other thing, isn't the homestead right limited to the

value of the property? In other words, if I suppose I buy a

property that's worth $100,000, the homestead right that I have in

that property is only $400,000, isn't it?

I agree. It is. That's not the issue here. There's not an

issue of valuation that the property isn't valued above the homestead right.

Is there title insurance on the first mortgage? I don't know.

I assume that's what this case is all about, Your Honor, but I don't know.

We're in the record, do we have the value for the home?

Pardon me? We're in the record, is there an evaluation of the

market value of the home? Well, there is not on the record,

but I would believe that both counsel would agree that the house is

worth more than $120,000. Is there any equity in the house?

No. Is that relevant?

No, it's not. Does it matter to our analysis that Fannie Mae is the

holder of the first mortgage as well, or is that completely irrelevant to how we

should think about this? In the fact that they're now the owner

of the property, is that what you mean? Yes.

Okay, so I don't think it is relevant. If Fannie Mae had discharged their

mortgage before the foreclosure on the second mortgage, that may be relevant,

but they did not. And if you look at the appendix and it shows

the foreclosure deed that went from the second mortgage holder to the second

mortgage holder, because there were no bidders at the foreclosure sale,

says it's subject to a first mortgage in the amount of $173,000.

So that mortgage was outstanding at the time.

So even if Fannie Mae had been 173, it's your position that they

still hold your client 120? Correct.

Yes, absolutely. They did. And they had a duty to have that

homestead right wave. They failed to do that. Fannie Mae or whoever did the title

had a duty to do that. And they did not do it.

So is this an all-or-nothing proposition? Is there any middle ground

for you and your client? Well, it appears that the Superior

Court believes it's a middle ground. That's why we appealed it.

We do believe it's an all-or-nothing proposition.

And is it that because it was only a second mortgage foreclosure?

Right. They didn't foreclose both.

They did not foreclose both. And that's very relevant.

There's a reason why the first mortgage holder didn't foreclose.

They didn't foreclose theoretically. I don't know because I'm not intimately involved.

But they didn't foreclose because there was an outstanding homestead.

So this is what confuses me. Assume I buy a condo for $100,000.

And I buy it with my wife. We pay cash for that.

Even though the property is worth $100,000, it's your position

that we each have $120,000 in homestead, right, to that property.

Correct.

It's not subject to the value of the property.

Well, it is. I mean, so if it's only worth $100,000,

it's the homestead rate that you and your wife have is up to $240,000,

or the fair market value of the property, period.

So it would not be a payment in excess of that.

So a lot of this comes up frequently in bankruptcy court, this issue.

And so if there was attachments on the house

and you had $100,000 of equity and you and your wife have $240,000 worth of homestead

rights, they couldn't attach your equity in the house.

So what rights did your client waive when he signed the waiver?

What did he think he was waiving?

So when he signed a waiver, it was to the second mortgage only.

If you look at it, I don't know what he thought he was waiving, to be honest with you,

but it appears to be a valid waiver.

It just signed Wayne Sabato, husband of Cheryl Sabato.

Doesn't say Astrick, and by the way, I've got this other homestead, right?

It doesn't say that.

Yeah.

It does not say that.

The Superior Court, and we agree that it was a proper waiver on that.

It's not an issue before you, whether the waiver on the second mortgage was

proper for that second mortgage.

But the case law is clear too.

You have to have a waiver for each and every mortgage.

So a waiver on a second mortgage does not apply to a first mortgage unless they put in

Judge Linn's language saying that I'm waiving the homestead to this one and to my prior mortgage.

Well, and theoretically, if they pay down the first mortgage to something under 120,

then there would be an exposure of the homestead exemption on the second mortgage.

Right. Yeah, there would be.

That's correct.

So that's our position.

It is our position that Wayne Sabato is entitled to $120,000,

his full homestead right.

The exceptions that are listed in the statute, there are five of them,

and this appears to be a sixth one that the Court is trying to add, and it's not proper.

Is the fair market value limited by the foreclosure sale?

I mean, can that $65,000 be considered the fair market value and therefore

it's a limitation on his homestead rate?

I don't think so.

I don't think so.

I think the foreclosure purchase price was $64,000,

whatever the amount of the outstanding second mortgage was,

but it was also subject to the $173,000 first mortgage.

So I don't think it is.

If we accept your position, doesn't that make it significantly harder for

someone to get a second mortgage?

Because it's not, well, why?

No, because it's assumed that's why

malpractice insurance is so high for title insurance companies.

It's assumed that a proper title search will be done

to locate this defect that the waiver was not there.

If it's common practice.

But the husband here knew that he hadn't waived, right?

I mean, it's not so, you know, he now waves as to the second.

What does he think he's doing when he waves as to the second?

You're sort of saying it's kind of a joke.

He's waved as to the second and it doesn't make any difference

because he's still got-

No, it's absolutely not a joke, Your Honor.

If you look at, he signed it simply as the husband of.

I can't- we didn't have evidence as to what he was thinking when he signed it.

You know, you go to a closing, you're not-

Well, it's required for the second mortgage.

So first mortgage wasn't a purchase money mortgage.

Was not.

It was a refund.

That's correct.

So when the second mortgage or look, they would have seen,

because it was in the record, that the person refinancing was the wife,

was a married woman.

Right.

So they would know there was a husband.

Right.

And they should have known to look at the first mortgage to see if there was a waiver

on the non-purchase money mortgage and they didn't.

To say what he knew when he was going there, you know, these are not lawyers

that are going to a closing.

These are not necessarily sophisticated people.

You go to a second mortgage closing.

You want the $65,000?

We need your husband to sign.

They don't say because you need to wave your homestead, right?

So we can eject you from the house or foreclose.

They simply say-

I guess the thing I'm having trouble with is he gave up, by signing,

he gave up $65,000 of value, it seems to me, of the homestead, right?

So what if the value received is more than the first mortgage within the homestead?

Oh, sure.

I agree with that.

But I mean, assuming that that's true here.

So for instance, say he took a second mortgage of $65,000.

He has a first of 173.

Oh, they do.

The wife does.

And the 173 is paid off at some point.

Then, yes, that waiver of a homestead applies.

But until that 173 is paid off, it does not apply to the first mortgage.

So all Fannie Mae needed to do was discharge his first mortgage?

Yeah, I think so.

I think if they had done that, they might have been okay.

I don't know.

Is there any state either by case law or statute that

adopts the approach you're advocating here?

It's my position that our statute is clear on this.

Yeah, anywhere else?

No, not that I know of.

Okay.

Thank you.

Good morning, may it please the court.

My name is John Plagg and I am representing Fannie Mae.

I think I agree with virtually everything you've said this morning.

There was a waiver and it wasn't a waiver of some kind of weird thing.

It was a waiver of the homestead right.

And it wasn't as to a particular mortgage.

It was a waiver as to this property.

I'm not going to claim my right to a homestead.

That is what he waived.

Up to the amount of the second mortgage?

No.

And here's why.

Foreclosure is, as you know, a statutory process.

The court can't change the statute.

The court can find the statute unconstitutional,

but it can't change the procedure.

And the procedure is, if the mortgage isn't paid,

that mortgagee can go do a public auction under RSA 479.

I'm not proud of this, but I say this to give you some background.

In the last 30 years between Maine and New Hampshire,

I have done about 10,000 foreclosures.

And that's not a good thing, and I'm glad that that has changed now.

But I went through two rough times in the market

where the prices went down and banks failed and so forth.

So I have seen a lot of foreclosures.

I've been to a lot of foreclosures.

I've represented people that have bought at foreclosures.

The bank under the statute needs to be able,

unfettered, to go put this on the block

and sell it to whoever's going to buy it.

But isn't it a distinction that it's a second mortgagee?

No.

But of course it is, isn't it?

You couldn't, you can't sell over the first mortgage, right?

If you, unless you buy out the first mortgage,

you're selling it subject to the first mortgage.

Absolutely, but it doesn't affect my process.

My process is, in terms of bidders,

they need to be able to come and say,

all right, there's a first mortgage.

I'm buying subject to that mortgage.

But other than that, I don't have any obligation

to people who might or might not live there.

Mr. and Mrs. Sabato have a homestead right,

only if they live there.

But why isn't it, why is it in any way unfair to your,

if you agree that you take subject to the first mortgage?

Why is it in any way unfair to your client

to preserve the homestead right for the balance

of what was not used up, so to speak,

by the second mortgage against the first mortgage?

And that was all it, as I said before,

all it really means is that instead of writing one check

to the first mortgagee, you divide up that amount

between the first mortgagee and the homestead owner.

For two reasons.

The statute doesn't call for that as a procedure,

and you can only follow the statutory procedure.

What I have to do in my foreclosures,

I have to publish for three consecutive weeks,

I go and stand there at the property and auction it off.

If you go and bid a dollar,

second mortgagee comes in and bids a dollar.

Second mortgagee will probably bid.

That might sell the first mortgage

and the homestead holder gets nothing.

That's correct.

Now, I'm going to buy a subject.

And even if then the second mortgagee who buys it

turns it around, flips it and sells it for $200,000,

the homestead right holder is out of luck.

Correct.

You've got two separate contracts here.

As a second mortgage holder,

I'm hoping that the first mortgage is screwed up.

That gives me more equity.

I don't care about the problem with that mortgage.

And I shouldn't care.

In fact, if this afternoon I went and discharged that mortgage,

would there be any homestead right connected

between the first mortgage and the second mortgage?

No, because that mortgage is gone.

That contract is gone.

So to draw a connection.

But if you didn't own both, sorry,

but if the mortgagee weren't the same entity,

you wouldn't have that control over the first mortgage holder.

That's correct.

As a second mortgage holder,

the reason the second mortgage holder didn't sell the property

beyond selling it to themselves at the foreclosure sale

is because that first was sitting there.

They didn't know it was bad or limited,

not completely bad, but limited.

At that point in time, your client owned the first mortgage, right?

Fannie Mae owns the first and can discharge it.

And if that's discharged, that's gone.

Nobody's talking about mortgages from 15 years ago

that have been discharged.

Likewise, if this mortgage is discharged,

we're not talking about any homestead right

from that mortgage connected to this mortgage.

You only look at the mortgage that was foreclosed on.

And the homestead right is limited to the value of the property?

Absolutely, yeah.

You don't have to write an additional check.

If your client had bid 173 on the property,

we wouldn't be here today.

If my client had bid 173 on the second mortgage foreclosure,

my client didn't buy at the foreclosure.

They bought after the foreclosure.

And my client wouldn't have gone to the second mortgage

foreclosure because it's sitting in first place.

So the only reason Fannie Mae bought the property

from the second mortgage holder

is because it realized that its first mortgage

was not as good as it should be.

They realized they couldn't foreclose on the first

because there was an outstanding homestead.

So who foreclosed? Your client did, right?

No. The second mortgage holder foreclosed

bought it at the foreclosure, sat there with title

subject to the first.

The first examines their title and says,

oh, we got a problem.

We can't foreclose.

Why? Because it's an outstanding homestead.

But we look at the title and we see

that the second did foreclose, and sure enough,

they had a waiver of the homestead.

So their title is good.

It's subject to us, but we can dump our own mortgage

so we don't care.

Aren't you essentially asking us to correct

title examiner's error for the first mortgage?

Has nothing to do.

No. The burden is not on me.

As I said before, I'm happy if there's a problem

with the first mortgage.

As nobody is going to lend in this state,

if they have to get into the weeds on every single mortgage

and make a connection between one contract and another,

there's nothing to do with those two contracts.

You think that's a weed?

That's absolute weed, because it's not a question of,

I examine the title and I say, is there a mortgage?

Okay, there's a mortgage.

Well, am I going to lend?

What's the property worth?

How much is the first mortgage?

Am I going to lend?

That's what I'm going to do.

Is the mortgage or married?

I want to know if the mortgage or is married,

and they asked that question on the second mortgage

and they got him to sign.

So I'm good with that as far as the second mortgage.

What the problem with the Superior Court's decision was,

they came up with a scheme that's not in the statute

requiring some payoff for this difference

between our mortgage and the homestead.

So if I'm a bidder at a foreclosure sale

and 99 times out of 100,

it's a professional bidder at a foreclosure sale.

Mom and Pop can't get financing ahead of time

to go buy the property at foreclosure.

It's going to be bought by an investor

who's got their own money, don't need financing.

They're going to go buy it, flip it,

and fix it up and whatever.

So those are the people buying.

If this person standing there at the auction

sees that maybe there's some furniture in the house,

they can't get in because nobody ever lets them in.

If they get in, that's because they sneak in a back door.

When they're looking in the house,

if it's occupied, they've got to say,

hmm, is it occupied by the borrower

and did they waive their homestead and are,

or is it a tenant there?

Because if the borrower has moved out,

their homestead goes.

The homestead's only good if you're living there.

You have to occupy in order to have the homestead.

Do you need to own it?

No, ownership, the whole purpose of homestead

is for the non-owner because the owner

is going to have to sign the mortgage

to give up their ownership interest.

But the homestead specifically applies

to those that don't have a title.

It went back to the days when a creditor,

the husband always owned the property.

The husband got sued.

They took the house away from the husband

and the wife and the children are on the street.

And so they protected the wife

so that the wife wouldn't be on the public doll.

That's how that came about.

So it was always somebody

that didn't have the title to the property.

Because if you think about it,

if you've got title, you already own the property.

You don't need a homestead.

You've already got right to the property.

The question is waving that right.

And he only signed, Mr. Sabato only signed

that mortgage, that second mortgage, for one reason.

And that was because he wasn't going to get the money

unless he gave up that homestead.

And then the lender knows that

and knows that it can go to a foreclosure.

But why isn't it, I agree with everything you just said,

but why isn't it limited to what he,

to the value that he got for the second mortgage?

He waived, yes, he waived the homestead right,

but why isn't it limited to the amount of the second mortgage?

Because let's say you buy the property at foreclosure.

Who are you going to pay

after you pay the first mortgage,

whatever the first mortgage bids?

You then say you bid $50,000.

He's got $120,000 homestead.

You've got to pay the difference between the $50,000 and the $120,000.

Who are you going to pay that to?

Well, maybe what you do is pay the money into court

and say, look, there's a first mortgage,

but the first mortgage is subject to this homestead, right?

We're paying this money into court

and the parties will fight it out.

It's not our fight.

Picture yourself at the auction.

You want to buy this property.

You figure it's worth this amount.

You got to put some money into it.

You haven't been inside,

so you don't know what the condition is.

You want to flip it and make a profit.

Wait a minute.

I got to pay when I get done,

not only what I bid,

but the difference between what I bid

and the homestead exemption.

And I don't even know if it's two homestead exemptions

or one homestead exemption.

And who am I going to cut the check to?

But you know you have to pay off the first mortgage, right?

And you're willing to take that risk.

Then I'm out.

I'm not going to bid.

And you're never going to have anybody buy

a foreclosure sale

because they're not going to pay full fair market value.

They're not going to pay more than,

and in your scenario

if the property is worth 120,

I've just paid 50,000

and then up to 120,000

to somebody.

Maybe I don't have to pay it

because maybe there's no homestead

because maybe they don't live there.

Maybe a tenant's there.

Maybe nobody's there.

So I'm not going to bid

because I don't want to find out

that I now have to pay a full fair market value

for a house that's trashed.

The basement's flooded.

They've removed every stick of,

you know.

But if everybody agrees that the fair,

that the homestead is limited

by the value of the property,

doesn't that?

No, I'm not going to pay

the value of the property.

So the 65,000 in this case

was not the value.

You would not consider that

the fair market value of the property.

Right, right.

Whoever bid at the foreclosure sale

is going to buy it

with specifically in mind,

I'm taking a big risk

because I don't know what I'm going to find

when I go in there.

Aside from the condition of the property,

isn't it a fairly easy thing to do

to figure out if it's a purchase money

mortgage or a refi?

I mean, wouldn't they at least know that?

And they'd know the identity

of the first mortgage holder.

The way foreclosures work is

nobody, if you've got

hundreds of foreclosures going on,

everybody is not examining

the title to every property.

They'll have bidders that will go.

Who should suffer the risk of that?

What's that?

Who should suffer the risk of that?

Not the bidder because otherwise

you're shutting down the process

and the banks are going to own

all the properties

and they're not going to be able to sell them.

Well, wait a minute.

I guess the list of horribles

that you're sort of portraying here,

the thing I'm having some trouble with is

your client bid $65,000,

if I understand correctly,

to purchase the property at the,

or whoever bidded foreclosure did that.

Is that right?

Correct.

And that was the first mortgage.

That was the second mortgage holder that did that.

So the person that did that knew,

I assume would have to have believed

that the property was worth

at least $65,000 plus whatever was owed

on the first mortgage.

Right?

Otherwise, why bid $65,000?

Why bid that amount if you didn't think it was worth,

it was worth that plus the amount of the first mortgage?

Right.

Not necessarily.

When a bank bids,

they're typically bidding their total debt.

So the total debt of the second was probably $65,000

and they were instructed to bid $65,000.

They don't usually make a,

I go to these auctions and I'm just amazed at this.

But if they knew they had to satisfy the first mortgage,

they'd have to pay that amount of the price.

That's correct.

They really,

If they didn't own it,

if I owned the first mortgage,

held the first mortgage,

they'd have to deal with me.

Yeah, they really should not have bid $65,000.

They should have bid $1,000

because they're buying it,

they're real purchase prices,

the first mortgage plus $1,000.

So, but it doesn't matter.

They were stupid and bid $65,000

and paid more in transfer taxes.

But it doesn't have anything to do with the homestead in it.

And I'll tell you, the statute,

if you look at the statute.

If they bid the first mortgage plus $1,

we also wouldn't be here.

Because then the homestead right holder

would have his hand out.

But there'd be money to cover it.

Right.

If you look at page four of the appellant's brief,

they've got the statute set out there.

And subsection three of 480 colon four

says one of the exceptions to the homestead right

is in the enforcement of mortgages,

which are made a charge there on according to law.

Okay.

It does not then go on to say,

so long as every mortgage in the title chain

complies with the law.

It doesn't say that.

And if the legislature wanted it that way,

they could have made it that way.

But 5A does say that.

Except the mortgage made time purchase

to secure payment of purchase money.

Yeah.

But that's that and then unless it's executed by both.

So that section three is modified by 5A.

Yes.

But in this as applicable to this case,

it doesn't say anything about whether this complies,

any other contract has any mistakes in it.

Counsel, your red light is on.

I'm happy to be done.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Thank you.

Thank you.
