This is case 2018-0406, state of New Hampshire versus Christopher Daniel Peach.

May it please the court. Thomas Barnard on behalf of Christopher Peach. I've reserved one minute for rebuttal.

Plan to focus on the second issue in the brief, sufficiency, and time permitting turn to the first issue, compulsory jointer.

I'd like to make three points about sufficiency. Focus on three areas. First, the procedural background.

Second, the legal requirements for sufficiency. And third, the evidence here.

After Peach rested, there were three pending charges. There were two single-act AFSAs that were based on solid sufficient evidence.

And there was one pattern AFSA that was based on more speculative or equivocal evidence.

And the state made this very aggressive tactical decision. It would nullpros the single-act AFSAs and proceed solely on the pattern.

By doing so, it forced the jury into this all-or-nothing decision, either conviction on the pattern or outright acquittal.

The state appears to have bet that the jury would be so adverse to outright acquittal that it would convict on the pattern notwithstanding the dearth of evidence of this two-month timeframe.

The problem is the legal requirement that convictions be supported by sufficient evidence. And this is a component of due process.

What was the evidence of timing here?

The only evidence that the state points to as to this two-month requirement is AP's testimony that she was five years old when the touching started and that she was six years old when it stopped.

So AP's testimony that she was five years old when the touching started and six years old when the touching stopped was not sufficient to establish that the touching took place over a period of more than two months.

That could cover 24 months or one day.

It could. Touching could have started shortly before AP's sixth birthday.

There was no other evidence from which those inferences could be drawn one way or the other?

There is not. There's no other admissible evidence in the record from which one could conclude that the touching occurred over a period of more than two months.

It is the legislature that determines and defines elements and courts, even if they disagree with the legislature's definition of an element, have no power to disregard those elements or their definitions.

And they must require that all convictions be supported by proof beyond a reasonable doubt with respect to each element as it has been defined by the legislature.

If the court has no further questions about the sufficiency part of the argument, I'll turn to the compulsory jointer part.

I plan to make two points on this.

First, the argument is preserved.

And second, the pattern allegations were known to the prosecutor at the start of the first trial.

Peach here moved to dismiss the pattern indictment shortly after it was brought.

He cited the substance of the compulsory jointer rule.

He said that after Ms. Trial, quote, new charges may only be added if they are based on newly discovered evidence.

He also cited the rationale for the compulsory jointer rule, fairness.

So this case is like Bach and Terasuec and demerit, all cases in which the appellant did not cite a rule by name, and yet this court still held that because the appellant cited the substance of the rule, it was still preserved.

Even if this court finds that the compulsory jointer argument was not preserved, it should waive the preservation requirement because the record would be no different if Peach had expressly cited the compulsory jointer rule.

So the state alleges that the defendant sort of was resting in the weeds waiting for the null process in order to make this argument.

Is that the state of the record?

No, no, the compulsory jointer rule was clearly established at the time of the first trial and the rationale is fairness.

So there's no requirement to put the state on notice that it needs to comply with the compulsory jointer rule or that it must treat the defendant fairly.

The state should have known that it was improper to bring the pattern indictment after the missed trial.

And they null process individual indictments then after this argument, which was made I assume at the beginning of the trial to dismiss the pattern.

Right, it was made before the second trial.

Yes.

If we rule in your favor on either of your issues, we don't have to address the other. Is that right?

Yes, I think that's right.

Compulsory jointer has three requirements. The state concedes to the conduct, the allegations are based on the same conduct and they are within the jurisdiction of a single court.

The state disputes only the requirement that the allegations be known to the prosecutor at the beginning of the first trial.

The state argues that AP's testimony during the first trial may have been what caused the state to seek the pattern.

I don't see the basis for that argument and the prosecutor's own statements contradict this argument.

The prosecutor said all the initial discovery leading up to the first trial very much paints a portrait of sexual assaults happening a multitude of times.

There was no greater basis to believe that a pattern AFSA indictment was appropriate after the first trial than there was before the first trial.

That's an admission.

On behalf of the state, yes, I think so.

What were the dates of the single offenses that were null process?

There was one that was null process. Is that right?

They were both null process.

What were the dates of those?

The dates alleged in the indictments.

July 1st, 2015 to November 30th, 2016 for both of them.

And then on the pattern indictment, the dates are a little different.

It's July 1st, 2015 to November 21st, 2016.

And this I address in a footnote to the brief.

Peach moved out of the house on November 21st, 2016.

There's no dispute about that.

He didn't have any contact.

He didn't see AP after November 21st, 2016.

So essentially the time frames alleged in both the single act and the pattern indictments are the same and the state does not dispute that.

The court has no further questions.

Thank you.

Thank you, Your Honor.

May it please the court, Elizabeth Woodcock for the state of New Hampshire.

First of all addressing the question of sufficiency.

The evidence was sufficient to support the pattern indictment.

The victim testified that she was five and six years old.

There were statements made by the defendant that suggested that these things had happened multiple times.

And the jury sent the court a note and said,

what if we find that this is only 45 days and the court said, no, that would be insufficient.

You have to find it's two months and the jury turned a verdict of guilty.

So they resolved any kinds of uncertainties in favor of saying that this had happened over that period of time.

Maybe. That's speculative.

No, I think that the guilty verdict after a question like that, Your Honor, suggests that they did consider the possibility that it was less than two months and decided it was not.

But what was the evidence that supported the finding that it was more than two months?

Well, I think, first of all, the little girl saying that it had happened when she was five and six years old.

Now the court pointed out that it could have happened the last day that she was five and the first day that she was six.

But that really is pretty unlikely.

There was evidence that they had moved to a specific spot in the summer when she was, I think, five years old.

And the other testimony were things like the defendant sending text messages saying that he'd made mistakes,

that if he told Tracy Clark, if she asked me to stop, I would stop suggesting that it had happened more than once.

The victim testified that it had happened in numerous rooms.

But the issue isn't that it had happened more than once.

The issue is that it happened more than once, more than two months apart.

Correct.

But given the testimony that she said that it had happened in multiple rooms on multiple occasions,

that he admitted that if she asked him to stop, he would stop, that he said that he had made mistakes.

The way that he talked to Tracy Clark, it sounded as if this had been a longer period of time,

that it hadn't been just one occasion as he testified at trial, that it had happened multiple times.

And so given the fact that the victim said that it had happened when she was five and six years old,

combined with all of this other information, it's reasonable to conclude that it had happened over a period longer than two months.

And certainly that is what the jury concluded based on the evidence that they had been presented with.

To suggest that this only happened in a 24-hour period when the little girl was the last day of being five

and the first day of being six is simply not supported by the evidence.

But it could have been in a 58-day period and still not satisfy the statute.

That's correct. That's correct.

And with sexual assault cases, particularly involving a child, establishing an exact timeframe is difficult.

But a child doesn't think in terms of, am I five years old and 364 days?

Oh, now I'm six.

When they're talking about being five and six.

What in the record would have prompted the jury to use 45 minutes in its question to the court?

45 days, you mean?

I'm sorry, 45 days.

I don't really know.

It seems like kind of an odd question to me, but they may have been just talking about it as a hypothetical.

And threw it out there asking the court, would that be sufficient?

Somebody may have been a real devil's advocate in the jury room saying, well, if it isn't this,

and then they haven't been given that instruction, they concluded that the state had met its burden.

Well, it seems to me if we accept your argument in order to get over the sufficiency issue,

all there ever has to be is testimony that it happened more than once.

No.

And then the jury can decide that it happened outside of a two-month period.

No, Your Honor, I don't think that I'm arguing that.

I think that what I'm proposing to the court is that the child says this happened when I was five and six.

So you start out with kind of a presumption that is happening for a longer period of time.

And then as she describes the incidents happening in multiple rooms on multiple occasions,

the defendant then has conversations with Tracy Clark where she's saying to him,

even if your marriage is going badly, you can't rely on your daughter for sexual gratification.

He hangs his head and doesn't respond.

The feeling is not that this just happened once or twice,

but that he had a reason to feel very guilty because it had happened on numerous occasions.

And given the fact that there were other people around in the house at different times,

it would suggest that that happened over a longer period of time than just a couple of days.

I'm sorry. I want to move on to the next argument.

Yes. Let's assume it is preserved.

Why did the state get a pattern indictment after the first trial?

What's the rationale for doing that?

The record is really not clear.

And I think part of the problem with the record is that both the court,

the state and I think really the defense brought this claim

that the pattern indictment was inappropriate because the prosecution had been vindictive.

And when the court said I don't see the evidence of vindictiveness,

the defense didn't push it.

They didn't say, well, this isn't just vindictiveness.

This is also compulsory jointer and they should have brought this pattern indictment at the outset.

I don't know why the state would not have done that simply out of an abundance of caution.

It seems like it would have been a reasonable thing for the state to have done before the first trial.

But having said that, when the argument was that the prosecutor is being vindictive

and trying to expose my client to greater penalties,

but the defendant is not saying this violates compulsory jointer,

the court then ceases on the vindictiveness and that's all we have as the record.

I think that probably the state looked at the evidence that it had at the time

and with child witnesses it's very hard to know how their testimony will come out.

And I think that the state having gone through the trial realized that this charge could be brought

and was not certain of it before the first trial.

So the new information that it had that was not available to it at the time of the first trial was the testimony at the first trial?

I think it was probably that, Your Honor.

But that's a state's witness.

So that's evidence that they always have access to that witness.

And I understand that prosecutors don't like to question child victims because it generates more evidence and presents more defenses.

But isn't that part of our analysis, the fact that the state had access to this evidence and it's not new evidence then?

Yes.

But the problem for the court is that the defense didn't make that pitch.

The defense rested on this vindictive prosecution argument and with the court and the state focused on that and clearly the defense.

So is that why they no-prost the individual indictments?

They want to prove they weren't being vindictive?

I have no idea why they dismiss those two charges, Your Honor.

I've been a prosecutor for almost 29 years and I have never made a motion to dismiss any charges at the conclusion of my cases.

So I found that really a surprise.

But having done that, having taken that step, what the defense is now arguing is that even though I didn't raise this compulsory jointer issue at a time when the court could have addressed it.

And I'm not suggesting that they were waiting in the weeds and thinking that the state was going to take this very unusual step because I would not think that anybody would expect the state to have done that.

The plain fact of the matter is on the record that we have now, if he is allowed to raise this claim now, he completely walks away from the conviction.

I see my yellow light is on.

If the court has no further questions, I will yield the podium.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you.

Okay, submitted.

Court stands in recess.
