This is case 2018-0094, Appeal of Town of Lincoln.

May it please the court. My name is Russell Hilliard. With me is Brooke Shiloh.

We're with the firm of Upton and Hatfield, and we represent the Town of Lincoln.

I have asked to reserve two minutes for rebuttal, Mr. Chief Justice.

Certainly.

This case begins in 1960, when, after the town meeting, the Town of Lincoln and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers entered into an agreement.

You have that agreement appended to the brief.

And essentially, the agreement provided that the Corps would restore this levy at the Franconia Paper Company along the west bank of the east branch of the Pemichuaset River.

And in exchange for doing that, the town entered into an agreement saying that it would maintain and operate all the works after completion in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the Army.

That's what the agreement said in 1960.

In order to facilitate the work, the Franconia Paper Company gave a right of entry, it was called,

to the town and the United States government, in order to do this work of restoration and later maintenance and operation.

That's in our brief as well, in the appendix.

In 2011, Hurricane Irene tore through here, and the river was raging.

The levy was damaged, but it held.

There was some damage on earlier occasions as well.

And we're here now because the DES contends that the town is the owner of the dam.

And by virtue of being the owner, it is subject to the liabilities and penalties set forth in RSA Chapter 42.

Do you agree that the town owns an easement?

The town owns it.

I hate to use the word owns, Your Honor, because it has.

I know you do. That's why I used it.

Well, and with respect to that, I have to refer to the documents and how they should be characterized.

There's the agreement between the town and the Corps of Engineers,

and there's the right of entry that was provided to the town of the United States by the Franconia Paper Company in 1960.

That's all we have.

Well, does the town have a duty to maintain the levy and repair it?

Pursuant to the 1960 assurance agreement with the Corps of Engineers.

And that's the critical...

Has the Corps asked the town to repair and maintain it, subsequent to the assurance?

Oh, yes, and it has.

As a matter of fact, as we stand here today, the repairs post-Irene have been substantially completed,

and the Corps and the town is doing their final walkthrough this very day on the completion of the work.

So from the perspective of the Corps and the town, the town has honored its obligations under the assurance agreement?

The Corps of Engineers has monitored what we've done here, monitored the design and construction,

and is doing a walkthrough and approving it.

So, no, the Corps of Engineers...

I don't want to mislead the Corps.

The Corps of Engineers was, what shall I say, distressed with the town on earlier occasions

that it hadn't done everything the Corps felt it should have been doing over the years.

So are you saying the Water Council has no jurisdiction?

Over the town?

Well, in that sense, yes.

In the sense that the only basis for jurisdiction is over the owner of the dam.

But, you know what, here's the thing.

I tend to agree with you that the Michelle case is distinguishable because it does involve...

If to apply it here, we would be applying it to obligations as opposed to rights.

Exactly.

I think you're probably right on that.

The thing I have trouble with, though, is the argument that, well, because this was an agreement

between the town and the feds, the state doesn't have any authority to impose this obligation,

this duty on the town.

And my thinking there is, isn't the things that the federal government is protecting by the terms

of its agreement, aren't its interests essentially the same as the state's interest in protecting

the public and that kind of thing.

And so if the town has this obligation to the feds and the state is sort of protecting the

same kind of interest, what's the harm with saying that the state can enforce it?

Well, two things, Your Honor.

The harm is that the town's undertaking was with the federal government.

State is a stranger to that 1960 agreement.

But it has a statutory obligation to save dams.

I agree.

And it has control over owners of the dam.

But the second part of my answer to the chief justice question is that, and I want to say

this in an appropriate way.

The town of Lincoln has resisted this categorization because they do not wish to be subject to the

regulation and penalties and other requirements that may come from the state.

It acknowledges the obligations it has to the federal government.

And those interests are parallel.

But I mean, wouldn't the, I mean, I think this might be a different case.

If you were saying, look, if we have to comply with what the state has told us to do,

you know, we're going to have to spend $3 million.

I'm just making the number.

We're going to have to spend $3 million, whereas the feds are happy if we only spend a million.

And that is exactly one of the concerns, Your Honor.

Here, fortunately, the state, in this circumstance, did not require us to come up and meet some

design standards they may have wanted.

They were content that we met the core standard.

But I mean, isn't the, I mean, isn't the, isn't the problem then, if that's not, if that's

not something that's at issue now, isn't, you know, why, yeah, shouldn't we wait?

Well, yes.

And that's one of the reasons that it's ironic.

We make, we in the state sort of make the same argument.

That is, that it's premature, it's not ripe, it's maybe moot.

But from our point of view, what is moot is the issuance of the administrative order in the

first place, that it was unwarranted and unnecessary.

The state is saying, well, what should be moot is our appeal from the issuance of it.

And we vehemently contest that because that's why we're here.

We acknowledge the town's obligations arising out of the 1960 arrangement.

And as I say, ironically, that's coming to fruition this very day.

Do I understand correctly that the state's not arguing a third-party beneficiary argument?

They're not trying to enforce the agreement.

They're, like, disclaiming that theory.

Is that right?

Is that your understanding?

Well, yes.

That is my understanding.

I only hesitate because of some passenger agreement.

Their avenue for control here is through the statute, not through the assurance agreement.

Exactly.

And our response is, we're not an owner, as that term is properly extrude in RSA Chapter 482.

Who are the third-party beneficiaries of the assurance agreement?

I haven't really analyzed that, Your Honor, I suppose.

Residents of Lincoln, maybe?

Residents or property owners along the river, I suppose.

Whether they're incidental or intended, and all of that flows from that, those categorizations,

no one has come forward over the years and said, I'm an intended RSA Chapter 482.

But doesn't the state say that the town's agreement with the feds, in which, in other words,

I would agree with you that Michelle does not extend to the obligations of an easement, only

the rights.

But the state then says that the town's agreement with the feds, in which it undertook obligations,

is enough to make it an owner under the statute.

In other words, yes, an easement generally would not make someone responsible for, you know,

the obligations of an easement.

If I have an easement across your land, maybe other than for my own benefit, I don't have

any obligation to maintain the easement for your benefit.

As the owner of the subservient estate, maybe that's true, but if I take on the obligation

to do that, then maybe I do.

But again, it's an obligation that runs to the Corps of Engineers.

In exchange for funding that was obtained in the initial instance.

So the Corps paid for the initial improvements as long as the town would continue to maintain it,

not unlike the Corps comes in and dredges a harbor, as long as the users thereof follow some maintenance

protocols.

Exactly.

They paid for the restoration in 1960 after the big 59 flood.

In exchange, the town agreed to maintain.

And that's a deal the town made with the Corps of Engineers, and it's prepared to accept the burdens

and obligations.

With the agreement of the owners.

Owners benefited as well from that agreement and granted the right of entry to enable it.

Frinconia Paper Company.

Yeah.

And is that entity in existence?

I'm sorry, Ron?

Who is the owner, if it's not the town?

Well, I'm not sure it's fully developed in the record, but there's now, if you'll see some

of the aerial photographs, there's now been a lot of condominiums built along the river,

along that property.

So, the old, the Frinconia Paper Company land as it stood in 1959 and 60, now is in the hands

of a number.

As I read the state's brief, they specifically acknowledge that the town is not the fee owner.

Somebody else is the fee owner.

And there are many.

And we don't know who that is, it's just, it's not the town.

It's not the town.

You can tell from the aerial photographs that it's a number of people.

Are you saying that it's undivided common area?

I'm sorry, Your Honor?

Are you saying that it's undivided common area in these condominium units?

No, no.

I didn't mean to suggest that.

I just mean that the town is not the owner of any of the land along here.

It's, the land is now divided among a number of different developments within a particular

development.

And those developments still would adhere to the right of entry, arguably.

Yes, that ran with the land and it was court to the registry.

My problem, and we've referenced it in our brief, maybe more so in the reply, it appears that

maybe the town is the most convenient entity to try to place this responsibility on.

Simply because, as we've been discussing, that land has now been divided up.

Has there been any effort to levy that responsibility on the fee owners, so to speak?

Yeah.

I could stand to be corrected, but not to my knowledge.

What if the legislature changed the statute to include dominant estate holders, like the town?

Would that solve your problem?

Might solve it for one party, but not the other one.

That would be an entirely different case.

So your argument is one of statutory construction.

Well, exactly, and that's why I'm pleased.

I was prepared to discuss appeal of Michelle at length, but it just struck me that the states

and the hearing officer's reliance on Michelle to go from the right to do the doc to the obligation.

I mean, my understanding of the law generally, am I correct?

My understanding of the law generally is if I own an easement across your land to get to some

other land of mine, that I don't have an obligation to maintain the easement for your benefit.

I may have the right to maintain it for my benefit, but I don't have any obligation to keep it up for your benefit.

Well, can I address that for a second?

And Michelle, let's say the doc that's installed in Michelle by the easement holder, say it's in disrepair

and it's a hazard, doesn't DES have the right to tell the easement holder?

You put that there, you need to fix it.

I don't know for certain the answer to that question.

It's a different, it's 482A, it's a different structure.

That may be the case, but again, the federal government put it there.

The town in 1960 agreed to maintain it.

So I still think that's a different situation than the hypothetical you're positing.

Mr. Hillier, can I just ask, so do you want us to say that this case is moot?

And if so, how do you want us to frame that?

My suggestion or my request is that you acknowledge our appeal, vacate the issuance of the administrative order

that the DES issued that's now before you, vacate it.

On grounds that the town is not an owner under the statutory framework.

Correct, if something, I don't know whether you add the words without prejudice or something,

but if something changes in the future, maybe something changes.

But what we have here today, this set of facts, these circumstances today,

the town is not the owner and should not be subject to this administrative order.

So it should be vacated.

That's my request.

I'm sorry, my red light is on.

Thank you very much, Mr. Hillier.

Thank you very much.

Good morning, may it please the court.

My name is Mary Maloney.

I work for the New Hampshire Attorney General of the Office,

and I'm representing the Department of Environmental Services in this appeal,

and I'm happy to take questions.

Why isn't this, why, what would be the harm if we said that this case was moot?

In other words, that the work has been done, apparently to the satisfaction of not only the Corps of Engineers,

but the state, if I understood what Mr. Hillier was saying,

and so the case is moot.

And I mean, and I don't know exactly what language we'd use,

but suppose we said that the case was moot in a way that would not prevent you, the state,

in the future from saying, you know, if it fell into disrepair again or something,

you wouldn't have been, we wouldn't have entered a judgment that would preclude you from coming back

and raising this argument again, but why, in other words, why do we,

I'm really sort of wondering, why do we have to decide this case now

when it seems like the work's been done and everybody's kind of happy?

Well, I don't think there's any problem in declaring the case moot,

but I think that the following order is that the appeal is dismissed,

it's not that the administrative order is vacated.

As we stand today, I believe they're up doing an inspection with not just the Army Corps in the town,

but also with the department.

And my understanding is there's still additional work that has to be done.

So we're not quite there.

For the department or for the Army Corps?

The town is doing the reconstruction pursuant to the permit application it filed with the department.

And the department issued the permit to the owner.

And that's part of the process.

Issued the permit to the?

Town.

To the town as the operator.

Correct.

Okay.

Correct.

And so that, you know, once we issued the order and the town commenced appeals,

it filed an application for a permit, the department issued the permit.

The work that's being done is being done according to Army Corps standards,

but there's also some additional work that's being done that the department asked for.

So they applied for the permit and you could enforce the permit.

You don't need this case, this ruling, in order to enforce a permit that was voluntarily applied for.

Or were there reservations reserved on the permit?

There were no reservations reserved on the permit.

However, the permit was filed by the town as the owner.

I'd like to address that obligations versus burdens argument a little bit.

And I believe Justice Donovan is correct that with regard to Michelle and the case that involved the dock,

if the dock was improperly constructed, if it encroached another property,

if there was a problem with some of the regulations at DES,

if it was constructed in violating some of the other regulations relating to wetlands,

DES would have the right to go in and enforce it.

Oh, sure.

But isn't that a different situation?

In other words, that's a situation where, yes, the only, in other words,

if I have an easement across your land, right, to get access to my land,

and I decide that I'm going to pave it, let's say, and I have the right to do that,

well, sure, if I pave it in a way that is, you know, negligent,

so that there's, you know, it's slanted and it collects water or something like that,

sure, I can, I have an obligation to correct that, but what did the, what did the town do here?

Well, the easement in this case is simply access.

The easement doesn't impose any obligations.

The easement only specifically allows the town access to somebody else's land.

Doesn't that cut against you?

Yeah, yeah, that comes when it cuts against you, doesn't it?

No, it's for purposes of maintaining.

It's within the scope of the town's obligation.

Okay.

So the easement was defined within the scope of the town's obligation that it claims it's took on,

and it also, it's also within the scope of the order that the department issued

to maintain and repair the dock.

Are you equating the easement with the right of entry?

You're interchanging?

Right, well, the town has indicated it obtained easements.

It identifies the right of entry.

There's the 1971 deed where the town has also indicated that that right of entry

was contained within the deed when the Franconia paper, or rather, was Green Acre Woodlands,

which was the successor.

So the right of entry was recognized in the deed.

Correct.

Was it called an easement in the deed?

It was called a deed, an easement.

You don't dispute the fact that there is a fee owner, and it is not the town.

That we don't dispute that at all.

We believe that Michelle stands for the proposition that, and based on the documents in the record

and the undisputed evidence, that you don't have to have a possessory interest in the land

to be declared the owner.

And under the circumstances of this case, the department has taken, or the town has taken on,

the mantle of ownership for purposes of maintaining and inspecting the repair stuff.

Has the department made any effort to impose responsibilities on the fee owner?

Well, what we did, and this goes back to 2014, when the department had begun to send the town letters,

the town contacted the department and said, we have a problem because we were supposed to get these easements

and we didn't get them.

And so the department undertook an effort and worked cooperatively with the town

and identified over 200 property owners on that land.

And we sent them all letters identifying that there was a deficiency, and we even had a town meeting

and invited all the property owners there.

The town was in a struggle trying to obtain money at town meetings, and they had tried several times to obtain it.

But they wanted us to assist them, and we were working ostensibly to assist them to get these easements

so that they could cross the property.

Lo and behold, one of the land agents at DES located the 1971 deed, and the easement identified it.

And then the town identified the right of entry agreement.

So that's how all this started.

In terms of imposing the obligations on the town, what's problematic, or rather not on the town,

on the individual landowners, what's problematic about that is the Army Corps always stands over here.

And the Army Corps does not contract with private parties.

So to take the mantle of responsibility off the town for maintenance and repair

and to give it to private parties could possibly interfere with that.

So does the fee owner, however many entities that might be,

they have no responsibility in the state's view for maintenance of this dam?

Yeah, that's the state's view.

Well, beyond paying property taxes, right?

Well, they pay property taxes.

And obviously the levy benefits more than just those individual owners.

There's a floodway.

And as the town noted in its PowerPoint to the 2016 town meeting,

it's about $25 million worth of property that could be destroyed if there were a catastrophic failure.

Can I just ask this question on the theory that hope springs eternal?

Let's suppose that at the end of the day today, the inspection is, you know, everybody says,

yep, they've done what they're supposed to do.

You're happy.

The feds are happy.

The town is happy.

How would the state be harmed if that were the case,

if we were to simply say this case is dismissed as moot

and the judgment of the DES is vacated without prejudice to them being able to file some action again

if there were some future problem?

How would that harm the state?

Well, and if next week there were a catastrophic storm

and we had serious damage to the levy,

the department would be back at square one in a position

and we would be re-litigating this whole issue again

if the department had to issue administrative orders.

So this is capable of repetition.

And also the department has a duty under the statute to inspect all dams.

When did the department first, if you know, take note of this particular levy?

I mean, with respect to the work that was done in 1960,

was the department involved back then?

I can't answer that question.

The department works cooperatively with the Army Corps of Engineers

and so when the Army Corps inspects,

the department also has a duty and obligation to inspect

depending on how the dam is categorized.

This was a low hazard levy.

So the inspection obligation on the part of the department is every six years.

Once it goes to high hazard, it goes up to two years.

So during all the transfer of property ownership,

the division, the department really wasn't paying attention, if you will,

to the chain of title as it changed hands.

There's no notice requirement back to the department if an owner sells?

Well, yes.

I mean, if by statute and by regulation,

if there's a transfer of ownership, the department is notified.

And again, when we inspect, we send our inspections to the Army Corps.

When the Army Corps inspects, they send the results to the state.

And down below, before the council, we did address the preemption argument

because it's not sufficient to say we're only subject to the assurance.

The assurance references regulations, federal regulations,

which are derived from those federal statutes identified in the assurance.

And again, we did raise the preemption argument.

We weren't preempted from regulating under those federal statutes.

And we work cooperatively with the Army Corps in all various stands throughout the state

that the Army Corps has a unique and joint municipal-federal role.

There's quite a few of them.

Do I understand your argument correctly in your brief

that you're not making a third-party beneficiary argument, correct?

On the part of the department?

Yes.

No.

Right.

No.

We maintain that we have jurisdiction to regulate the levy,

that we also have authority to issue administrative orders

to make certain that levy's maintained.

So would you be, under your theory, would you be making the same argument

if there was the right of entry easement and no assurance agreement?

Well, the assurance agreement certainly informs us as to where the responsibilities are.

I mean, the assurance was, but the answer is yes,

because there's also the vote from the town that agreed to undertake responsibility from the dam.

So there's other evidence in the record.

But the assurance, certainly the contents, informs us that this is what the Army Corps is going to do,

this is what the town is going to maintain responsibility for.

So all of those documents help to inform the department as to which parties are going to be responsible for what.

So if there's no easement in this case, does the department still argue that the town is an owner?

Yes.

Because of the assurance agreement, period.

And the right of entry agreement, which the town indicates has been registered and people have notice of.

So are both the, in the absence of either the assurance agreement or the right of entry,

does your argument still prevail, or do you need both in order to prevail?

I believe we, the assurance is sufficient.

The right of entry agreement gives them access.

But the assurance agreement, I mean, the right of entry agreement was granted by the paper company.

So they obviously didn't have authority to determine who has responsibility for what.

But the assurance certainly identifies who has responsibility for what,

what statutes the federal government and the town are operating under, and under what regulations.

And again, as we stated back before the council, under those federal statutes, the state is not preempted from regulations.

So your argument, I mean, in a sense, your argument is that what the sort of hypothetical posed by Justice Donovan is really,

in other words, by entering into the assurance agreement, that's like the Michelle people putting the doc on.

And now, if the doc starts to sink or is causing some problem, then the Michelle easement owners may have an obligation to repair the doc.

Is that sort of what you're saying?

I'm not sure.

Without any of the other documentation in the file?

No, what I'm really sort of saying is that the assurance agreement in which they undertake, in which the town undertakes the obligation to sort of maintain is sort of like the, like in the Michelle, putting the doc in.

Maybe once you, you know, maybe you don't have any obligation to put the doc in, but once you put it in, then you've got, since it's your doc, you've got the responsibility to maintain it.

Certainly, that is the mantle that the town undertook when it signed, when it entered into the assurance with the department.

But only to the limits of that agreement.

Right, which was subject to federal regulation.

So it's based on the criteria.

And the other point, too, is that the department doesn't make up criteria.

If you look at the statutes and if you look at the regulations, they reference federal standards throughout.

So when they're talking about this is how this has to be repaired, in the regulations, they link to Army Corps regulations, they link to U.S. Department of Agriculture regulations, they link to no regulations.

So if the Army Corps is satisfied, then the department's satisfied.

They were cooperatively.

So I've not run across a case when the Army was satisfied and the department wasn't.

And the Army, that's the other thing, did not undertake any official regulatory action against the town.

It was the department that initiated the regulatory action against the town.

Can you just clarify for me?

You probably have already answered this, but is it your position that the right of entry, the easement, is nice, but it's not necessary?

And it's largely irrelevant to your argument as to ownership.

You would be making the same argument even if the town had no easement right, no right of entry, right?

Do I understand correctly?

Well, I mean, we would indicate that if all we had was the assurance that the town had undertaken the mantle of responsibility

to maintain and repair the levy, and that is all we're seeking to enforce.

They would be the owner just because of the assurance.

It would have an ownership interest for purposes of maintaining and repairing the levy.

And if the town were to assign, would the agreement of the Army Corps, assign that contract to me,

I would become the owner for the purposes of this RSA?

Well, again, any transfer and ownership would be subject to department approval.

So, under the RSA 42 and...

I mean, a fee transfer subject to approval, but assignment of that responsibility under the assurance agreement,

a personal services contract?

Well, it's more than that.

So, if a dam owner is not owner of the fee and they transfer, it's subject to state regulation.

It's also subject to federal regulation as well.

So, any transfer of ownership interest, in this case, we are saying that the town is the owner and operator

for purposes of maintenance and inspection.

That's really all there is as far as the levy is concerned.

We don't have something where we're raising and lowering water levels.

So, that transfer would be subject to state regulation and approval.

Thank you, Councilor.

Thank you.

Well, here's four quick things, Your Honors.

First, the town did not put in this dam.

I think that was clear.

The Corps of Engineers restored a pre-existing levy.

So, it's not a situation where, like Michelle, somebody built a dock and a fell in disrepair.

I just want to make that clear.

Number two, the DES brief, the state's brief at 7, outlines some of the history.

And there's no indication of the state becoming involved or active in this matter until after Irene in 2011.

Third, that 1971 deed that keeps getting referred to, I said this in the brief, but the town was not a party to that deed.

It was a deed from Franconia paper company to the Greenland or Green something manufacturing company.

And it's simply...

Green engineering.

Was it Green?

I can't remember.

Green something, Your Honor.

But my only point is the town wasn't a party to the transaction.

It was a deed that had a list of exceptions and reservations.

And it included, this is one of them, number F on certified record, page 92.

And finally, the discussion about the permit and the town asking for the permit.

This is the one point where we were clear from day one.

It was my letter to the DES.

It's at page 116 of the certified record.

And we're sending back in because we are going to undertake these repairs, our intent to build and so forth.

And I say, please note, we have deleted the designation, quote, owner from the intent form as we do not concur with that designation.

But nonetheless, the board of selectmen agree, the town should undertake the work.

So when there was a question about permit issued to an owner, this is the cover letter that accompanied that application.

But you would be conforming to the requirements of the permit, regardless of the title assumed by the town.

Exactly. But we were doing it...

Yes.

I don't want to say purely voluntarily.

We were doing it to comply with the 1960 assurance agreement.

Right. And once you did, though, the department has the ability to enforce the requirements of the permit.

Right.

No dispute on that.

Right.

But the work was being done pursuant of the 1960.

Yes.

Thank you very much.

Thank you very much.

Case submitted.

Parties come forward.
