This is case 2018-0452, state of New Hampshire versus Jeffrey Aniapam.

May it please the court. Christopher Johnson on behalf of Jeffrey Aniapam.

The issue in this case is sufficiency of the evidence of criminal mischief.

My plan is first to make a point about the circumstantial direct evidence distinction,

second to point about the causation element, and third a point about the recklessness element.

Why is this, in your view, a circumstantial evidence case?

So, to understand whether evidence is direct or circumstantial,

it's not an inherent quality of the evidence.

It's a matter of the relation between the testimony and the element it's offered to prove.

And so when you look, for example, at RS's testimony,

she does not give direct evidence about Aniapam's mental state,

as is commonly the case. Mental state evidence is usually circumstantial.

But even with respect to causation, she does not see the laptop drop.

She gives direct testimony about events before and after it dropped,

but she doesn't see it fall, and so she gives no direct evidence about the cause of its fall,

as to whether it was dropped purposely or knocked out of his hands.

And so because she doesn't see that event,

her testimony about the surrounding events requires an inference,

so the jury can't find from her testimony unless it makes a further inference.

Isn't that slicing it pretty fine that she didn't see it fall?

I mean, she was inches away and saw everything that was going on,

and if she didn't see his fingers or whatever,

that would seem to be a distinction without a difference.

Well, I think it's because there's two different accounts in the case about how it fell.

And so the state's version is he dropped it in order to hit her.

If that were what had happened, there would be,

and somebody had their eyes on that act, you would see him drop it to hit her.

And in fact, that punch was the acquittal.

He was acquitted of having struck her at the same time.

Yes, yes he was.

So the jury didn't believe that testimony?

At least not beyond a reasonable doubt, that's right.

And then to get back to Justice Bassett's question,

the second account of how the laptop dropped is that she,

and by all accounts, she testified that she grabbed him.

She pursued him out of the house and grabbed him.

And so a second version of how it came to fall is that it got knocked out by her grabbing him.

And so that is, and the final point,

the defendant's testimony is not direct evidence of causation

because he's denying the incriminating version of how it came to fall.

And therefore his testimony also...

Does it turn on how it fell,

or does it turn on the fact that the defendant put the laptop in a place

where it could be damaged by either activity?

Right.

And so this, I think, gets to the content of the causation element.

And causation has two parts.

There's but for causation and proximate causation.

And I agree.

I mean, his act, viewed in the light most favorable to the state,

his act of picking it up and carrying it out of the house

is a but for cause of it being damaged.

But to convict him, they also have to prove

that he was the proximate cause of it being damaged.

And that's where these two accounts matter.

So that he, among many other things, is in the but for chain of causation.

I mean, the fact that they had a fight

is in the but for chain of causation of how it came to be damaged.

But the proximate cause of it being damaged depends on the exact mechanism.

And it's on that point that the evidence is circumstantial.

The state didn't have to prove that the defendant anticipated the specific result.

True.

Right?

True.

No, and that gets to the mental state element.

That's right.

I mean, the state doesn't have to prove to show him to be reckless

that he foresaw exactly how it would be damaged.

But what they do have to show on recklessness is two things.

They have to show that he was aware of and consciously disregarded

a substantial risk and an unjustifiable risk of it being damaged.

And we're not really arguing the unjustifiable prong.

So what I'm focusing on here with this is the state's obligation

to prove that he was aware of a substantial risk.

And I make that point because I understand,

viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the state,

he shouldn't have been carrying it out of the house.

Right.

And his testimony was that he was going to use it as a shield

to prevent what he anticipated to be a violent obligation.

And that's why I'm not arguing that the unjustifiable aspect.

I will grant they had sufficient evidence of unjustifiable,

that he would be aware that his conduct,

he's aware of an unjustifiable risk of damage.

You don't think it's substantial?

Exactly.

And so this is why to prove the question of whether his conduct

is a substantial risk of damage depends on the probabilities

about whether it would be damaged.

And that probability has to be sufficiently high

to be substantial.

And my point is that it's not sufficiently high,

that there's enough other ways this could have played out

without the computer being damaged to make the eventuality

of it being damaged not substantial.

What's the probability threshold for substantiality?

I mean, I don't know that I can mathmatize it,

but I understand it's not necessarily,

certainly not beyond a reasonable doubt.

I mean, we're talking about something considerably lower.

Something if it's 30% of a chance, isn't that substantial?

Possibly.

I don't think the court has ever said.

But here, I guess here's sort of substantively my point.

So one of the ways this could have played out

where it's not damaged,

and these are all could easily have happened,

is that he got away with it, the laptop,

and carried it off to his car,

and so it's not going to be damaged.

Another way is she caught up with him

and took it back from him, and it's not damaged.

Another way would be is if when they jostled

and it fell, it fell onto the grass

instead of the pavement, and so it doesn't break,

or that it fell from a low height.

And so there's enough other ways

that this could have played out

without the computer being damaged,

that it's not, the state didn't prove

that that risk was, that he was aware

of a substantial risk.

When he took it.

When he took it.

Carried.

When he took it.

Was there evidence as to the type of computer?

I think that there was.

It was certainly described as a laptop.

She may have testified to the name,

but I don't recall what it was.

Right.

I mean,

I mean, there are laptop computers

that can survive a fall.

Right.

I mean, there's some, yeah,

heavier cases and lighter cases.

There was certainly no evidence

that I recall that described this one

as a particularly fragile version of the laptop,

but then neither was there any evidence

that it was particularly hardy version either.

I just don't think we have that evidence.

Okay.

Just one more point on causation

to finish that line of thought.

So given that there's these two different

ways of the proximate cause could have happened.

He drops it or it gets knocked out.

The analysis is,

when the evidence is circumstantial,

is that it is insufficient evidence

unless the defendant's account

of how it came to be damaged is irrational.

So I am not here saying

that the state's account that he dropped it

and hit her on purpose is irrational.

That is a perfectly rational conclusion

from the evidence,

but it's not enough to be sufficient evidence of guilt

if the defendant's exculpatory account

is also rational.

If we disagree with you and think

that the evidence isn't solely circumstantial,

but it's a mix,

then do you lose?

I mean, certainly that standard doesn't apply,

but I don't think the court can do that,

but I mean, if the court did that,

I think that the standard doesn't apply

and I'm in a very different position.

Thank you.

Block.

Good morning and may it please the court.

My name is Sean Locke.

I represent the state of New Hampshire,

which asks that the court affirm the defendant's conviction

because the state did present sufficient evidence

that the defendant had committed criminal mischief.

The evidence supports the fact that he acted recklessly

when he handled the victim's laptop

and that his recklessness caused the damage it suffered.

And so I think the key issue here

is this direct circumstantial distinction.

And particularly with respect to the mental state,

the reckless mental state,

while there are elements of that mental state

that require that look to what the defendant

is aware of at the time he acts,

it's generally viewed as a more,

it has a more objective meaning

that is going to look at the circumstances

surrounding what occurred

whether or not that conduct was reckless.

That, at the very least,

shows the state presented direct evidence

of those objective circumstances.

There was evidence that he picks up the laptop,

whether you believe his version of events

where he intends to use it as a shield to fend off the victim.

In this case, you believe the victims.

Well, what's the direct evidence of causation?

The direct evidence of causation.

In terms of, I think there's, again,

at the very least, a mixed question here

where there's direct evidence that he is concealing,

accepting the victim's version,

he's concealing the laptop underneath his jacket

as he's attempting to flee.

He's not, I mean, in this room alone,

there are at least two, I think I see,

bags designed to safely carry laptops.

Those include padding.

They include secure, you know, you have secured straps.

You have protection for the laptop itself.

If I were to throw a laptop under my jacket

and run around with it,

I would not be securely transporting that laptop.

I would create a substantial risk

that that laptop, if I tripped over something,

if someone bumped into me,

if I just turned too quickly,

that I would lose control of the object

and drop it on the ground.

The direct evidence...

If your intent was to take the laptop,

protect it from the rain,

safeguard it and take it to your car

because you forgot your bag,

would that intent obviate the recklessness finding?

It could, but this...

It could take it for its own use and keep it safe.

It certainly could.

And maybe, you know, if this were a situation

where the defendant had essentially

was able to get away with having taken the laptop,

that may be, the case may be different,

but once the victim...

You may have a theft situation.

Right, you would have, you certainly have a theft.

Instead of criminal mischief.

Right, but once the victim realizes what happens

or that her laptop is missing,

she calls out to the defendant

and begins to pursue him.

His object now is no longer,

the laptop and make sure I don't drop it,

it's let me get away, get to my car

and get away from the victim.

And that's when the focus no longer remains

on protecting the laptop.

It becomes a situation where

when the victim grabs onto, you know,

reaches out to him and grabs his shoulder

or wherever she ends up grabbing him,

he turns to strike her.

And at that point, you know,

loses control of the laptop and it falls to the ground.

You have direct evidence of everything

leading up to that point,

that there isn't someone who witnessed

the exact mechanism through which

the laptop falls out of his arm

and testifies to that doesn't turn this

into a purely circumstantial case.

I think the defendant wants to cut

this kind of analysis

so fine that

almost anything,

almost any element or any piece of evidence

will make this a wholly circumstantial question

and that's not the analysis this court performs.

It looks to the totality

of the circumstances in determining

whether or not an element was met,

we can't just narrow it down to this one

minute detail and say

there's circumstantial evidence of this,

it's purely circumstantial.

There's a rational explanation, that's it.

It has to be,

you look at the entire course of events

that lead up to the harm here

and there is a mix of direct and circumstantial

evidence that leads to the laptop's destruction.

Would that include the defendant's testimony

about the purposes for which he took the laptop?

So,

the way I frame it in my brief or my memo

is that

even under the defendant's analysis,

even if the jury were accepting that

he creates a substantial unjustifiable risk

the minute he takes it to use it as a shield

and doesn't, once he passes the victim

and he's in her kitchen

or I think wherever he passes through to leave,

he doesn't set it down, he continues

to walk away with it.

He's passed the victim, he's gotten away from her

and instead of returning it and trying to put it down

he continues to carry it and creates this circumstance

where when she grabs onto him

he ends up losing control of the laptop

it falls to the ground and smashes.

So, under either circumstance, now

another answer to that question though

is that the jury, by convicting him of this

does reject to some extent his interpretation

or his claims in that argument

and the question is whether or not

in the light most favorable to the state

the state presented sufficient evidence

of the criminal mischief in this case

which means we look to

the victim's version of events

or we look to, we would credit the victim's version of events

or whatever evidence creates

the light most favorable to the state.

As to the state of mind

when are we assessing the state of mind?

Is it when he picks up the laptop?

Is it when he's going down the stairs?

Is it when he's

just milliseconds before it drops?

Does that matter?

I think

in that context

I think it's when, I mean

so the criminal mischief PCR again

because this is kind of a course of

conduct that occurs I think

at least at one point you would look at

is when he picks up the laptop and he starts carrying it

and concealing it and carrying it away.

Whether or not that has created that act

but certainly when the victim calls out to him

and asks him to return her laptop

to her and he chooses to flee at that point

rather than either place the laptop

down on the ground or on another surface

or return it to her and then leave.

I think at that point

you certainly, I think that's probably the best

point to look at where this course of conduct begins.

And that's where

now he's not paying attention to

assuming if the goal was initially to

take it and

kind of commit a theft

or whether the goal was to use it as a shield

that point he's no longer focused, he's created.

That's when the substantial unjustifiable risk is created

because he's not focused on protecting the laptop

he's focused on getting away from the victim.

And certainly at the point

of taking the laptop without permission

whether he's using it as a shield

or simply trying to take it away from her

that is

conduct that deviates from

what a law abiding citizen

or grossly deviates from what a law abiding a citizen would engage in.

So do you agree with Mr. Johnson

that a critical inquiry

here is whether there's this substantial risk?

Well the language of

I mean the recklessness standard requires

there to be a substantial unjustifiable risk.

Now I don't think

simply because the universe exists

where the laptop was not damaged

or may not have been damaged

that it doesn't mean that there was a substantial

risk of damage

in what happened here.

As I kind of gave my example earlier

if I had a laptop on my jacket

and started running around the courtroom

I'm creating a substantial risk

even if a universe exists where I successfully do that

because I could trip over the rug

and trip over one of these chairs

and if at that point I've created a substantial risk

because I would likely lose control of my laptop.

So how do we get a handle on

substantiality of the risk?

Where does the risk become substantial

if there's a 10% chance

that'll happen or a 30% chance

or a 70% chance?

How do we think about that?

I think at a certain point

I don't have a quantification

I don't know if you could ever really quantify risk

in this type of context

but I think it's going to look at the particular facts.

Some of it is going to stem from

the fact that obviously destruction occurred

there are circumstances

where destruction may not occur

but there may be a charge of criminal mischief

I can't.

But there may also be circumstances

where destruction occurs

but there was not a substantial risk.

Right and I think

let's say

I'm trying to come up with an example

let's say the defendant

you know on the island

in the kitchen assuming one's there

and it happens, it so happens

that in doing so you know

some other commotion happens

the laptop falls and smashes

there probably isn't a circumstance

where you would say there was a substantial risk

by engaging in that conduct

that the laptop would be destroyed

but in this circumstance

where the laptop is being held under a jacket

or being used as a shield

there is a substantial risk

in a situation where the laptop doesn't

you know that the laptop may not have come to harm

had something, had some other

event not occurred.

Having pitched it at her here

that could be also a substantial risk.

Exactly even if she caught the laptop

it creates the substantial and unjustifiable

risk that harm could have come to the object.

If the court has no further questions

we'll ask the case to be submitted.

Thank you councillor.

In case submitted the court is in recess.
