Good morning.

This is case 2018-0332, a Ronal Bolio and company

versus New Hampshire Board of Accounts say.

Before we get started, just I'll note that for this case,

Justice Bassett is disqualified.

And also for everyone else in the room,

we're going to hear the argument in this case.

Then we'll take a brief recess.

And then we'll hear the next two cases.

Right, Mr. Vanakoff?

I'd like to reserve three minutes of my time

for a rebuttal if I feel it.

Sure.

All right.

May it please the court.

I'm John Vanakoff.

And I'm here representing the appellant Ron Bolio and company.

Ron Bolio and company is an accounting firm from Maine

that was hired to do a standard financial audit of them

in 2008 and then successive years through 2011.

And Mr. Bolio, Ron Bolio himself, who

is the owner-operator of the company,

has been a CPA for 30 years doing dozens and dozens of audits

for different community action programs

and other nonprofits.

And he's never had a bad mark against them.

He's had peer reviews during that period of time

which have always been positive, including

during a period of time when it's alleged

that he engaged in misconduct.

Mr. Vanakoff, did your client's services

include an agreement to report on internal controls?

Well, the answer to that is no.

That was another potential.

He offers three different packages.

But this package was just for standard financial auditing.

It's a standard financial statement audit.

And what he reports on is that he's not

there to judge whether or not the financial controls were

adequate, but just that it's not really the same.

But exactly what is he to do that?

Isn't that sort of a core function

is to say like we reviewed the financial records

and they are sort of generally in order?

We did appropriate tests of?

No, he did.

He did all the tests that are standard under the generally

accepted audits standards.

But he wasn't hired.

He could have been hired to do an audit.

And these are things that he offers,

audit on the design itself of the internal controls,

audit on the effectiveness of the entity's internal controls.

So how we did determine what the scope of your client's

services are?

The engagement letter, is that what we need to rely on?

Yeah, what he had produced for the audits he did.

I mean, that was the scope of it.

But there was the engagement letter,

and there was also the report he

gave that showed all the testing that he had done.

He gave a report to TCCAP.

But we didn't have the work papers.

No, the work papers he didn't have.

And that's one of the issues here is that the work papers

under his contract with TCCAP and under the federal rules,

he's only required to keep them for three years.

And in fact, there's a question

as to whether or not there is actually

a rule in the state of New Hampshire that

will require him to keep these particular papers.

Because the rule is a rule for accountants,

but my client's belief was that this

was just for his accounting work when doing taxes,

things like that, but didn't really cover audits.

But nevertheless, he had the rule that was specifically there,

and it was a federal rule for auditing as opposed to something.

But he's facing a finding by the board,

subsequently confirmed by Judge Kissinger

that he failed to conduct these audits for 2008 through 2011.

How do you get around that?

That he failed to do them adequately?

Yes.

Well, that's what the order says.

Well, that's what the order says,

but it doesn't say there's no findings as to what he did

that wasn't right.

There's a finding for the 2011 audit

as noted by the subsequent auditor

that there was a misstatement in that one.

Is that sufficient under any evidence standard?

Well, is that sufficient in and of itself?

I would argue absolutely not that there

has to be gross misconduct.

And clearly making one mistake that was inconsequential,

and it was a mistake where his client had reported something

to him, and he just missed that what the report that he got

was not accurate.

But that is a scintilla, perhaps, of evidence of misconduct.

It resulted in a fairly large swing

in terms of having a positive sort of year end

versus a couple hundred thousand dollars in the negative.

But is your argument there was no consequence to that?

No, there was no financial consequence

as a result of what the mistake he made and not finding

the mistake his client had reported to him.

So how does your client get around the fact

that the subsequent auditor found more than 20 findings

and some of them had four significant deficiencies

that had never been reported on your client's watch?

Right.

And my client's testimony was that if he were given

the paperwork for 2011, 2012, that Mason and Rich got,

if he was kept on that audit, he very likely

would have found what they found.

He said, but for the years, they never

found anything wrong with the audits from 2008 through 2011.

But all of a sudden, the fiscal year 2012 audit,

they look back and they say, oh, for this year, well,

Mr. Bowley was in the process of doing that.

And he even sent a note to Todd Fahey,

who was the acting trustee at the time,

and said, you know, I need that paperwork.

I need their final report to me in order

that I can conclude my work for that year.

And he said, no, you're fired.

So for example, the 2012 issues with the guardianship

account did not occur under your client's watch?

They didn't.

And there was nothing that occurred on his watch.

And nobody pointed to that.

There was no testimony with regard to that.

There was no testimony at the hearing before the board

to suggest how they reached conclusions

that he had failed to meet the standard.

But they reached those conclusions.

But the attorney on the board, when

faced with my motion or my objection

to the introduction of the AG's report,

he said, well, we're going to allow the documents in,

but not the conclusions of the AG's office.

And there's great reason for not allowing that.

One is there was no testimony where

they could say, we reached these conclusions

for these reasons based upon these facts, this data.

It was none of that.

This was done without any evidence whatsoever,

albeit there was that mistake that he made.

So let me make sure I'm understanding.

Are you saying that if we look at the report that

was done by the state, but not the sort of conclusions

that we can't determine from that that there was any violation?

Is that what you're saying?

Well, I am saying that.

But I'm also saying that the board didn't

point to anything in that report other

than the conclusions themselves, which

had been excluded from evidence.

But couldn't the board, in other words,

couldn't the board from looking at the report

minus the conclusions have then drawn conclusions

that were the same as the ones that the investigator found?

Why?

Why couldn't they do that?

Because there was no evidence that

showed that Mr. Bolier had done anything other than what

he was hired to do and that fell within the standard.

So again, if I'm understanding that, what you're saying

is that one could not determine just from the report

absence some sort of as you characterize as conclusions

that there was anything wrong.

As far as I know, that's true.

And there was no testimony as to what in there.

I'm not an accountant.

So I don't know what was going on in the heads of the Mason

and Rich audit is.

And I don't even know if it was their conclusion,

the conclusion of whoever it was in the attorney general's

office that produced this report.

But they reached these conclusions.

And it's like, I show up for a hearing

and I'm prepared to cross-examine whatever

testimony there is.

And whatever evidence is suggested that may show

that my client actually acted grossly negligently

or negligently at all in performing these things.

And there was nothing there.

And the board says, well, I should have brought witnesses

in to prove that he did everything right.

And I'm thinking that isn't the American way.

And it clearly isn't allowed by the statute itself, which

establishes, the 541A, establishes that the burden of proof

is on the party that proposed the proposition or made

the proposition, and that then has

to be proven by a preponderance of the evidence.

So they said no.

So I'm clear when we talk about conclusions.

There are conclusions at the end of the report

that most of which pertain to TriCat, the agency.

Because the report was geared toward the agency, not the client.

So the board's order cites to the report, page 3,

which is part of the executive summary, which

talks about the accounting firm, perform the audits 2008

through 2011, prepared incomplete and inaccurate reports.

Is that a conclusion or is that a finding

that was OK for the board to consider?

Well, it's a conclusion.

I mean, obviously it's.

The board also cites to page 11, which

talks about that misstatement on the financial condition

and the cash position.

So that's a finding or a conclusion.

It is conclusory, but it's a conclusion

that my client admitted to at the hearing.

And then page 12, just not to belabor this,

but that one cites to the guardianship issue, which

was post your client's tenure.

Yeah.

He wasn't there.

So were those the conclusions that you were anticipating

would be excluded?

Yes.

Given the back and forth that you had with the board.

Yes, absolutely.

Thank you, Mr. Vanakar.

OK.

And I didn't really get into the other issue

with regard to it, but I think it's well briefed,

especially perhaps in the responsive brief

that I provided to you on the records retention.

By the retention.

Yeah, thank you.

Thank you.

May it please the court.

My name is Seth Ziraki on behalf of the New Hampshire

Board of Accountancy.

There are two separate board findings

that issue on this appeal.

The court should affirm as to both.

The appellant's primary argument

is that there was no evidence for the board

to conclude that the appellant failed to properly conduct

auditing services.

But the fact is there was plenty of evidence.

And I'll highlight some of the most significant.

First, the engagement letter clearly

set forth that the appellant would

report on internal controls that's laid out in our brief.

In the four years, 2008 to 2011,

that the appellant audited TCAP,

it did not detect any significant concerns

that TCAP's financial statements

on their financial statements, not a single one.

Nor did the appellant identify any deficiencies or weaknesses

in internal controls.

There is sort of a disconnect, though,

between the finding of the board or in their order

that there was an oversight on internal controls,

yet that follows this statement about the misuse

of the guardianship funds, which was after Mr. Bolio's

tenure.

Well, I think what the subsequent auditing firm

in 2012 found a large over 20 either material control

weaknesses or significant deficiencies.

Did they tie them to the particular audit in question?

They did.

And that's laid out in the board's order.

They said, looking at these 24 items,

there's no way that those 24 things couldn't

have existed in prior years.

And on that basis, they used their specialized knowledge

in this area and found that the prior firm, the appellant,

should have detected those internal control weaknesses.

But they didn't tie it to, for example, well, in 2010,

this would have been obvious.

Or in 2009, this would have been obvious.

They don't go to that level of specificity,

but they found that they must have existed

over an extended period of time.

And they should have been identified by the appellant.

They wouldn't have appeared overnight.

That's the point.

That's the point, Your Honor.

Yes.

Now, there was additional evidence beyond these internal control

weaknesses and significant deficiencies identified

in the Attorney General Office's report.

So I just want to make sure that I understand.

You're saying that from the later audit that

was done by another firm, and what they reported

was as the problems, it was reasonable for the board

to be able to say, well, if these things that have been

pointed out existed, we can draw the reasonable inference

that those things would have existed in earlier years.

And why that's true?

That's exactly right, Your Honor.

I think the board obviously is composed of licensees.

They have this specialized knowledge in this area.

And under this Court's precedent,

that specialized knowledge should be deferred to.

So other than the age use report, what evidence did

you present to the board to prove this?

In addition to the AG's report?

Yeah.

OK.

So first, in the appellant's owner's own testimony,

he admitted to a disclosure error in 2008.

Was it significant?

The board identified it in their decision.

So I think it's fair to say that the board did

find it significant.

But I think even more significant than that,

and the board goes into some detail in their order,

was the fact that the appellant destroyed its audit workpapers.

If you look at page 18 of the board's decision,

that's at 488 in the appendix.

That was a separate basis, though,

that had nothing to do with the quality of the audits.

I think it supported both findings here.

And if you look at the board's decision,

the board notes that when the appellant was contacted

in January of 2013 by the special trustee

that had been appointed to oversee TCAP,

the appellant had no papers, no workpapers

of backup of this work file.

If the appellant had followed even the three-year retention

period that they said they did, they

would have had these workpapers in January of 2013.

For the later audits.

For the later audits, certainly.

2010, I suppose, and 2011 as well.

And even the five-year would have not

produced any papers for the 2008 audit.

Perhaps not for 2008, but for 2000, certainly 2009, 2010,

and 2011.

Sopina was issued in 2015?

The Sopina was issued later.

I'm referring the board pointed to a letter that

would came from the Mason and Vedder.

Which was not a records retention letter.

It just said, put your carrier on notice.

That's right.

But there was testimony at the hearing

that the appellant didn't have these records even as of that.

And the 2008 so-called error was the omission of a footnote.

Was that actually acknowledged as an error

or just as an unexplained entry?

I believe it was acknowledged as a disclosure error

in testimony before the board.

But I think back on the workpapers issue,

it was significant to both findings of the board.

The appellant's owner testified there was no documentation

of the process followed in purging the documents.

The appellant's owner testified that he couldn't recall

when he destroyed the records, nor could he

recall exactly what was destroyed.

I think a fair reading in the board's decision on this point

is that there were credibility issues there.

And the board found that the destruction of the audit

workpapers was also evidence that the appellant had failed

to properly conduct auditing services.

So you're saying the board could have found that these

were destroyed either because, well, I suppose

worst case inference would be they never existed.

They just sort of signed a letter saying that everything's fine

but without really doing very much.

Or at least that the records were,

the records would have revealed incriminating information.

That's right, Your Honor.

Yes.

Now, if I could address the notion that the Attorney General's

Office report may have been admitted into evidence

on a limited basis, I think that argument

should be rejected for three separate reasons.

First, looking at the transcript,

it shows that the board chair and the parties

agreed at the outset that the report would

be marked for identification.

At the conclusion of the testimony,

the board chair expressed-

Well, not actually, because didn't the board

say that's not how we do things here?

There was a suggestion it would be marked for ID,

and then the board said, no, no, we don't do that.

We're just going to-

There was discussion that it would be admitted,

not for its conclusions, but only for context.

There was some back and forth.

I don't think the issue, frankly,

was preserved with the necessary clarity at that point

to make this an appellate issue.

But even if the board did rule that,

the board's consideration of the report

was consistent with that framework.

There was a conclusion in the report

under the heading that there was auditor misconduct.

That was the conclusion.

That's not what the board relied on.

It relied on these underlining findings

that we've gone through earlier.

Including page 12 about the egregious misuse

of the guardianship funds, which was

after Mr. Bolio's tenure.

So does that taint the board's view of the report

vis-a-vis Mr. Bolio's auditing services?

I don't think so, Your Honor.

Again, I point back to this.

Over 20, I think 24, either significant deficiencies

or internal control weaknesses.

One of which included these guardianship issues

which began in 2012.

Well, I think that was symptomatic

of the same types of internal control issues

that the board said existed beforehand.

And the board said it must have existed beforehand.

I would also, on one final point on the admission

of the AG's report, in addition to not being preserved

adequately at the hearing itself, under RSA 541,

to properly preserve an issue for appellate review,

the company needed to raise it in a motion for re-hearing.

And if you look at the motion for re-hearing,

I don't think it was adequately preserved

in the motion for re-hearing either.

Do you make that preservation argument in your brief?

Not explicitly in the brief.

If there were insufficient evidence on the auditing charges,

but perhaps sufficient evidence on the records retention,

what would we do?

I think there's sufficient evidence here.

The board upheld the sanctions here by a unanimous vote.

As I said, a significant finding

that supported both of the board's findings

on the failure to adequately conduct auditing services,

as well as the failure to preserve

the records for the requisite period of time,

that fact supported both those findings.

So I think this court should affirm on that basis alone.

But if we didn't, in other words,

if we thought that there was a basis to affirm on one,

but not on the other, should we

send it back to the board on the theory

that maybe they would have imposed a different sanction?

I think that would be reasonable, Your Honor.

Yes.

All right.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you.

Savannah Court, you have five.

Thank you, Steph.

Once again, there really was no evidence with the conclusion

that there's no way that this couldn't have existed

in the years prior to Lisa Rich doing that.

You're saying, so in other words,

you're saying when we look at the underlying evidence,

we will not be able to draw the inference

that if these things existed in 2012 or 2013 or whatever,

they didn't, it could have been,

it would be reasonable to infer that it could have been

that this just happened in those years.

I don't think you'll find the evidence there

with regard to those previous years.

It'd be helpful if there was a definition of what

these things that previously may have existed were.

Yeah, and then that is, again, that's an opinion.

It's a conclusion.

Without testimony, it's an conclusion

that I think has to have been reached by an expert.

So you're saying that the board needed

to have an expert accountant testified before them?

Well, there was no right.

Nobody from the AG's office.

We don't even know who wrote the report, really.

But we don't know the qualifications.

It clearly doesn't meet the Daubert standard

for an expert opinion coming into evidence.

But we do know the report was on the list,

and there were witnesses on the list.

So you knew ahead of time there was no witness corresponding

to the report.

I did.

So what do we do with that?

Well, I think what you do with that

is say that exactly what I have argued

that they didn't prove their case.

It was their obligation to do it.

And for the court to say that I should have brought people

in to help potentially prove their case,

that's not the way I've ever practiced.

You present your evidence, I cross-examine.

I present contradictions.

So what was the basis for Judge Kissinger's mistake?

Was he asleep at the switch?

I didn't quite catch that, and I

don't want to get in trouble by answering this.

What do you say Judge Kissinger missed?

I think Judge Kissinger seems to have missed the fact

that there was not evidence on which these conclusions were

based that was presented to the board

and that the conclusions themselves shouldn't have come in,

and they were just adopted by, again, by Judge Kissinger.

I think that was his mistake.

He did the same thing the board did,

and that was to adopt the conclusions that

were stated in the Attorney General's Office report.

And thank you very much, Mr. Pinnacle.

Case submitted, the court will take a brief recess.
