This is case 2018-0680, Ventus Realty Limited partnership versus City of Dover.

May it please the Court, Your Honours. My name is Kevin Rossio, and I represent Ventus Realty Trust.

I reserve two minutes for rebuttal. It seems like these days you can't read the newspaper or listen to the radio or the news on the television.

I'm not hearing a story about corporate greed, a situation where corporations are putting profits ahead of people, especially in a medical field.

You can't hear a story about a big farmer putting profits over patient care, or health insurance companies putting profits over patient care, their insurance care.

This is not that case. In fact, it's the opposite.

What's being asked here by the City of Dover is that Ventus, as managed by national health care, put patient care after tax revenue.

The basis of their appraisal, the basis of their opinion of value was cut significantly, nursing expenses, ancillary expenses, and social services expenses.

Without any justification, as a matter of fact, their own appraiser agreed that you shouldn't do this.

Can I just ask you whether it was wrong for the trial court to reference the transfer tax issue and why?

Because both appraisals agreed this wasn't fair market value. This was not a market transfer. This was corporate restructuring.

Ventus had transferred 355 nursing homes nationwide into a new entity called CCP. There were no appraisals done.

And given the breadth of the amount of transfers, it really wasn't practical for Ventus to do an appraisal for each of the 355 nursing homes.

So now they're faced with what do we do? Do we put the value we think it's worth? And then somehow get penalties and interest by the state when they come back and look at it and say you undervalued.

So they did, I guess, the easier, more practical way and just paid the full amount.

But I don't think that's, that was a year and a half after the date of value. I don't think that's an opinion of value and both appraisals agreed to that.

So how do these cuts impact your client's evaluation?

Well, so when you look at, I know the judge had made some reference that our appraiser didn't look at, only used one year of data.

That wasn't the testimony. The testimony was he looked at three years. He looked at 2012, 13 and 14.

2014 wasn't appropriate because at least nine months of it wasn't appropriate because it was after the date of valuation.

2012 was the prior, so in May 1st of 2013, National Health Care took over management of the nursing home.

The prior administrator didn't do a great job in many areas including keeping financial records.

So he felt that that data was unreliable. But it did show they spent more in expenses in 2012 than 2013.

So the real difference, the crux of the difference in the valuation was deducting expenses.

And with the nursing home, sorry, what the city had overhead done, that they went through and just cut the vital sources of this company.

They didn't cut director's salaries. They didn't cut compensation benefits for officers and directors.

So they attributed, because of that, a greater profit than actually existed?

Exactly.

But the appraisal process isn't confined to actual historical numbers because if somebody buys an underperforming asset,

if it's just managed poorly, that doesn't drive down the value of the property.

Absolutely, Your Honor. This isn't that case. This isn't Coliseum Vickery, which my beloved mentor argued before this quote many years ago,

where this quote said, well, you entered into bad debt property or bad leases, long-term leases that are no longer profitable.

That's your fault. That's not this case. What they're saying is, as a matter of fact, contradictory.

They're saying in one instance, you know, we can't tell the acuity levels between you and the competitors,

and so therefore it's unreliable data, but we're going to do it anyways.

They're going to look at a fact that when national health care took over this business in May 1st of 2013,

they inherited a hot mess.

They inherited a building that was purely, had significant physical and economic obsolescence.

It was deteriorated, and they learned very quickly after taking over on Thanksgiving

that the prior management company had to generate an insufficient to heat the whole building on the loss of power.

On Thanksgiving, they lost power. They couldn't heat the building.

They had to move patients onto other areas of the building.

They got approval from the state, which is very difficult, for $2.9 million for improvements

that started right around the time they took over.

Why isn't this, I mean, I get all your arguments and they presumably were made eloquently to the trial court.

Maybe not.

We're here.

We have a 19-page opinion from Judge Howard that it seems to me this is a classic case of competing experts,

and Judge Howard spent a lot of time analyzing all these arguments about costs and underperforming assets,

and, well, this is what the industry standard is.

How can we get behind that?

Because the judge overlooks some critical other evidence, Your Honor, as we pointed out in that brief.

For example, ancillary expenses, which are a big component of the reduction.

The appraiser, the city's appraiser says, very, very, test of, well, this she said in her brief.

She says, because ancillary expenses vary greatly depending upon Medicaid utilization

and acuity levels, comparable data provides limited analytic ability.

Now, ancillary expenses are speech therapy, physical therapy, respiratory therapy, which we're known for.

So we can't cut that in occupational therapy, drugs and certain devices.

She went through, the gross data was uncontroverted.

Both parties agreed that in 2013 that this facility spent $1,890,000 on ancillary expenses.

Her projections, even though she says limited data,

limited data you can't look at the other competitors and make this determination,

she cut it to $1,674,000 without any evidence.

That's $216,000.

We're known for respiratory therapy.

She didn't even know that the other competitors did not have a full-time respiratory therapist as we did.

Does that exact differential play out into a finite percentage, if you will, of the ultimate appraisal value?

The difference in the expenses are about $800,000.

That's $200,000.

Then there's about another percentage for social services, which is employees they need to admit and discharge.

So when you're discharging a patient who just went through a critical illness and has to go home,

you have to make sure the home is safe.

The nearest competitor did $400,000 less than us a year.

That's roughly eight a week.

We needed more employees.

The biggest is on nursing, though.

It's like $500,000 or $600,000.

Difference in nursing expenses, which includes RNs, registered nurses, licensed practical nurses,

and CNAs, as well as other drugs.

If you're staffing more than competitors, is that something the appraiser has to accept?

That wasn't the evidence at the trial.

If that was the evidence at the trial, I would say.

So when they took over, in addition to the building needing $2.9 million, what needed more than that,

but bringing $2.9 million in, when they inherited it,

the state determines what they call CMI index for various categories.

The category that involved nursing, the state looks at the pace and shots,

which that's the only group in this equation that has, the appraisers can't,

and they determined that this facility, at the time they took it over,

at the time of appraisal, was at a 2 out of 5,

which both Mr. Prisco and Mr. Gilmartin, Mr. Gilmartin says,

I'm the financial bean counter, I push back when I can,

but the ultimate decision on nursing goes to the director of nursing.

That's where this belongs.

And so the evidence at trial was they didn't have enough staffing,

and yet they wanted them to cut it.

And yet they wanted them to cut it even further where that either jeopardizes patient care

or as Mr. Dennehy testified,

the Gold Center in Lexington did this a number of years ago,

and they closed their doors.

We should not be 60% of our patient days.

This is not revenue.

60% of our patient days is Medicaid,

some of the most financially and medically at risk people in our society in the Dover area.

They deserve the same level of dignity as everybody else.

As the expert testified, we're in a situation where,

because one of the things that the court pointed out was said incorrectly, we submit,

that we didn't prove that the need for future nursing care will continue in future years.

That's not true.

Ms. Koschitz, the city's expert, testified that medical expenses

are going to continue to increase.

The cutie levels are going to continue to increase

because people who can afford to avoid nursing homes do.

So they go to assisted living facilities,

and they have at-home services.

The people who are going into nursing homes are the most at risk.

Now, 60% of the patient days were Medicaid,

but only about one-third of it was the revenue.

That was it.

So 60%, but one-third of the revenue is from Medicaid.

And so all the evidence at this case that we submitted this trial suggests you can't cut it.

Now, she testified in another multiple place,

at least three spots in her appraisal, a confidential appraisal,

on page 233 of the confidential appendix.

She talked about lower acuity levels resulting in sicker patients at nursing homes.

On page 193 of the transcript, she testified to the same thing.

On page 263, she talks about the imbalance between Medicaid and Medicare,

meaning Medicaid is not paying enough, and it's going to get worse.

And so all these things were testified to.

She also testified very eloquently,

because we know they talked about our appraiser only using the trailing 11 months.

Her own report on page 263 on the confidential appendix said very aptly,

industry participants, which is market value,

look at the trailing 12 to 24 months.

We only could use the last 11 months because that was the most reliable data.

She ended up doing the same thing, except just started making cuts.

So when you look at what was said, what was presented,

we proved not only through our expert, but we proved through their expert

that you should not be cutting these expenses.

You should not be cutting the expenses of nursing, social services,

and ancillary medical expenses without being able to review the patient data.

At one point in her testimony, she says,

she admitted that it was just purely guesswork.

Her projections were just guesswork.

It's too important to guess on patient care.

This is not a situation where we're saying that the administrator of this facility

was earning a million dollar salary and we should cut it because everyone else,

that's not what she's doing.

One of the other things that she cut, very small,

but it goes to her mindset is the management fee.

She says it should be between 3% and 5%.

She did no calculation as to what it's done in New Hampshire.

She just said 3%.

We were at 4.5%.

She decreased.

It was a small decrease, but it was a decrease.

Our management fee was lower than the other competitors,

but she still cut it anyways.

Just put it at a straight 4%.

When I asked her, why did you cut it?

I just picked the middle one.

That's how they drafted this appraisal.

They just picked the middle one.

So when you look at the actual medical expenses

and whether they're market or not, she supports that they are.

She had said that nursing expenses usually go between 30%

and 45% of gross revenue.

Our appraiser came up at 35%, 34.7%.

Her calculation of gross nurse expenses went 42.5%.

Your light's on.

You have your two minutes.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Good morning.

May it please the court?

My name is Laura Specter Morgan

and I, along with City Council, Joshua Wyatt,

represent the City of Dover.

This court should affirm the decision of the trial court

denying the tax abatement in this case

because as the trial court properly found,

the taxpayer simply didn't meet its burden in this case.

This isn't a case where the City of Dover

questions the quality of care

or is asking anyone to cut any nursing services.

This is a very...

But in effect, isn't the city asking them to

operate the facility at a lower level in order to,

I guess, meet this lower value, if you will,

on the income-based approach?

Is that the net effect?

It is not, Your Honor,

because what the city's appraiser here did,

and I think it's interesting we're talking so much

about the city's appraiser,

when the trial court's decision was based entirely on

the taxpayer's appraiser and we'll get to that,

but what the city's appraiser did was

she looked at the actual expenses

and then she went out to the market

and she looked at the market expenses

and she said when you compare the market expenses

and the actual expenses, the actual expenses are high.

That's exactly what the...

Was this market providing identical services?

It's interesting because although you heard a lot today

about respiratory care and discharges,

the taxpayer's appraisal doesn't mention any of that.

The taxpayer's appraisal says our value is lower

because of the worn condition of the interior finishes,

which is what the certificate of need was granted for,

simply aesthetic changes,

and because of our lack of private rooms.

So they were increasing the number of private rooms.

So both appraisers are praised as a nursing home.

This respiratory specialty...

But under the income approach,

the special services, respiratory services

are part of the income generating model, if you will.

This was not, it might have been easier for all of us,

if it were just a property appraisal, bricks and mortar.

But somehow we're here with this income approach.

So isn't it important to focus on the actual operations,

not a vague comparison with an operation

that might be materially different?

I don't think it was vague, Your Honor.

The city's appraiser has a degree

in nursing home administration.

She has experience in nursing home administration.

She used the exact same comparable facilities

the taxpayers appraiser used.

Now he didn't use them to determine what the market value was.

He looked at them and said,

well, we're sort of in the ballpark,

so our expenses are reasonable.

That's not what he was required to do.

He was required to determine whether or not

they were within the market,

and he did not do that.

The one thing that concerns me here

is I think the use of the data after the date of appraisal.

Why is that appropriate?

Your Honor, I think the trial court held two things.

First, the trial court held that the city's appraiser's use

of the actual data from after April 1, 2019

wasn't appropriate, but then he held,

but her appraisal doesn't rest on that.

There's many other aspects that support her appraisal.

So is he right about that?

He's absolutely right about that.

As for the transfer tax amount,

yes, this was a large transaction

and they didn't have an appraisal done,

and there were a lot of nursing homes at issue here,

but it's important to look at the timing of this transfer.

This transfer was in August of 2015.

That is around the same time that you have to file

your tax abatement appeal.

Ventus obviously knew it was going to appeal this.

It obviously knew this was going to come up,

and it didn't have to do 335 appraisals.

It had to do one.

If it had done an appraisal of this property at that time

and it showed a lower value,

they would have had a lower transfer tax stamp.

They didn't do that.

And both the statute, RSA 78B102

and BTLA case law says what you put down

in the transfer tax amount

is prima facie evidence of the value of the property.

The trial court didn't go there, though.

The trial court did not go there.

The trial court said it's one of the many things

I am considering when I am looking at the value of this property.

And the other important thing about the post-April 1st,

2014 information here, Honour,

is that it demonstrates exactly what was predicted here.

It demonstrates that during 2014,

the new operator reduced costs

by over $300,000.

But should we be able to consider that?

That seems like we shouldn't be able to think about that.

But both appraisers said

when a new operator takes over,

you expect them to tighten up the ship

and start reducing expenses.

I mean, they're buying it presumably

because it's an undervalued act.

I mean, they can buy it and make it run better

and then make money.

This was not that kind of transfer, as I understand it.

This was sort of a corporate reorganization.

It wasn't someone coming in and buying them to make money

and make them better.

This was simply a corporate reorganization.

But nonetheless, both appraisers said

that when a new operator comes in,

expenses go down.

And the fact that they did go down

simply supports what both appraisers said.

But not to the degree that

the city's appraiser projected.

Not at that point, Your Honour. Correct.

And the initial purchase was

a new operator coming in.

This corporate transfer was internal,

but there had been an acquisition prior there too.

No, Your Honour. What there had been

was there was a lease of the property

by one operator. They didn't renew their lease

and a new operator came in with a new lease.

But there was a new sheriff in town starting

like 2012 or 13 or something?

2013.

Right. And isn't that a relevant consideration

in terms of

valuation of the property?

Absolutely.

And the city's appraiser did consider that.

She looked at many years of data.

She adjusted them for the market.

And she made a projection into 2015.

She used the 2014 data

to help her do that, but that's

not solely what her appraisal was based on.

So

from your perspective is this just

two competing experts in the trial court

heard all the

testimony and came down

basically endorsing

the view of one expert?

Yes, to a degree.

Except that what the trial court here did was

the trial court didn't adopt

the city's appraiser.

The trial court said the taxpayer

failed to meet its burden.

And while the trial court went through the analysis

of the city's appraisal, there's a footnote

in there that says, I don't even have to do

this. Because

regardless of what her appraisal is, the

taxpayer didn't meet its burden.

And this court has held as recently as 2017

in the PSNH case that when the

taxpayer doesn't meet its burden,

simply trying to pick apart

the city's appraiser is not sufficient

to meet that burden.

And the determination

that the burden hasn't been met,

what

deference do we owe the trial court as to

that determination? It's an unsustainable

exercise of discretion decision, Your Honor.

If the court has no other questions,

I will simply ask

that you affirm the trial court. Thank you.

Mr. Rossio, your two minutes.

Thank you very much, Your Honor.

So

to follow up on that point, Your Honor,

we

can prove our case

not only by our expert

but by the city's expert as well in the city's evidence.

That's Brickman and Damoulas. The Damoulas

Court in the decision that made there

even though they said the detail was

correct in not buying

the petitioner's expert, they sent

it back to determine what did the evidence

support

denying the abatement.

So that's why we're spending so much time talking

about the city's appraisal here. It's not because we think it's great because we don't.

That's the whole point

that the city, our expert

even though the court incorrectly said we didn't

stabilize expenses, we did.

He looked at those other

expenses and said they weren't comparable.

And he said, I'm not

going to cut them based on that. I can't make that decision.

The city's appraiser took

the fundamentally flawed

and I would once again say

grossly misfeas and

step of saying let's deduct

nursing expenses without any support

for that. And the court bought that.

So our expert did look at the

valuation, did look at the expenses

and said how can we judge

there are more expenses, especially in a situation as

Mr. Priscoe and Mr. Gromatin testified

they had two

rating. If you look at page

222 of the

confidential appendix, that's the city's appraiser.

She goes through and compares

the gross data

for 2012, 2013,

2014. We actually

increased national health care when

he took over on May 1st, increased nursing

expenses from 2012

and 2013. They went up.

There was a slight decrease in

2014, which we shouldn't have looked at,

but it was under $50,000 in nursing

expenses. Well, that was a

quick two minutes.

It was. And you were going

fast.

I brought my inner boss to know.

Thank you, Mr.

Priscoe. Okay, submitted.
