Good morning. Good morning, your honor. It's nice to see you both. Thank you. This is case

2018-0638 in the matter of Gregory Landgraf and Natasha Landgraf. Your honor,

Kevin Rossio for Natasha Landgraf. We are appealing a decision from the complex

family docket made by Judge Foley in October of 2018. One of the issues on appeal is the

property division. Mr. Landgraf is a substantial income earner. He dwarfs by the court's own

finding her income. Despite that, the court ordered what it found to be a 78-22 division

of assets and a 14-year marriage with two children. When we argue, our argument is that the business

is appraised under a value of 1.2 million, which would then bring, if the court would

accept that finding, really the property division to 82. What was the principal difference

in the two experts' methodologies? Pretty much the same, your honor. It comes down

to just four different bases, whether the cap rate, which we say is too high used by Mr.

Landgraf's appraisal, including the fact that he says that the business has almost a 6%

growth potential in the future, which at the time, the economy was going at 2.5%,

so he's saying this business is going to grow at twice the value of the rest of

the economy, but he used a higher cap rate. For that reason, he kept cash out, significant

cash of $3 million, which was unlike what the company had used in prior years. It didn't

add a zero back in, as well as applied a higher lack of marketability and the fact that

this company had $12 million in assets. Did your client's expert apply a discount

for lack of control?

He did not apply a discount for lack of control because of the fact that they had 50-50 ownership,

so they could operate in such a way, and they had operated in such a way over the course

of the year.

Mr. Maloney found that nine of the 10 factors regarding control weren't met. How do you

address that?

When you look at the operation of this business overall, this is a situation where both

had 50-50 interest. Any potential buyer, we're going to assume under Cattrell, we're going

to assume a willing buyer and a willing seller are going to cooperate in a like manner, in

a positive manner.

The testimony was the brothers hated each other. They didn't talk socially. They didn't

socialize with their parents. They did nothing. In spite of that, the business grew significantly.

During the marriage, which is one of the issues that we have here on property division,

during the marriage, the court found that the revenues for this business went from

$8 million in 2008 to nearly $20 million by the time of the divorce in 2002.

But why wouldn't 50-50 split deter a buyer from buying the property? Because maybe that

buyer won't get along with the brother either, but they won't be able to just work it out

and then the assets potentially frozen. Wouldn't that deter somebody from paying?

I don't think so because when you look at the situation where the brothers did

not get along at all and didn't coexist together in a reasonable manner, they were still able

to put their love for money, I guess, ahead of their hatred for themselves.

And you would expect any and when you...

That's a pretty big flyer for somebody to take while I'm going to buy in, but I

can't do anything unilaterally. I don't have control over the company.

But they do have the control with the like manner of when you look at Cattrell

and you say willing buyer, willing seller, so we're going to presume for a hypothetical

sale situation that everyone's going to get along. And if we're going to presume that

they're not going to, then I think we're deviating from Cattrell and now applying a

standard of well they may not get along.

Well isn't the real issue here the 78-22 or 82-18 split?

It is.

I mean that's where the real money is here rather than the valuation of the

business.

Exactly. I was responding to Justice Hicks' question. And the court's factors, the

court cites in its order the law, which is in the absence of special

circumstances, the trial court should make as equal a division of assets as

possible. That is the law. That is the statute. That is the case law that

you've determined in prior decisions. And then he goes and says well these

four factors outweigh that. And I'm going to do the 78-22 division.

The first factor he uses is well the husband is closer to retirement than

the wife. Husband is 56th at the time of trial. Wife is 40. When you look at the

factual findings he made otherwise, if you look at silver and what you just

recently decided in silver, is that when you reversed on discretion, what

your standard you use is does the record support an objective basis for

the discretion? The record doesn't support that husband is going to

retire in 10 years and wife in 26 as a basis to deviate. The court found

that there's a high likelihood of continued bonuses. He approved the

husband's appraiser which said this business is going to grow at nearly

6% going forward. So we know the business is going to continue. At a

million dollars a year is what the husband was making. A million dollars

a year. Over 10 years he's going to make 10 million dollars. Wives at

$20,000 a year. In the absence of a fault divorce, is there any case

where we've affirmed division of this magnitude with a disparity of this

magnitude? I'm not aware of you. I know you've reversed like in Tishkovich

in McGrath. Tishkovich is at 131 New Hampshire. McGrath is at 136. So I

know you have said when you looked at this that this is way too

significant. But there is no objective basis for the fact that

the husband's going to retire. I respectfully submit. He then says,

well, the husband's going to have to pay taxes on this. Well, first

of all, that caught me by surprise. Husband didn't disclose any tax

expert what the new tax laws were going to do with respect to his

income. There was no notice of that. But even if you consider that,

even if you consider that, the court found that in 2017 the husband

paid $390,000 in taxes. He made over a million dollars. Roughly,

that's $610,000 in net income to wife's 20. So on an objective

basis, that's not a reason to deviate. If you look at the third

problem with the court found, the court found that the husband

contributed more to the excess of acquisition of assets in

Natasha Landgraf, minimally. I say that's an error of law. When

you look in Dombrovsky decision, and you look at Harvey

decision, the court, you rejected the argument of, well,

husband worked more. He was the primary bedwinner. So

therefore, that's a bigger factor. That was rejected. And

it doesn't matter that the business originated from

husband's family.

No, I respectfully, and I'll get to that in a minute, your honor. I

don't think that that does, but just if I could finish this

point. When you look at Dombrovsky and the records found in

this case, the court found, in its own findings, just two

paragraphs, two or three paragraphs ahead of that,

that the wife contributed significantly at times exclusively

to the care and education of the minor children as well as

to the orphaned home. That's Dombrovsky. That's the economic

partnership that we talked about. As far as the fact of this

business was acquired during the marriage, I don't think the

record supports that the business was paid off during

the marriage. I don't recall any testimony that that actually

took place. But even so, when you look at the fact that

this business grew substantially at the time of the

marriage, by the court's own findings, husband was making

less than $150,000 a year from the business. The court

then finds the revenues for this business was $8 million in

2008. It ballooned, it grew it more than double to almost 20,

I hear, under $20 million. His income went from 2008 of

roughly $190,000, ballooning to over a million.

Was there evidence of the value of the business at the

time of the marriage?

Other than extrapolating from the revenues?

There was no evidence of value of what it was at that time,

and there was no appraisal submitted as to what it was

at that time. But we know that the business grew, just

nobody's own income, that the business grew. And as a matter

of fact, Mr. Landgraf testified at one point that in prior

years they were having difficult time making ends meet,

and they only took bonuses once a year. So we know that

this business has grew during the marriage. And for those

factors, I think it's unsustainable when you look at these

basis.

Well, can't the trial court look at the business? It's my

understanding here that the company serves essentially one

other company, provided parts to one company. And so there

is some speculation as to whether the business is going

to continue to grow, given the fact that it only has one

customer.

It has more than that, Your Honor. I think if you look

at the record, and I could say there were other customers,

I think the majority was between one and two customers. But

in spite of that, the husband's own appraiser said it was

going to grow at five and a half percent, Your Honor. It was

five and a half percent. That's significant. They weren't

expecting any downturn. It was growing twice the rate of

our economy. And so that wasn't the basis that he

suggested. So to read into it, I think we'd go off what

the judge said. And I think the judge also-

If the trial court were to issue an order for 50% of the

value today, and then the value does decline, the wife doesn't

share in the cost of value, correct?

The wife wouldn't share in the cost of value. Nor would she

share in the increase value, Your Honor. So if the business

goes up in value, that's the difficulty of-

Is that a factor that the trial court may consider sort of

future projections, tariff impacts?

Not without evidence, Your Honor. And I think as you had

done, and I think it stapled in, you reversed a judge who went

on her own in quizzet evidence, I don't think the judge can do

that. Matter of fact, the testimony from the husband's

appraiser was, tariffs weren't a concern.

Well, that uncertainty as to the future would impact the

valuation of the business, not the percentage division, right?

Exactly. That goes into cap rate. And that's how the

cap rate's determined as part of the process. And once

again, the husband's appraiser shows 5.5%, greater than what our

expert said. And so when you look at the amount of cash that

this company had as far as $3 million plus other assets of

$12 million, really, this was a money printing operation.

This was a very successful business. Did anyone explain why

they were holding $3 million in cash?

Well, good point because they wanted to, which I think

is done to control, is unallowed, and you really shouldn't

do it.

Well, wasn't it because it had no inventory, a very low

inventory? That was the business design, and they needed,

if they needed inventory, they needed the cash to get

inventory.

That's one of the bases that the husband's appraiser had

said. But what it overlooked in there is that it's payable,

it's receivable, it was collecting at a faster rate

than industry standards. The husband's appraiser

acknowledged that the cash was relatively high for a

manufacturing business. As a matter of fact, the

statistics that were presented at trial, undisputed, was

manufacturing business generally holds 6% of their

working capital as cash. This was 31%. This is by far

greater.

And as the evidence pointed out at trial, too, the cash

increased as the husband was going through the divorce.

It really started increasing in 2015 after the assault

in Mexico. And so I think the handwriting was on

the wall. They were talking about divorce then.

And so that could be an explanation of it. But what you

look at is you look at what would a general business

know what this business would do.

Is the track court required to look at the overall

distribution in total, or can it proceed asset by

asset?

I think both, Yuan. I think it could look asset by

asset, but the general over nature at the end of the

day matters. And so that's where the 78, 82, whatever

you're going to find.

There were other assets that arguably were divided

unequally as well.

As far as my recollection around, there weren't any other

assets divided unequally.

You know, she kept her...

A property was awarded 100% to one party or the other.

Yeah, the net equity of her house was $140,000, where

his house was $700, no mortgage, $610 or whatever

the value was.

So by any stretch of the imagine, I think that she

got 100% of any group of assets by that nature.

In the property division, the court says, well, they're

kind of two different ways we can approach it, and they

kind of come out even, and one of them is just

allocating 25%.

And one of them is a little more asset by asset

parcel.

That's right.

Where did the 25% come from?

I just think he just said, well, maybe I gave her

25%.

I mean, that's my recollection of his decision of

saying, well, I'll just give her 25%.

If I gave her 25%, considering the fact of those

four factors, which I pointed out, I think, are

improper to consider, he just arrived at 25%.

Which rises to...

I know I got a minute left.

The child support issue is also a big issue of

contention in that the deviation that was made,

as well as fault, I just don't have time to talk

about the fault because I think the reversible

error is also there, too.

But on the child support, the basis he deviated

from was not raised prior to the trial.

It was the first time in the decision.

He raises the issue of the taxes that...

Sorry, the property division payout that he may

have to pay to my client.

He may have to take a loan out.

Mr. Landgraf may have to take a loan out and

therefore it's good to deviate from the child

support guideline because he may have to have

this obligation.

That's not allowed.

This quote is said, you can't consider property

and child support in the same thing because

property division doesn't go to the child.

Second of all, the court says when you're

considering a deviation, the statute says when

you're considering a deviation, you must

consider what's in the best instance of the

child.

There was no analysis of what's in the

best instance of the child.

He comes and says that the kids don't need

that much but made no finding as to what

they do need.

What this case said in Silver, very aptly so,

when you're going to deviate from the

child support guideline, you could have

made a decision of what the standard

living is going to be at both houses.

At Dad's house, they have helicopter rides,

they have gators, they have all this

equipment, all this two different properties,

sprawling land, at mom, they have a leaky roof.

One of your points, am I right, is that

even with the court's downward adjustment of

reasonable expenses that the child support

still falls short?

It still falls short, about $2,000 a month.

I use that as a back, as a, you know,

suspender's issue, but in reality too,

there was no basis for the deviation.

How much the kid should spend on clothes,

there was no objective basis that she

was spending more than what she needed

to spend, or that what she was spending

was actually too much for the kids.

Rest assured that these kids standard

of living at mom's is a lot less with

Dad with $610,000 assuming you accept

the tax finding in mom at 20.

Thank you.

Good morning.

An unsustainable exercise of discretion

is a very hard standard to reach.

A fact finder at the trial court level

is in a better position to weigh the evidence

and opine upon the credibility of a party

and the methodology of an expert.

Very recently, just last summer,

and after we all briefed this case,

the case of Thomas Galinas and Karen Galinas

came down where the court did exactly that.

The court chose that one party's expert

had a better methodology.

The court found that one party's expert

made better considerations and that the opposing party's

expert in valuing a business had significant

and material errors.

If you read Judge Foley's decision in this case,

you will see that Mr. Albright had

a number of different valuation errors

in his hybrid methodology, which the court said

caused it to lack confidence as it related

to the ultimate result.

One of the major issues that the trial court considered

is that Mr. Albright, when looking at various

three businesses to measure against this business,

inappropriately and inaccurately found

that one of the business sales was $15,600,000.

It was only conceded on cross-examination

that that third business wasn't $15,600,000

but actually $5 million.

Let's assume that the use of comps, as it were,

it was a little bit squirrely.

Let's talk about the deviation in the division of the property

in this case, 85, 15, 80, 20.

Isn't that what it was?

Certainly.

RSA 45816 specifically prescribes

that the court has the authority

to consider property acquired before a marriage

in order and unequal division of assets.

This is not an exact science,

although counsel indicates this was a 14-year marriage.

The party separated at 12 years

and by all accounts it was bad from the start.

In this particular case,

the two largest assets of the union were...

Why should one party or the other bear the brunt

of that financially?

That it was, quote, bad from the start.

Understood, but the court does nevertheless

have the authority to weigh as many as the factors

as necessary in order to make an overall division

of assets and to put more weight

in some factors than others.

It wasn't lost on this...

Your argument is that the court put a lot of weight

on the fact that the business originated

with your client's family.

It wasn't just the business.

It was the business and the marital home.

The findings are replete with that the marital home,

the husband bought the land decades before the marriage.

The wife would have been seven years old

at the time, it was 22 acres of undeveloped land.

He personally built the house, he cut the land,

he built the ponds.

All of that asset, all of that work

was done prior to the party's marriage.

There was also testimony at trial that at the time...

So that, sorry, but that means,

so if we look at the house.

Sure.

That's a factor for awarding that to your client.

Yes.

And then if you look at the business separately.

Yes.

Were there similar factors?

There were similar factors.

This wasn't a situation where the wife was a corporate spouse

where she helped or assisted in any way

in the growth of the business.

And it's actually kind of interesting.

But she did raise the kids, allowing the business to...

She was a homemaker.

To grow the business.

No question she was a homemaker.

But the husband also parented these children

and that's why he ended up over wife's objection

with a parenting plan that provides him

with a substantial amount of time with the boys

from Thursday to a Monday morning.

Is there any case that we've decided

that supports the proposition that being a corporate spouse

is more important or should be given more weight

than raising children at home?

Not one particular case, but the court also talks about,

did any of the parties take any steps

that caused the diminution of the marital estate

or that caused issues with the marital estate

in this particular case?

The court found that the wife from an early on standpoint

was pursuing other relationships online

through millionairematch.com

and that that contributed to the breakdown of the marriage.

So in terms of a fault ground analysis

or an unequal analysis,

I don't think the court could find that

one particular party caused the irremediable breakdown

of the marriage, but it was really a compilation

of different factors.

There was no fault, sorry.

There was no fault ground against either party.

Correct.

Can you identify any case where there's been

such a lopsided division of property

in the absence of a fault divorce?

Not in your state.

And why should this be a case where you go

to approximately 80, 20 when the presumption

is in favor of 50, 50 in a long-term marriage?

There's a presumption, but it's a rebuttable presumption.

And I think that the court didn't just analogize

the or focus as Justice Hans Marconi has indicated

on the fact that the husband's business of 60 years,

which was founded by his grandfather,

ultimately he and his brother inherited it,

is the single issue.

But I think that the court also looked at the fact

that Natasha Landgraf was a young,

healthy, employable 40-year-old woman

at the time of the party's divorce.

She had been educated at the expense of the husband

during the course of the party's marriage.

Under the current support order granted,

she's to receive $41,964 in child support,

$48,000 a year in alimony.

And the court indicated that she already had $20,000

of income in her bead business

if she chose not to do anything different.

So she was receiving a net effect of $110,000

in support plus the court also found

that she'd be receiving 10% of any bonuses

that the husband would be receiving from his business.

So as a practical matter, if we look at just one year

from April of 2017 to April of 2018 in support,

that was approximately $238,000 in support

that she received.

I think that the court looked at the assets

that the husband had during the marriage

and quite candidly created an unequal division

of assets to measure and to recognize

that the predominance of the assets

that existed approximately 3.7 million of them

according to the judge's findings

were all things that the husband had

prior to the party's marriage.

Should it matter to us that during the party's marriage,

the business in particular grew in value substantially.

His income certainly grew substantially during the period

and therefore capitalizing that the value of the business

would have increased substantially during the marriage.

Should that matter?

I find that to be an interesting point

and if you look at page bottom of 11

of my brief in page 12, I did a summary for you

on a year by year basis of what the husband's income was

from this business during the marriage

and you will see that his income was under 400,000

ranging from 217,200 in 2003 to $446,000 in 2013.

We know from the testimony in the underlying record

that by that point in time, the wife was already

planning to exit the marriage.

In 2016, which was our client's highest earning year

up until that point, that's when the party separated

and it was a million dollars.

Tony Albright and Rick Maloney testified

when they gave their expert analysis

that in approximately 2008 we began an economic upswing,

particularly in the automotive industry.

I'm sure you've all read that this particular business,

70% of its gross revenue is achieved

from one particular contract with Freudenberg

and that this particular company is so tied

to the automotive industry that if anything happens

to that industry, their overall revenue scheme

is going to significantly decline.

Did the trap work align that fact in its order?

It considered that in its order, but it also considered

that each of the experts testified

that we have been in the longest run that people

have ever seen in the automotive industry

and both of them talked about a potential downturn

in a short period of time.

So presumably both experts took that into account

the uncertainties of economic growth nationally

and in regard to this company going forward

and the trial court did as well.

So that's already incorporated

in the valuation numbers, isn't it?

It was except for the speculative issue of the tariffs

which had not yet come into play.

This is an predominantly aluminum and steel business

and without aluminum and steel being

at a decent rate for purchase,

it will absolutely dip into the profits

of the company on a going forward basis.

So should we speculate about the impact of that?

I think that you are tied to the record

that you have before you,

but I think you can consider certainly

that each of the experts were clear that

we're at the end of this cycle.

I think you can also consider the fact.

You're probably indicated that it was improper

for the trial court to look at the time horizon

for each party in terms of retirement work life.

Do you agree that that's an improper factor?

No, I think that courts can consider that.

I think when there is a vast disparity in age,

I think that can be looked at as one of the many factors.

I don't necessarily think that would be

a controlling factor unless there were testimony

that there is to be an imminent retirement

and I concede there was no such testimony in this case

but I don't think we can move beyond the fact

that my client was 56 years old when this case was tried.

I'm also mindful of the trial record and the transcripts

which include that the wife's bead business

had gross receipts of $200,000 in 2016 and 2017,

although her net profit after deducting from expenses

was approximately $20,000 a year.

I do believe that the trial court considered

that this is a very capable young woman

who's going to be able to do something

at a minimum of the $20,000

that we conceded be imputed to her

or something much greater.

Was there evidence before the trial court

as to how a payout could be affected from the business?

In terms of a division? Was there cash available

to pay the wife her share?

Let me address the issue of cash in a different way

that I hope will answer your question as well.

Each of the two experts found a,

it was appropriate for this company

to have a different amount of cash on hand

to pay its bills.

Tony Albright came up with the theory

that it only needed one month of cash,

whereas Mr. Maloney came up with a theory

that it would need just under two months of cash

because this was a pay on demand type of business

and there's a lot of information in the record

about what that means

for an automotive industry related company.

But the suggestion by council in his presentation to you

that this company inappropriately hoarded cash

in order to defeat a claim for a division of assets,

that's not sustained by the record.

This is a company that has always kept

approximately two months of cash available.

I didn't mean to suggest that at all,

I just said it's a matter of business prudence.

Why is it so high?

No one's suggesting there's any impropriety here,

I don't believe.

But regardless of the cash,

I think my question goes to was this,

a payout would necessarily mean a payment plan?

My client.

Or a sharing of stock or, I mean.

My client was ordered to pay.

Was there any evidence before the court

as to how it would be carried out?

There was no evidence as to how it would be carried out

but if you read the court's decision,

it finds that my client had sufficient assets

to make the payments and ordered him to pay,

I believe it was $548,000 in cash to the wife

as well as to divide a retirement plan

which was at the time roughly a little over 300,000.

We've conceded in post trial submissions

that that amount may be higher or lower

because we don't know what the market has done

with respect to allocable gains and losses

since this case was tried in Kauai Candle,

it's probably more given the market.

But this is a wife who will walk away

after a 12 year marriage with over a million dollars

and at a bare minimum, $110,000 a year in support

which puts her in a far better position

than she was prior to the marriage

and gives her roughly 25% of the marital estate

according to what judge fully found.

You referred earlier to the wife's conversations

about divorce on the internet.

Can you clarify the timeline in terms of the incidents

of abuse vis-a-vis the conversations about divorce?

So it appears that in as early as 2007

the wife was according to this court's findings

engaged in a, I think he used the word flirtatious

relationship with a Mexican photographer.

And then from that time forward there was evidence at trial

and it's before you in the transcript

that she was advertising herself on various websites.

This was her second marriage.

She was married to someone else when she met my client

and the findings reflect that she wasn't honest with him

when they got married.

The trial court made findings

that there were incidents of abuse in several years,

2010, 2012, is that right?

The only finding that the prior judge made

on that specific issue was that

in the domestic violence trial,

and that was back in February of 2017

was that my client had pushed the wife

and that's part of the domestic violence order

that issued, but there were no other specific findings

made to credit any specific references that the wife had made

and my client acknowledged during the domestic violence

order hearing that they had gotten into a scuffle

and she pushed him, he pushed her

in the finding ensued.

But in this particular case, which is so distinctive

from all of the other cases that courts have considered

domestic violence, this is not a wife who went to a counselor.

She didn't have any physical injuries,

the level and extent of the allegations.

The light is on, I think you probably covered up the light

with your paper.

Oh, sorry, and that tells me to stop, I think.

Yes, it does.

Okay, I hope I answered your questions.

Thank you very much.

Thank you.
