This is case 2018-0617, appeal of Susan Fornir at all.

Mr. Head.

Before I begin, I've asked to reserve and with the court permission I would reserve two minutes.

Thank you.

May it please the court?

My name is Richard Head on behalf of the appellants.

Fundamental and basic premise of this appeal is that the council aired when it upheld the project that was designed to minimize impact on threatened and endangered species.

Instead of what the rule itself says, which is that the project has to be designed in a way that results in no adverse impacts.

The state suggested that no adverse-

Is that a rule or is that a statute?

It's a rule.

And I misspoke, I apologize.

No, you didn't.

It's a rule.

You didn't.

The state has suggested that no adverse impacts means alternatively minimal impacts.

The reasonable and prudent measures that do not jeopardize threatened and endangered species is a process rule that does not involve basically DES at all.

Or even if DES had the wrong standard, Fish and Game had sort of an independent presumption to know the law.

Essentially anything but really focusing on the language of the rule is that the project has to be designed in a manner that has no adverse impacts on threatened and endangered species.

Is that possible?

Is there any ability to develop a project where there are endangered species then on the property?

Yes, and we had an expert, Dr. Kevin Ryan, testify as to how you go about doing exactly that.

Well, even he said that any impact is going to cause an adverse impact and development is an impact.

Development is an impact, but what he did say is that you can design a project that results in no adverse impact.

But the first and fundamental step is that you have to know what you're dealing with.

You have to have a step.

You have to understand the circumstances because you can't do as you did in this site,

which is design a project, implement it, and then study.

And they clearly were worried about it because they had within the permit a requirement that the town fund $18,000 to study.

But it compounded the error much further by saying, okay, you've studied it.

But no provision in the permit or in the design of that permit that says if we learn something during the course of our study,

we're going to modify those conditions.

But I thought Mr. Anderson had studied the property before.

So there had been what's called an NRI, Natural Resource Inventory.

It's not a study to determine, it's a snapshot.

It's not a study that would evaluate as Dr. Ryan had testified to that says you have to know where they're coming out in the spring.

How are they feeding going into breeding season?

Where are they feeding?

They go into different types of territories.

For example, the turtles, the landings and spotted turtles will come out of hibernation, find a place to warm up where they're getting into the sun,

find a feeding ground to find a breeding ground, and then ultimately return back to hibernation.

And in the heat of summer, they need a place that ultimately is cooling so they don't die in the heat of the sun.

What we don't know is anything about those patterns on this property.

Is the burden of the applicant under the rule to demonstrate that the project design will not have an adverse impact?

So what's the remedy that you seek?

The remedy that we're seeking is a remand back to the council for them to then demand it back to the department to

evaluate this design under the correct standard of the rule.

So we're asking essentially that all of the evidence before the court is the

managing engineer at the Department of Environmental Services understood that the standard was to minimize it.

But your opponents say that this is just a matter of semantics.

If we send it back for that, they'd come up with the same conclusion.

They just substitute the word no adverse impact and the project's good to go.

So what we don't know is one, is that true?

Because I think we have to give the department an opportunity to just decide, okay, we did.

The court rules that minimize impacts is not the same as no adverse impacts.

They then take that knowledge and evaluate it.

And they would have to do that in the context of, now we actually have a little bit of study.

Maybe we do have a little bit more information.

Maybe we can implement a design.

There's no consideration for example, as the hognose snakes are moving around this property.

Is there a period in the year that we actually have to not operate?

Is there a period of the day during a period of the time when the road is higher risk?

So you don't actually travel on that road during that period of time?

What is the statutory basis for the no adverse impact rule?

I really couldn't find a place that said no adverse impact, which gave rise to a concern.

This is an ultra-various regulation.

No, so there's probably three parts I think I would refer, three aspects I would refer to.

First is RSA 212A colon 3, which describes the purpose of the Threatened and Endangered Species Act,

which is to maintain and enhance, has the word enhance in it, Threatened and Endangered Species.

212A-

Is that an impact, though, enhancing?

I don't think so, no, I'm sorry, it may be an impact, it's not an adverse impact.

212A colon 7 is a strict prohibition from the take of Threatened and Endangered Species.

And then probably the one that's most important is 212A colon 9 paragraph 3.

That's the one where you see in the briefs a, I'll call it conflating of that provision

and the rule that is actually the one that applies here.

212A colon 9 is a direction to state agencies, because this is a fishing game statute.

And it directs state agencies under paragraph 3 in the middle that says that, meaning the agencies,

shall take such action as is reasonable and prudent to ensure that actions authorized,

funded or carried out by them, do not jeopardize the continued existence of such species.

That is the rule, sorry, that's the statutory provision that says to the AOT program,

which otherwise doesn't care about Threatened and Endangered Species.

You don't have to start caring about these.

You have to put in your rules a measure that provides that what you do, which is a permit,

your actions issue a permit, do not threaten the existence of such species.

But that doesn't say the existence on that property of the species.

It talks about the existence of the species.

Exactly.

And what we also know, and we heard this from Dr. Ryan during the course of his testimony,

if you take the Blanding's Turtle, for example, it takes 14 to 20 years to reach sexual maturity.

It, during the course of its life, may only have a few offspring that survive to adulthood.

You have a requirement that if you do not have 90% survival at adult populations,

it's so small because it's so threatened, you risk the crash of that particular population.

The statute also says any project that will result in the destruction or modification of habitat of such species.

So why, why are we issuing permits then?

Because any development of the property is going to result in a modification of the habitat.

What we don't know is whether or not this particular location is in fact habitat.

We know generally in this region, these species exist.

Because of a lack of study, we don't know if there is a way in which this project can be developed

that does not destroy that habitat.

And it's not, and it's not just to be clear,

the continuation of that sentence is the modification of habitat of such species,

which is determined by the executive director to be critical.

The executive director is actually not designated any part of the state of New Hampshire to be critical.

So that part of that sentence is actually inapplicable because the director's just never done that.

So we're talking purely about the beginning of that, which is the species itself.

So the three threatened and endangered species we're talking about on this piece of property.

So help me out.

It sounds to me like Justice Bassett was right that the rule exceeds the protection afforded by the statute.

In other words, by analogy, the rule is an insurance policy that there's no impact or no harm.

But the statute says that implies a reasonableness standard.

No, the statute does not imply reasonableness standard as to the rule.

The statute says the state agencies have to take reasonable and prudent measures.

So for example, I think their rule said, as was suggested,

anywhere in the state of New Hampshire which is high value habitat will prohibit all development.

Without any consideration for what's actually happening on the ground, that might be too much.

They have to take reasonable and prudent measures essentially in the rule making and

the Department of Environmental Services did that in this case when it passed

50, screw up the rule number, sorry, 50319.

Is it in the record whether there were similar studies when the school was built and or the playground was built?

I don't believe any studies have been done.

There have been sightings of threatened endangered species.

And we know that because the reports that are generated from the Natural Heritage Bureau

show sightings of threatened endangered species.

What we don't have and what is clearly missing is the ability of the applicant to meet its burden of proof under the rule

that it must demonstrate that the project is being designed in a manner that will not adversely affect it.

So are you anticipating sort of a grid by grid review of this property?

No.

Is that what the applicant needs to submit?

I think the applicant needs to submit sufficient information that then allows, that meets its burden.

Whatever that may be, and I think the agency gets to make that decision as to whether or

not sufficient information has been demonstrated.

But in this case, what we do know is that one, the agency understood the wrong standard.

If they had meant to minimize, the rule should have said minimize.

And then we might have appealed the rule as not being strict enough.

But it says no adverse impacts.

So one, the record is.

Do the existing population that is on the property subsequent to the prior mining graph work, so what's left, in essence?

Yeah, the prior gravel in this particular had been discontinued for a period of time and actually had itself become habitat probably for some of these species.

And it seems to me the optimal result from your client's perspective is that this development might go forward.

And should we be concerned that if we adopt your interpretation, no adverse impact that that amounts essentially to a regulatory taking?

Because again, I think we go back to Dr. Ryan's testimony where he said he's been involved in numerous projects,

number of projects in which a project is being designed within an area where threatened endangered species are known.

You do the evaluation and study and you go around that in a way that allows those species to coexist.

And there is a way, and he testified you can do that.

So no, and we were very clear on the record we are not.

But coexisting isn't the same as no adverse impact.

Coexisting is not the same.

I think you can have no adverse impact if you can coexist.

If you can coexist with the endangered species in the project, then you have no adverse impact.

It doesn't say no impacts.

The rule is not very broad.

It does not simply say thou shalt design with no impacts.

So if there's one last hot-nose snake after this development takes place, is that an adverse impact?

So it's interesting actually because the rule goes to design.

So it's similar to, and we put this in our brief, you design an airplane so it doesn't crash.

It doesn't mean a plane never will crash.

It simply means you take those steps in the design stage based upon the information you know to go ahead and design a plane so it doesn't crash.

Planes crash.

We would say also that you design a project where you know to be threatened and endangered species to avoid any adverse impacts.

It doesn't mean that during the course of it there won't be an adverse impact.

That's not what the rule says.

If there's an adverse impact in the way in which that occurs, that falls into the fishing game stage.

So if the proposal is, well, there are 500 hot-nose snakes on this property and the proposal is that 10 of them are going to get killed by this at an adverse impact.

No, it's actually...

Would you stop the project?

Good question.

Not the situation we have here, but if the population is still maintained or enhanced, but I think you're going to have a different problem because the

fishing game statute prohibits the take of a threatened endangered species.

So you can't deliberately design a project that results in the take of a threatened endangered species because you have a separate statute that prohibits that.

But you acknowledge a fishing game did recommend a number of conditions to this project that were accepted.

So is that enough?

Yeah, it's interesting.

Two parts to that.

One is that those conditions that were recommended use the word minimize.

So in this process, and one of the biggest problems we raised was DES misunderstood its own rule and what it meant to say minimize impact.

It communicated that to the fishing game personnel who were reviewing it with DES.

Then when fishing game provided its recommendations on conditions, it hardwired into that minimize.

So the conditions themselves use the word minimize.

So that's why we say ultimately we're asking the court to remand it to the council and with instruction to remand it back to the agency to review it under the correct standard.

And hopefully we would ask with appropriate study and information so they can base that.

Your reply does not.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Mr. Aslan?

Good morning, May it please the court?

Chris Aslan from the Department of Justice on behalf of the Department of Environmental Studies.

I am splitting my time with Attorney Mayor.

There are 12 minutes for myself, 3 for him.

So that's where we'll head.

Contrary to the framing of the appellants here, I believe the issue before this court is not whether DES or the Water Council applied an incorrect legal standard.

But whether DES acted lawfully and reasonably, when it relied on the applicants acceptance to New Hampshire fishing games proposed conditions as sufficient evidence that the applicant had

demonstrated that it met the standard in the Administrative Rule 1503.19H.

That rule requires that the applicant demonstrate the project had been designed in a manner that will not result in adverse impacts to state or federally listed threatened or endangered species.

Because DES lacks any expertise as a wildlife biologist, it must rely on outside expert opinions and advice to make that determination.

And in this case, and actually in the case, the way that DES gets that outside expert input, it's not to ask the applicant to put forward an expert and rely then on the applicant's expert.

But to require the applicant to work with New Hampshire fishing game and give fishing game, who are the state's experts, the opportunity to recommend and propose conditions to protect the species.

Well, I don't have any problem with referring the matter to fishing game because they have expertise.

It does seem to me that the referral came with a arguably a misstatement of the standard that should be applied.

And that's fundamentally their argument.

As you gave them the wrong set of rules, so of course they came back using the wrong set of rules and said, not, this doesn't have an adverse impact.

This doesn't have an adverse impact.

It says minimize impact.

Do this to minimize impact.

Those aren't the same thing.

That's their argument.

Yes, indeed, Your Honor.

And I think the distinction I'm trying to make is that at the end of the day, DES, as the permitting agency, has to make a determination about whether the evidence presented by the applicant is sufficient to make the standard and the rule.

The standard is the standard.

This is what it says.

Does it matter that there was great debate during deliberations among the council members about what the meaning of the statute and the regulation were?

Well, I think that's this situation and this rule in the statute scheme is confusing and subjects.

The language, as was discussed, doesn't match well.

If you will grant us that, what's the harm in a remand?

Well, the harm in a remand is that I don't believe that this decision was unlawful or unreasonable, and neither did the Water Council, I'm sorry.

And so there's a basis for remand under the law, unless there is an unreasonable or unlawful act by the decision.

But if we send it back and said, you know, no adverse impact means no adverse impact, not minimize impact.

So you seem to say, well, that's a bunch of semantics, so they'll come to the same decision.

Well, what's wrong with saying, OK, let's see if that's really so.

We don't have the expertise to make that decision here today.

That's a possibility, certainly.

But I think the important piece of this is that you look at the record that was before DES,

and it made its decision.

It had evidence that Fish and Game, who was the state's expert on protecting threatened and dangerous species,

had had a full opportunity to review the project and had done so.

Fish and Game had proposed conditions with the specific intent of protecting threatened and dangerous species.

The applicant had accepted those recommendations and incorporated them into the project.

And there was no contrary evidence presented to DES that said that those conditions and

design criteria that were imposed on the project were insufficient to meet the standard of the rule.

Applicants' expert was brought in on appeal, made many opinions about whether he thought that the project had been designed in an appropriate manner.

But none of that was before DES.

Right, appeal at the water.

Correct, sorry, that the water counselor.

But none of that was part of the record before DES.

DES had a record with an expert that it trusted saying, we've reviewed this to protect threatened and dangerous species.

And through these things, applicant agreed and presented that project to DES.

DES then said that's sufficient.

So is that review limited to determining whether the water counsel acted reasonably?

Technically, I think that's correct, that you're reviewing the water counsel's decision and then had the same standard applied to DES's decision.

It's not just reasonably, it's not whether it acted lawfully or not.

That's correct, reasonably and lawfully.

What if we're concerned that the regulation is ultra-various, it goes beyond the statute?

Well, that's certainly a possibility and I will admit that the rule does not follow the language of the statute.

And whether the rule is written well or not, it may be a problem.

But DES has ever interpreted the rule to its strictest literal sense of saying that you can't have any impacts on the project.

To what extent are we bound by DES's interpretation of its own rule?

You're certainly not bound by it.

The case law says that you'll give them some deference, but it has to be consistent with the statutory scheme that it's trying to implement.

And here, the statutory scheme that is being implemented is the Endangered Species Conservation Act and specifically the provision in 212A colon 9 Roman 3.

It says that agencies such as DES cannot take state action will jeopardize the continued existence of threatened species.

And as you discussed with the Attorney Head, that's a broader, lesser standard than the rule itself imposes.

So to the extent that the rule is interpreted strictly, it perhaps is ultra-various.

But DES has never done so.

It interprets it in a more broad sense in conjunction with the statutory scheme.

To what extent can we accept the presentation that Fishing Game was not aware of the standards at 4th and 15th or 3rd in teenage?

Well, I don't believe that that's what the record shows.

There is evidence in the record that Fishing Game was at least copied on emails that included the specific language of this rule.

Fishing Game is also, the evidence shows, has been engaged in reviewing AOT permits for many, many, many years.

They've reviewed hundreds of these, and they certainly know what the process is.

DES has its own regulatory structure.

Fishing Game has no permitting authority, but they have the opportunity to impose conditions.

And they know that DES requires applicants to put those conditions into the project before they will approve it.

And so I don't think there's a dispute that Fishing Game wasn't aware of the rule.

I believe that the applicants or appellants are arguing that there was miscommunications and that the word minimize came into the discussion.

But as we set out in our brief...

Well, I was in miscommunication and misunderstanding.

Okay, here's the rule, but then they say, okay, but this is what it really means.

This is the adverse impact rule just means minimize impact.

And that's what they did.

And that's, you're saying, well, that's what they've always done.

So they should be able to do that here.

I don't think that the record would support the notion that DES told Fishing Game what the rule meant.

The rule existed, Fishing Game saw the language of the rule.

There was a back and forth where the word minimize is quite frequently.

And frankly, I think that starts from Fishing Game's perspective as...

Well, it doesn't matter where it started.

That's what they were doing.

They were giving conditions that would minimize the impact.

They weren't giving conditions that would eliminate adverse impact.

Do you agree with that?

I agree that the conditions were intended to minimize the impacts to threaten an endangered species.

But I don't believe that the appellants have shown that there's a distinction between

a project that's designed to minimize and a project that's designed to result in no adverse,

unless you take the interpretation that says designed to result in no adverse impacts

means there will be no adverse impacts.

If you minimize the impacts, you're reducing them to the greatest extent possible.

The only thing more restrictive than that is to say, do not develop this project.

There's been an argument by the appellants that there should have been a study done in advance.

And in fact, their real goal here is to have a remand so that the study that wasn't part of

the record below on the initial decision can be inserted and then they can have a battle

of the experts that, for whatever reason, they didn't bring forward in time to have

DS review at the initial...

So was there a study of the property?

There has not been a study.

There was, as Mary had mentioned, a natural resource inventory done,

which is essentially walking of the property to see what natural resources exist at that time.

It's not a study of what threatened and endangered species are out there and how they're moving

around, which is what the applicant is seeking.

Those studies take a long time to be done properly.

They can take years.

As the one that is going on now is a three-year study that demonstrates,

it can also be very expensive.

And this would be a significant burden to developers and property owners in the

state if they were required to do long studies before they could develop their property.

That's never been something that's implemented by either fishing game or DES as a requirement

for an AOT permit.

And it's nothing that's in the rules or the statutory scheme either.

Isn't there an overlay with AOT permit that anticipates this ongoing evaluation?

There is.

And shouldn't we consider that the alteration of terrain permits are

issued to facilitate development of the property?

I do think it's important.

The regulatory scheme for an AOT permit is about allowing development under appropriate conditions.

It's not about preventing development.

And the appropriate conditions here is to make sure that you're not causing,

jeopardizing the continuing existence of the species that may be on the property.

And that's, there's some movement in the joints there about how to imply that.

And unfortunately, because of the regulatory scheme where DES is the permitting body,

but has no expertise with wildlife and fishing game is the expert on wildlife,

but has no permitting authority.

We're caught in this somewhat complicated circle that leads to this.

Isn't Water Council's job on appeal to straighten that out?

Well, I don't believe so, Your Honor.

The Water Council's job on appeal under their statute is to decide whether DES's decision

was reasonable and lawful.

Not to decide whether fishing games conditions were appropriate or anything else.

In this case, fishing game was the only expert involved at the time of decision by DES.

And so the record is DES relied on that opinion as sufficient evidence to meet the standard.

So do you agree that there could be circumstances where there's an application

and it's denied no conditions, no conditional approval because it

has an adverse impact on endangered species?

Yes, Your Honor.

There was no specific testimony to that for some hypothetical in this case,

but there was testimony that DES requires an applicant to impose whatever conditions

fishing game proposes for a project.

If fishing game were to come forward and say,

do these 15 things in the applicants, if we can only do 10 of those,

it would result in a denial.

If fishing game came and said, we don't think there's any way you can do this project

on this site, that would result in a denial.

So that's theoretically a possibility.

I know you say that's not what the deal is here,

but you agree that's a possibility.

I do, Your Honor.

Isn't the problem here, we've got a regulation that, I mean, if the

regulation just said minimize impacts, we wouldn't be here, right?

That's correct, Your Honor.

The fundamental problem in all of this is the wording of the rule

creates, it's not quite ambiguity, but it creates a conflict with the statutory scheme

and the regulatory scheme, and it's the as applied nature that doesn't run into that

ultra-various problem, but the language of the rule might light on.

Thank you, Mr. President.

Mr. Mayor, as I understand it, you have three minutes.

I intend to use that time wisely.

May it please the court.

Eric Mayor, Donna Huttucker, and Chindella.

I'm here on behalf of my client, Northeast Sand and Gravel,

one of the interveners in this matter.

We submitted a joint brief with the other intervener,

the town of Milford, I'll be speaking on behalf of both parties.

The appellants frame the issue as a matter of interpretation

or misapplication of an administrative rule.

As the justices have indicated, if this matter were to be remanded,

part of it would be given DES the opportunity to provide the clarity as to

what is intended by the phrase minimize and does minimize equal no adverse impacts.

However, at the Water Council hearing on this matter,

that opportunity has already been afforded.

Both DES and Fishing Game have responded to those inquiries.

They were asked by both DES's council as well as the town's council

as what was meant by the phrase minimize.

And both Gloria Andrews, who was the engineer over at the AOT Bureau,

responded that the phrase minimize the hope is always no adverse impacts.

And Mike Marchand, who is the supervisor of the non-game division

over at Fishing Game, who proposed the 18 separate conditions,

all of which were meant to protect threatened endangered species.

But having a hope that it'll have no adverse impact

is different than saying it will have no adverse impact.

Well, and that's where the wording of the rule is important.

It's because the project has to be designed to have no adverse impact.

That's not an assurance that there will be no adverse impact.

And in this instance that when DES imposed those 18 conditions,

the goal, the hope and the intent was that those conditions would result

with the implementation of those conditions,

though the design would not result in adverse impact.

But saying that the goal has no adverse impact

is different than saying it has been designed so it has no adverse impact.

Isn't that a distinction with a difference?

And is her word choice pretty careful?

And I think in terms of care, in terms of word choice,

we're dealing with engineers.

Actually, Ms. Andrews stated during her testimony

that she is not a, quote, word person.

So we're dealing with folks that do not speak

with the level of legal precision, say attorneys or judges do.

We're talking about people that are speaking

through informal communications.

It's an iterative process where there's a lot back and forth,

a lot of emails.

And this use of the word minimize was latched onto

to try to create a narrative that DES applied the wrong standard.

But when looking at the transcript,

when asked what her intent was,

it was no adverse impact.

And Mike Marchant, who's really a critical figure

in this matter who provided the 18 conditions

or a substantial number of the conditions,

stated that the goal is always no adverse impact.

And they are functionally indistinguishable,

no adverse impact in minimization,

at least in terms of application and implementation.

So I don't believe that this is a matter

of misinterpretation of an administrative rule.

It's really trying to get to the bottom

of what was the intent of the project partners

when in these informal communications,

they use the phrase minimize versus no adverse impact.

So is it a subjective administrative clause?

I don't believe it would be a matter of administrative clause

because that would require initial determination

that the statute is unambiguous.

And I don't believe that there was a strong record below

as to the use of the word minimize and other projects.

What we do know is that when it came to this project

and when the use of the word minimize was used,

the intent was no adverse impact.

And that's what the record supports.

That's what the testimony.

To the extent that there's a lack of clarity,

what's the harm in sending it back saying

to be clear, no adverse impact means no adverse impact

if that's what you really did, just confirm that.

I think that's already been confirmed, Your Honor.

I think this testimony provides that confirmation.

My red light is on, but I think that confirmation

has already been provided.

And if this permit were invalidated or stricken down,

and there, you know, to obtain that confirmation

is that you potentially stop work.

And that would be adverse to the folks

that have relied and acted upon this permit already.

Thank you, Councilor.

Again, if I wasn't clear,

we are looking at the lawfully and acted lawfully

and reasonably and we would argue they not act lawfully

by allowing the project to proceed under the wrong standard.

I will, to follow up on what was just said,

note that originally Mock, who's the administrator

or the administrator for the AOT program,

testified, and he testified that when asked,

and by minimizing projects, you were in fact suggesting

that it is designed in a manner

that will result in adverse impacts.

It will be minimal, but it will result in adverse impacts.

That's the interpretation Mr. Mock said.

Okay, but minimize does allow room for a take.

I guess it does.

There's clearly a great deal of misunderstanding

within the department as to exactly what they're doing.

They've already admitted they don't have expertise

in fishing game matters.

I would not say you give them deference

in this particular case.

I think you, and what we do know

are what the words of the rules say.

And the rules say no adverse impact.

And all we're asking for is that because all of the review

appears to have been done under a minimal impact standard,

that it be remanded back to the council

with instruction they send it to DES for proper review.

Thank you.

Thank you, council.

Case submitted.

The court stands and brief recess.

All argued.
