This is case 2018-0234, State of New Hampshire v. Julian Azebair.

Well, the record player, are we on video yet? No. Thank you.

Good morning. May it please the court? My name is Thomas Barnard. I represent Julian Azebair.

I have spoken with court staff about reserving one minute for rebuttal.

Azebair concedes that the evidence here was sufficient to support convictions for seven convictions

for our aggravated felonious sexual assault. The question is whether it supported the eighth,

ninth, and tenth convictions. In light of the State's concession on the third issue,

I plan to focus on the first two issues in the brief. First, the evidence did not support

the indictment alleging Cunalingus in the living room because there was no evidence of that act.

The State notes that SH testified that the crime did not occur and then argues that

the jury was entitled to reject that testimony and therefore infer that the crime did occur.

This argument overlooks the fact that the State has the burden of proof and the possibility

that a jury would reject testimony that a crime did not occur does not equate to affirmative

evidence that the crime did occur.

Well, what about the affirmative evidence that, from which inferences may or may not be

brought work that the crime did occur?

There was no affirmative evidence that Cunalingus took place in the living room or, for that

matter, in any location other than the bedroom or the YMCA.

Wasn't there testimony that had happened multiple times, if not the one specific

incident that the witness was testifying about, where she was equivocal?

Well, she testified to multiple specific instances.

She testified to an instance in the bedroom.

She testified to six instances at the YMCA.

So I don't recall whether she said Cunalingus occurred multiple times, but even if she did,

it's already consistent with the specific instances that she testified to.

What she said here was it didn't happen because she was too little.

And it happened a bunch of other times, right?

I don't know if she said it happened a bunch of other times, but she did testify to other

specific instances, yes.

What she says, it didn't happen here because I was too little.

And that's what the jury, the state's argument is the jury may or may not give

that explanation credence.

Right.

And that's true.

The jury is entitled to completely disregard testimony if it finds the testimony

incredible, but that doesn't mean that the jury is entitled to draw the inference

that the facts are opposite of the fact that's testified to.

If you disregard the testimony, then it's just out of consideration.

Turning to the second issue, the evidence did not support...

Excuse me, on this one, you're raising this as plain error.

I argue it was preserved because defense counsel did make a general motion to dismiss,

but I concede it's an issue, and I argue that even if the court finds that it was not

preserved, it was plain error.

And let me skip to maybe this is your second issue.

If we were to agree with you about the single issue, why should we send it back

for resentencing?

For resentencing on the remaining convictions?

Yes.

Okay.

Because, well, first, that's what the court did in Houghton, so there is precedent

for that.

And second, when the trial court sentences a defendant, the trial court is looking

at all the charges.

So the trial court here said, I've got somebody who has been convicted of 10

AFSAs, and I'm going to impose a sentence in light of the fact that he's

been convicted of 10 AFSAs.

In fact, as a bear were only properly convicted of 7 or 8 AFSAs, then the

sentence would be different.

And that's not just on the individual sentences, it could be on any other

sentence.

So what we're asking the court to do is to remand to the trial court so the

trial court can have a resentencing on all of those convictions that were

before the court in the original sentence.

The second issue in the brief is our argument that the evidence did not

support convictions on both the pattern indictment and all of the single

act indictments because there was insufficient evidence of a pattern

beyond the acts that were alleged in the single act indictment.

And there's no dispute that the trial court gave the instruction

essentially that was asked for, which is you can't include

what's ever in the individual indictment.

You can't include that in the pattern analysis.

It has to be other things.

So that instruction was fine.

You're just saying the evidence didn't add up was not sufficient.

Why isn't testimony, in addition to all these other specific individual

incidents that she testifies to, why isn't it enough to say that it

happened a lot, that it happened most of her childhood and then take

into account the defendant's text messages?

Why doesn't that get over the threshold?

Well, for two reasons.

First, we're conceding that seven AFSA convictions were proper.

So that already reflects the reality that there were multiple acts

of sexual abuse.

And second, it happened a lot, sort of glosses over the question

of exactly what it is.

I know the State focuses on SH's testimony at page 130 of the transcript

where the State says the sexual assaults quote occurred throughout her childhood.

Well, if you place that in context, what she's talking about is touching.

She says that Asavar had this habit of touching or rubbing her leg when he had visits

with her when she was a teenager, 16, 17 years old, and that that's what prompted

her to disclose to her mother because she wanted the touching to stop.

The pattern indictment that we're talking about in the second issue in the brief

isn't the one that alleged touching.

There was a separate pattern indictment that alleged touching.

This one alleged sexual penetration, specifically fellatio or conalingus.

So a lot of these instances where she says things like it happened a lot

or it was very frequent, she's not referring specifically to fallatio

and conalingus, she's referring to general acts of sexual impropriety.

The problem is that other than SH's testimony about the acts

at the YMCA, she never testified that there were additional acts of conalingus

or fallatio that would meet the definition of a pattern.

Didn't she testify to specific acts at the YMCA but also that it happened

other times at the YMCA?

She did.

She testified that Asavar brought her to swim lessons about six times.

She said it occurred practically every one of those times.

And two were charged and that would leave four.

That would leave four and we concede so the jury can use one of those

to satisfy the pattern indictment.

The problem is it doesn't have a second one because those swim lessons

all took place within an eight-week period, which is less than the minimum

two-month period that's required for the pattern indictment.

So you'd have to add that one with some of the other testimony.

Right.

Whether a fallatio happened in the living room, in the family apartment,

other places.

Right.

You'd have to find some other act.

The problem is all of the other acts she testified to,

they were already the subject of a single act indictment.

And you're arguing that he can't be convicted of both the single acts

and the pattern, but isn't the issue really he can't be sentenced

for both the single act and the pattern?

It's both.

It's conviction and sentence.

Double jeopardy precludes multiple convictions,

multiple punishments for the same charge.

And the court cases are clear that two convictions,

multiple convictions constitutes multiple punishments

even if there's no higher sentence or even if the sentence is concurrent

or suspended.

But isn't the purpose of the pattern charge

to deal with situations where arguably you have a young person involved

and it was over many years and they can't go back and say,

well, it was June 5th, 2005.

And here we have, as you've conceded,

we have some uncharged incidents at the YMCA.

And then why isn't it enough that then she also says it happened a lot?

Well, that is the purpose of the pattern charge.

So if we have a victim that just says,

look, it happened too many times for me to remember,

and here's what typically would happen, that's enough for a pattern charge.

And if we have a witness that says,

well, I can remember these five specific instances,

then that can be charged either a single act or as a pattern

plus no more than, I guess, three specific instances.

But if we have a witness that says,

well, I remember specific instances,

and then also beyond what I've already testified to,

it happened throughout my childhood,

then that would be enough for the specific instances and the pattern.

But we don't have that here.

The SH testified to specific instances,

which he never said, beyond what I've testified to,

fellatio and conalingus also happened on numerous other occasions

throughout my childhood.

So that's what you say is the missing piece.

If she'd said it happened a lot,

in addition to the specific things I've talked about,

then you wouldn't have an argument.

I agree.

Good morning, Your Honor.

Thank you.

Thank you, Mr. Barnard.

Good morning, Your Honors.

May it please the Court.

Mr. Barnard is taller than I am.

The victim did testify that this abuse had occurred

throughout her childhood.

And if you read her testimony and you...

Specifically, these acts of abuse not just touching.

No, not just touching.

And it's clear not only from the way that she's talking

about what happened to her as a child,

it's clear from his responses to her

when they're sending back and forth the messages.

You know, I have an addictive personality.

You know, I couldn't control myself.

And then her responses...

But that doesn't get us to the number of incidents.

Well, the number of incidents, I think,

is in the overall testimony that she gives.

And also, when she responds to him,

that doesn't absolve you of...

An addictive personality doesn't excuse rape.

And his response is sort of,

oh, well, you know, I'm a weak person.

That contributes to the overall impression from the jury

of what the victim is talking about.

Certainly, since she was three years old

when her mother started dating this man

and they were married when she was five,

her testimony is that this abuse happened

pretty much throughout her childhood.

But that doesn't, Mr. Barnard, have a good point,

that the state could have just asked one more question,

which is what you're talking about happening a lot.

Do you mean Felicio and Conalingus,

as opposed to touching,

and, oh, do you mean incidents beyond

those which are specifically charged here?

If that question had been asked,

we wouldn't have to be struggling with it.

Well, true enough.

I mean, it's always easy to go through a transcript

and say, well, I would have done this better.

It's a lot harder when you're standing in the courtroom

trying to do it.

But the point is that the argument

is that the court should have acted spontaneously.

And that's why I think part of the problem

is that nobody saw this as being a problem.

When Defense Counsel is giving his closing argument,

he's saying you're supposed to believe

that they're simultaneously having oral sex

in the 69 position.

He's not saying she said it didn't happen.

So the way that the testimony came through

is part of the issue for the jury

to come back and say, well, we think that this was proved.

But didn't the victim say it didn't happen?

Yeah, because it couldn't happen because she was too small.

That's what she affirmatively testified to.

She said it probably didn't happen,

but we weren't there hearing the context

in which this testimony was given.

We don't hear her other explanations

as to this kind of thing happened every time.

So if we're looking at this situation in the living room,

her explanation is that it probably didn't happen

because I was too small.

Well, they may have said to themselves,

well, if the man started dating her mother when she was three,

and now she's between the ages of seven and nine,

what exactly is she recalling?

A seven-year-old put up against a man's torso

is tall enough to do that.

A nine-year-old is certainly tall enough to do that.

And those ages match that particular residence.

That's correct.

So when they're hearing her say,

it probably didn't happen.

We're not hearing her voice.

So we don't know how convinced she is of that.

And yet she's very clear that this was happening

on a routine basis that almost every single time

he has the opportunity, he's taking advantage of her.

The other thing says...

The issue of the conflict, if you will,

between the pattern and the individual acts

and the proof required was raised

at the beginning of the trial to the court.

So both parties were on notice

that this was an issue.

Right. Well, I still think that the testimony in it

kind of folds back on top of itself

to some degree, Justice Hans Marconi,

because it's the same information.

She's saying that from the time that she was a little girl,

pretty much her entire childhood, he was abusing her.

So even if you said to yourself,

well, you have two charges that were brought

in connection with the YMCA,

and that remains four visits,

and that's not exceeding two months.

All you have to do is look at her,

the rest of her testimony,

to understand that this was an example

of what had happened,

but that it was happening over and over and over again.

And when his response to her emails is so completely,

well, you know, I thought if you come over

and spend the night at my parents' house,

well, it would be optional.

What?

It's clear what he's talking about.

He's talking about the ongoing abuse

that he gave as this addictive personality

who was always doing this every time.

So if you look at the context of the testimony,

I think with respect to both issues,

the court did not commit plain error

and not, by its own spontaneous act,

dismissing the charge with respect to the first argument

and with respect to the second argument,

if the pattern is ongoing

and the victim has given you specific instances

that this is the kind of thing that happened every time

and, oh, yes, it happened pretty much throughout my childhood,

I think that the evidence is sufficient.

Given the interrelationship of all these sentences,

if we found some issue for the defendant,

would they all need to be reimposed?

I'm not certain.

And in fairness, I'm not sure that,

given the fact that some of the sentences were concurrent,

that it would really make all that much difference.

On the other hand...

The court did adopt the State's recommended sentence,

which grouped the various convictions.

It did.

If this court is troubled by it,

I can't stand here and say, in all fairness,

I cannot see some merit in Mr. Barnard's argument

with respect to resenancing.

I'm not certain that the court has to do it,

but I tend to err on the side of caution

and so I wouldn't be standing here saying absolutely not.

Even if we were to find that there are four issues here,

the State's conceded error on the third issue,

if we were to affirm in other respects other than that,

should it go back for resenancing just because of that problem?

Again, I think that the sentences are fairly clear,

but I've never been a judge,

so I don't know whether a court seeing

that some of the convictions had been vacated

would feel that this would be unfair.

I suspect that courts, that different judges

would view it differently.

And so as I say, I'm not sure that I can say

there was no merit to Mr. Barnard's argument.

I would not be candid with the court

if I didn't say that that would not raise a flag with me,

but I'm not certain that,

given the sentence imposed, it's required.

I see my yellow light as on

the court has suffered the questions.

I will yield the podium,

and I'll move the microphone back.

Thank you.

Unless the court has questions, I would leave the bottle.

Thank you, Mr. Barnard.

Thank you.

Okay, submitted.

Court's adjourned.

In recess, adjourned.

All right.
