Thank you. The matter before the court is state of New Hampshire versus Eduardo Lopez. It is case number

2018-0104. The state is represented by Elizabeth Woodcock. Mr. Lopez is represented by Christopher

Johnson. Mr. Johnson has reserved one minute. Mr. Johnson, you may begin whenever you are ready.

Thank you, Your Honor. May it please the court, Christopher Johnson, on behalf of Eduardo Lopez.

This case raises a question of interpretation of the Eighth Amendment's Cruel and Unusual

Punishments Clause as applied to juveniles who are not found to be incorrigible.

My plan this morning is to focus first on the principal question, which is how to define

the upper limit of the non-life equivalent sentence. And within that, I think there's

a broad question and a narrow question. The broad question is what is the right

conceptual approach to defining that upper limit? And then the narrow question is once one is within

a particular conceptual approach, how do you pick a particular number of years? And then in closing,

to the extent time permits, I'll briefly address the question of how to measure life expectancy.

I'm happy to take the court's questions at any point. Attorney Johnson, I have a quick procedural

question. Did Mr. Lopez seek sentence review? He did. And the sentence was not changed.

Okay, thank you. So to begin with the question of defining an upper limit on a non-life

without parole equivalent sentence, this raises a pure question of law. The facts of the cases

are relevant and there's no deference due to the trial court's judgment on this question of

law. The conceptual dispute, as I understand it, about what makes a sentence sufficiently

qualitatively different from life without parole revolves around two positions. The state's position

takes a minimalist approach or what I think of as a death focused approach, which refers to a

sentence as not the equivalent of life without parole if a prisoner is eligible for parole

before death, before life expectancy expires. The defense position takes a broader approach to this,

but I call the life focused approach, which is defined as eligibility for release

at a time when it's still possible realistically to build a post-prison life.

So at age 62, a person cannot build a life, a meaningful life?

So I think that gets to the selecting the number within the life. And so I would say

to build a life after decades of imprisonment, a person needs some time, you need some social

resources, and you need a certain amount of energy to build a life after decades of imprisonment.

And once you get much beyond the age of 50, it is going to be too late for too many. So I

certainly, I mean, I take the point that we're dealing with a bell curve here. There are no

doubt people who could be released at age 80 and would be able to build a meaningful life.

And there's people who would be released at age 24 and could never do it.

But my point is that the constitutional rules to be addressed to the broad middle of that bell

curve. And so once you get past age 50 or substantially past age 50, the eligibility

for release comes too late for too many people. Mr. Johnson, is it your argument that that delta

between the state's position and your position differs for every defendant?

No, I think as I understand it, and certainly my position is, but I think both sides position

is this is not properly conceived of as an individualized question. So that the point

at which a sentence becomes the equivalent of life of that parole doesn't vary depending on

the details of the particular prisoner. And there's good reasons for that.

I mean, the rule that the court announces will be applied in future to 17 year old defendants.

And at age 17 or 16, their future medical conditions essentially are unknowable. So

you're not going to be able to say what is the life expectancy on an individualized basis

of this particular person. And the sentencing consideration, and if that becomes the focus

of the sentencing consideration, we end up having sentencing hearings that are about

you know, defendants genetic predisposition to diseases. And that's just not appropriate.

What about the other aspects of meaningful life in terms of that are individualized in terms

of background or education? Did those be taken into account as well? Or not?

So again, I think I think there's value in per se rules. And for example,

just as the law has established a per se rule at age 18 is the age that marks the boundary between

legal adulthood and you know, legal minority, we don't sort of say, well, this 15 year old

is particularly mature. And so that person can vote at age 15. Whereas this 20 year old is

really still putting it all together and is not mature. The law picks a bright line rule.

And I think similarly here for a sort of an age or term of years focused inquiry,

you know, there's a lot of value in the bright line rule. For the reasons I said individualizing

that kind of inquiry gets courts into things that are very hard to gauge.

But our ruling here will only apply to two people, I assume, right? There's nobody else

that's in a life sentence. That's true in the sense that these are sort of the people who

who's previously had these sentences. But by and vision is in future, if juveniles

commit first degree murder in this state. And they can't get life without parole because

they're not found to be incorrigible. Courts are going to need to know for those future cases,

what is the upper limit on a non life without parole equivalent sentence. So it's not to

impose an illegal sentence. So why isn't the upper limit 40 or 45 years?

Well, so this would I guess to I guess my first question, I think if to answer that question

when first has to go back to the kind of the conceptual dispute. The reason it's it's not

that late is first you have to look at the Supreme Court's language in the relevant cases.

The Supreme Court spoke of a chance for fulfillment outside prison walls. It spoke about

a chance for reconciliation with society. That is not the words the Supreme Court would have used

if what it envisioned as the non life without parole equivalent was essentially just a short

and late reprieve from incarceration. It envisioned a bigger broader opportunity. And

again, it's we're not saying anybody has a right to be released. It's just the question

of when they are eligible when a non incorrigible juvenile at the latest is eligible.

But Mr. Johnson, if the Supreme Court shared your view, wouldn't have just said,

well, there's a bright line here. And it's if the sentence goes over say age 50,

then that's in effect a life sentence. They had the opportunity to do what you're

saying we should do. Well, I think so. But they were still sort of

putting together the building blocks that got us here today in terms of the bigger holdings or the

more foundational holdings that you can't sentence juveniles to life without parole.

And so that was the issue that they faced. There are there are more than there's more

than one philosopher who would say that it is the quality of life that matters, not the

quantity of life. Well, and I think I'm not necessarily going to say I disagree with that.

But I think to have to build the kind of life that is consonant with the Supreme Court statement

about having a chance for reconciliation or a chance for fulfillment, a person needs time.

They need social resources and they need a certain amount of energy.

And when that really directed at the rehabilitation piece of punishment, if you will.

Yes, you've got your your punishment, you've got your retribution, and then you've got your

rehabilitation and a without adequate time, there would be no rehabilitation opportunity.

I think I think that's right. I think it's which is why what the court is contemplating

is juveniles who've done it, you know, unquestionably terrible crime, but are not

incorrigible and cannot be treated the same as adults who got life without parole or can get life

without parole for that same crime. You know, the Supreme Court spoke as just as Hans Marconi

indicated, there's a profound difference between juveniles and adults that is recognized in the

Supreme Court's case law. And my fundamental point is that a non life sentence has to be

very different from a life without parole sentence to reflect that profound difference

between juvenile offenders who are not incorrigible and adult offenders. And this is again why sort

of when the court sort of has to decide what's our broad approach to answering the question,

the broad approach is not let's figure out life expectancy and hit a target a little bit

before that. The broad approach is for these non incorrigible juveniles is the upper limit

is at a date no later than they could that the broad number of them will be able to

have the time put together the social resources and still have the energy

to start from scratch and build the meaningful life.

New part question. How should we evaluate statutes that do set maximum terms, albeit for

adult offenders, 30 years in manslaughter cases, 20 years for use of firearm? How should we

evaluate that? And is this an issue that perhaps the legislature should be reviewing

under policy considerations? I mean a lot of legislatures around the country have done that

and I've cited the statutes in my brief. Legislatures in those states what I understand

them to be doing is they're looking at the population and many of them have more than two cases.

So they're looking at a broader number of cases and they're saying

rather than go through the process of trying to figure out which of these juveniles is

incorrigible and can get life without parole, we're going to give them all eligibility for

release at an age when that you know at an age X. And when you look at all those statutes age

X turns out to be the vast proportion of those statutes it's 30 years or less.

And so the legislature could step in here but it's a constitutional question and since the

New Hampshire legislature has not stepped in this court has to decide the constitutional

question of what number is too high under the Eighth Amendment so that what we are offering

is not what the Supreme Court envisioned. We can't offer merely the short and late reprieve before death

we have to offer at least for those who could get parole they don't even they not even get it

but eligibility for parole at a time and an age when it's possible to have a second act

to have a part of life that's not defined by the crime and the decades of imprisonment.

Mr. Johnson I think what you're saying is that life expectancy should play no role in our analysis

is that right? Fundamentally I mean what I would say is this I mean if through some

miracle of medical science we all our life expectancy all doubled and so now everybody's

living 150 years or 175 years you know that would be relevantly different but what I'm saying to the

because then there'd be more time to build a meaningful life but given where we are the proper

approach to answering this question is not to sort of figure out life expectancy and hit a number

a little less than that the proper approach is to figure out at what age after decades of

imprisonment is it sufficiently possible for enough you know for the big part of the bell curve

to create for themselves a life that's not defined by their crime and by their decades of

imprisonment. How do we perform that analysis that as as you say has been performed by

legislatures how do we perform that analysis without speculating and pulling numbers out of

the air? So I think what I mean it's not this court's fault that the legislature hasn't

done anything you're in this position where you have to have to do this and so that gets to I guess

the second point which is that you look at you know that you understand that as I've said it takes

time it takes social resources it takes energy to build a life and you look at you know the

data about what you know my fundamental point about all the life expectancy in prisoners

is that I think it should not be controversial that long-term incarceration is bad for a person's

health and so the life expectancy of people with decades and is going to be significantly shorter

than the life expectancy of people who haven't and so this court looks at that you look at

how much time is going to be remaining roughly and you look at what sort of what amount of

time is necessary to accomplish you know to take a shot at having a meaningful life

and I think the statutes around the country that have picked 30 or you know set a pretty

a good basis to pick that number. Can I just ask a follow-up question that I should have asked at

the beginning? Mr. Johnson am I right that this is your appeal raises only a federal

constitutional issue and not a state constitutional issue? Yes your honor. Thank you your red light

is on you've reserved one minute Ms. Woodcock when you're ready. Thank you your honor

may it please the court. Elizabeth Woodcock for the state of New Hampshire I wanted to just

correct one factual issue here and there is another juvenile who is awaiting resenancing

it's Mr. Tullock and he's not part of this appeal obviously what as I understand it and I haven't

had much conversation with Mr. Strelzin about this but as I understand it what they had agreed

to do was to wait until these cases were decided to address the resenancing for Mr. Tullock.

So setting that aside for the moment I disagree with Mr. Johnson that this is a purely legal question

it isn't really the question is a question of the trial courts or the resenancing courts

discretion and when you look at the Supreme Court cases that have come out

Montgomery Miller and I would also add the Booker case even though Booker didn't address

the issue of life without parole for juveniles it addressed whether the sentencing guidelines

were mandatory and the court's preference each time has been to give the sentencing court more

discretion so I think that that when you look at this particular issue the issue is whether

the court properly considered the information that was presented to it in reaching the

sentence that it imposed it's it's not simply a matter of well it could could this person

get out of prison and have a meaningful life or something like that and is this a constitutional

issue it's not simply that it's what did the parties present to the court what did the court

consider and was the sentence under the the the uh based on the record presented to the

Ms. Woodcock is there is this is your point that this is uh a discretionary decision by the court

and we should review it with some deference uh Mr. Johnson's arguing that it this is a

constitutional question and where that line is is a question of law not something that we

can or should defer to the trial court huh well I think that it would be a different

matter your honor if the legislator legislature had acted if the legislature had said this is what

we think is the appropriate uh point at which someone should be eligible for parole under

these circumstances the legislature has not acted and if you read the supreme court opinions

they're saying give the deference give the discretion to the trial court it's not saying

that and the and the court asked earlier asked Mr. Johnson well couldn't the supreme court have

come out with a bright line rule and said 30 years that's it that's the time that you have to have

uh an opportunity to argue for parole but you would agree you would agree that the question

of whether uh the sentence is constitutional or not is a legal question not not something

to which we would defer to the trial court right yes I think that if if the sentence

had been unconstitutional that would certainly be something that that this court would address

so the states the state's position is that there there's no need for a bright line the question

is whether each sentence is constitutional in the context of each individual defendant is that

your point I think that that's part of it your honor because because sentencing hearings are geared

towards individuals it it is one of the things that uh as an aside that I always found remarkable

about the United States sentencing guidelines because they removed if you look at the guidelines

they removed all of the individual factors and tried to make a one-size-fits-all and

that's why when I when I asked the court to think about the booker case that's the beginning

of the supreme court saying look this is not a one-size-fits-all and since the legislature has

not acted to uh you know adopt a one-size-fits-all then I think that the court in this case

was acted within its discretion and considering all the different information that uh the two sides

presented likewise I suppose there are degrees of incorrigibility would you agree with that

huh I I think that there probably are degrees of incorrigibility but I think that if a court

found uh uh juvenile to be incorrigible it wouldn't matter whether he whether he or she

was more incorrigible than uh another person who was also incorrigible so while I think there

could be degrees I'm not sure that that would factor in once you've found that the individual

was incorrigible and the court so obviously the court in this case did not find that Mr Lopez

was incorrigible is it appropriate is it appropriate to consider the ability to petition

for a suspension of the sentence at some point does that factor in

all right it it was not made a big part of the argument uh in the trial court your honor I

I think that the court this court could certainly consider it as as it's obviously a part of

what is in the possibility but I don't think that the issue was squarely raised for this

court I think that the issue that is squarely raised for this court is whether the sentence

imposed in this case is a de facto life sentence and uh it it simply isn't uh your your position

as woodcock is that whether it's a de facto life sentence or not is a mathematical calculation

you would just look at the cdc life expectancy it's either above it or below it and that

answers the question no I don't think that that's the that's the answer because obviously the center

for disease control tables haven't been adopted as a matter of uh statute uh in New Hampshire or

any place else to my knowledge but but it is a piece of information that the court can consider

and I think that when you look at the sentencing hearing in this particular case

you had uh Judge Snuggler heard from family members of the defendant heard from uh family

members of the the young man who was killed heard from the police officer who intervened

that looked at all of the different factors the the defendants behavior while he was in prison

there were a lot of different things that contributed to this sentence the court then

concluded that release at age 62 uh was not the the possibility of release at age 62 was not a de facto

life sentence and certainly the tables helped the court to reach that but he's also he he has

the defendant standing in front of him um you know if there were other factors that the court

should have considered you know I think that there might be a a different way of

analyzing it but absent anybody who comes in and says this man's life expectancy is much shorter

than what you might anticipate um that that information wasn't presented to the court

except in some studies that uh the people who had done the studies acknowledged were deeply

flawed now quick ma'am if i'm wrong did both parties uh asked the trial court to review actual

actuarial tables in order to determine the proper sentence right uh the the defendant raised the

question of life expectancy your honor when when uh criticizing the state's recommended sentence

which was much longer than the one that was imposed the the uh defense urged the court to review a study

of uh of michigan prisoners and said that that was the more appropriate uh approach i think it was

the state that was pressing the center for disease control uh tables i'm not sure that the defense

wanted uh that to be used has any court uh deemed the michigan study to be reliable

uh i don't know the answer to that i know other courts have considered it but the people who did

the study as i think i noted in my brief said that it it first of all it's an older study

because it's back in 2003 and uh they the people who wrote the study noted that it had uh limitations

and it's been a long time since i uh worked with statistics but i think that a lot of it depends on

the the size of the population that is being used and uh and other factors that may or may

not apply to uh the prison situation in new hampshire am i correct that there's no other

state uh appellate court that has performed this analysis uh

i'm not certain what the court is asking it there's no other appellate court that's come out and said

here's the bright line rule this is what we're going to adopt this age as being the age to my

knowledge um i think other courts have may have wrestled with it but not exactly as this court

is right now but i think that one of the things that uh going back again to the discretion discretion

of the trial court you know when when the states as mr johnson i think um suggested in his argument

when the states adopted these statutes they were states that had a lot of juveniles to have to

resentance and in new hampshire uh uh at the time that um miller was decided i think that we had a

potential of five juveniles who could be covered by this uh one of whom has been resentenced um

michael soto uh i don't think that steven spader has ever challenged his sentence and so that

leaves us with the remaining three um that is a very different proposition from looking at a state

like florida or california where you might have hundreds or even thousands of juveniles to

resentence and i think that the legislatures in those circumstances acted because it was not

going to be dealing with a handful of juveniles i think that the more appropriate approach under

these circumstances therefore is to look at what the supreme court has been saying which is you have

to give sentencing court's discretion and the court here uh i mean it the sentencing

memorandum that was submitted by the uh defense as i asked the court to transfer that if you

take a look at that it is enormous uh photographs of the defendants family all kinds of legal

arguments information about the defendant everything you can imagine but miss woodcock

you recognize at some point it becomes a de facto life sentence right yes i think i think that that's

true but and how does the testimony about for example the nature of the crime

impact where the de facto life sentence boundary line is well that's true but i but but it's also

a factor in what the court is looking at it's it's not doing this in effect to vacuum um the other

point that i would make is that uh mr johnson keeps saying well you have to be able to come out

and have uh sort of a meaningful life uh i mean i hate to say it but 62 was looking younger to me

every year uh so i'm not i'm not probably the best person to be asking about what a de facto

life sentence actually is um but uh but if if the court turns to those cdc tables and looks

and sees that this person could get out and live another 15 years well 15 years is a long time

it's also a very long time 15 years is a long time when you have no life skills

and um no nothing to fall back on so is that as mr johnson has emphasized is that something that

that is included in the mix well i i think that it is included in the mix your honor to the extent that

once these uh people were uh once the life sentence was lifted off them then they

gained access to rehabilitation programs that would not have been available to a person who

was serving a life sentence the so the prison treats those individuals differently with the idea of

course that this court has said over and over again that one of the uh one of the goals of

sentencing is rehabilitation so it's not as if the individuals who are serving the sentence are

being cut off from that opportunity and i i think that that's an assumption that is inherent in

mr johnson's argument that somehow uh well at 62 you would have no life skills that's not necessarily

true at 62 you could come out of prison with significant life skills your red light is on

thank you your honor i will yield the webx to mr johnson very much mr johnson

thank you your honor i just a couple of brief points first on rsa 651 20 the state has not

argued that that is um relevant consideration in its brief on appeal and so i think the court

has to answer this question by reference to mr lopez's 45 year sentence not what might be two

thirds of that and secondly in answer to your question i think justice hicks about what

of other courts in other states done maybe justice bassett's question um courts have held

sentences unconstitutional because they are too long and i cited those cases i think um it is a

jurisprudentially possible to say this sentence is too long and we just leave for further elaboration

on remand what is the borderline um indian but um you know so i i so that's why i think

courts other courts have just chosen that tactic is rather than just announcing a rule

they've said this sentence is unconstitutional because it's the equivalent of de facto life

mr johnson can i just ask a follow-up to the question i asked earlier which is we're we only

have the federal constitutional issue in front of us if we i had but do i understand correctly

that the state constitutional issue was raised below but not addressed by the trial court is

that so that's right i think there was a separate state constitutional issue raised below about

whether life without parole for juveniles is unconstitutional um and my thought about that is

that um if i prevail here that this sentence is the de facto equivalent of life the court would

have to remand for a new sentencing hearing and if i don't prevail that this sentence is not

life without parole then he then mr lopez can't benefit by a ruling that life without parole

is unconstitutional so that state constitutional question sort of remains for a future um thank

thank you for clarifying that thank you both counsel for excellent presentations case submitted

court stand in recess uh and the record should reflect that we're breaking before we hear

the state versus the case of state versus dingman uh on which uh justice donovan is disqualified
