This is case 2018-07-09, state of New Hampshire versus Jeffrey Brock.

May it please the Court, Christopher Johnson, on behalf of Jeffrey Brock, I've reserved one minute of my time for rebuttal.

The issue in this case is the sufficiency of the evidence to prove venue.

My plan is to address first the merits, that is to say the legal definition of what is proper venue,

and second to address the timing of the objection, and I'm happy to take the Court's questions.

Can you start with timing? Sure. Why isn't this argument waived?

So begin with the preliminary point and then the substantial answer.

So the record shows that this was in fact raised before the trial started.

It was the day of trial, but it was before Jeopardy had attached, for example.

So I think counsel did raise this at a time where if the prosecutor wanted to change course, it would have been possible to do.

But more substantially, the reason this is timely raised is because there's no problem with the charging documents.

The charging documents in the case said Woodstock, the courthouse was the right courthouse for Woodstock.

And unlike in Johansson, there's two crucial distinctions that separate this case from Johansson.

And the first is in Johansson there was a pretrial order saying this case is going from Cheshire to Hillsborough County.

There's no pretrial order here. There was no pretrial order to which to object.

And secondly, in Johansson there was a disconnect between the charging documents and the courthouse.

On the day that the lawyer walked into the courthouse, the charging documents said Cheshire and they know they're in Hillsborough County.

Here there was no disconnect. The charging documents said Woodstock and we're in the right court for Woodstock.

The disconnect was between the evidence and the courthouse.

And when the disconnect is between the evidence and the courthouse, that's the sufficiency of the evidence claim.

So is there an affirmative obligation on part of a defendant who receives discovery and sees that there may be a jurisdictional issue

that the defendant is required to file a pretrial pleading, alerting the court, and the other side to that?

Yeah, not at all. I think to say so would be to require the defense lawyer to raise the issue prematurely.

We have an adversary system that defense lawyers has no duty to rescue the prosecutor from a mistake,

a self-inflicted mistake the prosecutor made, because the prosecutor had the same discovery.

And the prosecutor should know that there's a statutory mechanism if you see a problem where this case is going to cover several different judicial districts.

You go to the chief administrative judge.

Again, the defense counsel wait till the middle of trial when someone's testifying and then say, well, look at this.

When the problem is of this nature.

So we're not, I mean, in Johansson, the answer is clearly no.

Right.

When you're walking into the courthouse with Cheshire County document, Cheshire County charging documents, and you're in Manchester, you can't wait.

But if it's revealed at trial.

It's revealed at trial, but even here, I mean, to say that it's revealed in the discovery, I mean, discovery is not always right.

I mean, sometimes witnesses don't testify in the trial the way that...

Now, as you say, defense counsel doesn't really have to tip his or her hand.

They can wait.

I think that's right.

You know, when it's this kind of situation where the disconnect is between, not between the charging document and the location of trial,

but between the evidence and the location of trial.

So you're saying it's okay to lie on the weeds and then spring the trap.

Right.

And I think it would even be different if this were somehow information that the defense lawyer had some sort of special privileged access to.

But it's the discovery.

It came from the state.

Right.

I assume the officer's report didn't specify exactly where he was when all this conduct occurred.

Right.

I think, I mean, some of it is clear.

I mean, the officer wrote a report about what happened when they got to the jail in Haverhill.

You know, and I'm sure everybody knows where the jail is.

But the rest of it, you know, I don't know that it was exactly clear from the discovery where each threat was made.

But even if it was, you know, the defense lawyer has no, you know, it would be different maybe if the defense lawyer sort of knew this

and the prosecutor didn't have reason to know this.

But the defense lawyer only knew what she knew because she read the documents the prosecutor gave her in discovery.

And she had no reason not to think the prosecutor knew that as well.

And, you know, again, the defense lawyer even here I think went above and beyond in before jeopardy attached saying, you know,

in the morning of trial before the trial starts, I think we're going to have an issue.

So it's your theory that the state was required to try half of the counts in Plymouth and the other half up in Haverhill?

No, not at all.

What the prosecutor should have done is read his own discovery and seen just like the defense lawyer did,

seen this coming and there's a statutory mechanism that the prosecutor can invoke,

which is you file a request with the chief administrative judge to say, look, this case covers several different judicial districts.

It would be economical to try it in one place.

Please issue an order telling us we can try it in Woodstock.

And the prosecutor, you know, that's the mechanism.

And it applies in cases where they're not maybe sure if it happened in Woodstock or Easton.

And you could have a doubt.

The prosecutor has any doubt.

You go to the administrative judge and say, give us an order saying venue is proper.

Aren't those really for cases of sort of continuing crimes, crimes that don't have a specific spot where they occur?

Well, I think this mechanism is more generally applicable or more powerful than that.

It saves the prosecutor from being put in an untenable position.

And if the prosecutor is not sure or if you have a case that should be tried once,

but the crime traveled geographically, you go to the administrative judge and you say,

this is what's going to happen.

I don't care which court, really, but put it in one court.

We can try the whole thing there.

If that's all that happens, isn't this a mere technicality?

Well, I mean, the prosecutor had a mechanism that probably could have fixed this.

But for this court to call it a technicality sort of disregards the statutory language,

it would transfer from the chief administrative judge who under the statute is the one who has the authority to say,

yes, we're going to try this one place.

If that's all it is, why couldn't it be waived?

Well, I mean, it could be, but it just, it wasn't here because it was raised at the appropriate time here.

Is proving venue an element of the crime?

Yes, yes.

It is one of, and the state doesn't dispute that venue is one of the things that has to prove.

And so I understand the sense that this was, you know, we are taking advantage of a mistake the prosecutor made,

but it was a self-inflicted mistake to forgive them for it would transfer power from the administrative judge to the prosecutor.

It would say, don't bother with a statutory mechanism for getting a pretrial ruling saying,

we're going to go on Woodstock with this whole thing, just do it.

You the prosecutor, you're going to just do it.

And unless the defense can show prejudice or something, it doesn't matter.

And that's, the legislature could say that the statute could read that way, but it doesn't.

There's no requirement that the defendant has to establish prejudice here.

Right, and this legislature could have said that, but they didn't.

It's venue is something the state has to prove.

And the defense lawyer, this was not a Johansson type situation because the charging documents,

there was nothing wrong with the charging documents.

They alleged a crime in Woodstock.

And because all that happened was the evidence came in showing it wasn't in Woodstock.

It's a sufficiency of evidence claim and properly raised mid-trial.

I guess I should touch a little bit on the merits because that also is in dispute.

So the text, the statutory text and the constitutional text is county or judicial district.

I think the proper interpretation is that those two terms, county and judicial district,

map onto two distinct concepts, superior court venue and circuit court venue.

County is what the statute is the word when you're talking about a court with a county wide reach,

typically superior court.

Judicial district is the term that applies when you're talking about a court with a smaller than county wide reach,

mostly circuit courts, or in this state Hillsborough is divided into superior court judicial districts.

The flaw in the state's argument is that it takes those two words and the statute that is using two terms for two concepts

and it sees those two terms as relating to one concept, venue.

But when there are two different categories of court, it's not a one concept of venue.

It's two concepts of venue.

Under the state's argument then, just so I'm clear, you could try any grafted county based offense in any of the circuit court districts.

I think that's exactly right.

And that's what I think of as the Nashua-Peterborough problem.

The Nashua police could start bringing their misdemeanor charges in Peterborough because it is Hillsborough County and vice versa.

And venue would be proper.

And that can't be right.

In effect, the or judicial district part of that statutory text ceases to have meaning.

The only place, and this is the second problem I think with the state's argument,

is that there are a few judicial districts in the state that cross county lines.

So, for example, the Hillsborough Judicial District has the town of Hennicker, which is in Merrimack County,

and it also has the town of Hillsborough, which is in Hillsborough County.

Applying the state's rule to that kind of judicial district creates, I think, an absurd result.

And it is this, that a misdemeanor committed in Hennicker on their rule could be tried in any circuit court in Merrimack County

and also in Hillsborough County in the Hillsborough Circuit Court, because that's Hennicker's part of that district.

But a felony committed in Hennicker can only be tried in a Merrimack County courthouse.

And so you have this result that venue for misdemeanors is wider in those judicial districts than venue for felonies.

It doesn't make sense the way you describe it, but when you look to the purpose for the venue statute historically,

the jury trial aspect of it is that you are entitled to a jury of your peers in your neighborhood,

in a court as close to you as possible.

Here is trial by a judge, and as you know, the judges, the circuit court judges get shuffled like cards almost every week.

Well, that's true. And I think there's one part of the description that you gave, which I would quarrel with.

I think venue is not about being tried in the community where the defendant is from.

Venues about being tried in the community where the crime happened.

And so I think in the state's brief they talk about how, you know, he was raised,

Mr. Brock was raised in the vicinity of this and to, you know, it doesn't matter if he traveled to Nashua and committed to crime,

venue for that is going to be in Nashua.

And so it's not really about, you know, what is, venue is not about what's the most convenient or local court.

It's about, you know, these lines that we draw on a map matter.

And so even though Hooksett is a lot probably closer to Manchester than it is to Concord,

the felonies committed in Hooksett because it's Merrimack County go to Concord.

How should the fact that the judicial district language was added only in 1978 impact our analysis?

I think, and I'm not sure, but I think that it was at that time that the courts,

maybe the court systems were being readjusted and particularly the lower,

the sub-superior court level courts were being re-conceptualized.

And so the Orr Judicial District reflected the idea that with this system of circuit courts,

and some of the circuit courts are crossing county boundaries like the Henniger-Hillsboro situation,

we need a term for circuit court venue and because we are defining these circuit courts by reference to the judicial districts,

we're going to call it, we're going to add Orr Judicial District.

And so that mapped on to this idea that, you know, the concept of the test of venue in a circuit court is the judicial district,

even if that judicial district crosses a county boundary as Henniger-Hillsboro does.

And so it I think supports the idea that county is for superior courts.

Orr Judicial District is for sub-county level courts.

So for all of those reasons, I'd ask the court to reverse these convictions.

You still have one minute if you need it.

Thank you.

Good afternoon, Your Honor.

My name is Assistant Attorney General Gordon Landrigan representing the state.

As accurately stated by co-counsel, this case really presents two issues.

First, whether or not by waiting to raise venue until the day of the trial,

the defendant effectively waived the venue argument and the subsequent meritous argument,

which is whether or not reading the Constitution, the plain language of Article 17,

whether or not the court should interpret it as really a spliced interpretation between the judicial districts,

even though the legislature at the time didn't say superior court and district court,

or it should be read with the plain language, which just says that no crimes shall be tried

in areas that weren't committed either in the county or jurisdiction,

which really creates, I guess, when we're talking about the overlapping district courts,

kind of a Venn diagram, so a wide variety of places where, so long as there's some nexus

to either judicial district or county, that it's proper to be held there.

But in most instances, wouldn't that sort of write the judicial district language out of

it would have no meaning?

Not necessarily, Your Honor, because as co-counsel was talking about,

it didn't happen in this instance when they talked about the Hillsborough-Hinnaker situation

where that district actually crosses county lines.

So in that case, the language I think what the court's getting at is whether or not

the judicial amendment in 1978 would have any effect.

In that case, it would, because it would allow it to be held anywhere within either of those counties,

or sorry, if we were talking about Merrimack County, it could be heard in a brief

or kind of a smaller area of Hillsborough or vice versa.

And I think that a brief recitation of the trial record, not to go too deep into the facts,

actually really gets to the heart of venue,

because whether or not it was waived by not bringing it up ahead of time.

So it's a mix of fact, but also of all places and missions of the Defendants' Council,

the person who had access to these records and knew very well where most of this crime occurred.

So the state had access, same access to the records, right?

Yes, it was disclosed by the state.

And the state had access to the officer who arrested the defendant?

Assumedly so.

I mean the defendant could have filed, I suppose, a motion for deposition,

but you typically don't do that in a misdemeanor case.

Typically not.

So the prosecutor could have asked the officer what route did you take,

where were you when these things occurred, right?

Well, this really brings us to the heart of, again, what the article 17 says.

The state's position, I believe the correct position based on traditional tools

of constitutional interpretation, is that when it says county or judicial district,

either one satisfies the venue requirement.

So if we apply that it's undisputed, unfactorily disputed,

that all of this occurred within Grafton County,

if that's the state's interpretation of it,

we don't need to track down exactly where everything happened

in order to satisfy the material element of satisfying venue.

Well, my point is really on the waiver issue.

Why isn't bringing it to the court's attention right before trial sufficient?

So if the court will indulge me, I just want to read just a brief passage from Al

because I think it really speaks to this.

It says that part one, article 17, was designed for the protection of the accused,

was regarded by the framers of the Constitution as a privilege

of the highest importance because it would prevent the possibility of sending him

for a trial in remote county at a distance from friends among strangers

and perhaps among parties animated by prejudice of personal partisan character.

And that's important for a couple of reasons.

First, that last sentence perhaps among parties animated by prejudice,

that's the only part of really the thrust of why that was passed in 17, I believe, in 1986.

That very last part, it even says perhaps, talks about the jury trial.

Everything else talks about the unfairness and the hardship

of requiring someone to come to a remote location.

So the heart of it is, if you always...

Well, Creighton County is pretty large and say there's a town that borders on Merrimack County.

Essentially, your argument means anything that's in the locality would be fine.

I think it would have to be a different factual, just a small qualifier there

is that I think the crime would have to have some nexus to all the judicial districts within that county.

I mean, this, it crossed three.

But this remoteness thing, now that we all travel and drive around,

it really isn't that remote to go from Plymouth to Concord.

Granted, Your Honor, but I think the legislation had to work with some boundaries

and I think counties were the best.

But to answer your question, if it's obvious that it all occurred within Grafton County

and the defendant knows that and he shows up and he's actually knowingly suffered

every hardship that this part is there to protect, it's kind of lying in wait.

And I should probably use a better term,

but he's already kind of knowingly suffered the hardship when he could have avoided it.

But here, wouldn't it be reasonable for counsel to wait

till she drew the testimony out from the police officer on cross-examination

that established the facts that then provided support for her venue argument?

Well, again, if the court adopts the state argument that anywhere in the county establishes venue,

there's nothing in discovery.

I'm talking more about waivers.

She raises it right ahead of trial.

Hey, I think there's a problem.

And then at trial pulls out the information that this was a traveling series of events.

Yes. So, again, not again, sorry.

There's just several statements in the record that show that of all people,

the defense counsel appreciated, anticipated that this was coming.

On pages 46 through 47, she said, quote,

in other words, the course of conduct has been in discovery all along.

On page 56 of the trial transcript,

the trial court made a finding that the facts were well within the information

that was presented to defense counsel.

And I'd also note as a side that that's a finding, a factual finding

about the court that has not been challenged.

But yeah, but again, the defendant raised this prior to trial.

So the fact that she pointed out that it was in discovery all along

doesn't, that that's not a waiver issue

because she alerted the trial court to this issue before the trial actually began.

But the hardship had already been suffered at that point.

So there was a mention about maybe applying the concept of when jeopardy attacks

attaches, which for purposes of a jury trial, which we're not dealing with,

is when the jury is sworn.

And for purposes of the bench trial, I imagine it's at opening statements

and when evidence is starting to be admitted.

But again, that really frustrates the entire purpose

and in a sense would require the court to ignore the consistent case law

showing why these protections are a place in the first place,

which is to prevent somebody from starting those in the first place.

And again, if they've come to court and they just raise it the morning of,

it's kind of too late to really cure that hardship.

Well, again, what about during trial?

If it comes out during trial, I mean, I'm not so sure.

What's the support for having defense counsel alert the prosecutor

that there's a defect in the elements that need to be proven?

I don't believe it's the prosecutor they would have to alert.

That is that mechanism.

Well, or the court.

Yeah.

Ooh, I think I have this defense.

Yeah.

So I think that there's two questions there.

One is if it is not clear from discovery,

I don't think that there's an affirmative obligation to raise that ahead of time.

But there is no dispute effect either.

Even if it is clear from discovery again,

where does defense counsel have to alert the court or the state

that there's a defect in their case?

Well, under 490 F colon 2, any party can make that motion

and that's compared to a request for a change of venue in the superior court,

which I believe can only be done by the defendant in cases of,

essentially, the well has been poisoned.

But under 490 F colon 2, it doesn't state that any party,

only certain parties can make that motion.

In fact, plain reading of the statute says that administrative judge

could make that ruling su espante.

And while we're talking about 490 F colon 2,

I think there's something else that's really important to consider

when looking at that next to article 17.

And that's that opposing counsel has essentially invited the state

to use that as a way to cure or clear up any venue issues.

The issue with that interpretation is many...

Well, let's stay with two-fold.

The first one is that what opposing counsel is saying

is that an administrative judge can dissolve a prosecutor

of his obligation to prove venue which is constantly prescribed.

So opposing counsel's position is that the constitution says that

in misdemeanor cases or district court cases,

it has to be in the judicial district.

At the same time, he's also saying,

despite what the constitution says,

there can be an administrative order that just dissolves

the prosecutor's obligation to do that.

Those can't be read side to side.

In fact, it would...

If the court doesn't deal with that decision now,

at a later date, they'd be forced to the question

of whether or not the administrative action

where the state to take it is even constitutional.

So again, whether or not the court has to deal with that now

or later, the argument sets the court up for that issue.

What is consistent is looking at the statute

and the constitution in a way where it's consistent,

and that way, if the judicial and county satisfies venue

in either judicial court, then the administrative remedy

for within either of those districts

doesn't create a constitutional conflict.

Requiring the court to make the decision

about whether or not a statute is unconstitutional.

So why isn't it a problem to see a judicial district

as being broader than a jurisdiction for felony cases

as the defense points out?

Sure.

So there's hypotheticals.

One is that although one case might involve a jury trial

and another might require a bench trial,

there's one-day jury trials and there's ten-day bench trials.

So if we're talking about the hardships again

about coming to a different county,

dip into a judicial district,

you might be ten days in front of a bench trial

one-day for a jury trial.

So the fact that one's more serious consequences,

there's no real connection to why

more serious consequences need larger venue

and less serious consequences need smaller venue.

But to go back to 490-F-2,

it's the state's position that the legislature passed that

in, I believe, 2011 to really cure, I guess,

if you were to take that argument to the extremes,

that all of a sudden you have this wide-ranging venue

for misdemeanors and smaller perfalonies,

that statute allows a judge to administratively cure that,

I guess, in the words of opposing counsel,

that absurdity.

So there is a mechanism to prevent,

I think it's in the thrust of efficiency and justice,

to really rein that in in case there's a scenario

that just doesn't really strike an administrative judge right.

The court has no other questions.

I'd ask the court the case piece submitted.

Thank you, counsel.

Mr. Johnson, you have one minute.

Thank you.

Just very, very briefly.

I just wanted to respond to the one point about there being

a conflict or potential conflict between venue being

an element the state has to prove under the Constitution

and the administrative judge having the authority

to declare where venue should be.

We already have that with motions to change venue.

It's perfectly acceptable that those two things

are reconciled.

In effect, what the statute just does

is it gives the prosecutor a way to file a motion to change venue.

And that is perfectly consistent with venue

being an element that matters.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Case submitted.

Court is adjourned.
