Good morning.

Just for everybody's information, we will hear argument

in the first two cases, then we'll take a brief recess,

and then we will hear the argument in the final case.

This is case 2018-0239, Neil Kirk versus Thomas Clow et

al.

Good morning, Your Honors, and may it please the court.

My name is Laura Specter Morgan.

I represent the town of Ware and the individual select

men who have been sued in this matter.

I have reserved two minutes for rebuttal.

This court should reverse the decision of the trial court

for three reasons.

First, Mr. Kirk lacks standing to challenge

the calculation of the default budget.

Second, the town properly includes-

Hasn't that been answered by a constitutional amendment?

There has been a constitutional amendment

that has addressed that, Your Honor.

However, the text of that constitutional amendment

makes it very clear that it does not become effective

until the governor proclaims it.

The governor did not proclaim it until December 5, 2018.

Moreover, that constitutional amendment

gives taxpayers the right to challenge any money that the town

has spent or has approved spending.

And the calculation of the default budget

neither spends money nor approves spending money.

It's simply a calculation.

So A, the constitutional amendment doesn't apply,

and B, even if it did, it wouldn't affect the issue.

Moving aside from the constitutional amendment,

why isn't $20, $30 enough to afford

standing to a single taxpayer?

There's two reasons, Your Honor.

First, while the allegation was that he would suffer

a $20 or $30 impact in truth when the town recalculated

the default budget, it ended up that the difference between

the proposed default budget and the new default budget

was 0.057 cents per thousand.

Shouldn't one cent be enough?

I'm not sure it should be enough, Your Honor,

but even if it were, this is a burden

that is shared by all of the taxpayers

of the town of where equally.

Everyone has the exact same impact.

What's the total freight?

I didn't see it in the briefs.

What's the total freight?

The total tax base?

Yeah, I don't know.

All of the savings combined, if we grant the relief

requested.

$457.

For the entire town?

Yeah.

For the budget.

$457.

Mr. Spector Morgan, can you just clarify for me

what happens if there's no operating budget adopted?

There's two options.

One is that it goes to the default budget.

And I don't understand.

I've never had experience with the alternate procedure

of holding a special meeting pursuant to paragraph 16.

How does that work?

I've never had experience with it either.

But what the statute permits is that the select man

can call a special town meeting without going

to the Superior Court for permission

to do so to try and get that operating budget adopted.

And my understanding of how that special town meeting would

work is that it would be just like a traditional town

meeting where you would sort of beat out that budget

until you came up with a number.

So it's not just a binary choice.

It's not the proposed budget or a default budget.

It's the budget article.

And then the special meeting is also an alternative.

And when does that get invoked?

That is completely at the discretion of the select

man whether or not to call that special town meeting.

After the vote has occurred?

If the operating budget fails, yes, sir.

Can you shift your focus, and then I'll be quiet.

Can you shift your focus to RSA 40 colon 13 Roman 9C,

defining the term contracts as used in the subdivision

regarding default budgets?

The statutory amendment that was adopted after this case?

Yeah, evidently.

Yes, effective August 11, 2018.

Yes, I can certainly talk about that.

So as the court is aware, Mr. Kirk

is a representative in the New Hampshire state legislature.

And my understanding is immediately

prior to the Superior Court hearing this case,

he had proposed an amendment at the legislature

to specifically define contracts

as he asserted they should be defined,

only contracts that were previously approved at town

meeting.

And the legislature has adopted that.

That, again, became effective after the date of this case.

Well, what was the law before?

The law before only said that the default budget was

last year's budget as altered by debt service, contracts,

and other obligations previously incurred

or mandated by law.

So there was no definition of what was meant by contracts.

There was no case law on what was meant by contracts.

And most of the towns did include

any contract that they happened to enter into in the year.

And these contracts, in particular,

are contracts that are uniquely within the discretion

of the selectmen.

They're for the municipal prosecutor.

They're for the police chief.

They're for the town.

Right, but can they have, but let's

assume that they are within the discretion.

But can the selectmen bind the town to an amount of money

that's in addition to, in other words,

it seems to me that it's one thing if the selectmen enter

into a contract, and they can perform that contract

within the approved budget.

That's one thing.

But can they approve a contract that they know

will take them over the amount of the budget?

That they know will take them over the amount of the budget?

They would have to find the money within the budget

to do that.

Yes, so they can.

By transfer or some other means?

Yes, they can transfer between lines.

But they can't go over the original budget amount.

In any given year, they have a bottom line budget amount

that they cannot exceed without permission.

And that happened here, didn't it?

That did not happen here, Your Honor.

They entered into contracts at the end of 2017.

They put those contracts both in the operating budget

and the default budget.

And the way the statute was written at the time,

they were perfectly within their rights to do so.

The statute said, you take the default budget,

and you increase or decrease it by debt services.

No, but that then would increase.

Because what they did, if I'm understanding correctly,

is they took, let's make it very simple.

Suppose the default budget is $1 million.

Yes.

That's the last, that's the earlier year's budget.

It's $1 million, right?

The voters approve it all.

Now the select men enter into a contract for, let's say,

$40,000 to give a raise to a number of employees.

And they have the authority to do that.

But now what you seem to be saying

is that the default budget that they could then

present at the next year's town meeting

would be $1 million, $40,000.

That is absolutely what I'm saying.

How can they do it?

Because that then allows them, without any vote of the town,

to increase the prior year's budget by $40,000.

What's their authority to do that?

The statute.

The statute allows the default budget

to be last year's budget increased by contracts.

And it did not limit what those contracts were.

So in other words, they could,

you're basically, so is there any limit on that?

In other words, could they decide, could they decide,

listen, you know, we really like the police chief.

We're gonna double his salary.

Are we really like, and the voters get no input on that?

It's an extreme example, but I do believe

that under the way the statute was written, yes,

they could enter into that contract.

And here's why.

The statute gives the select men the authority

to calculate the default budget.

It requires that they disclose the default budget

at the budget hearings.

It also gives the select men the authority

to change the default budget.

It specifically does not give town meeting

the authority to amend the default budget.

So yes, the way the legislature wrote the statute,

it was entirely within the discretion

of the board of select men

how to calculate that default budget.

No matter how large this new contract might be,

a new grader, a new warehouse, whatever.

I mean, certainly we can take it to extremes.

I don't think that's extreme for the town of where.

Well, the town of where could, for example,

enter into a lease purchase agreement

in any given year, binding the town.

But that lease purchase agreement,

unless it's approved by town meeting,

would need to have an escape clause.

So certain contracts, if they are for many years,

have to have an escape clause.

And these contracts all had that escape clause,

by the way.

These contracts all had provisions in them

that if there was not sufficient funding

at town meeting, the contracts couldn't get there.

But see, that's the thing.

If we interpret the statute,

you said before that there's a limit,

that the select men can't authorize a contract

that would allow them to spend in excess of,

in my example earlier, a million dollars.

In any given year.

In any given year, right?

Yes.

But if we accept your construction of this,

this is an exception to that.

They basically can say, oh, well,

we can't spend more than a million dollars

because that's what the town meeting approved.

But we can go ahead and do it now

because then it'll go in the default budget

and the voters will have no choice.

They either vote for the new budget

or as a matter of law, this budget gets approved.

That is true.

However, the voters select the select men.

So the legislature delegates the authority

to the select men to do this.

The voters elect the select men.

If the voters don't like what the select men are doing,

they're free to vote them out of office.

And it doesn't, can't the first budget

be reworked at the first meeting?

The operating budget?

Absolutely.

Yeah, so it's not just the budget presented

to the first meeting or the default budget.

There's the opportunity for the town

to vote at that meeting to change the budget.

So there's no opportunity at the deliberative session?

Yes.

Yes, absolutely.

The operating budget can be amended at the deliberative

session.

Right, but that doesn't affect that.

They can't amend the default budget, right?

The town meeting cannot, no.

Right, so then, I mean, it just seems to me

that if this seems like it's a very, if the legislature,

and it seems like this is what you're saying,

that what the legislature intended to do by creating

this SB2 procedure is basically give the select men

the ability to exceed the prior year's budget.

What the legislature intended to do with the default budget

is to ensure that all legal obligations could

get paid even under a default budget.

Debt service is a legal obligation.

Other obligations mandated by law is a legal obligation.

These contracts are legal obligations,

and Mr. Kirk does not contest that they are binding

and that the town has to amend that.

But you're saying that the select men can amend the default

budget, but the town voters can't.

Correct.

That's what the legislature provided.

And doesn't that contradict RSA 32-8,

the limitation on expenditures?

No, because you still have that bottom line number

that they can't exceed.

Well, it says it limits expenditures

for the purpose established by the budget

unless you do a transfer or have some emergency.

So it kind of narrows into specific line items,

or it appears to.

So the line items can be moved around.

And in a given year, once you have a budget,

obviously you can't exceed that.

But I don't think 32-8 limits the ability of the select

men to enter into contracts over matters

that they have clear authority to regulate.

What was the increase here in the health care premiums?

The increase in the health care premiums.

I do not know the number off the top of my head.

The health care premium increase actually wasn't contested.

Right.

I understand that.

That's why I'm asking this question.

I don't know off the top of my head.

But I guess I'm still having trouble understanding

conceptually how this could work.

Because, for example, I have always understood

that if the town, go back to my example,

a town meeting in year one approves

a budget of a million dollars.

And let's say that sometime during the year,

the town had previously entered into some contract

that contained a variable interest rate of some kind.

And all of a sudden the interest rate is going to go up.

And the town has a binding obligation

to pay that interest rate.

It was always my understanding that they

had to pay the interest rate,

but they still couldn't exceed the million dollars.

They were going to have to cut in some other area.

Or they had the ability to go to DRA to get approval to pay that.

Or they had the ability to have a special town meeting.

Sure.

OK.

But what you seem to be saying is that now there's a new thing

that they can do is, by basically just saying,

it's OK for us to exceed the budget.

We don't have to go to the DRA or have a special town meeting.

And we can just approve this contract.

And this will become, even if it goes over the million dollars,

it doesn't matter.

OK.

This isn't new.

This has been around for 20 years.

And it has worked fine for 20 years.

This is the first case we've had in 20 years.

Second, again, they're not exceeding the budget.

And there is complete transparency in the default budget

as to what is included in that.

Particularly in this case, as attorney Lehman conceded

at the Superior Court, the town was very clear

what it was putting in.

It put in all contractual increases.

It put in all contractual decreases.

That's what the statute called for at the time.

The statute has changed.

This is going to be a very detailed,

specific decision on one town, one case that hopefully

will never happen again.

So this is never going to come up again.

This should never come up again.

You say it's not happened in 20 years.

It's not going to happen going forward.

This is a one-time case.

Yes.

I see my time is up.

And I reserve two minutes for a battle.

Thank you.

Good morning, May it please the court?

My name is Richard Lehman, attorney of Manchester,

representing Neil Kirk of Ware.

I would submit that what the town of Ware is arguing to you

is a fairly insidious attack on all the best traditions

that have existed in New Hampshire.

Why isn't this moot, though?

Why isn't it moot?

Yes.

I mean, the challenge was made.

The budget was amended to comply with the challenge

allegedly.

And so they brought an appeal.

The statute's been amended.

We're here defending what was won below.

And I would submit that it's not

as simple as they say it is simply

because there may be other cases from prior years still out there.

And their argument about the default budget being something

that selectmen are able to effectively unilaterally

ratchet up year after year as a serious problem that

undercuts all of our traditions of checks and balances,

interwoven pieces of government that stop each other

from doing things that are inappropriate.

What's the contract under this statute on default budget?

And what is it now?

And what was it on August 10, 2018?

Prior to August 10, 2018, I would submit it

for the purpose of including it in a default budget.

It can only be something that the town voters, the town

legislature, approved.

There's two options.

You have to choose one.

It's either things that the voters approved or things

that the selectmen unilaterally decided

to include in the calculation.

So you're saying the amendment last year

didn't change anything.

It just confirmed your understanding

in the argument you're making.

Correct.

It clarified what the understanding

of the existing law was going to be.

In my brief, I argued that the Latin phrase

noceter asocius means like things are bunched together.

And the three things that were together

are debt service, which is something

that under the municipal finance law the voters of the town

have to approve and have to approve by a supermajority.

Is there a level of harm?

I mean, should there be a level of harm required

for this sort of challenge?

I mean, originally the claim was

it was a burden on the right to vote

or right of association, and that didn't fly.

So now it was the financial harm.

That's correct.

I think any time that the government

is extracting tax money from a citizen

is a sufficient basis to support a claim,

and that's what was happening here.

Even a hypothetical one?

Because at this point in time, when you brought suit,

there was no vote.

We didn't know whether or not the default budget was

going to be an issue.

It was still, even though the default budget itself

was not on the ballot, it was the fallback position.

And the reality is that voters in SB2 towns

approach the proposed budget with reference

to what their alternative is.

And I think it would be foolish to suggest

that they do anything else.

What about the special town meeting alternative?

You allude to that in your brief.

Well, a special town meeting option

has to be brought by the selectmen who

are the people who have the power to ramp up the default budget

or by voters who can petition the superior court

to call for a special town meeting.

But there's no guarantee that's going to happen.

Does Mr. Kirk's standing in this matter

depend on there being a tax increase?

If there were no tax increase, total.

But these contracts were included in the budget.

Does he have standing?

Or does his standing depend only on there

being an increase in taxes?

His standing depends on what the taxes would otherwise be.

The 40 colon 13 doesn't just allow for increases.

It also requires decreases.

So the fact is his taxes would have otherwise been lower

if certain things had happened as well.

So I don't think just looking at the bottom amount

and how much he pays covers it all

because of a pre-existing collective bargaining

agreement that had been approved by voters three

years ago expired and was reduced.

Even if the budget had gone down, any taxpayer in the town

could come in and sue.

I think that's true both as the Constitution,

as the law existed at the time a suit was brought,

and especially sue, true given the standing amendment

that the people overwhelmingly approved at the last election.

When you said that the only contracts that

can be included in the default budget

are the contracts that were approved by the voters

at the earlier town meeting.

Are you saying that even if the selectmen

after the town meeting want to enter into some new contract

and they're willing to not, and that contract is not

going to go take them over the budget

because they're willing to not spend money on something else

that was approved, that even if they're not

going to exceed the budget, they can't enter

into that contract?

They can enter into the contract, but they just

have to fund it out of monies appropriated

by the legislative body of the town.

Right, so in other words, I think

you're saying we're on the same page then.

You're not saying that if the voters at the earlier town

meeting didn't specifically say you can do X,

that the selectmen can't enter into a contract to do X

as long with the understanding that they can't

exceed the budget by doing that.

No, I think that's correct.

The town argued that the check on the improper behavior

by the selectmen in terms of ramping up spending in a town

is that they get to elect the selectmen.

And I would submit that's not enough.

Under our system, they get to late.

It's too late.

The money's already spent.

But they also get to vote not just on the tax

errs, but they get to vote on the tax eds.

So let me try to clarify, see if I understand this right.

Two of the contracts, one's an increase

for the town administrator for $14,000,

and one is for a police prosecutor for $16,000.

And you were saying that even if the total budget has gone down,

if it's a million-dollar budget, using the Chief Justice's

scenario, and it's now 980, but it

includes these two contracts that were agreed to the year

before that that violates the statute,

and Mr. Kirk has standing?

Correct, because it depends on what's happening

in all the other lines that go into default budget as well.

Some of them are going down, some of them are going up,

depending on whether obligations are expiring

during that year as well.

So if every other contract were the same as it was the year

before, and then one more position was eliminated

so that these two contracts could be increased,

your position is that that violates the statute,

and Mr. Kirk has standing, even though the taxes are

going down.

Even though the absolute amount is going down,

the decision has been made to eliminate the position.

So the default budget should be reduced

by the eliminated position.

And then the contract ramps it back up again.

That is a level of taxation that the legislative body

in the town never approved.

And it's the approval by the voters of the taxes

that they're going to be paying that is ultimately

at the heart of this.

So is it your position that even if there's no increases

but someone has come in and a contract price has gone down,

somebody in the town says, well, wait a minute,

I didn't get the chance to vote on that.

It lowers my taxes, but I don't want my taxes lowered

by that amount.

I'd rather have that person employed by the town.

Do they have standing?

Even if the taxes go down, even if nothing else

is going up.

I don't think they have standing to go to court to.

Is the statute violated?

Excuse me?

Is the statute violated?

I don't think so.

So it can go down.

I'm having a hard time wrapping my head

around the hypothetical.

So you enter into a contract during the year

where you say instead of increasing

the town administrator's salary,

you're gonna decrease it by $10,000.

And that has never been presented to the town

at town meeting.

Is that a valid contract?

And does the select man enter into that contract,

violate the statute?

I don't think so, but.

So it's one way, but not the other.

I think so.

Generally speaking, the constitutional provision

that I cite in the brief and the statutory scheme

protects people from having their taxes raised

in ways they don't consent to.

It doesn't generally protect them

from having their taxes lowered.

Isn't that covered by 30, I would say 32.8,

which limits expenditures except in situations

where the town has to pay a judgment

or transfers balances.

So they're allowed to, the select man would be allowed

to transfer balances to fund a raise to someone else.

They could definitely do that.

That's not.

Without a vote.

Transferring within, right,

that's their prudential authority to govern the town.

So isn't the town, isn't that what they did here

with the default budget that it's within?

They've just moved money around?

I don't think that is what they did

because they added to the default budget,

determinations, not that were made the previous year

and involved the reduction,

but that involved the increases

that the voters had never approved.

And that ultimately is the heart of it.

You know, here's the thing I guess I'm having,

that I'm not sure exactly how the earlier statute,

the statute that we're concerned with here

was intended to operate.

If it seems like everybody agrees,

or at least between the two of you,

that the select man can't spend more,

let's say in year one,

they can't spend more than what the town approved, right?

So if everybody agrees on that and everybody,

and I think it sounded like you all agree,

that everybody agrees that as long as they don't spend more,

the select man can enter into whatever contracts

they want to, as long as they, you know,

if they decide they're gonna spend more money

and one thing they're gonna have to take it

from somewhere else so they don't go over.

If all of that is true,

and it sounds like you all agree to that,

I guess I have difficulty understanding

why the statute even makes reference to anything

other than the approved budget for the prior year

because you all seem to be saying that the town,

the select man can't spend more than the prior year's budget

unless they, you know, declare an emergency,

go to the DRA or whatever.

So what would be the purpose of those debt service

and contracts, et cetera?

They can spend more if the town committed

to those increases in a previous year.

So if you have a collective bargaining agreement

the last three years and contains raises

for each of three years,

in the third year it's gonna go up

but it was approved prior to the first year.

So that's an increase but it's one

that the voters of the town have already approved.

What about the healthcare premiums here?

I was a select man and I know every year

we'd get a bill and it was always going up

so what do you do about that?

How can the voters approve that?

Why isn't that increase contemplated by this?

The select man either have to find it

in the default budget or propose an operating budget

that the voters will approve.

But didn't you say that it's not just

the total of the default budget that bothers you

and you think violates it.

If it's something that didn't get specifically approved

that's increased that also violates the standard.

Isn't that what you're saying?

I don't know because if it's an increase

that's part of a collective bargaining agreement

which healthcare premiums typically are

then it was approved.

Well, not every town employees

are part of the collective bargaining agreement

but they have insurance.

We don't have that record in front of us here.

So I think it's hard to answer.

How much is the healthcare increase here?

I don't know.

Is it more than the amount that we're fighting about

which is $500 or something?

Well, when we started this fight

that's not what we were fighting about

and I would submit that it's unclear from the record

what happened after we were in Superior Court

having this out.

I would also submit that we haven't talked

about the standing amendment

and what the town is trying to accomplish

with its standing argument is really something.

I filed a motion to strike that argument earlier

and I would like to incorporate those arguments

by reference if I can.

Effectively the town is making a retroactivity argument

that the government is not allowed to rely on.

Retroactivity prohibitions protect

and all constitutional protections protect citizens

from the government.

They don't protect government from accountability.

So can I just ask, your standing argument

just to clarify what you said to me before

doesn't depend on there being a tax increase.

The standing argument depends on the proposition

that the government proposes to take money

out of my client's pocket

that's not legally appropriated.

Can I just go back to one of the things you said before?

You gave the example of a collective bargaining agreement.

Let's say you're in the third year

of a collective bargaining agreement

that calls for certain raises.

But I'm still somewhat confused

because don't the selectments presumably know,

let's say that there's gonna be this much of a raise

that is required by the collective bargaining agreement

that we entered into three years ago.

We're in the last year now

and that is gonna call for a certain amount of raises.

So presumably they put that into the budget

that they send to the voters to approve at the town meeting.

If the voters approve some lower amount,

the selectments still have the obligation

to pay the amount of the increase

out of the funds that the voters have approved, right?

So they're gonna have to cut somewhere else.

They're gonna have to cut somewhere else.

So I guess I'm still back to my question.

If that's all true, why isn't it just

whatever the amount that the voters approved

at the last town meeting, that's the default

because they may also have approved increases

and that's why the legislature

put those three things in there.

Can I take you back to those three things

in your Latin, which is better than mine?

I've expended all of mine.

So would you describe for me exactly why you think contracts

and the other two matters are similar?

You're construing one of two possible definitions

of contracts.

The other two things are items

that have been approved by voters, by law.

Those things have to be approved by voters

before they become valid expenditures.

The towns are not allowed to go into debt

without supermajority vote from voters.

Contracts are like the other two

in that you should construe them to be like the other two

in that they have to be approved

and they can't just be something

that the selectmen have decided to tack on

to the top of the default budget

because ultimately that's what they're really arguing

is that the selectmen have authority to raise taxes.

Over any old contract.

Over any old contract that they enter into in the year,

they could enter into it the day

before they have to submit their default budget

and include it.

The suggestion is that the legislature

and if you're gonna find the legislature

delegated that authority,

I would submit it should be very clear

because it is contrary to everything else

in the way our system works,

including the other two items

that the word contracts is grouped within the statute.

Thank you.

Can I just ask one?

Does the court's public benefit analysis

to support attorney's fees?

Does that depend on whether there was a tax increase?

I don't think it depends on the amount

or whether there was a tax increase.

It depends on the proposition

that towns have done this thing

of adding money to default budgets

that was not approved by schools

and that I submit is a very big deal.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Morgan.

Just very briefly, I wanted to touch on

Justice Hans's question about why this isn't moot

and this isn't moot in large part

because of that attorney's fees award,

which this court should reverse

regardless of how it finds on the merits.

Mr. Kirk did not transfer a substantial benefit

on the taxpayers of the town of Ware.

He may have conferred a very minor benefit

to the two men.

A minor financial benefit,

but not necessarily transparency benefit.

Well, there's no claim

that there wasn't transparency here, Your Honor.

It was very clear below

that the town was very transparent

about how it came to its default budget.

Mr. Kirk just disagreed with that

and ultimately the trial court.

But isn't there some benefit conferred

by clarifying this issue?

To the state as a whole perhaps

and the legislature went ahead and did that

based on the Superior Court's decision,

but the benefit to the town of Ware

is remarkably minimal,

particularly considering how much

they've spent in attorney's fees defending it.

The award of attorney's fees

they're going to have to pay

if the court's order is upheld

and the very minimal change between the default budget.

If Mr. Kirk as a taxpayer doesn't have standing,

who has standing?

It's possible no one has standing.

Nobody can challenge this

if the selectmen completely go off the rails.

It's just gotta wait till you get to vote

on the Board of Selectmen again.

It's possible and it's either the Bear case

or the Duncan case.

I can't remember which one,

which says just because it may be the case

that no one has standing

doesn't mean you give standing

to someone who doesn't have it.

We asked that the court reverse

the decision of the trial court.

Thank you very much.

Thank you.

Case submit.
