Good afternoon. Thank you, sir.

This is case 2018-0423, state of New Hampshire versus Ronald L. Fuller.

Good afternoon. May it please the court. Thomas Barnard, on behalf of Ronald Fuller, I have reserved one minute for rebuttal, plan to focus on the first issue and to make two points regarding that issue.

First, Swiss testimony did not satisfy rule 701 because empirical evidence about the frequency with which victims engage in certain behaviors beyond the common experience of an average juror.

Second, the admission of Swiss testimony. How could that be in this stage of hashtag me too?

Well, it remains the case that the average juror does not have experience with a large amount of sexual assault victims.

So if the question is what does the empirical evidence in the media every day?

It is, but that's, you know, it is filtered through the media and the media doesn't present scientific, generally doesn't present scientific findings about the frequency with which individuals who are known to be victims engage in certain behavior.

Attorney Barnard, in light of me, what was the nature of the objection at trial? Was it just on expert testimony grounds? Was there a relevancy objection?

Yes. I think defense counsel also mentioned relevancy. The primary objection is that this is improper lay opinion testimony that it would require an expert.

How do you respond to the state's position that the door was open?

So the state does make this specific contradiction argument, and I have four responses to that.

First, this is an alternative ground. The trial court did not find specific contradiction.

So under State v. Hayward, if the trial court had considered specific contradiction, its ruling would have been discretionary.

So this court can only affirm on a discretionary alternative ground if admitting the evidence was the one and only correct ruling the trial court could have made.

The state can't meet that burden here.

And second, the record shows that the state was not responding to the defendant's opening statement.

The state in its opening statement told the jury that Officer Swift would quote, corroborate CH's testimony.

So the state was always planning to offer this testimony even before defense counsel gave his opening statement.

Third, defense counsel's opening statement created no misimpression.

He made a statement regarding CH's lack of credibility, but that was not a misimpression.

And he made no statements at all about the empirical evidence regarding the frequency with which victims engage in certain behavior.

But the biggest problem with the state's specific contradiction argument is that it reflects a fundamentally flawed conception of the doctrine.

The state appears to believe that an argument about credibility in and of itself can form a misimpression,

and that specific contradiction, when it applies, means that we throw all the rules of evidence out the window.

Both conceptions are wrong.

Specific contradiction applies when there is an area of inquiry that has been placed off limits by a court rule or by a court order.

So three common examples would be a defendant's character, placed off limits by rule 404b, suppressed evidence,

placed off limits by a suppression order, or the accuser's sexual history, placed off limits by rule 412.

Here, there's no rule or order that excluded this area of inquiry, empirical evidence about the frequency with which victims engage in certain behavior.

Either party could have called a qualified expert to offer opinions based on reliable methods, regardless of what any party's opening statement was

and without any need for opening the door or any misimpression.

What was the nature of Detective Swift's participation in the trial? I'm sure she was identified as a witness for the state.

She testified that she was an assisting officer and that she had interviewed several witnesses.

She did not testify as to the content of any of those witness statements.

It appears that she had no relevant admissible testimony to offer, certainly aside from what's contested.

Did the state disclose her prior experiences investigating sexual assault cases or participation with the Carroll County sexual assault response team in any way?

The record isn't clear. Part of the defense objection was that this was undisclosed expert testimony.

The state didn't dispute that it hadn't met the requirements of expert disclosure.

What disclosure the state did or didn't make was not further reflected in the record.

Why isn't this allowable testimony under 701 because it's rationally based on the witness's perception?

If that's her experience that this is what happens, why can't she say that?

Well, the state cites two cases in its brief, Gonzalez and Tierney.

And the facts of those cases are pretty much directly on point with the facts here.

These are both cases from 2003. In Gonzalez, a social worker testified that denials and recantations were, quote, not unusual.

And a detective testified that contemporaneous reports were unusual.

And this court held that those witnesses' testimony was, quote, expert testimony and inadmissible.

It's not really the holding in Gonzalez, is it?

It is the holding. The court went on to find that the error was harmless,

but that was the holding regarding the admissibility of that testimony.

It still hurts.

I think we know who the trial judge was.

And the second case from 2003 was state v. Tierney.

And there an officer testified that it is not unusual for a child to be sexually abused in the home

for the perpetrator to reside in the home and for a non-offending result in the home,

a non-offending adult in the home to not know what is going on.

This court held that the officer's testimony, quote, required specialized training, experience and skill,

not within the ken of the ordinary person.

So the primary point is that SWIFTS observations, they may have been personal observations,

but the question of what does the empirical evidence tell us about the way in which people who are known to be victims behave,

that's a scientific question that can only be answered by a witness who is qualified as an expert witness.

Well, Justice Six would ask you, why isn't this just a proper subject of cross-examination?

It's not. Well, we have the lay opinion rule and the expert testimony rule to ensure that when scientific or specialized knowledge is presented to the jury,

it's reliable. And under Dalbert, courts have an obligation to ensure that that testimony meets a threshold level of reliability.

And here that did not occur. One of the points I make in the brief, one of the questions I ask, which a state doesn't answer,

is how does Officer SWIFT know which of the cases that she's investigated involve a true allegation?

There's no explanation for that of what process she went.

Is that something that Defense Council would like to do during the course of a trial and try to uncover that?

How many of these investigations resulted in a conviction or a confession? That's not the stuff you want to do a trial, I assume, right?

Right. Well, you could say that about any evidence that is excluded by the rules of evidence,

that there might be some way of attacking that evidence on cross-examination.

But the point of the rules of evidence is to exclude unreliable scientific testimony.

It's not just to say, well, it all comes in and the defense can attack it however you want.

This would be really hard to attack on cross-examination.

If you had an expert witness who was testifying on the basis of studies or reports,

the defense would have those studies and could say, look, let's go through these studies. Let's go through these cases.

Let's see if the numbers bear out your opinion.

Swift can just say, look, I can't give you names of all the cases.

I can just say I've been doing this for a while and this is my impression.

How do you cross-examine that? It's virtually impossible.

And if she was testifying as an expert, 12 or 15 cases was probably too small of a sample size for that opinion to be admissible.

Exactly. If there were an expert witness who said, well, look, I looked at this small number of cases,

it's unlikely that would meet the Daubert standard to draw these universal conclusions about the world of people who have actually been sexually assaulted.

The state called a witness Swift who wasn't qualified as an expert whose opinions were not shown to be based on reliable methods.

And by doing so, the state surprised the defendant with her testimony.

So the state avoided the pre-trial expert disclosure requirement.

The state eliminated the defendant's right to conduct a deposition.

So if they had disclosed her as an expert, it would have been all right?

Well, at least then the trial court would have addressed whether her testimony was admissible under Rule 702.

And there is some question, as we've been talking about, about whether given the small sample size,

the lack of apparent lack of any real record-keeping or data analysis, whether this would have qualified.

There's got to be that data analysis out there somewhere, though, right?

Yeah. And I don't dispute if the state calls a qualified social scientist to testify about the behavior that sexual assault victims exhibit.

Court made clear in Cressy that that's admissible.

Either party could call experts to testify about this.

But what they can't do is call a lay witness with no disclosure, no deposition, and no scrutiny under Daubert.

Well, then did the state prosecutor here fail to read Gonzalez?

I don't know why the prosecutor felt entitled to introduce Swift's testimony.

Could you address the second claimed error?

Sure. The testimony about...

The TV, or about the video.

The video. Right.

So the state says, okay, the defendant created this misimpression about the reason the video was seized.

Because CH hadn't alleged anything about the video camera at the time of its seizure.

The problem is, the reason the video camera was seized had nothing at all to do with the case.

It had no risk of creating an unfair, misleading advantage.

And that's what specific contradiction requires.

And Mr. Fellow's testimony, was it true that the police gave it back to him because they didn't find anything on it that was incriminating?

That was the defense counsel's representation.

The defense counsel said, look, they took the video camera and they kept it for a while.

It looks like it might have been some time before they gave it back.

They didn't find any video of any children doing anything.

So there was nothing incriminating.

So why wasn't this harmless error like it was in Gonzalez?

Well, this was not harmless error because it created the impression that there was another investigation.

And the jury could only speculate as to what other type of investigation would necessitate seizing Fuller's video camera.

I'm sorry, I was going back to the first issue.

Oh, okay. The state does not argue that the first issue is harmless error.

So it's not an issue in the first issue.

One last point I want to make, though, about the first issue in the state's conception of specific contradiction,

is that the state appears to believe that if specific contradiction applies,

then all the other rules of evidence get tossed out the window.

And that's incorrect.

And I can give an example.

If a defendant testifies, I would never commit a crime like this.

And the state has a witness that has observed the defendant commit a similar crime on another occasion.

That witness can testify because although that area of inquiry was previously off limits, it's now on limits.

And that witness's testimony isn't excluded by any other rule of evidence.

But if the state has a witness that just heard a rumor that the defendant had committed another crime like that,

that witness cannot testify.

Their testimony is hearsay.

Specific contradiction might apply.

And it might remove the rule 404b barrier to inquiring about the defendant's character.

But the evidence still has to satisfy the other rules of evidence.

And if it's excluded by hearsay, then it's inadmissible.

The same analysis applies here.

Even if specific contradiction applied, we don't agree that it does.

But even if it did, the evidence still has to satisfy rule 701.

And here for the reasons we've been talking about, it did not.

If the court has no further questions, thank you.

Thank you.

Good afternoon.

May it please the court?

My name is Sean Locke, and I represent the state of New Hampshire,

which asked this court to affirm the defendant's convictions.

And I'll start by hitting, I think, the most important piece of this,

is that Officer Swift didn't give an opinion in this case.

She testified based on her personal experience as an investigator of sexual assault offenses.

She didn't opine that the victim was credible because she gave her,

she made disclosures over time or she made a late disclosure.

So why was that observation relevant?

The observation was relevant, I think, for two reasons.

And one dovetails a bit with the idea of opening the door,

and part of that is the defendant's argument,

the piece that wasn't stated, as he makes his argument,

is that it's not just that the victim wasn't credible.

The victim wasn't credible because she made piecemeal and late disclosures.

That was the argument presented to the jury for consideration.

But that was actually correct.

I mean, other than the suggestion about her credibility,

she did report in a piecemeal manner.

It is correct, but the idea that because she did that,

she shouldn't be believed.

It's one thing to say that these allegations aren't true.

It's another thing to say, well, because she didn't make a full disclosure at go,

these allegations, all these late disclosures are not true.

So it made Officer Swift's testimony relevant to say that it is common,

or in her experience, it is common, that victims make disclosures over time.

They do not make, they don't necessarily disclose every element

or everything that happened to them in the first interview.

So whenever a defense attorney is critical of the manner in which a victim,

a ledge victim, discloses, the state's then open to putting somebody on

and saying, ah, that happens all the time.

Well, it certainly makes it more relevant.

I mean, the question here in relevancy, which is a low bar,

is whether or not it makes it more or less likely that a particular piece,

a particular act occurred.

And so the fact of the matter is if it is common, or at least normal,

or at least common, not uncommon,

that a victim would make a late piecemeal disclosure

that makes it more likely that the victim in this case may be providing,

you know, the fact that she made a late disclosure doesn't mean she is fabricating.

It seems to me that the only thing that makes it relevant is a unspoken opinion

that, yeah, that's what's going on here, otherwise it wouldn't matter.

What do you, when you say unspoken opinion?

Well, it's not that you're saying, oh, this isn't an opinion, this is just fact.

But it seems to me that it has embedded in it an opinion,

or else it wouldn't, you wouldn't be, have the relevance to this case.

Well, it certainly, I mean, she describes her experience with this,

but again, she doesn't come out and say, you know, the victim is believable for this reason.

But that's exactly the inference that is supposed to be drawn.

It may be the inference, but the jury can invite other inferences as well,

and the defendant could argue other inferences.

She's not presenting this as her opinion that a person is believable

because they make a later piecemeal disclosure.

What other inference could the jury derive from that testimony?

I mean, not from the testimony, but there's still the argument the defendant has made

that the later piecemeal disclosure makes the victim not credible.

And so that argument is still out there for the jury to consider as well.

Even though there is other testimony that this is a very commonplace thing,

i.e., happens all the time, so what other inference could they draw?

The other inference from the...

Other than it corroborates the witness, the victim's testimony.

That could, that is one of the inferences they could draw.

The point is, there's an inference that has been made by the defendant

that that information or those actions make the jury,

or the victim in this case, not credible.

And the state, that makes Officer Swift's testimony relevant.

The defendant simply said, you shouldn't believe that the victim isn't credible.

These allegations don't add up when you think about it in whole.

I think he would be correct in the sense that Officer Swift's testimony

would not be relevant in that case.

But because he tied it to the fact that she made late disclosures

and she didn't make a full disclosure at the first time allegations arose,

that is what makes this testimony relevant in this case.

That is also part of what opens the door to this testimony in this case,

assuming this court were to conclude that it wouldn't have been relevant

in the normal courts.

What was Swift's testimony used at the closing, if at all?

I honestly can't recall that off the top of my head.

The defendant didn't have Swift's testimony.

And would the prosecutor be able to say,

close with ladies and gentlemen, use your common experience?

Late disclosures? Is that common or uncommon?

Is that proper closing argument?

I think that would be a proper closing argument in this case.

That would be a proper...

And that actually gets to the point of expert testimony in this case.

And the defendant discusses Gonzales and Tierney,

but I would point this court to DePaola,

where in DePaola this court confronted a situation

where you had witnesses who worked for telecommunication companies

who testified regarding the range at which a cell phone tower

could project its signal or could receive a signal from.

This court in that case concluded that that testimony,

although it has some...

Those witnesses did rely a bit on their professional education

and what they received through education and training through work,

that was lay opinion testimony regarding how those towers operated.

And some of that relies on the fact that everyone has a general understanding

of the further away you are from the cell tower,

the weaker your signal is,

the more likely you're going to be to have signal problems.

And that's the same thing that can apply just as readily in this case,

where the jury can, with this information,

reach its own conclusion about whether or not the victim,

you know, making a late disclosure or a piecemeal disclosure,

is whether or not that means the victim is credible or not.

And that's, I think, the piece that responds to some of the questions about,

well, she didn't offer her opinion.

She didn't offer opinion to the jury.

The jury can obviously reject her opinion if it wanted to,

but they weren't given that blank statement that there's someone

who is opined to us with a degree of experience

that this is, the victim should be believed despite the fact that they should be.

So, Mr. Barnard directs us to look at Gonzalez and Tierney.

Why shouldn't those, why shouldn't we follow those as he says?

I think, well, several reasons.

I think, one, this still falls within the category of lay testimony.

The witness testified based on her personal observations and experiences

as an investigating officer.

The defendant seems to want to have it both ways.

Basically to say, well, she had to be an expert, but she's not an expert.

She can't be an expert.

I mean, that's the impression I'm receiving here is that...

Well, maybe she should have come in as an expert,

but maybe she wasn't qualified to be an expert,

which is why maybe her testimony shouldn't have come in on this regard.

That's true.

I mean, that could be the case and that could be an assessment that's found,

but I think at the same time you have situations where witnesses,

whether qualified or as experts or lay witnesses,

are testifying about their experiences.

I'm thinking of an example, perhaps with a car accident or something like that,

where you have a mechanic who's testifying about the damage to a car

and there may be that in your experience,

have you seen this type of damage before?

Is that person an expert for the purposes of testifying to that

as opposed to what caused this particular damage,

which may be an opinion that would require expert testimony?

But it doesn't necessarily...

That, I think, is the distinction here that is important.

This witness is testifying about what she has observed in her experience.

This is something that's readily perceivable to members of the public.

But isn't that letting the jury speculate, though, as to the cause?

I mean, you think back to...

Everyone used to think eggs were bad for you.

Science has come out, maybe they're not.

So by throwing this out there,

now the jury has to rely on perhaps faulty perceptions.

Well, no, I think the jury is allowed to rely on its common sense

when it's making that determination.

On the one hand, they've been told that giving a piecemeal or a late disclosure

means the witness is not credible.

On the other hand, there's an officer whose experience...

We have investigated offenses where...

Who just says it's common, but doesn't give a reason...

Well, for victims to...

It's common for victims to make later piecemeal disclosures

to the point that, you know, did those lead to convictions?

What was the result of those investigations?

That is fodder for cross-examination

that the defendant had the opportunity and forewent the opportunity to present.

But he didn't have the information to do that.

I suspect Detective Swift didn't either.

How did Detective Swift know whether these were true allegations of sexual assault?

Well, and then that's the answer.

If you ask the question, you know, how many of...

You say you've investigated 14 sexual assault cases.

How many of those were the result of piecemeal or late disclosures?

I don't remember. How many of those led to convictions?

I don't remember. I can't tell you that information.

That allows the defendant to impeach your credibility,

even if, you know, they don't end up with an exact number

that allows the defendant to argue.

You heard her say this, but use your common sense.

She can't remember. You can't rely on that particular statement.

The defendant forewent that opportunity to pursue that line of cross-examination

and now seeks this court to give him a chance to, you know,

to basically a second chance because he made that choice.

So is this evidence admissible only because the defense allegedly opened the door?

We find that the defense didn't open the door.

Is it still... Is it error for it to have come in when it did?

No, and the state presents that argument as alternatives.

I mean, on the one hand, I think I opened with the opening the door argument,

but I also present evidence that shows it's both relevant

and it was admissible as lay opinion or lay testimony under Rule 701.

If there are any questions, I will turn and just discuss briefly

the second issue of the video.

Yeah, what was the misimpression that Mr. Fuller led the jury down

towards in testifying about the return of his video camera?

So the misimpression that's at issue here is that

essentially it left him open to argue that the lack of anything criminal

related to the victim on the videotape means he didn't do the offence

due to the things that the victim has accused him of doing.

The point of a misleading impression is it has to mislead the jury in some way.

It's not that there is only one interpretation

and that only interpretation is misleading.

There may be explanations, there may be ways the defendant could have argued

that evidence that didn't mislead the jury,

but the idea is the state before the argument is made

has the opportunity to correct any mis-

or the opposing party has the opportunity to correct

any sort of misleading impression that is created.

So it's my understanding the camera was seized in 2005.

Correct.

The victim alleged that she was being videotaped in 2013.

Correct.

And the camera was not then confiscated from the defendant thereafter?

As far as I'm aware, I don't know if the record reflects

exactly when the camera was returned to the defendant

some time passed between when it was first seized

and when it was returned.

I don't know if that was after 2013 or before 2013.

And I don't know if it was, it doesn't,

at least as far as I'm aware from the record,

it wasn't re-seized after these allegations necessarily.

So if the state had simply crossed-examined the defendant by,

you know, the camera was returned to you in 2012

a year before this allegation was made,

that would have cured any harm, wouldn't it?

It could, that's possible, yes, that's one way

they could have corrected the misimpression.

The other issue is the idea that,

or the other misleading impression is that this recording

never happened.

I mean, there may have been a video camera.

This incident didn't happen because there was nothing found

that showed the victim in the bathroom.

The camera may not have recorded anything criminal

in the sense of the victim was naked

or anything like that in the bathroom

when, before she found it.

And so if the police didn't see anything that kind of sprung

out to them as being child pornography

or something of that nature,

they wouldn't have necessarily pursued that line of investigation.

They may not have pursued that line of investigation.

So that's, again, another misleading impression.

How do you distinguish Gonzalez?

Sorry?

How do you distinguish Gonzalez?

Gonzalez.

That's the one that says this is in opinion

inadmissible opinion testimony.

Okay, so this is going back to the first issue.

Yes.

Okay, sorry.

I think that, I mean, I would look instead,

like I said, I would look to the more recent decision

of this court in De Paula in this case

and say that that is what controls here

in the sense that there are circumstances

where you have this, you have a lay witness

who may have knowledge based on their work experience.

De Paula is the cell phone case?

The cell phone case.

That have knowledge based on their work experience

that, you know, maybe the average everyday person doesn't have,

but it still stems from kind of a generalized understanding

of how things work.

And that is why that stayed in the category of lay testimony

rather than in this also comes up.

Did De Paula discuss Gonzalez?

I do not recall off the top of my head.

And this also fits in with situations

where you have someone who's presented,

for example, financial records.

Person is presenting financial records.

They're explaining those to a jury.

This is an expert in financial records.

They're qualified.

They do so because their work experience

allows them to interpret this for the jury.

I mean, the jury may be able to take the records

and try to decipher them themselves.

This is simply aids them.

But if they fall in the category,

they've never been qualified as experts

when they're just providing that blank,

kind of factual explanation to the jury.

And how does the jury evaluate

something that they don't have

personal experience with

that they might have personal experience with?

I doubt very many jurors

have experience with late-disclosing victims.

They may not have experience

with late-disclosing victims

in the sense of the sexual assault.

But I mean, I think everyone has experience

with the fact that you hear a story from someone

or you have a child who tells you,

you know, Suzy did this on the play.

And then you learn, you know,

two weeks later the story is a little different.

There's more details.

I mean, people have experience with how

this happened to them.

And stories could change.

And there can be sort of a group effect.

So isn't there a little more to it

than just having jurors

seize on

sort of what they think

the testimony means?

There may be.

And I think that is something that would have been

fodder for cross-examination

in testing the limits of

what Officer Swift knew about

the particular cases that she's saying

is common that we receive piecemeal disclosures.

And that didn't happen in this case.

The court has no further questions.

Thank you.

Case submitted.
