Good morning.

This is case 2018-0284, state of New Hampshire versus John Orm.

May it please the court?

Stephanie Hausman on behalf of John Orm.

I have reserved two minutes of my time.

I want to address the third issue relating to this court's

review of materials that the trial court considered in camera.

Unlike the usual in-camera review situation,

the materials this court will consider

are not confidential by law.

Rather, the state refused to turn over unredacted copies

and arguing that they were not relevant,

and the trial court reviewed those

to determine its ruling on Mr. Orm's motion

to compel discovery.

So that information involved an investigation of other people,

other than your client.

Would that be something that the defense needed?

My understanding is that there were witness statements

or statements of individuals about drug dealing in the area.

And so some of the conversation was about Mr. Orm.

And I understand from the state that maybe other parts

of the conversation weren't directly about Mr. Orm.

But in certain circumstances, they sort of jump around,

and they're talking about various people

that are involved in this case.

And so it was important for the defense to understand.

Did they involve any of the witnesses

who testified in this case?

Yes.

So there were four individuals that the state

submitted redacted materials for, and two of them,

they said they were going to call as witnesses in the case.

And one of them, they did call as a witness in the case.

So is it an important factor that there's

an ongoing investigation?

What weight should we accord to that?

I think that there is some case law that

has to do with ongoing investigations

and confidential informants, and that there

is a privilege about the identity of the informant,

but particularly for those witnesses

or those individuals that the state had identified,

that privilege doesn't apply.

Why not?

Because the privilege has to do with the identity.

And so for most of the individuals,

the identity had been revealed already.

And in terms of the Rule 12B about disclosure

of witness statements, there isn't

anything in that rule that limits it

in terms of relevance or there's no limits there

for ongoing investigations.

What about the state's interest in preventing

the jeopardization of an ongoing investigation that

has little or nothing to do with your client?

The materials had already been disclosed

under a protective order, and the defense

was asking for them again to be disclosed

under a protective order, so that only defense counsel

would know them and wouldn't provide copies

to Mr. Orm at the jail.

So unlike many of our gagny cases,

Defense Counsel actually knows what we're talking about today.

Everybody knows what we're talking about.

Defense Counsel certainly has more

of an idea of what we're talking about,

but again, the representations about what

is in the unredacted segments of those statements

is unknown to the defense.

But the defense can hypothesize

that the context of the conversation

might illuminate the.

You have made confused.

I thought the defense lawyer had been given

all of them unredacted material.

No.

OK.

Yes.

So the trial court was given the unredacted materials

as well as redacted materials that

had been given to the defense.

I do want to jump ahead and make one point

that this court had ordered us to submit an appendix

with the redacted materials.

I did so to the best of my ability in consultation

with trial counsel.

I understand now from the state that the last segment

of materials included in my appendix

actually wasn't subject to the defense motion below.

But I do want to point out that at the time the state submitted

the unredacted materials, they also

provided a packet of redacted materials

so that the trial court could compare and contrast.

And those are kept in the trial court's file index

number 40.

I think that might be the best material for you all

to review because it is what the trial court reviewed.

And that involves factual findings

that to which we should give the trial court some deference.

Yes.

I think so.

But again, I can't make any argument

about whether there was a sustainable exercise

of discretion or not because it's an in-camera review

situation where I don't have access.

So to some degree, you're just

going to have to trust us.

Yes.

As with all in-camera review issues.

But I want to point out that because the material

that you will be reviewing are not confidential by law,

this court will use a broader lens

in determining whether the trial court aired

and not ordering the state to provide

the unredacted materials to the defense.

And the court's usual essential and reasonably necessary

standard doesn't apply here.

Rather, under state versus Etienne,

which is at 163 New Hampshire 57,

this court should turn on for any information

it finds that Mr. Orm could argue was favorable and material,

which includes information that could lead

to the discovery of relevant and admissible evidence.

It also includes evidence that is otherwise relevant

to the preparation or presentation of the defense,

both at trial or at sentencing, so mitigation evidence.

But don't we have case law in the right-to-know context

that says that there isn't a right for public disclosure

of information about ongoing investigations?

There is an exception to the right-to-know law

that has an exception for ongoing investigations.

I don't know how well that tracks

in the criminal discovery context

because necessarily all discovery

is about an ongoing investigation or an ongoing case.

And so that case law or the interpretation

of that exception hasn't been brought into the discovery.

I agree it's not a good fit,

but there are public policy discussions in those cases

about why it's not a good idea to turn over materials

in an ongoing investigation

if it impacts others beyond the defendant.

Yes, although, again, in criminal cases,

there are often co-defendants or other cases

that are ongoing that nonetheless discovery is required.

The state's primary argument here

is that it wasn't relevant.

And again, relevance isn't a factor,

particularly in terms of the Rule 12 disclosure requirements

of witness statements.

But it is a factor that the court has allowed to use

within its discretion?

Yes, I think so.

And getting back to your appendix,

so the appendix that you provided to us

that included the redacted material.

Yes.

What pages are not no longer relevant?

It is the last segment of discovery pages.

I don't know the numbers, I apologize,

but it's broken into three segments.

But again, if the court asked the trial court

for their index number 40,

it should contain both of those packets

that the trial court considered.

We've been talking about the last issue,

but the second issue has to do about Joinder

and the felon and possession charge,

which your client was acquitted of.

Yes.

So how should we think about that?

That it wasn't the presence of the gun in the room,

a relevant factor that would have come into play

whether or not there was a felon and possession charge?

The issue in Joinder was that the jury

would find out about his felony conviction

and that that could prejudice them

in terms of deciding the drug charges.

Although it's some evidence that they weren't affected

by that, it's not conclusive evidence

that they were not affected

and that that worry did not come to pass.

And so it's still a possibility

that they were affected by knowing

that he was a felon in reaching their conclusion

on the drug charges.

On the first issue, isn't it true

that the cooperating individual, Mr. Coco,

testified that your client sold drugs?

He did testify to that, yes.

Okay.

Yes.

So the fact that the detective testified

that the things that he possessed

were indicative of somebody selling drugs,

where's the prejudice?

You're right that the defense suggested

that it was Mr. Coco

who was selling drugs out of that apartment

rather than Mr. Orm.

But again, another critical issue

in the case was the mental state.

Was this possessed by Mr. Orm with an intent to sell

or was it possessed with an intent to use?

And so the expert testimony given by the police officer

went to that critical issue.

So how is that testimony any different

than a police officer testifying

that somebody with slurred speech, glazed eyes,

is indicative of impairment in a DWI case?

Is that the same type of opinion that's offered?

I think that police officers can testify

about their observations.

So when he spoke with me, he had slurred speech.

I observed that his eyes were glassy.

I'm not sure that in a typical DWI case,

the police officer also then offers an opinion

about what can be inferred from those observations.

Oh, they do all the time.

Because that is an opinion on an ultimate issue.

And here I think the trial court properly ruled

that this was expert testimony in saying,

I'm observing these things.

That's the factual testimony.

My observations of these things

lead me to conclude this expert opinion

that that's indicative.

In a DWI case, that information wouldn't be relevant

unless it were tied up with the notion

that this is what we observe

in the context of somebody who's intoxicated.

Sure, all of those observations are relevant,

but the jury is the one who makes

the ultimate determination about

whether those observations lead them

to conclude the ultimate issue beyond a reasonable doubt.

Thank you, Karen. Thank you.

Good morning.

May it please the court.

My name is Erin Fitzgerald,

and I represent the state in this manner.

And I asked the court affirm

the defendant's conviction in this case

because the trial court properly admitted expert testimony,

properly joined the defendant's felon

and possession charge with the drug-related charges,

and properly denied the defendant's

request to compel additional disclosure of information.

Can you focus on the last one?

Isn't Attorney Houseman correct

that there is no statutory or common law privilege

that applies to these materials?

Well, they are not confidential under the law.

However, as Justice Bassett pointed out,

there is case law that protects information

relevant to ongoing investigations.

There's case law out of the New Hampshire Supreme Court

that says that certain things do not need

to be provided if it could jeopardize ongoing investigations.

And also, this court is correct,

this was part of an ongoing larger New Hampshire investigation

into the sale of drugs in this state.

But if the records were subject to a protective order,

how would that jeopardize an ongoing investigation

if the information is limited to defense counsel?

Ian, the defendant.

It just means that it can't be left behind,

but the information is still out there.

But also, at the beginning,

you have to say whether it's even relevant.

We could turn over everything,

that it would be open to everything that we know

if you were to say that.

The first question is, is it relevant, pertinent,

essential to this case?

And when you review those documents,

you're gonna see that much of it

has nothing to do with Mr. Orm in his dealings.

It has to do with other people.

So it's not even relevant to the matter at hand.

So I would just say that first step is,

is it even relevant?

Should we be turning it over to begin with?

And then the next question is,

okay, what kind of protective steps here,

what was redacted or kept behind?

Was it what involved or was tailored

to other investigations of other people?

Does the state know what happened

to all of those other people?

I've reviewed the document,

so I know the names and the context.

Does the state know what happened

to all those other people?

There's still an ongoing investigation into the matter,

so it is still open.

Additionally, for those of the justice who have reviewed it,

some of those people that spoke to the state

weren't even on the witness list.

So turning over those, as defense properly pointed out,

only two of those people were even put

on the state's witness list.

And again, Moore was presented and turned over

because of that.

I will just for clarification points,

I can give you the bait stamp numbers

of those redacted documents that the defense counsel gave you

that were not turned over to the court.

They were not turned over in the unredacted

and redacted form because they weren't being challenged

by defense counsel, trial counsel.

So we didn't turn those over.

That's bait stamp number 240 to 283.

Those are the ones that you've received

but were not considered in camera.

I'd like to turn now to the expert testimony.

The trial court here properly admitted

Detective Du Bois' opinion testimony in this case.

Rule of evidence 702 authorizes the trial court

to admit expert testimony so long as it's reliable

under 51629A.

Well, how do you determine whether a police officer's

prior investigations and their observations

anecdotal information?

How do you determine whether that's reliable?

It's based on their training and experience.

Well, for here, Detective Du Bois, it's based on his,

how many times does he go into a situation

like he went into in this case hundreds of times?

It is training and experience.

There is a whole classification under Rule 702,

specialized knowledge that is permissible outside

of that scientific.

Yes, scientific, you are going to see more

of those numbers, numerical data, peer review.

But in the technical and the specialized knowledge,

which is permissible as expert testimony,

you're not going to see those as often.

I will point out that the defendant has not

provided any case law where police expert testimony has not

been admissible because it hasn't

met a numerical data or the Doe-Bear factors.

So is the state's position that it satisfied 51629A

or that it didn't have to in regard to this testimony?

That it did satisfy 51629A1, where it lays out

those three factors of sufficient facts and data,

reliable principles and methods in applying those principles.

And what are the reliable principles and methods here?

Yes, so the principle is that drug dealers regularly

use certain items in their drug business,

items such as drugs, scales, baggies, cash, money,

things like that.

Was the Soudov shotgun excluded at trial?

No, that was admissible at trial.

So ammunition, firearms, that is the principle,

that those are regularly used in drug business.

And Detective Du Bois testified about how

he reaches that principle and how he did.

Thus it's reliable.

He explained that those items, such as scales, drug dealers

need to weigh out their product.

Drug buyers don't usually show up with scales on them.

They're minimalist.

They don't want all that extra.

He explained that for all things, baggies.

Drug dealers need to package their drugs.

Drug buyers don't usually show up with empty baggies

asking them to be filled.

Quantity, there's generally, well,

he did admit there's no hard fast line of quantity

that says drug dealer versus drug user.

The higher the quantity indicates that it's more drug dealer

because drug users are more of a one off what

they can take in a dosage safely that won't cause them to overdose.

He also testified why firearms are indicative of drug selling,

the fact that they want to protect their money

and protect their product.

And he used these observations to confirm

that these are items that are generally

used in the drug dealing business.

And they're indicative of that.

Was all of this testimony set forth

in an expert disclosure document?

So what we did was all the reports

were turned over to defense counsel.

And defense counsel had an opportunity

to depose Detective Du Bois.

And these opinions were explored during the deposition?

Yes, they did ask him.

And the state has provided the deposition transcript

and its appendix to this court for review.

But Detective Du Bois, during it,

was asked about the significance of items found.

Was he identified as an expert?

Or was he just put forward as a fact witness?

No.

So in January, prior to the state,

sent an email to defense counsel out

of an abundance of caution.

Our position in front of the trial court

was that this was lay testimony,

that we did not need to disclose it.

But out of abundance of caution,

we did notify defense counsel

that we intended to elicit this type of testimony.

It was then put before the trial court.

The trial court determined that it was not lay,

that it was expert.

And you haven't appealed that?

And we have not appealed that.

So that is not before this court.

To the extent that the court wants to look at that issue,

under 701, this would still be admissible as well

as it was rationally based on the officers' observations.

And again, it was helpful to the trial of fact.

So whether it's analyzed under a 701 or a 702,

it was admissible.

It strikes me that it would be helpful for someone

to issue a declaration from this court

on whether such testimony is expert or not.

But is this the case to do that?

Well, I will tell you that question is not directly

before the court.

We have not appealed the trial court's ruling

on whether it was lay or expert.

So at this point, the trial court

has stated that it's expert.

And as a result, that is how both parties

have briefed the issue.

But if we find that it's lay opinion testimony,

we can find that the trial court reached the right conclusion

on the mistaken grounds, right?

And that's correct.

And that's why I say even under a 701 analysis,

there was enough information in front of the trial court

to properly analyze that it was helpful to the trial.

In fact, it was just something

that would be looked at under a 701 or 702 analysis.

And that it was rationally based.

Again, usually much of the same facts

that based on his observations as the evidence technician

during the search, that he made observations

in that it was rationally based on those observations

that this type of material and items

were indicative of drug sales.

What about the Joinder issue?

Why was that not error?

Yeah, so the Joinder issue, the state's position

is that it's a single criminal episode here.

So as a single criminal episode,

it's related and the trial court must join related offenses

unless it is against the best interest of justice.

Here it's a single criminal episode

because all the charges occur at the same time

and at the same place.

May 4th, 2017 in apartment 11 in Manchester,

they are also similar, the same criminal episode

because two of those shotgun shells were found

mixed in with all the drugs in the drug paraphernalia.

That's linking the shotgun

and the drug business together.

Also importantly, the search warrant, underlying the search,

was for drugs, also it included,

and this is on defendant's appendix A68,

the search warrant is in there.

But it was for firearms and ammunition.

So again, that's reiterating

that this was a single comprehensive investigation

in linking those two offenses together.

Who was on the lease?

Whose apartment was it?

So it was Charles Zilly Jr's apartment.

So he was the one on the lease.

The defendant here was staying at the apartment,

living in the living room of the apartment

and that's where basically the storefront of his business

was that living room with his tables set up there.

The defendant appears to argue

that you should adopt a new rule

that multiple possession offenses

can only be a single episode

if the state shows simultaneous possession

or use of all of the items that are underlying the charges.

I just point out that the defendant has provided

no case law for this new rule

and there are several cases in the brief

that articulate that joining felon and possession charges

with drug charges is permissible.

Thank you so much.

Thank you very much, council.

Case submitted.

Yes, thank you.

Thank you.
