This is case 2018-0591, town of Dunn-Partner versus Michael

Guini et al.

Good morning.

May it please the court?

My name is Patricia Pansiaco, and I'm here on behalf of Michael

Jay Guiney, the appellant in this case.

As a preliminary matter, I would

like to request two minutes of my time for rebuttal

at the end of my opposing counsel's presentation.

Thank you, May.

Thank you.

Way before the court today, Your Honor,

is to request a reversal of the trial court decision

in this particular case, which was submitted by the town of

Dunn-Barton and due to the ongoing dispute between my client

and the abutting property owner.

That order found an undefined area of my client's property

had become a public highway by prescription.

It also found that a boundary line agreement, which

is the poster child for why people who

craft boundary line agreements was valid.

When it was completely invalid, and I'll

represent to the court, I believe,

as does other people in this case,

that the source of all the litigation between these two

parties is this invalid boundary line agreement.

The court also found my client was

bound by a 50-foot right-of-way reservation shown

on that boundary line agreement.

Because, and I'll quote the order on page 25,

my client signed the deed that referred to this 50-foot

right-of-way when he did no such thing.

And I'll represent to the court also

that the abutting property owner, his deed,

makes no reference whatsoever to the boundary line agreements

or the 50-foot right-of-way.

The deed your client received did reference

the boundary line agreement.

Is that right?

I'm sorry, Your Honor.

The deed your client received when

he purchased the property referenced

the boundary line agreement.

Yes, he did, Your Honor.

It is referenced in his deed.

Now, before I get into.

As are the 50 feet, right?

The actual 50 feet spelled out in the deed.

Yes, it is.

It's referred to in the legal description

as well as the legal description by which the grantor

took title, which is different.

Didn't he take a contrary position in the 2006 litigation?

I'm sorry, Your Honor.

Didn't he take a contrary position in the 2006 litigation?

He referred to the 50-foot right-of-way.

He believed at the time when the boundary line agreement

details were not completely known,

and its impact in this case, that it was valid.

The presumption is validity.

But when his property was surveyed

after the litigation in 2006 concluded,

it was discovered that the new boundary line,

as described in all three agreements,

was never mocked by the survey.

Nor were their deeds swapped between the abiding property

known as to clarify the title on either side

to make sure they each had clear and marketable title

to what was shown on the boundary line plan.

Now, I have brought some marked up copies of four or five

exhibits from our appendices, which I apologize

for its density.

I have had discussions with opposing counsel

and counsel for the town.

They do not object to my referring to these exhibits

to aid the court's understanding.

But I have to represent to you clearly

that I have color-coded them for ease of reference.

They were not presented color-coded to the Superior Court.

But the maps are in the record.

And was that three rods wide in 1821?

And the cart road doesn't connect to anything.

Right, the other end.

It does end at the pasture.

That's my understanding, right?

The cart road ends at the pasture.

Sorry, say again what the disputed area is.

This is how to do this here.

The area on this side is my client's front lawn.

The 50-foot right away is in this area.

And if that's this, it stands up to this denominated property.

The 50-foot right away referenced in the boundary line agreement.

And the deed.

Right, OK.

At the bottom of my agreement in 1988,

there are records from his fight for his sense of disease

in those times.

And Mr. Hill's background was testified above

by our expert in travel.

My understanding is from Mr. Rogers,

he was a grandfather of surveyor.

Been older when he's the state adopted regulation

to govern survey.

My client's expert also testified before the court

that very often the survey is who

were grandfathered next to the licensure.

In the time of training that surveyors have today,

one scale of which is abstract and the deed will be titled there.

Nonetheless, Mr. Mygater worked for Mr. Hill.

And this is all on the transcript.

Mr. Mygater was a student, an apprentice

if you will, of Mr. Hill.

He did the fieldwork for Mr. Hill.

This plan is a copy of this fieldwork.

And I apologize if the quality of the video is bad.

I put it in an approximate location

and this is my best guess.

Of the disputed area, my client's structure, the stone wall

that we say is the common ground in my home

by Mr. Hill provided to you an example of Mr. Mygater.

Did he plow Kelsey Road?

Did he plow Kelsey Road?

Did you, Mr. Mygater?

Did he plow?

Yes.

One of the few people that apparently did

a portion of which contains the disputed parcel here.

Understood.

Thank you.

So just for the record, as I mentioned earlier,

the area of travel still is an open question.

And the evidence was traveled by town plow trucks.

Was there any evidence to anyone other than town plowing?

No, Your Honor.

There was not.

And that's part of the problem.

If we conclude that the BLA is invalid,

can we still sustain the trial court

on the basis of its other findings and the testimony?

As to the prescriptive highway, no, Your Honor.

And the reason why is the evidence

does not satisfy the requirements

to create a highway by prescriptive youth.

In any.

Even the 12.6.

Yes, that's true, Your Honor.

Correct.

But the trial court concluded otherwise

based on, as Justice Donovan referred to,

a lot of testimony from a lot of people

who've plowed that road over the past 60 years.

Well, we have to look at that, Your Honor,

and in the times at which these people reported having

engaged in these activities.

So as to the standard here, my understanding

is based on my reading of the case law.

This court will need to find legal error

or that the evidence doesn't support the finding

and decision of the trial court for reversal.

I would say to all of you, both

exist in this particular case.

Towns in cities in New Hampshire have

a number of different ways to go about widening roads

and constructing roads.

They can build it on their own land.

They can dedicate a road or take land

by eminent domain to build a road if there's a public need.

I will tell you that before this case was even filed,

the defendant filed a lay-off petition

with the town of Dunbatten to lay this area out

as the public road in 2015.

And the board of selectmen denied it.

There was no occasion, no public need,

as was clearly articulated in the Green Crow case.

So to prove a public highway by prescription,

the factual evidence in the record

must show by the balance of the probabilities

open in adverse use without the consent of the owner.

Within 20 years, prior to 1968, as a point of reference

as to the timing that I mentioned,

the town of Dunbatten owned my client's property

from 1939 to 1944.

So any prior prescriptive use, period,

was interrupted because they had taken the property by tax.

I know this is a complicated case,

but your red light is on.

Can you sum up?

As to the BLA, the evidence in the record shows

that this particular BLA is a postage child.

There were no markings.

It created a new line, and it flies in the face

of this court's holding in the Dred B. Dow case from 2002,

where this court struck down a boundary line agreement that

did not meet with the statute.

In returning to the public use, there

is no evidence that any member of the public ever went out here.

In fact, the defendant testified at trial

that there were houses out there over time,

but they kept burning down.

Nobody lives out there.

Thank you, counsel.

Thanks.

May it please the court.

My name is Steven Whitley from Mitchell Municipal Group

for the town of Dunbatten.

I ask for five minutes to address the court.

The town takes no position on the prescription or private party

cross claims that have been appealed.

The town's narrow concern is on the right-of-way width

if the prescriptive ruling is affirmed.

If this court does uphold the prescriptive road finding,

the town agrees that the issue of right-of-way width

should be remanded back to the trial court

for a finding on what that width should be.

The trial court had some evidence of width before it,

but declined to make a specific factual finding.

What width does the town need?

Well, it's a factual question, Your Honor.

So the case law, as I understand it,

is that prescription is the traveled way,

plus whatever extra room you need

for the various maintenance activities.

And there is some testimony in the record

of some of those other maintenance activities.

There is, however, no specificity

about what that extra room is.

And so I'm clear you've indicated to the court

that you do not take a position.

The town does not take a position

on any prescriptive rights.

That's correct, Your Honor.

That's correct.

In the town's memo, we asserted that we believe

that one to two feet would be sufficient,

but that is a finding for the trial court to make,

not this one.

What is the public use of this disputed area?

What's the town's interest?

The town's interest is twofold, Your Honor.

If a road by prescription exists here,

the town has an obligation to maintain that road

and also to understand where the public rights stop

and the private rights begin.

And in addition, that's alluded to in the record,

Mr. Nault has an undeveloped lot

that requires 18 feet of width

in order to pull the required permits.

For access.

For access.

That's right, Your Honor.

And so the town's other interest,

as well as the other parties,

is determining whether or not

he has sufficient width to do that.

So why isn't the town's position

that it ought to be 18 feet wide?

Because the case law is that the prescriptive rights

are only as much as the facts support.

And the trial court, unfortunately,

did not make a finding about the extent

of the width of the prescriptive rights.

As I mentioned, there was evidence before the court,

but it didn't make that finding.

Unfortunately, none of the parties

filed a post decision.

Did it make a decision as to the length

of the prescriptive taking?

I don't believe it did, Your Honor.

No. As opposed to the width.

No.

So the-

So we don't know if it went all the way

to the Nault's property.

Well-

Because the disputed area ends

in the midst of Mr. Guiney's property.

And there was some testimony about, you know,

where does the right of way,

the deeded right of way begin

in the public road end.

And I don't believe that was squarely addressed

by the trial court.

The town's petition did include an exhibit,

which included, which described the disputed area.

The town petition, however,

didn't make any representation about what the width was,

what the length was,

nor did the actual body of the petition.

The trial court order similarly did not include

finding on length or width.

Mr. Guiney takes the position

that the town's exhibit represents a width of 12.65 feet.

Mr. Nault takes the position

that the exhibit A represents a width of 50 feet.

I think that's a good argument

that there was no representation

because those two could not be more dissimilar.

With respect to Mr. Guiney's 12.65,

I don't think that is what that measurement

is intended to represent.

As I look at, and it's appendix one at 16,

or appendix two at three,

it's the same diagram.

As I look at that the 12.65 is a distance

along a certain course.

It's not a measurement of any width.

And in fact,

Mr. Guiney's expert, Mr. Rogers,

testified at trial that he believed

the width to be 13, I believe 13 to 15 feet.

So that would seem to be inconsistent

with the measurement that's on exhibit.

So the town believes,

I see I'm running out of time here,

the town believes that if the prescriptive ruling

is upheld, it should be remanded back to the trial court

for findings consistent with hope and be buckled.

And that is the case that has probably

the most concise articulation of the tests to be applied.

And that is basically that the prescriptive rights

are whatever the evidence establishes.

And it's your view that the record as it stands

isn't sufficient for the court to address it.

The court would probably need to have

some sort of additional hearing.

Potentially, Your Honor.

I don't wanna speak for the trial court.

It's possible that if this issue had been flagged,

the trial court could have simply answered it.

I don't wanna say that further hearings are not necessary.

So we can send it back and leave it to the trial court

as far as you're concerned.

Yes, Your Honor.

That's correct.

Thank you, Ken.

Thank you.

Mike, please the court.

Michael Chirney for the nalts.

I think what we're hearing today

are a lot of different facts

and I can't address all of the different factual disputes

but I do encourage the court

to look at the facts as found by the trial court

because in the presentation,

I heard 12 separate factual representations

that are just different than what the trial court found.

Tony, do you agree that this case has to go back

to the trial court regardless of what we decided to do?

No.

Page two of the trial court's decision

and I'll quote,

the court finds first that the trial testimony

and maps submitted into evidence

demonstrate that the disputed portion in caps

was used for public trial

for at least 20 years prior to January 1st, 1968.

There was substantial discussion

in one of the facts that we all agreed on

and we see in Attorney Puntz-Dakou's plan right here

is determined what was the prescriptive rights

as supported by the facts.

But doesn't he need the trial judge,

need evidence that the public use was within

like a foot of Mr. Guiney's house?

Coffin v. Plymouth.

Okay, prescriptive highway has the same width

as is typical in the area.

And we have on one side 50 feet,

we have on the other side, okay, three rods.

There's only 127 feet between where it's 49.5 feet

and it's 50 feet.

It's completely illogical to go, okay, from 50 feet.

What if that 50 feet cut through Mr. Guiney's house?

Would we still say the evidence supports public use 50 feet?

Because that's typical in the area

that it goes right through is front door or something?

Well, that's exactly what the Hobein case is about.

If there were obstruction such as a house

or in Hobein it was a wall or topography

that would prevent that, okay,

then that particular prescriptive road may be narrow.

In this case, there was no evidence

that it was any need for it to be narrower.

There was more than 50 feet between the house

and the barn.

So my father always used to say

that'd be too close to the road for that house.

Well, let's be clear, okay,

we're not talking about 50 feet of pavement.

We're talking about the same width

as is on the other side, okay,

which may only have a traveled way of 15 feet,

but it's a three-rod road, 49.5 feet.

To get back to your question a little bit earlier,

there was testimony from several witnesses,

most of whom plowed on the road.

I think everybody who ever lived in Dunbarton

plowed the roads in Dunbarton.

But Mr. Audet also testified about his father

and also testified about those no-good rotten teenagers

who he would see going down, okay,

and having parties down the brook

and that the town wouldn't do anything about it.

I cite in my brief that portion of the transcript

where Mr. Audet talked about those,

I think he called them hippies or something like that,

who would go down.

We're at a disadvantage, as you well know,

because we didn't take the view that the trial judge did.

Would you walk us through what the view would tell us?

Well, I think that's why there would be a deference

to the trial court who has actually taken the view, okay,

but a couple-

What would we see if we were Judge Kissinger?

Well, you would see a multitude of possible road locations,

okay, including that Kelsey Road goes right up to where,

also see, okay, lots of stone walls.

It's New Hampshire, there used to be farms out there,

woods have grown up, okay,

and the stone walls, okay, would have blocked off

where Mr. Guiney's expert suggested

that the road in 1821, okay, was laid out, okay.

If you looked on the ancient maps,

you would see that the road is laid out

actually went almost exactly to where my client's house is now.

There were ancient foundations,

the house burned down in the 1850s,

which is a long, long time ago, okay,

but the court has held that ancient foundations

can be supportive of where road locations were.

So you don't agree that the 1821 layout

is the pink on her first map?

Correct.

You say the 1821 deed references Kelsey Road.

Correct.

The blue here, okay.

Correct.

And do we have a no good teenager hippie rule

that trespassers constitute public use?

No, but we-

Do we recognize that?

We also don't have a requirement

that plow drivers don't count as public use

or that people going down, you know,

to the brook don't count as public use

or that there's even any requirement

that you show more than the ancient maps.

There's three cases that I cite my brief

including Mahoney, okay,

that all the court relied upon were ancient maps.

There were I think a total of maybe 10 different maps

that Judge Kissinger looked at.

He cites seven, okay, of those maps in his order.

Okay, and those seven maps show the road going

as our expert, the surveyor, Dauburg,

you're testified it went.

That's why in Judge Kissinger's order,

he explicitly states, okay,

that Kelsey Road goes west as the nalts assert

and not south as asserted by Guinea.

Is it your position that we can affirm Judge Kissinger

even if the boundary line adjustment is invalid?

Well, Judge Kissinger made no determination

as to whether the boundary line adjustment

was valid or not.

But there's already been about that.

If we think it's not valid, can we affirm?

Yes, because Judge Kissinger specifically presumed

that it was invalid, which is why he held boundary

by acquiescence, okay, and to stop a by recital on deeds.

That was assuming that it was invalid.

Which exact boundary was established by acquiescence?

The boundary of the eastern stone wall, okay,

that is depicted in that 1988 boundary line agreement,

that the surveyor, Mr. Dauburg,

asserts is the true and correct boundary,

but that the other surveyor asserted

was the incorrect boundary.

There's another stone wall that's more westerly

that he felt was the correct boundary.

And that relates to the disputed area.

So this line right here,

and what is the eastern stone boundary

in the 2006 litigation that was before Judge Morrill?

Okay, the Guyanese had asserted that as the correct boundary.

It has been understood to be the correct boundary

for 30 years or more,

including documents they filed with the registry.

So I apologize for jumping around a little bit here,

but this is really a fact-based case.

And there are several facts

that take a lot of time to go through.

And Judge Kissinger went through those

US Geological Service maps.

He went through the State of New Hampshire's maps.

He went through the town of Dunbartons maps, okay?

All of these maps show the road

as the nalts have asserted.

Does the boundary line agreement

need planning board approval in order to be effective?

I'm not really sure.

A boundary line agreement in 2019,

would I'm not sure the status of the particular ordinances

in 1988, and that wasn't something

that I saw was discussed at all.

So let me just go back to the first question

that Justice Donovan asked you.

So your view is that the trial courts

already decided both the width and the length?

Correct.

The trial court-

The disputed area.

The disputed area.

By which has been defined in the court order?

It was defined in the town's petition.

Court's order refers to the town's petition,

and adopts the town's petition's language of disputed area.

And so the 50 feet ends, though, at the barn.

And after that, we don't know how wide it is.

So this is 50 feet wide?

Mm-hmm.

Okay, this is tall.

Right, but continuing on to your client's property,

it could be 12 feet wide.

So.

Deeded right of way in Mr. Guiney's reference

to Mr. Guiney's deed, not your client's?

I believe it is in all deeds what was asserted

was that when a deed went to Mr. Guiney,

that he didn't sign the deed

that had the 50 foot right of way.

Okay.

Okay, you don't typically sign-

But it's in your client's deed.

Yes, yes.

You don't typically sign deeds that you receive.

Thank you, counsel.

Okay, submit it.

We'll take a brief.

Oh, I'm sorry, you had two minutes?

Yeah.

I'm sorry.

I always do that.

It's my product of my advancing age.

Oh, that's quite all right, Your Honor.

I'd like to refer the court to Appendix Roman 4 at 24.

This is the deed for Mr. Nalt.

It describes the property as in reference to a range lot.

There is no reference to the boundary line agreement

instruments that are recorded.

It also refer the court to its holding

in O'Hearn v. McLeaner acquiescence requires recognition

of a particular boundary as being true

in occupancy up to that boundary.

There's no evidence of that in this case at all.

The facts in the record do not support the elements

and it was raised by the court

and never raised by the defendants as a defense.

What about Mr. Tierney's position

that the court's already figured out the width

and the length here by referring to the disputed area?

Do you agree with that?

I disagree because the prescriptive area

is subject to the traveled area proven.

It's very fact specific.

And when you adversely possess

or prescriptively capture land as public,

it's the used area as defined

that becomes subject to the public rights,

not a fictitious 50 foot way.

But you agree that the court referred

to the disputed area and that's the definition.

You're just saying it was wrong in reaching that conclusion.

It should have been a narrower traveled way.

Correct, right.

If the town wanted a 50 foot right away,

it owned the property from 1939 to 1944.

It could have built a road right on its own land.

It also liked to submit to the court

that Warren v. Short controls the outcome in this case.

It is directly on point.

There is no proof in the record

that there was the absence of permission.

It was never touched upon.

And in this case, we have a private easement

dating back to 1873 running through

the middle of the prescriptive way.

A heightened level of adversity must be shown

and it wasn't.

The town plot plot tracks turned around

because they had nowhere else to reverse directions.

That's why in front of my client's house became known

as so-called Kelsey Way.

But true Kelsey Way road runs to the town

of Goff's town line.

This court has previously also held

that seasonal plowing by a town

does not rise to the level of maintenance

and should not be considered use of the property

for the reasons of prescription.

Thank you very much.

Thank you.

Case submitted, court stands in recess.
