This is case 2018, 0570, Northern New England Telephone Operations LLC, DBA, Fairpoint Communications, and NE versus Town of Acworth.

Good morning, Your Honours, and may it please the Court. My name is Laura Spector Morgan. I'm from the Mitchell Municipal Group, and along with my colleague J.Y. Law, we represent the towns of Durham and Hanover in this matter.

However, this case involves every town in the state of New Hampshire. I have reserved two minutes for rebuttal, Your Honour.

Don't let me forget.

I won't. This Court should reverse the decision below and dismiss the appeals, because with regard to polls and conduit, the decision allows various taxable aspects to go untaxed.

The trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion in adopting Ms. Bulkley's utility survey value, and the trial court aired in applying the depreciation period from HB 1198 to this case.

With regard to the right of way, the trial court aired in its legal conclusions regarding automatically arising licenses and in not considering the licenses to be perpetual leases.

And the trial court aired in adopting Ms. Bulkley's right of way value.

To begin with, the trial court's decision allows various aspects of taxable value to go untaxed.

We'll begin with guys and anchors.

To go untaxed, you said.

To go untaxed, Yes, Your Honour.

The Court held with very little analysis that guys and anchors are not taxable, because it said that taxing has to be specifically authorized by a statute.

No one disagrees with that.

Was that interpretation of the statute or was that a factual finding?

It was an interpretation of the statute, I believe, Your Honour.

And if you look at the statute and issue, which is RSA 72-8A, it clearly divides telecommunication equipment into two separate categories.

Structures which hold the actual wires that transmit the signals, and the wires that actually transmit the signals.

And there can be no argument that the guys and anchors don't have anything to do with transmitting the signals.

They hold the poles up.

So they clearly fall within the category of structures, poles, towers.

They aren't themselves structures.

They're not structures, Your Honour.

But, as a New York case has held, and I cited it in my brief, utility anchors and guys should be viewed as related to the physical integrity of the pole and an integral part of that pole structure.

Because without them, Your Honour, depending on the angle of how the wires come in, the poles will fall down.

Is it clear that the guy wires and anchors were not included in expert Bulkley's analysis?

It's not clear, Your Honour, because she offered absolutely no testimony as to what was included in her analysis.

Well, she compared to the DRA, I'll call it formula, that excludes guy wires and anchors.

But then she also referred to data that included in the cost approach the installation of guy wires and anchors.

So do we know whether it's in or out of her analysis?

What she said, Your Honour, was that the utility survey data should, and she used the word should, include all the cost included in installing a pole.

Now, as part of this record, Fairpoint has cited to the part of the CFR, which actually explains what goes into the FERC 364 accounting.

That wasn't before the trial court, but I have looked at it, and it does indicate that it includes guys and anchors.

Again, there was no testimony at trial about that.

Fairpoint also asks you to consider the term structure ambiguous, and to look at the DRA's calculation of the new formula to come up with the value of poles,

and which DRA we don't know again, but which doesn't appear to include guys and anchors.

Now, it's important to note, it's really important to note that DRA is not trying to find the fair market value of the poles.

DRA is complying with HB 1198, which specifically takes out of the realm of fair market value telephone poles and conduit.

And it says, it provides various categories are going to be assessed according to certain statutes, and then it says all other real estate is to be assessed at fair market value.

So here it's so clear that DRA is not coming up with the fair market value that it's just not an apples-to-apples comparison

what DRA is doing versus what was supposed to have been done in this case, which was defined the fair market value.

The trial court's decision also allows mobilization costs to go untaxed.

Now, the trial court assumed that mobilization costs were included in the utility survey, but again, there was no testimony at trial regarding whether mobilization costs are or are not.

And this is not a case about the interpretation of the FERC 18 CFR Part 101.

But Fairpoint has cited to a definitional section in that regulation, which defines what transportation costs are.

But that definitional section doesn't tell you where you include those transportation costs.

And if you look at the 364 section, it doesn't say anything in there about transportation costs.

But wasn't there testimony about transportation costs?

There was a lot of testimony and cross-examination of these experts.

There was. And the mobilization costs, Your Honor, primarily came in in the RS Means Analysis, because when you use the RS Means Analysis, it specifically says you have to add in mobilization costs.

However, in this case, Your Honor, the court rejected the RS Means Approach used by Ms. Bulkley.

So whether or not that was added into our RS Means Approach is irrelevant to the court.

Did the court reject it in total or just sort of clipped its wings in terms of addressing her analysis?

What the court said is that her RS Means Analysis, it said that it rejected it because dropping certain costs from that analysis was advocacy, not a principal decision.

So it did reject her RS Means Cost.

Is it fairly preserved given the fact that you raised it for the first time on reconsideration?

Well, Your Honor, there are certain things that only can be raised on reconsideration.

Once you get the trial court's order, you have to address the rulings the court made, and that's not always going to be evident during the trial.

So your expert espoused the value of the transportation cost? That should be included at trial?

Our expert said that the mobilization costs should be included in the analysis.

Our expert did his analysis based on RS Means Approach, and so he did add in those mobilization costs.

And was there an assumption that Ms. Buckley's survey data included that?

There was an assumption, and there was no evidence, and this gets us to our next points, Your Honor, which is the trial court, and it's a hybrid.

The trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion in adopting Ms. Buckley's utility survey.

The utility survey is completely undisclosed.

There's no real information provided about it.

Exhibit 48, a trial, is a summary of that information, and all that summary tells us is the cost of a poll in the year it was installed, and then it trends it forward to what that cost would be now.

The trial court spent some time addressing the fact that while the underlying data wasn't provided, the results sort of correlated to other data that was provided.

So the trial court spent some time not adopting blindly this underlying data, but addressing it in context, if you will.

It did, Your Honor, but the values that the trial court compared it to were all values that either aren't intended to come up with fair market value, don't represent fair market value, or the court had already rejected.

It used three things in particular.

It used Ms. Buckley's RS means analysis and said, well, this is close to that.

But it had already rejected that analysis because it didn't include certain costs.

Parts of that analysis.

Parts of that analysis.

It relied on Mr. Santsusi's PSNH data, but Mr. Santsusi testified that that data didn't include many costs, and so those needed to be added back in.

And it relied on the DRA's 2017 values, which, as we've already discussed, is not intended to get to fair market value.

The summary that was provided doesn't tell us what the companies are, and we know these are all companies that Ms. Buckley had some sort of professional relationship with.

So we don't know whether it was a good sampling of all the companies.

We don't know the number of polls.

She testified it was several hundred thousand, but we don't know an exact number, and we certainly don't know an exact number by year.

We don't know what states the polls are in.

She testified there were new elections.

The Congress seemed to believe that if this data were important, there was plenty of opportunity for your clients to seek it in discovery.

So was this a strategic decision?

We'll just wait and let her come in and testify and undermine her testimony?

Or why didn't the town seek to have this data ahead of time?

So I have been saying for many years that I was blessedly not involved in the trial of this case, but my colleagues were.

And here's what I understand the facts do have been.

The towns did seek to get this information.

The towns propounded interrogatories in October of 2017.

Did you file a motion to compel?

We did not file a motion to compel, Your Honor, and let me explain further.

We filed our interrogatories in October of 2017 for reasons beyond Fairpoint's control.

It wasn't able to answer those interrogatories until February of 2018.

So that's a four month period, which was about a month before Miss Bulkley's deposition.

They took the deposition and shortly thereafter the trial is resumed.

So there wasn't a lot of time to file a motion to compel.

Moreover, Your Honor, it wasn't the town's burden to do it.

Fairpoint at all times here had the burden of demonstrating that it was over assessed.

So if its expert relied on this data and its claim was that this data was confidential,

it was Fairpoint's burden to seek confidentiality order from the court.

It was never the town's burden to do that.

Well, maybe in response to a motion to compel, that might have been their obligation.

But if they answer your interrogatories and respond by saying that this data is confidential,

I think, and you don't do anything about it, I don't think that Fairpoint has an obligation to do anything else.

But it goes to the credibility of the testimony, Your Honor.

It goes to the weight.

And so that's why you don't do it.

It's a tactical advantage, right?

I don't think it was a tactical decision, Your Honor.

But this is similar to an expert coming in and doing a comparable sales approach, right?

Here are the three comparables we used.

But they don't tell you what neighborhood those comparables are in.

They don't tell you how many bedrooms those comparables have.

They don't tell you what adjustments they made.

They just give you three values of comparables.

I don't get the analogy between a telephone pole and a house.

Well, it's not, the values aren't analogous, Your Honor, but the method is,

the not sharing the underlying data, you wouldn't allow it in a comparable sales approach.

But the poles aren't for sale.

But there are three different ways to come to value, as you all know.

And one of those is a comparable sales approach.

And if you didn't have the comps, you wouldn't accept the value.

Same thing here.

But again, here it seems to me the trial court spent an inordinate amount of time

sort of dealing with some of these assumptions arising from the missing data,

i.e. we understand some of this was from the Midwest.

So we're relating it to a New England construction environment.

So it's not as if the trial court accepted the expert's testimony,

sort of blindly sight unseen.

There were a lot of reference points that were brought out in the testimony.

I agree.

There were a lot of reference points, Your Honor.

I would argue that none of those reference points

support accepting the utility survey value.

And so if you throw out that expert and the trial court did not credit the town's expert,

you're left with no expert testimony.

And Your Honor, the town, again, had no obligation to put on expert testimony.

If Fairpoint's expert's conclusions of value were thrown out,

Fairpoint hasn't met its burden and the cases get dismissed.

But if the trial court used the town's expert's opinions to, again,

sort of vet different aspects of Fairpoint's expert's opinion,

isn't that all evidence the trial court's entitled to rely on?

Absolutely, Your Honor.

The trial court also aired in adopting the 40-year depreciation from HB 1198

for the reasons we've already discussed,

that that was never intended to come up with fair market value.

Did the trial court really apply that later enacted statute,

or did it, again, just use that statute as a reference point

to reconcile two different depreciation values set by the two experts?

Here's what it said, Your Honor.

On the other hand, the determination made by the New Hampshire legislature

that a 40-year depreciable life should be applied was made very recently

and with input from all of those interested in the industry

and doubtlessly focused on the New England climate,

the court finds the appropriate period of physical depreciation for polls

is 40 years.

But again, the testimony was not that everyone agreed

the depreciation should be 40 years.

No, Fairpoint's expert was like 35, and the town's expert said 60.

60, yes.

So the trial court was looking for reference points

and looked at the statute.

Was that an error?

It was an error, Your Honor,

because the statute was a compromise.

And the evidence, the legislative history clearly shows

that there were different recommendations for periods of life,

including the one that came out of the Assessing Standards Board

that was for 50 years,

and the legislature decided not to adopt that

because they didn't think it would pass.

Your light's on.

Yes, it is, Your Honor.

You still have two minutes.

Yes, thank you very much.

Your Honor.

Thank you.

May it please the court?

My name is Mary.

Thank you.

May it please the court?

My name is Matthew Johnson.

I appear on behalf of the Appellee Northern New England

Telephone Operations LLC doing business

as Fairpoint Communications NNE.

At its core, this case is about the trial court's exercise

of sound judgment and discretion,

procedurally, legally, and factually.

Procedurally, Judge McNamara, to start with,

came up with a method or scheme or framework to wrestle

what is as almost impossible task before him

to get these cases, the key legal issues

and the key factual issues before this court today.

Legally, Judge McNamara analyzed and synthesized

these competing taxing statutes and pole license statutes

to come up with a proper mesh of those

to determine important rulings moving forward

both at the summary judgment and trial court level stage.

Actually, Judge McNamara utilized his judgment

as this court has already noted to weigh

the tremendous amount of evidence presented

to, on both virtue, a witness testimony, exhibits,

and vigorous cross-examination by experienced counsel

on both sides to value and weigh the competing experts

presented and come to the conclusion

that Ms. Bulkley of Concentric was credible

and persuasive and at Fairpoint

had met its burden of proof.

Let me ask you about guys and anchors

and maybe we can move on quickly after that.

Why aren't they included in the value?

They seem to be pretty important to me.

Your Honor, they are included in the survey data.

The FERC regulations make a requirement

that the guys and anchor costs are included in the data

that Ms. Bulkley relied on to provide the survey,

so I would submit it somewhat of a red herring

because the valuation methodology, the survey utility,

Judge McNamara relied upon, included that data.

Expressly or merely by reference to the FERC valuation?

Expressly because the way the data is created

is by relying on these detailed FERC accounting records

that tell these utilities you got to include XYZ

in your cost accounting,

and that's what drove the survey data,

so it was expressly included.

I would submit as well, it's also,

I believe Judge McNamara got the taxation issue

correct as well because by virtue of taxing statute,

the authority to tax has to be expressed.

It can't be by implication.

Guys and wires and anchors are not included in...

They aren't structures?

Yeah, and they are not structures

because if you look at 231.163, Roman 6, I believe,

it might be 261.6,

it differentiates between structures and guys.

The poll license statute says there are structures

and then you could put guys and anchors onto it.

So your argument is they aren't separately taxable.

Correct.

But they can be included in the value of the poll.

And they were included in the value of the poll

based on the utility survey that Judge McNamara got.

And not all polls have anchor wires.

Not all polls have these things.

Correct, and that's the other issue.

It's not a situation where all of them polls and anchors

and there was testimony at trial

across examination relative to how

and push trial briefing about how often,

how frequently you have these.

So I think an important point to note is,

and as we refer back to the, you know,

Snipe at midnight exercise from this court's case law,

these are complicated assets.

And so there's a range of values that are reasonable.

There cannot be any one absolute mathematical certainty number.

There can be a range that can be found.

What I think is important for this court to look at

is the plaintiff's brief, Addendum 105.

That's page 12 of the trial court order.

That's the chart.

And the chart shows you one thing,

that there are five different tools

or values put together to find evaluation.

The only one that is a significant

and demonstrable outlier is the town's expert,

GES, Mr. Sansusi.

All the other data sets are very comparable.

What about the fact that some of these

aren't geared toward producing market value,

fair market value?

I'm not sure I would agree with that point, Your Honor.

I believe that those data sets are cost,

those are all trying to find cost,

and everyone has concluded the only reasonable approach

on this is a cost approach.

Just as Hicks noted before, you know,

it's not like a cell of a house.

You can't get sales value here,

except for the right-of-way piece

that we can discuss later.

It's only cost, and this is the DRA creating cost.

And frankly, the PSNH survey data is creating cost.

And I think another important factor for the Court

to consider, Ms. Bulkley did not have the DRA survey data

or the PSNH survey data

when she came up with her survey data.

So this is an after-the-fact, independent corroboration

that she is within the realm of reasonableness

because her numbers approximate that.

And frankly, her numbers are higher than the PSNH.

Did you refer us to page 12?

Yes.

Thank you.

Sorry to interrupt.

Yes.

That's page 12 of the trial court's order.

I believe that is the most instructive

and most from a diagrammatical standpoint

vision of why the trial court's decision

was imminently reasonable.

Did expert Bulkley include mobilization costs?

Mobilization costs.

Did the expert, Ms. Bulkley, include those?

Our position would be, Your Honor,

that the FERC accounting data specifically includes

one of the costs to be mobilization costs,

the transportation getting to and from.

And again, that is the data that forms the basis

for the utility survey,

and therefore the mobilization costs

were, in fact, in the survey data.

I believe we've touched on the burden

of the proof argument, your issue,

but one other point to make on this.

The towns, even in their brief on page 20,

concede, at least with respect to the town of Durham,

their fair point is owed a tax abatement.

So if there's a concession

that they're owed a tax abatement

almost on a per se level,

their point is met as a burden of proof.

And I would note as well,

just as a further issue here,

the town's expert valuations were different

than the town's assessed valuations,

which further establishes

that there is no one mathematical certainty

on this thing, and the real question is,

is the expert to the trial court look?

Which was higher?

The GES and SUSE assessment.

I believe at least on one town.

I'm not positive on the second town,

so I don't want to overstate the record.

A couple of legal issues the court addressed

I think are important.

The towns have not appealed

the fundamental finding by the court

that the 231-161 poll licenses

must include the taxation language

from 72-23 for the towns

to be authorized to tax that property.

All they are arguing are two separate arguments.

One, that the licenses that are obtained

automatically pursuant to 231-160-A,

that language is implied as a matter of law.

Now first they say to contract law,

this is statutory, so I'm not sure

that's an applicable comparison.

But secondarily, there's nothing in that statute

that suggests that it should be

somehow an end run around the requirement

in 72-23, or an exception to the exception.

But how does a town include the statutory language

if the license comes into being

as a matter of law?

How do they do that?

Excellent question.

261-163 expressly authorizes

the towns to modify the licenses.

So they have a ready and available vehicle

to universally modify the licenses

to include...

By town ordinance?

No, they can do it by town meeting

and they can do it the way

that all towns normally conduct business

if they can have a meeting,

and they can have a vote,

and they can propose an amendment

or modification to all town-held licenses

to include this express language.

But Ms. Specter Morgan would tell you

that that's a burden on the towns.

I would respectfully disagree with that

because this is how the towns conduct business.

Towns conduct business through public meeting,

public notice, and making decisions.

This is no different than any other set of circumstances.

And again, you can't tax by implication.

There's nothing in 160-A

that suggests they have the power to tax,

whereas in 231-161, they don't.

So again, there's nothing saying

that town cannot tax these automatic licenses.

They just have to take steps to do it

at the front end to make sure

that taxing language is in there.

As this court in appeal v. Reed noted,

72-23 is a notice and consent provision.

You have to notify the third party

that they're going to be responsible for taxes

on otherwise exempt property.

It's essentially an exception to the exemption.

And if you do that...

So planning boards would have to make a note on the plan?

Conceivably, Your Honor, they could do it that way

because it really is a function

of a notice and consent element.

And as Judge McNamara found,

I believe in his motion to reconsider order.

Even though these are automatically granted,

it's not as if there's no paperwork.

There's a plan.

There's detailed information where the polls are going to be.

It's all laid out there.

The planning board process is never quick.

So there's a couple of hearings.

So there's ample opportunity for mechanisms

by which the mandatory taxing language should be there.

So the next issue that towns approach from is say,

well, maybe this is a perpetual lease.

Well, 231.160, the statutory scheme,

talks about licenses, licenses, licenses.

The court has already found in the Rochester progeny of cases

that these licenses are other agreements

within the provisions of 70 to 23.

If the court had really thought that these were actually leases,

there would really be, in my opinion,

no need for the court to have gone that way

and construed the licenses.

But they are fairly perpetual.

Yeah, but there's a difference between

fairly perpetual, I would respectfully say,

and perpetual because under the statute,

the selectmen have the right at any time to modify these licenses

and they also can revoke them.

And as Judge McNamara noted,

the mere fact that they have not revoked them

doesn't make it perpetual.

And I think the Hampton Beach case is instructive

where the court looked at this issue of perpetuality

and found that a 99-year lease would not be,

but maybe a 999-year lease would be.

So again, the standard to get to perpetual lease

is dramatically different.

I would notice well that the trial court,

as trial court exhibits 17, the town of Durham,

no one had ever taxed these properties as leases.

So, I mean, there's no fact.

I mean, this is an argument or an issue

created from an advocacy standpoint

to find another way to try to get around

Judge McNamara's ruling relative to the taxation.

We've talked about taxation of guy who's widers and anchors.

The rest of the Judge McNamara's order

really were factual findings.

These were very much left to the sound discretion

of the trial court.

He heard, again, as noted before,

a tremendous amount of testimony on all these issues,

vigorous cross-examination, a ton of exhibits.

And again, concentric's data, as the court noted,

was validated by external sources,

both the PSNH survey data and the DRA survey data.

Trial court didn't just wholesale adopt

the concentric valuation model.

He evaluated the evidence, listened to the cross-examination,

decided that within that context,

he would adopt the survey data

because he believed that was best data to use

because of the real-world data.

Was it improper for the trial court

to impose the House Bill 1198 depreciation rate?

Absolutely not, Your Honor.

The Judge McNamara's order on the motion to reconsideration

make very clear that he did not wholesale adopt that

where he felt compelled to rely on the statute

or anything of that nature.

What he was faced with was multiple competing data points

in terms of what the polled depreciation valuation should be,

one of which was the process by which HB 1198 came into being

and a concentric expert on one hand,

a Sonsusi expert on another hand,

plus testimony and evidence that Mr. Sonsusi's opinion

had been somewhat all over the place

on polled depreciation schedule before.

The Judge looked at that information and decided

this is the most appropriate in his mind,

having hurt everybody and weighed the evidence.

Really, I would view HB 1198 as a tool for the court,

but it was not reflexively adopted.

Who brought that to the court's attention?

The HB 1198?

I'm not sure the answer to that question.

So we've talked about the depreciation schedule.

The only other issue, the right-of-way methodology,

the town's attack how Judge McNamara used

or came up with the right-of-way methodology.

As this court in Rochester has noted,

figuring out the valuation for the use of a public right-of-way

is probably within this category.

The three items we're here before today,

the most tricky.

That's a difficult set of circumstances.

Judge Morrill previously had come up with a formula

or a framework that met the facts of that case.

Judge McNamara made clear in his motion reconsideration order

that he didn't just again reflexively adopt that.

He heard all the testimony, considered the evidence,

looked at that case and decided,

based on the evidence presented before him,

the Verizon approach that Judge Morrill had used

met the facts and circumstances of this case

and therefore he used that as a guide and a tool to do it.

Is it problematic that he excluded sort of the income

from co-locators on the polls,

but then allocated value to those co-locators?

Great question. Absolutely not, Your Honor,

because a couple problems with attach your income.

First of all, this was an across-the-fence approach,

so you're looking at sales data.

You're not supposed to combine appraising methodologies of sales

and income at the same time.

Second, it's unclear to me whether the towns even have

authority to tax income.

So that's questionable in terms of that piece of it.

But third, this is not how the towns had ever taxed this before.

This was a creation of the GES and Susie opinion for trial.

No one had really sought to do that before,

so I think the court was right in looking at the attach your

incomes thing, valuation, and saying that's not appropriate.

The court also found flaws just with how it did it

because there was gross income.

There was no deduction for expenses or costs

when there was testimony at trial that they had,

Fairpoint had expenses related to that.

I see my time is up.

Thank you, Mr. Johnson.

Thank you.

Do you need your two minutes?

I do, Your Honor.

Please proceed.

I'd just like to make a couple of points.

First, the Durham value did change over time,

and there's a lot of testimony in the transcript

as to why that happened, but primarily that happened

because until these cases went to litigation,

no one had accurate poll numbers for the towns.

It wasn't until discovery in this case that anyone

was able to agree on the numbers of polls.

Second, HB 1198 was given by Fairpoint to Ms.

Buckley, who testified about it at the court

until the first day of trial, the court had no idea

that legislation had been passed.

With regard to the attach your incomes,

I would encourage this court to read

the Creekside Senior Apartment case

that Fairpoint cites in its brief

because that case speaks to low-income housing tax

credits and how those are, in fact,

part of the value of a property.

Similarly, here, the attach your income

is part of the value of the property.

You're not taxing the income.

You're taxing the value that that income adds to the tax.

Do the towns tax the attachers?

Like for their slice of the value of the right-of-boy?

I don't know.

And finally, Your Honors,

what you heard Attorney Johnson say

I think summarizes why Ms. Buckley's testimony

just wasn't credible.

He said that guys and anchors aren't taxable,

but they were included in the utility survey.

If they're not taxable,

why were they in the utility survey?

They're not taxable separately.

I think I understood his argument to be

you don't have a separate line for the guys and anchors.

Correct.

Part of the poll value.

Correct.

They are part of the poll value, Your Honor.

For all of those reasons, Your Honor,

and the reasons set forth in our brief and our reply brief,

we would ask the court to reverse the decision

of the trial court and dismiss the appeals.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Case submitted, the court will take a brief recess.
