Good afternoon, Your Honor. Thank you, Paul. This is case 2018-0674, State of New

Hampshire versus Hector Rivera. May it please the Court, Stephanie Hausman, on

behalf of Hector Rivera, I have reserved two minutes of my time. When the trial

Court made both of the rulings at issue on appeal, it had provided to the

parties the complainant's counseling records, which were from about a year

after she first made her allegations to the police. Those records identified two

other mental health providers that had treated the complainant. As to the first

issue on appeal, the defense asked for an in-camera review of the records of the

complainant's eight-day hospital stay, which had occurred six months before she

went to the police with her accusations. Based on the records that Mr.

Rivera had, Mr. Rivera asserted that the hospitalization was for an

attempted suicide, that the complainant had a history of hallucinations, and that

it was unclear as to which mental health providers she had first made her

accusations and discussed going to the police with. These assertions met the

low threshold necessary for an in-camera review. This Court has held that mental

instability, particularly a condition that affects a person's perception of

reality and suicide attempts are favorable evidence. Thus, Mr. Rivera met his

burden of showing a reasonable probability that the hospital records

contained relevant material. So is that standard favorable evidence is enough to

meet that standard? Yes. Something that's favorable? Yes. The holdings that I

cite for the proposition that this Court has found it to be favorable

evidence actually have to do with motions for new trial, so it's a

different standard, and the standard for in-camera review is relevant and

material. So I think that's even lower than favorable. It doesn't include

reasonably necessary? Whatever that means? That has to do with whether the

Court turns over records that have been reviewed. But not the in-camera

review itself. But not the request for an in-camera review, which has a very

low threshold because the defense or whichever party is requesting it

doesn't know what necessarily know what is in the records. And there has to be a

reasonable probability that the information is in the records? Yes. A

reasonable probability that the records contain material and favorable

information. The Court aired in basing its decision on the assumption that the

hospital records would be cumulative of the records Mr. Rivera already had. Is

this Court held in King without doing an in-camera review, such a ruling is

speculative? So do we just follow King? Is that what you say we should do here?

Yes, and we are asking at least as to issue one that the Court remand for an

in-camera review of the hospital records. And then what will happen if

there are records that need to be disclosed? If there are records that

need to be disclosed, then they get disclosed to the parties, and then

there is litigation about whether a new trial is warranted. But first, do you

want us to, maybe Justice Bassett asked this, do you want us to remand the issue

for an in-camera review by the trial court? Yes. On issue one, because the trial

court denied an in-camera review, no records were obtained. And so on issue

one, we're asking for a remand for that in-camera review to take place. On

issue two, there was an in-camera review. The trial court didn't disclose

any of those records. I don't intend to address that issue because

there's not much I can say about it. But at this stage we're asking

the court to conduct an in-camera review of those records and to remand if

there was anything in those records that should have been turned over. And if we

find that there are records that should have been turned over from the C&C

records, what then, what happens on remand? On remand then the parties are

given the material that they should have been given, and then there is

litigation about whether a new trial is warranted. I forget the standard for

that. I think the state can make an argument that it's harmless and the

defense would make an argument that it would have affected the outcome. So it

wouldn't be inevitable that there would be a new trial, even if we sent it

back with records? No. Right. On either issue, if the court remands it's not

inevitable that there will be a new trial. Now is there any evidence in the

record that the records that were disclosed in September 2017 included

anything else that was, that might have been included in February 16 and the

spring of 16? I mean typically when the counseling records ask people to provide

the records that, and where they were treated and then they get the full

record before they treat somebody. So I'm assuming the trial court would

have pointed that out. Yes. It did, right? That's correct. So there wasn't an

indication in any of the court's orders that the records here contained

these records. And instead what seems apparent from the record is that these

records referenced that she had been treated in these two places before. And

at the time in 2016 she was suffering from hallucinations and suicidal

ideation. The records here indicated that she had been hospitalized for eight

days for a suicide attempt. These records also indicated that she had

a history of hallucinations I think dating back to maybe her childhood. So that

is what was contained in these records that may have been further fleshed out

by the records that were requested. And don't we owe deference to the trial

court on the CCNC records? It's not whether we, if we were trial court

judges would have disclosed them but whether that was a sustainable exercise

of discretion for the trial court to disclose what it disclosed? I think that

this, the trial court is in no better a position than this court in reviewing

those records to determine whether those records should have been turned over

as being essential or reasonably necessary. Except that they've reviewed

the demeanor of the witnesses and the content of the testimony first

hand. That might bear upon whether they were helpful or should be

disclosed. I think that it's true that this court knows more about how the case

eventually turned out because the trial court sat through a jury trial but at

the time the trial court made these decisions no trial had occurred and I

don't think there had been any evidentiary hearing where the complaint

had testified. And we can't use the additional information that we might

have acquired about the trial or anything for our consideration of

whether the court aired or not, right? I think that's correct, yes. I address

the state's argument that the defense didn't really have anything to do

with her counseling or her psychological condition. I don't think that's

relevant to this court's determination because again this court is reviewing

the information known to the trial court at the time the trial court made

its decision and any decisions that the defense makes given the trial

court's decision not to do an in-camera review or turn over any information

can't affect whether the outcome would have been different had these

decisions been made differently. Unless there are any further questions,

thank you. Thank you. Ms. Woodcock. Thank you, your honor. May it please the

court. Elizabeth Woodcock for the state of New Hampshire. I would just

point out that the defense really didn't make much of a pitch to the

trial court. When the defense filed that second motion asking for the

Brynmire Hospital records and the second group of counseling records,

it didn't take the counseling records that it had been given

and explained to the trial court what it felt they were lacking. It just said

that there was a reference to this suicide attempt and a reference to

other counseling records. So when Justice Shulman gets that

motion gets the state's response he decides well because of this one party

authorization that references the counseling records I'm going to order

those records to be disclosed and he gave that information what he felt was

relevant to the parties. At that point when he did that that was in July

before the trial in September and what the defense could have done

is to then file a motion to reconsider

pointing out that she had said that that she had disclosed this abuse

in the spring of 2016 which was closer to the suicide attempt.

If the defense had wanted to link this up

it could have contacted a psychologist or psychiatrist

to provide some kind of connection between

this suicide attempt in February of 2016 and

whatever the records at the Brynmire Hospital. Does that really need an expert

to draw that temporal relationship? I don't think you would your honor I

think you probably if you've done a search in case law or even done

looked at the DSM manual I think you could have found some kind of

connection but the defense didn't do it. It just said basically

I want more. Well it files two motions for these records. Pardon me?

Filed two motions for the production of records and it did

from reading the motion seem to draw a connection.

Well it's a pretty attenuated connection.

To my mind if Justice Shulman finds that the records that have been provided

are very detailed which is the way he describes them.

Nobody made any objection to that characterization.

Nobody said well I think that that these records are not detailed

and they leave open more questions than they resolve.

But the trial judge did not review the February 16 records?

No. So how do we know? Well the the the problem is not that

that the court didn't review it it's that the defendant didn't give him

any reason to go and ask for them.

He was getting their granted the threshold is not high

but there is a threshold and the the victim in this particular case

had agreed to turn over the counseling records that she

that they ultimately or initially reviewed.

She didn't agree apparently to turn over the remainder of the records.

The court's ability to order a counseling

agent in North Carolina as the trial court acknowledged is

to turn over records is somewhat

it's it's a little bit of a stretch. I mean he can he can certainly issue the

order and hope that they'll comply. But that's not what his decision turned on.

No no it is not. It is what what the judge determined was that these

the suicide the records associated with the suicide attempt

there was no reason given to turn those over. Well didn't he say that he thought

they would be cumulative? Yes he did. How could he ever

make that assessment without the documents? Well if you looked at the

CCNC records that would have referenced the suicide attempt just a

couple months before I assume right? One would assume so although the only

sentence that he disclosed to the parties was

that she had reported that she had been sexually abused in the spring of 2016

which leads me to believe if this if the records from Brinma

hospital had been turned over to these counselors and

usually as the court has pointed out the the records are fairly

they try to collect everything that they can find on the

on the victim and what her needs are or the patient and what her needs are.

But there's no apparently no reference

that would cause the trial court to say well then

having seen the second group of records I now feel that these

Brinma records may be relevant. It just doesn't happen

and nobody tries to connect the dots for the trial court.

How do you distinguish this case from King?

Well I think that the problem with this particular case is that

as I keep saying there's nobody's making any

real connection. I think that it could have been fairly easy at least to make

draw some connection but there were other explanations for why this woman

may have attempted suicide. Her husband was going to be deployed to

Africa. They were making very little money. Their cars had been repossessed.

She was under a lot of stress and at the time she made the telephone call

to the defendant. She was pregnant. I mean I can think of

a lot of that seemed to me that she had a lot on her plate.

So wouldn't all that possibly go to credibility or reliability as a witness?

Certainly and if she'd been asked on on cross examination about the

information that the defendant already had

which as I say the the trial court says that that information

was detailed but she wasn't. And so while I don't think that you can

use her testimony to justify the trial court's

determination to turn over some records and not others

I don't think that you can wind the tape back to use an outdated

analogy. We're old enough to know what you mean.

But I do think that it's hard then

for the defendant to say I was denied my right to confront her

when there was no attempt to confront her with the information he already had.

Well just because he decided that that information wasn't useful

for cross examination I don't see how that extends to the

information that he didn't have. Well I think that if he's making the

argument that I could not confront the witnesses

against me even though I had detailed a detailed

psychiatric history I could not confront her with that.

I think that that is a real reach. Nobody has challenged that characterization

of those records. It's it stands to reason that

Justice Shulman wouldn't use that word unless it was true.

So I think that the problem is when you look at what the

defendant the justification that the defendant has made

for this these February eight days in the hospital records

it isn't there. The connection is not drawn.

I don't think it would would have been very hard for him to draw it

particularly given the information that the court gave them in the summer

of 2018 saying that she had first disclosed this to a therapist

in the spring of 2016 which would have been

presumably a few months after this suicide attempt.

I think you could have drawn a connection he didn't.

They decided not to file a motion to reconsider or a third motion for the

counseling records and they had the time. The trial wasn't going to take

place until September. You're not making a preservation

argument are you? No but I'm pointing out that if

if you get an adverse ruling from the court

and then you get additional information or you decide

I really can't live with this ruling. I'm going to

try to get the court to reconsider. I'm going to point out that the additional

records draw a closer connection between the

disclosure and the suicide attempt. I'm going to

do a google search and get some some monographs that talk about the

relationship between sexual assault victims,

post-traumatic stress disorder, and suicide attempts.

I'm going to try to draw some kind of connection

for the court and make it hard for the court to say no

and the defendant just didn't do it. In regard to the CCNC records

what level of deference do we owe to the trial court?

Are we in as good a position to decide whether

more documents should have been turned over? Is that

the standard or do we defer? I think that it

I think it really is almost an impossible standard to apply

your honor. I and I don't mean to be facetious but

the problem is that you owe the court some deference and so

you're not going to just say well I would have done this differently and

therefore this is wrong. If on the other hand you went through the

records and you found that there was more information

than what the court disclosed that that was related to the

defendant's motion I don't think that you then defer

to the trial court and say well because then I think if there's a clear

connection then the trial court made an error.

Unless it's cumulative to the documents that were already produced.

Yes and I think that there's a pretty good chance that from

what the order is very terse the one that was

issued in July of 2018 but the court seems to be

pretty comfortable that the only new information is this

disclosure in the spring of 2016. If the court has no further questions I

will yield the floor to Ms. Hausman. Ms. Hausman

you're two minutes. I have nothing to add unless the court has further

questions. I like your exhibit. Thank you.

Thank you council. Case submitted. Thank you your order.
