This is case 2018-0308, state of New Hampshire versus Adele Geary.

Ms. McGinnis.

Good morning, may it please the court. Susan McGinnis, I'm here today representing the states of New Hampshire.

This is a state's appeal seeking to overturn a decision by a trial court that the officer lacked reasonable suspicion to stop the defendant's car.

There are really two issues in the appeal. The first is whether the court aired in analyzing the issue under the test that applies to tips from anonymous informants rather than the test that applies to identifiable informants.

And the second issue is if the trial court properly applied that test, did it air in finding that the information provided by the caller was insufficiently detailed to permit the reasonable inference that she had witnessed an ongoing motor vehicle violation?

Ms. McGinnis, did the trial court listen to the 911 tape at the suppression hearing?

Yes, that was almost the entire case was the 911, the call to 911 and the call from 911 to the dispatcher, the Sheriff's Department dispatcher.

Was the tape enhanced or slowed down in any way?

No, the tape was played exactly as it was recorded.

Is there any dispute that the caller ended with or didn't end?

But you mentioned the phrase crossing after the caller provided the substantive information regarding the car spurring all over the road.

You can clearly hear it. I've listened to the tape. You can hear they are swerving all over the road. They are crossing.

As she says the word crossing, the 911 operator is talking over her, but you can clearly hear the word crossing even if you couldn't swerving all over the road.

I mean the U.S. Supreme Court has held that weaving all over the road, driving all over the road and weaving back and forth are all sufficiently correlated with drunk driving to provide reasonable suspicion.

But it seems like the trial court found that the caller said crossing as well.

No, the trial court said the only thing the caller said was swerving all over the road.

But I don't think that's supported by the record. You can clearly hear her saying crossing.

And when the sheriff's dispatcher provided the information to the officer, he told the officer that the witness had reported that the person was swerving all over the road and crossing the yellow line.

Now, I give you the caller did not say crossing the yellow line, but it was a reasonable inference that that's what she meant.

And if weaving is enough, weaving within your lane is also evidence of drunk driving.

So I think the court aired and finding that it was insufficiently detailed to permit a reasonable instance that she'd witnessed an ongoing motor vehicle violation.

The court seems to have read that and so did the defense as you have to say something happened more than once for it to be an ongoing motor vehicle violation.

I think that means it's just something that could possibly continue.

But swerving, she didn't say she swerved across anything. She said swerving all over the road.

So that implies making abrupt changes of motion that are putting her all over the road.

Whether that's her lane or the entire road, it's still incredibly dangerous behavior.

Why is the person who called 911 an identifiable witness as opposed to an anonymous informant?

Well, first of all, I want to make a couple of points about the facts that the defendant swerved.

He says that the caller abruptly hung up. That's not supported by the record.

The 911 operator says she lost the call.

So the woman is identifiable because when you call 911, the 911 system automatically records the number, the telephone number that is calling.

And you have a recording of this woman's voice.

So that doesn't indicate that she didn't want to remain anonymous, though, does it?

The problem is that the defendant objected to any information about the fact that they had identified the caller from her phone number.

But what happened is that he objected the court sustained, because this was in the motion, the objection in the motion to suppress,

that they had actually identified this caller from her number and knew some information about what had happened.

During the hearing, the defendant objected that that was irrelevant because it happened after.

And then at that point, the court interrupts and said, I agree, objection is abstained without giving the state a chance to respond.

But that information was entirely relevant to whether the information provided by the person was sufficient for the police to ascertain identity.

It doesn't have to be an identified informant. It has to be an identifiable informant.

But she didn't leave her name or her number.

She didn't have time before the call got lost because the first thing the 911 operator asked her is, what's the nature of your emergency?

So she explained she was following this car with a certain license number that was swerving all over the road and crossing.

The 911 operator interrupts and says, where are you?

And she starts describing her location.

And then all of a sudden, just the call disappears.

She didn't abruptly hang up. The call disappeared.

And if the state had been allowed to bring in the remainder of the evidence, it would have been clear that that's not what happened.

How do you know that she didn't hang up?

I mean, technically, is that something that's discernible?

It's not in the transcript because the court excluded the information.

But she didn't return the dispatcher's call.

The dispatcher called her and said I could not reach her.

But the defendant is reading that as she refused to answer.

But that presumes that the call went through.

We all know on cell phones you can lose signal.

Or if your phone dies, you can't receive a call.

So it presumes a lot of facts.

I think the underlying concern here is what if this unidentified person had it out for the defendant for some reason?

Had some vendetta.

Isn't that important for the trial court to know on the motion to suppress?

If she's identifiable, that's not a consideration.

This court has said that if there's enough information for the police to be able to identify the person,

then you don't look into the reliability and credibility of the informant.

You only look into the reliability of the information and the person's basis of knowledge.

If you listen to this call, the caller is clear that she's driving behind someone who's engaging in this behavior.

But wouldn't the defendant have the ability then if the caller is identifiable to investigate whether there's motive behind the call?

And they would.

And in this case, the state did identify the witness and planned to call her at trial,

which is what the state said in its motion.

And in its closing argument at the hearing, they did identify the woman.

And she was willing to testify.

So the defendant could have explored all of that.

And did I understand you correctly?

The defendant objected to going down that road?

Yes.

Is that right?

The defendant objected to any information from the officer about whether he had contacted the witness or she had been identified.

In fact, he objected to any evidence whatsoever other than just playing the tape.

So the state was prohibited from presenting information that was entirely relevant to whether she was identifiable.

Well, the state must have offered the officer that conducted the stop.

Yes.

And the defendant didn't want the officer to be able to testify.

But he did.

But he did.

And it corroborates the information that was provided by, much of the information is provided by the caller.

Yes.

That's the location, license plate?

Yes.

In fact, he was given the make and model of the vehicle.

The caller had not provided that.

But by giving the license plate number, which was a complete New Hampshire license plate number,

either the 911 operator or the sheriff's dispatcher had gotten the information about the make and model of the vehicle

and had then given it to the officer.

So when the officer found the car, he knew its approximate location, license plate number,

make and model, and the swerving all over the road and crossing information that had been given by the 911 caller.

Even if it was, even if you analyze this as an anonymous tip, if you listen to the call,

there's no absolutely no reason to believe that this caller had a vendetta against the defendant.

You can hear what's going, you know, you can, there's enough information.

And the court didn't find that the caller was unreliable or didn't have a basis of knowledge.

The court made findings that the first three prongs of the SUSA test were met.

The court's problem was that she didn't explain what she meant by all over the road.

Right.

And the fourth prong of the SUSA analysis is all that's really at issue here in this appeal, isn't it?

The fourth prong of SUSA is the only prong at issue if you're considering anonymous informant.

Right.

If we went with your first argument, that'd be a matter of first impression for us, wouldn't it?

Whether identifiable?

Well, it's based on the facts of each case.

I mean, in Gowan, you said the court found the woman was identifiable because she stopped in person.

Right.

But we've never held that a 911 call makes a caller identifiable.

You've noted that that's one of the factors that sort supports reliability and credibility,

but not makes a person identifiable.

No.

But the U.S. Supreme Court and federal courts have held that when it's a 911 call reporting

an emergency, the same test applies as applies to identifiable informants.

You don't have to look at the reliability of the credibility of the informant because

there's an emergency at hand that has to be answered quickly.

There's nothing further?

Thank you.

There is one thing further.

If you don't mind.

Sure.

Do we need to weigh the sufficiency of the 911 call as related to the driving under the influence

ultimate charge as opposed to other potential motor vehicle offenses like being on your cell

phone texting that could cause you to swerve?

Do we have to link it to this charge?

You don't have to link it to DOWI.

You just have to find that there was reasonable suspicion of an ongoing motor vehicle offense.

If the person was on their cell phone, that's an ongoing motor vehicle offense.

If they're texting, it's an ongoing motor vehicle offense.

If they're simply crossing either the fog line or the center line, that's an ongoing

motor vehicle offense.

But I think swerving all over the road clearly implies that this person is engaged

in dangerous behavior that's been found to be indicative of drunk driving.

So there's an emergency at hand.

Thank you.

Nothing further?

Mr. Leahy.

Good morning.

Please to court.

Matt Leahy for Adele Gary.

If there's one point I want to make that I think is the most important thing here.

Is this issue of identifiable?

The issue isn't whether an anonymous caller or an informant is identifiable.

The question is, does he or she know that she's identifiable?

Because that's what leads to the presumption of credibility.

At the end of the day, what we're talking about here is, is there a reason to believe

that this caller was credible?

If in this case where they're anonymous, or if they know that they can be identified.

For instance, if they give their name or the 911 comes on and says, your honor

recorded line, can I help you?

That kind of thing.

Then that leads that caller to believe that they can be identified.

Then the law says, because they have an incentive to tell the truth to protect

themselves so they don't get into trouble, they're given kind of a meaning.

But that relies on the supposition that we, when we use our cell phones,

don't think that we can be identified by the person at the other end,

especially if they're law enforcement.

But what's the basis for that supposition?

That you can be identified?

That you can't be.

I would assume that if I called the police on my cell phone and then keeled over

that they would figure out who I was so they could come and help me.

The federal cases that, I'm going to go by the law,

the federal cases that the state cited in its brief did not,

specifically said there was not a per se rule that making the call

and the fact that your number is recorded makes you not anonymous,

not an anonymous caller.

So you're saying, as a matter of fact, if it said I'm Jim Bassett

and I'm calling about this person driving in front of me, you lose.

You lose, you lose.

What they said was it's a factor that can be taken into account.

In fact, I included it in my brief, some of the cases cited said

it's really nice when the caller identifies themselves,

which didn't happen in this case.

And the identification has to be at that time because you're getting

into the head of the caller.

That's your view.

So when they said at the hearing I objected, it was because,

one, for a number of reasons, it was after required evidence,

which is not to be considered on the reasonable suspicion basis.

And two, they did not have the 911 operator in the courtroom.

So it was here.

Mr. LaHaye, do you challenge any of the trial court's findings?

No.

No?

So we are simply talking about the fourth prong of the SUSE?

We're talking about the fourth prong.

So why isn't the statement, the driver in front of me is swerving

all over the road, evidence that the caller is witnessing

an ongoing traffic filing?

Because for the reasons that the judge stated,

and that is she did not describe what she meant by that.

It could be she swerved for a pothole, one-time occurrence.

From a practical standpoint, if that became the standard,

you could have 911 inundated with calls.

I just saw somebody cross the yellow line.

That's different than saying swerving all over the road.

Isn't it?

Well, not really, because the question is, what does that mean?

That seems to indicate some repeated behavior.

It's not just, oh, that person crossed the yellow line,

which I think maybe all of us probably did today on the way in.

I think an interesting point is, if you look at the SUSE case,

the SUSE case was on the facts almost identical to this one.

This court created its test.

There was no dispute about the facts.

They didn't send the case back for another evidentiary hearing.

That factual record had already been established.

If what you just said were the correct,

then the SUSE court could have said, well, on these facts,

we don't have to remand the case back to the trial court.

We can find on these facts, which are established,

that there was an ongoing motor vehicle violation.

The US Supreme Court had the same facts in Navarrette.

I'm sorry?

The Supreme Court had the same facts in Navarrette,

and they found that there was enough evidence.

I don't think they found just so well.

Driving all over the road is what the caller said.

That issue.

But of course, we're first looking at the case under the state

constitution under Part 1, Article 19.

And our court, this court has set up a very,

looked at the issue very carefully,

set up a very specific test.

And then this trial court applied that test

and necessarily made factual and credibility findings.

So for instance, when the state says,

well, it was a drop call, there's no way of knowing

whether it was a hang up call or a drop call.

The court could consider that.

Could have found that she hung up.

The court could have found that the caller lacked credibility

because she didn't answer a call back.

The state has some explanation for that,

but ultimately, deference is given to the trial court

in terms of their findings.

One of the points that I made during the hearing was,

my client was found and stopped in the parking lot

of the all-town convenience store.

So the caller, you can hear her on the tape,

says, because she's being asked,

where are you?

And she says, well, I'm going by the all-town convenience store.

She doesn't say, the vehicle just turned into

the all-town convenience store, I'm right behind her.

She doesn't say that.

Well, she could have been half a mile from the store,

but she made that statement too.

And that goes to the absolute point.

Is she in a position to make observations

that are reliable because ultimately,

and it comes out of the state's brief,

it's about credibility, reliability, and basis of knowledge.

But that's not what you're,

you have a very narrow challenge in front of us,

which is the fourth factor in SUSE, right?

All that other stuff about reliability

and whether she's credible is different than

is swerving all over the road legally sufficient.

I don't agree that this trial court found

that this caller was reliable.

But what she found was she was talking

about the same vehicle in the same time frame

and made contemporaneous observations.

She did not say she was reliable.

So is your challenge is unlimited to the fourth factor?

It's the states.

I'm sorry.

I'm sorry.

Yeah, but you're...

I'm not sure that there's anything to challenge

in the order because the trial court did not make

that they were reliable.

You know...

So are you saying that the court

didn't get the first three factors?

I'm not saying that.

Obviously it was in the same neighborhood,

it was in the same time frame

because my client was found there

and there was some kind of observation probably.

But that doesn't mean that it's reliable

on every issue.

And so just the statement that,

you know, swerving all over the road,

that sounds very much like the SUSA case.

What's your position on the crossing,

whether or not she said crossing?

I will tell you.

I listened to that tape.

That tape was played in the open court.

It may be my hearing isn't what it used to be.

My staff has listened to it.

You'd have to slow that down.

I can't hear it.

You can say swerving all over the road

and then that dispatcher jumps right in there

and all of a sudden the call is ended.

So that tape was also marked as an exhibit

and entered into evidence.

We have it.

Yeah, and you have it.

And we've listened that way.

Yeah, if you can hear that,

I can tell you honestly,

the judge obviously couldn't

because she did not include it in her order.

So if we don't go down the road of the SUSA test,

do you concede that you don't prevail here?

I'm not sure what you mean by if you don't go down the road.

This only applies if we're talking about an identifiable witness.

Right.

And so if this is an anonymous, informant case,

where do we go?

If it's an anonymous case,

the trial court is correct.

If she's not anonymous.

Yeah, I'm sorry.

Yes.

Then it's something different.

I agree with that.

Thank you.

Case submitted.
