Good morning. This is case 2018 for 292, State of New Hampshire versus Henry Carnival.

Mr. Schlar, you need to stand in front of the microphone there.

Good morning. May it please the court. My name is Michael Schlar. I appear today on behalf of the appellant Henry Carnival.

This case is about an aggressive prosecution statute that has been used in a manner that the legislature

never could have intended and a confusing series of legal decisions that have added no clarity to a criminal statute.

There is no question that the facts of this case are undisputed and indisputable.

In fact, they exist on a very short video clip which shows the entire series of events happening.

I'm sure. And there is no question Mr. Carnival wasn't driving his car very well.

But he was making a mistake when driving badly.

Did you argue that to the jury? I was not trial counsel.

Did trial counsel argue that to the jury?

Trial counsel argued a pure accident type of defense, Your Honor.

But is our contention that trial counsel's actions were woefully inadequate?

Because he adopted a strategy that amounted to no defense.

We also talked to at least one accident reconstructionist who said I can't help you.

He apparently did so.

However, an accident reconstructionist would have been one thing that could have helped the case

and as we know from the subsequent proceedings, experts have different opinions.

One can consult with more than one expert in the course of preparing a case.

What's the obligation? How many experts do you have to go to to not be ineffective?

I believe it depends on one's evaluation of one's strategy.

If one chooses and it could have been a legitimate choice and a legitimate strategy

to not retain the services of an expert.

But by making that choice and then simultaneously choosing to rest

without putting the defendant or appellant on the stand.

What didn't the defendant testify?

Your trial counsel's strategy was to discourage him from doing so,

presumably on the basis that it is a risky strategy and it is a strategy that I have used.

I certainly submit that when one places a client on the stand,

one is also subjecting that individual to cross examination

and one is taking the risk that they will not do terribly well.

And it was Mr. Buckley's opinion that Mr. Carmel would not do very well

after preparing him to testify on multiple occasions.

That was Mr. Buckley's decision. I have no disagreement with that.

But by making the combination of decisions he made, there was virtually no defense put on.

And that we submit is inadequate as a matter of...

It is not that either decision in and of itself...

Are you waving your statutory argument? We've drifted from...

We have, but I've been trying...

Our statutory argument is, of course, my primary argument in this case.

Motor vehicles are different.

A motor vehicle can certainly be a deadly weapon.

We've seen that in the news.

But an automobile is also an object that certainly has the ability to cause death.

That we use every day, casually.

And while we are obviously careful in operating it,

we do not regard it in the way we regard other deadly weapons.

A gun is always a firearm.

We are always aware of its deadliness at all times.

A kitchen knife is deadly.

A kitchen knife certainly can be as well.

But we also have a body of law specifically directed to motor vehicles.

And the reason is because they have this unique nature

of both having the ability to create great harm, yet are driven daily.

Often by human beings and often therefore by human beings who make mistakes.

But you agree that a motor vehicle can be operated recklessly.

Yes.

And there is a specific statute that addresses exactly that phenomenon.

Reckless operation.

But is it your opinion then...

Are you arguing that an individual can't be charged with reckless conduct

if it involves a motor vehicle?

It requires a remarkable set of circumstances.

And it is exactly why this area of the law is as muddled

and unclear as it in fact is.

Because this courts has struggled for years

with not only the definition of deadly weapons,

which have been difficult enough,

but also with notions of recklessness, negligence, gross negligence

with regard to motor vehicles.

What we need is recklessness here for conviction, right?

It is correct.

It is a greater burden than negligence.

Can I get someone off on Route 93 on my way to work recklessly?

Can I be charged with a class B felony?

I would argue you could not.

And the reason you could not is because you may be a bad driver.

You may have made a mistake.

You may have relied on your mirror for the infamous blind spot

instead of what we should do.

We've all seen that exact phenomenon happen on the highway.

It's not a felony.

What happened here?

It is what happened here.

What we see is Mr. Carnivali overtaking a car

and cutting in way too quickly.

And yes, that may be reckless operation of a motor vehicle

and maybe a violation of RSA 265-79,

but it is not a deadly weapon.

So they're mutually exclusive in your view?

Absent some other ethereal factor,

it is very, very difficult to conceive that the legislature

intended the combination of reckless and deadly weapon

to both exist in the automotive world

because the legislature is very clever when it comes to vehicles.

If you kill somebody with a motor vehicle,

there are a number of statutes that apply to exactly that event.

You don't have to show it's a deadly weapon.

There is homicide relating to a DWI.

There is negligent homicide,

or using the model penal code approach, negligent homicide.

There are ways where a vehicle,

if operated exceptionally badly with calamitous results,

can certainly result in a felony conviction.

Why isn't that what we have here?

There is no such statute as negligent assault

because motor vehicles are different.

And yes, a motor vehicle can be used as a deadly weapon,

and I can give you examples of how an automobile, theoretically,

could be used recklessly as a deadly weapon,

playing chicken with a destrian, for example.

Let us think of William Tell.

Now there is reckless conduct with a deadly weapon,

a bow and arrow and an apple on the head.

The story is that Mr. Tell succeeds in splitting the apple.

If Mr. Tell fails,

clearly that's reckless conduct with a deadly weapon.

Even though he succeeds in only hitting the apple,

his conduct was reckless.

The same can be true of a car.

I aim my car at a pedestrian to try to scare them,

and then I slam on the brakes with the expectation

that my brakes may be perhaps better than they are.

I was being reckless and using the car in a manner

where even I perceived that damage to a person

could result in a factual determination.

It is a mixed question of fact and law,

as is so often the case,

and it is why so many of this court's decisions

in the realm of recklessness involving,

and negligence involving motor vehicles and criminal law

in fact do have fact specific analyses

and why they even have hypothetical analyses.

The driver of the log truck perhaps would have fallen asleep

when he crossed the center line or had it or sneezed.

They do have a significant factual basis,

but one of the problems with that muddied, tricky analysis

is that it makes the law incomprehensible

to those charged with following it,

and criminal law more than any other area of the law

is supposed to be clear to all of us.

We have to know what conduct is prohibited,

and we have to know perhaps the extent

to which that conduct is prohibited.

We know that killing somebody is going to result

in an exceptionally harsh thing.

We know that selling drugs.

Given the speed,

compared to the speed of the vehicles in this case,

half a second could very well have killed the victim in this case.

Do you agree with that?

I am not sure, and I don't believe there was evidence of that,

but I think any time there is...

There's doing my own accident reconstruction.

I think any time there's a motor vehicle accident,

there is that risk, and I think it's always a risk

every time we get into a car,

and oftentimes that risk is based on no factor

other than good or bad luck by millimeters.

Here you watch the video,

and there was a lot of fortunate luck here

after the accident, after the contact,

because the car is spinning around,

you've got an infant, you've got the driver,

and it wouldn't have taken much to have two fatalities.

It would not, and it was a horrible accident,

but we see the difference between that,

the difference between conduct here

and the same conduct that has befallen most of us

at some point on the Interstate Highway of being cut off

because somebody wasn't paying enough attention to their right

is a matter of milliseconds and feet.

So would you be making the same argument here

if we had two fatalities?

If we had fatalities,

we would be dealing with a completely different area of law

because the legislature has seen fit

to address fatalities differently.

There is a statute in which mere or gross negligence

is sufficient to sustain a conviction for a homicide,

and reckless and homicide is manslaughter,

and manslaughter does not have as an element

the use of a deadly weapon.

That's correct.

It is, in fact, a lower bar

if there is a fatality because we have made

or the legislature has wisely made a policy

that when someone is dead, there is a difference

rather than somebody almost dying.

We could use the same analysis with drugs.

Selling drugs that results in the death of a person

is a serious matter.

It's a homicide.

Even though selling the same drugs to a different person

without the calamitous result is still a serious matter,

but not as serious,

we treat fatalities differently.

We always have.

And we treat driving decisions

as bad driving

or negligent driving,

which is also a motor vehicle statute,

or reckless driving.

And reckless driving does not involve

this ethereal notion

of trying to infer whether the vehicle is being operated

as a deadly weapon.

So are you arguing more that this is prosecutorial

a breach of prosecutorial discretion?

I think it is an aggressive prosecution.

Was your client charged with conduct after an accident?

He was as well.

And if we review the record,

the conduct after was not based on the requirement

that there be contact between the vehicles.

In fact, the prosecutor in his closing argument

makes it very express that the statute does not have

contact between vehicles as an element of that offense.

It also does not have knowledge of it

as new or should have known.

And the should have known element is that

after cutting the other car off,

presumably Mr. Carnivali should have looked

in his rear view mirror.

He didn't.

But yet when we see him drive off,

we also do not see this a type of rapid acceleration

or running away or fleeing.

And fleeing is certainly an element of guilt.

It's an argument that fleeing the scene

shows a knowledge of wrongdoing.

This is nothing more and nothing less

a driving error and an egregious one.

But it's an egregious error that is made

on I-93 and I-89.

Are you arguing that the evidence doesn't support

a finding of reckless conduct?

Or are we arguing about whether it should be

class B felony or not?

Or both?

May I answer your honor?

I do agree with this and I'm out of time.

I wouldn't have asked if I didn't want you to answer.

Understood.

I am arguing that this series of events

could not as a matter of law be class B felony.

It could be a violation level offense

of reckless driving.

It could presumably be a couple of other statutes.

It could even be reckless conduct, perhaps.

That would result in another statutory argument

but not one for today.

Thank you.

Your light's on.

Thank you very much.

Ms. McGinnis.

Good morning, please, the court.

I'm Susan McGinnis here today

representing the state of New Hampshire.

The defendants' arguments here at oral arguments

seem to have changed considerably

from the arguments that were made in the brief.

The arguments in the brief were that conduct cannot be reckless

unless there's an intent to harm

and that it can't be a deadly weapon

unless there's an intent to harm or kill.

And now it seems to be that the statutes in this case law

are vague and don't give notice,

which is not anything that was ever argued in the trial court.

You'll grant that this is a fairly aggressive charge

under the circumstances, won't you?

It is a fairly aggressive charge

that was based on fairly aggressive driving

in really close quarters

that put a great deal of number of people at risk.

I mean, there were cars, at least six cars,

within 100 feet of where this happened.

There were, you know, a couple hundred feet

of where this happened.

The defendant put a lot of people in danger here.

His driving was really aggressive.

I mean, if you watch the video,

he's following way too closely at 70 miles an hour,

weaving in and out of traffic.

He clearly knew that the cars in front of him

and the victim's car were slowing down

because he put his brakes on

as he was getting ready to go into the victim's lane

and then put them on even harder

right in front of the victim's car.

I mean, this is not just bad driving.

This is aggressive, dangerous driving.

And this is not normal driving,

and it's not the kind of behavior

that average law-abiding citizens engage in.

It was aggressive driving

that deserved a charge of reckless conduct

with a deadly weapon.

Yes, cars are deadly weapons.

They're not always deadly weapons

if you drive them safely.

If you follow the speed limit,

if you use your turn signal.

This is what I can't get past is,

okay, if these two people had died,

he could be charged with a felony negligent homicide

because they died.

But he can't be charged with felony reckless conduct

because they were driving an extremely safe car.

The child was properly contained in his seat.

The driver was safely seat-belted.

The airbags went off.

I mean, the only reason these two people

aren't dead is those factors.

I think what Mr. Sklar is arguing

that he could have been charged with acting negligently

but not recklessly under the circumstances,

even if there was a homicide.

But negligence is failing

to become aware of the circumstances.

That's not what we have here.

When women fail to become aware of the circumstances,

the video clearly shows that he was aware

that the victim's car was right in front of him.

He was aware there were other cars on the highway.

He was aware that the cars in front of him were slowing down.

Is that a factual determination?

That is a factual determination.

And that's the determination that the jury made.

It's the determination that the court made later

when the motion to overturn the verdict was filed.

It's a factual determination.

Recklessness, negligence are all factual determinations.

And for recklessness, all you need is an awareness

of the circumstances,

you're aware of them,

and you consciously disregard those risks.

When you pass in traffic,

there is always some risk.

Not necessarily if there are no cars around,

but in this case, there were cars around.

There were a lot of cars around,

and they're in a construction zone.

They had already passed one construction zone sign

that warned that there was construction in a thousand feet.

They were approaching the 500-foot zone

of the construction,

and everyone else is slowing down.

Except the defendant.

If we accept your argument,

don't we open the door for every one of these charges

when they involve a charge of reckless conduct

and a car to be a class B felony?

Not necessarily, no.

I mean, if under these circumstances, yes.

If there are cars in close proximity,

you're speeding, you're ignoring other traffic,

weaving in and out, cutting in too closely,

every case turns on its own facts.

Now, for instance, if he had left enough room

and been pulling in between cars,

and then the car in front of the victims

had unexpectedly slammed on the brakes.

No indication that there was any reason

for anyone to slow down.

The car in front had unexpectedly slammed on the brakes.

That's not reckless conduct.

But if you assume reckless conduct

in your driving a car,

why wouldn't every case involving reckless conduct

with a car be a class B felony?

You don't assume reckless conduct

when you're driving a car, but...

You were just positing reckless conduct.

So if it's reckless, it's going to be a class B felony

if you're driving a car.

It depends. It could be reckless

and not involve using the car

in a way that would make it a deadly weapon.

For instance, there was a reckless conduct case

that I argued years ago,

where a woman was driving...

Her boyfriend thought she was driving too fast,

so he pulled the emergency brake.

There were no other cars, you know,

immediate vicinity, so it made it put them in danger,

maybe, but not them, but not other drivers.

It really all depends on the circumstances.

A car is a deadly weapon if it's used in a particular way.

It's the way you use it

that makes it capable of causing death or serious bodily injury.

Is this defendant merely misjudged the speed of the car

he was pulling in behind?

No red lights, but just misjudged the speed.

Does that support the reckless finding?

Just misjudged distance?

I don't think that would,

but that's not what the jury found,

and it's not what the court found.

It was a construction zone.

It was a construction zone.

There's no comment of you need to be more careful.

There are cars around you need to be more careful.

You're on a highway, you need to be more careful.

I mean, the defendant's conduct,

first of all, he's following way too closely,

he's clearly upset.

I can see him make a hand gesture, don't know what it was,

but I can see him do it in the video.

Then he aggressively cuts right in front of that car.

There's no way he could not have been aware

of how close he was to the victim's car.

And he had his brakes on before he pulled in front of it,

so obviously he knew people were slowing down.

He could have simply stayed in his own lane.

He chose to aggressively cut right in front,

and then he put his brakes on.

There was a car in his lane at that point in time also.

There was a car in his lane,

that had been slowing down for a couple of seconds,

a car in the other lane

was slowing down for a couple of seconds,

and the victim testified

that he was adjusting his cruise control speed

to maintain a safe distance.

The gap was still closing a little bit,

and when the defendant pulled in,

there was not enough room to do it.

And he couldn't have simply,

if he just misjudged it, maybe a different story,

but that's not what happened.

He's got his brakes on.

He knows cars are slowing down.

He knows the gaps are decreasing,

and he does it anyway.

And quite frankly,

this whole issue of the ineffective,

his statutory interpretation,

not reasonable.

If you had to show an intent

to cause serious bodily injury or death,

that would mean that the reckless conduct statute

means nothing because that would be an attempted murder.

Right?

If you have an intent to kill,

that's attempted murder.

That's not why you have reckless conduct

if you have to show an intent.

That's not what they intended.

And for deadly weapon,

you don't need to show that you intended

to use something to cause harm.

You just have to show that the way it was used

put people at risk of death or serious bodily injury.

You fire an arrow at a tree

and someone standing 50 feet away,

and the arrow bounces off the tree

and hits the person.

That's probably not reckless conduct

with a deadly weapon.

You shoot a bow and arrow at a tree

and somebody standing then three feet of it,

that's reckless conduct with a deadly weapon.

I mean, that's a risk you are aware of.

We have case law that provides

that the statute doesn't require

that a weapon's use be accompanied

by a culpable mental state.

We do.

The case law is clear that reckless conduct

doesn't require a purposeful mental state

and the use of a deadly weapon

doesn't require a mental state.

So both the case law is not muddled.

The statutes aren't muddled.

They're entirely clear,

and these arguments were never really made

in the trial court.

You started to address the ineffective assistance claim.

As far as ineffective assistance.

First of all, the defendant's expert

never said the victim was speeding up.

He said the victim was using cruise control

and failed to disengage it quickly enough.

He victim blamed.

That's something defense counsel did not know

when he made decisions about getting an expert.

What he knew is that the police decided

it was reckless conduct based on the video.

He thought it was reckless conduct

with a deadly weapon based on the video

and then he sent it to an expert

along with some police reports

and the like and the expert concluded

that it was reckless conduct with a deadly weapon.

Did Mr. Carnival testify at that hearing

about his willingness or ability to testify a trial?

No, he didn't.

And they admitted the attorney's deposition

and the attorney testified

I gave him an opportunity to testify.

We advised him strongly not to do it

because every time we tried to prep him

he said things that undermined

the pure accident claim.

At trial they told the court

that he was going to testify

that they needed a few minutes to talk to him.

They took a break.

They went and talked to him.

He made the decision not to testify.

This is entirely reasonable.

You can't say that no competent attorney

looking at the video

and getting the opinion of the expert he did

wouldn't have decided to get another expert

and the defendant's own expert's testimony showed

that an accident reconstruction was not possible

because those kind of the skid marks on a highway

the yaw marks that they needed to determine things

were gone already.

But did counsel know that at the time?

He made a decision not to get another expert?

He must not have because he went to an expert.

He did go to an expert

if there was anything they could do

and the other problem was that they had asked

to preserve the victim's car

but somehow it was not preserved.

So they don't have the victim's car.

They tried to get the information off the black box.

That was the other expert that

defense counsel consulted.

They could not get the information off the black box

off the VW because it's not compatible

with software that's available.

So there were no options.

They could look at the video.

The only thing they could do is look at the video

and try to decide what it showed

and what the defense is now trying to say that it showed

is not even what their own expert said.

If you would address the conduct after the accident charge

should he have looked in the review mirror?

Was there any indication that

he should have known this was happening behind him?

Well the jury found that he did

and he hasn't appealed that conviction.

He's not made any arguments about that conviction.

So he's waived any argument

that they could find that he knew about the accident.

And I don't know how he possibly couldn't have known.

He's right there and there's all these squealing tires,

a giant crash, pieces flying everywhere.

I mean how do you not know?

But he hasn't challenged that conviction

so he's waived it.

There's nothing further.

Thank you counsel.
