Thank you. The matter before the court is state of New Hampshire versus Robert

Dingman. It is case number 2018 0662. The state of New Hampshire is represented

by attorney Elizabeth Woodcock. The defendant is represented by Christopher

M. Johnson. The broken should reflect that Justice Donovan is disqualified from

this case. And as always, Mr. Johnson, whenever you are ready, you may proceed.

You've reserved two minutes. Thank you, Your Honor. May it please the court,

Christopher Johnson, on behalf of Robert Dingman. The issues in this case are

fundamentally the same as in the case I've just addressed. And so I don't plan

to repeat myself and I appreciate the court's sort of incorporation of those

points in this argument as well. And so my plan for this particular argument is

to make a point about a distinctive feature of Mr. Dingman's case in terms

of what he requested the upper limit be and make a couple of follow-ups. But I'm

happy to take the court's questions at any point. So beginning, it's a feature

of Mr. Dingman's case that the argument is that 30 years is the upper limit on

what is not the equivalent of life without parole. And let me be clear

again, I'm not saying that everybody has to get 30 years. These numbers

that we've been talking about are by definition the upper limit on what is

acceptable for non-encourageable juveniles. Mr. Johnson, just to clarify,

Mr. Dingman's arguing that 30 years is the upper limit. And Mr. Lopez, in the

other case that we had earlier this morning, argued 35 years. Is that

right? That's right. And that's a feature of the way the claims were

preserved in the courts below. So what I would say further about that is that

once we are in this neighborhood, we're in the realm of that narrower

question of having, if the court agrees, having determined that the proper

approach is the broader approach faithful to the Supreme Court's language

about this question being answered by reference to there being a chance

for reconciliation with society and a chance for fulfillment, the court comes

to the question of, let's choose simply to say that this sentence is

unconstitutionally too long and just see what the superior court comes

up with on remand. The court then confronts the question of how to

define that upper limit. And as I have said, I think crucial to answering

that question is the recognition that prisoners are in a very different

position from people who haven't lived decades in prison

in terms of needing the time, needing the social resources

and still having the energy to build up

the wherewithal from which to make a meaningful life.

The reason 30 years in particular makes sense

is that there are a large number of statutes in other states and we've

already talked about the sort of motivation for

the creation of those statutes. But it's significant and has been

significant to the U.S. Supreme Court in other cases that state

practice is manifested in legislative action can

help answer questions raised under the Eighth Amendment's cruel and unusual

punishments clause. And because a large number of

states set 30 years or less as the default,

where it's okay to sentence somebody to that term

without a finding that they're incorrigible, I think that

is very meaningful, should be meaningful to this court

where it to pick a number. And as I've also cited in the brief, when you look

across all of the juveniles who've been resentenced since

Miller and Montgomery, the median number of years they get

without parole is 25. And so state practice there

is comfortably beneath what I'm saying should be the upper limit.

So let me ask you, Mr. Johnson, in arguing that 30 should be the upper limit.

Does that depend at all on either life expectancy,

for example, for prisoners in New Hampshire, as opposed to general

population? Or is it and or is it also a function

of individual issues, such as the nature of crime

and behavior in prison? Well, I think sort of the nature of the crime

can contribute to the question to answering the question of whether the

particular juvenile is or is not incorrigible.

And so to that extent cases can depend very much on the facts.

Right. But once you get past that threshold, does it matter?

Once you get past that threshold, I think the details of the crime don't

matter. Now, certainly behavior in prison is going to matter very much to the

parole board. And I want to be very clear. I'm not

saying that Mr. Dingman or anybody in his position has a right to be released

at any particular age or ever. It's just when is the moment when

he has to have been given the chance to advocate for release before the

parole board? The parole board will do what it's going to do.

And it can deny parole for any of a broad number of reasons.

But what the sentence is unconstitutional and illegal

if for a non-incorrigible juvenile it pushes

that moment of first opportunity to speak to the parole board

too late. And your position is that that moment of opportunity

is not an individualized analysis, but that

the constitution requires a bright line. Is that right?

I think that's right. And I think the reasons for that again are that

there's an individualized approach would be profoundly problematic.

And again, because we're not just talking about these two,

the rule that gets set is the rule that applies across

to the end of time for juveniles found not to be incorrigible but convicted

of these kinds of crimes. And so one has to think about

a sentencing judge who's looking at a 17-year-old offender in the future

has no idea and no way to know

whether that person is going to get diabetes in their 30s

or something. It's just one problem with the individualized approach

when if you use life expectancy is you require a sentencing court to ask

questions that it really can't answer. And I think you also make

sentencing depend on factors not only that are hard

to gauge but are hard to justify. Like, you know, should

defendants who, you know, have this reason to think they're going to live

longer, therefore get longer sentences

for an otherwise identical crime? It certainly is permissible

for the initial sentencing judge to gauge the likelihood of rehabilitation

of any particular defendant and that frankly can vary.

Yes. And so I agree. Absolutely. I mean, so once you're within, and again, but

back to I think a preceding question that gets to this question, I'm not saying

that these sentences are unwise. I'm making a stronger claim.

They are unconstitutional and illegal. So but

absolutely, once you're within the range of, you know,

a lawful sentences, judges have a lot of discretion to measure things like

likelihood of rehabilitation and seriousness of the offense.

The problem here is that these sentencing courts impose sentences

that are unconstitutional and illegal. And so we're not, we don't, you only get to

the case specific details when the sentencing court is within their

lawful discretion. Do we look at, in this case,

the fact that there are two sentences and so do we evaluate each one

independently or together? So it's been

not, it was litigated below, but not pursued by the state on appeal.

And I think not even very strongly litigated below

that question. And the answer that has emerged and is I think

not contested here is that you look at the cumulative minimum.

And there's a lot of good authority from other state Supreme Courts. I mean, I

think the state wisely didn't choose to pick that fight.

Because again, Mike, I'm not, I hope I'm not coming across as if I'm

making all this up. The hallmark or the

what we're looking at is the U.S. Supreme Court's language and its logic

in those opinions. And the language spoke that the Supreme Court wouldn't have

said a chance for fulfillment outside prison

walls if all that it envisioned as the constitutional

right was a sort of a very late reprieve from incarceration.

That's sort of more an act of mercy at the end of life rather than

the idea that non incorrigible juveniles get a second chance

or at least have a chance to get a second chance

if they get paroled. I wanted also to address the number of offenses

in theory regardless of the number of qualifying

offenses. Right. That's right. I mean, I suppose if, you know, a juvenile

committed some sort of mass murder that would support a finding that

they're incorrigible and we wouldn't be in this position.

So I mean, I'm not saying that such a detail has no relevance at all, but once

we're in the position of a non incorrigible juvenile

it doesn't matter. You may have answered this question before

from Justice Hicks, but I know a number of courts including

two that you cited in your reply brief have

evaluated individual sentences and found them either to

cross the line or not. I think there there were maybe 50 year sentences or

something, but in striking down sentences

have the those courts just dealt with that issue?

Is there any court that's gone on and said oh and here's the bright line

which you're asking us to do? That's right and

yes and again I think that's sort of I'm asking you to do that in a less

forceful way than I'm asking you to agree with me in other respects because I

think jurisprudentially it is possible to say

as those courts have said in the California Supreme Court and the

Connecticut Supreme Court were particularly eloquent on this they said

50 is too long. They didn't then take the next step

of giving guidance to future trial judges to say well what

wouldn't be too long and that's a fair move

with no question, but I wanted to present

you know eventually through a period a series of repeated cases over time or

in a single case we're going to come to I hope a number

for the better guidance of sentencing judges, but you're right it's not

impossible to let the question percolate and say

for Mr. Dingman 40 years is beyond is is a de facto life

sentence and it has to be less and you know I think this

points to be made on both sides of either giving guidance early or letting

the case law develop as you know as a fair fair debate.

I did want to make a point I think a problem with the state's sort of

life expectancy centered approach that we can't forget is relates to how

life expectancy is calculated in terms of it's the measure of the

point at which half the people in the given cohort will have died

and half outlive it and so a problem with that

conception or that approach to defining this right

is that by definition you're creating a constitutional protection

only for the longer lived half or slightly more than half

of the cohort and again there's bell curves I mean

with all of these things some people will live to be a hundred and some

will die at 38 but there's a big middle and if we

cut off the right too much at the peak of the curve

all you know too close to life expectancy you know you by definition you're

saying the rest of you you the shorter lived of you

you know don't have this constitutional right but that sort of begs the question

if you say 50 percent is the middle of the bell curve

is not constitutionally acceptable 40 percent is 30 percent is 20 percent

maybe it should be 2 percent because jeez we don't want to interfere with the

rights of that 2 percent right no I understand that I mean

you know as with like the legislature saying 18 is the age of majority rather

than 18 and six months or 17 I mean there

you know when a court is called or a legal body is called upon to draw

a right line it's always easy to you know to

criticize that bright line by reference to the points right to the next of

on either side and so I take that point and I'm not

making any very precise claim about where on the curve

you know downward you have to go because I'm not saying

everybody has to be eligible for parole even the person who's going to die of a

heart attack at 34 I'm not saying that and you know

there is obviously a legitimate interest and punishment in these very

serious cases and so you know even if one were

to know that a particular juvenile offender is going to die at age 30

I'm not saying they're entitled to release

or even eligibility for release before then

you know there has to you know the constitutional rule

needs to be drawn with the whole population in mind and not

not on the basis of the outliers either the really long-lived outliers or the

really short-lived outliers you know as the argument you're

making about a bright line been considered and rejected by any court?

I don't I'm not aware of any of the courts that have addressed this question

as treating it as a as a defendant specific issue

I think because you know that would evolve

getting in and some courts in fact criticize that idea by saying we really

can't make the sentencing judgment depend on

you know an analysis of how long this person's grandparents lived

and therefore how long he's likely to live and we can't make it based on a

prediction of you know his chance of lung cancer or something

A because we don't know those things now and B because

you know it's sort of not seemly for the sentencing judgment to depend on

those things and if it is individualized then I suppose my

hypothetical defendant known to die of a heart attack at age 30

you know he can't be sentenced more than six five or six years

because you know he's entitled to those years too and so

I just I don't it just doesn't make any sense and I'm not aware of any court

that's treated this legal question

varying on the individual defendant but again of course once you've

identified the legal upper limit absolutely as justice sick said

it's a very individual sentencing is inherently individualized at that point

your red light is on thank you thank you again

thank you your honor elizabeth woodcock for the state of new hampshire

i'll take questions at any time but i will point out that if i thought that

62 looked pretty young to me 47 looks even younger

and i think that the proposal that mr johnson is making of

a 30-year sentence for an individual who committed not one but two murders

uh just it it it goes against one of the basic

premises of sentencing in new hampshire which is

retribution uh the the thought isn't it isn't it a bit

one-sided to look at the age from our respective um seats at the table as

opposed to the juvenile defendant who's looking at 47 or 57 as

as a life sentence like what's left after that so

what lens do we use to weigh that age group well i mean the court raises a

good point when i was a kid we never could understand

why my parents thought it was funny when jack benney said he was 39

because we thought that 39 was really old and no one would ever want to be

39 so there is that point but the court isn't

sentencing the juvenile from his perspective

the court is looking at all of the different factors

and imposing a sentence that the court thinks

is fair fair to the juvenile certainly and also fair to the citizens of new

hampshire that the sentence will encourage the citizens of new hampshire

to believe that the court system treats serious crimes seriously

and killing two people and then being eligible to walk out

the prison doors all other things being satisfied

at age 47 is not a very terribly long sentence but but miss woodcock the

inquiry as to whether it's fair or not which i would

agree with you the trial courts entitled to great discretion is

different from whether it uh crosses the constitutional threshold

isn't that i think it's i think it's somewhat different just to pass it

i think that the that an awful lot of the constitution

is in my view was an effort on the part of the people who were writing

the first ten amendments to ensure that there was a certain fairness that

people were treated equally that the state couldn't have

kind of an upper hand that made it impossible for individuals to

enjoy their own lives but the problem here

is that this sentence is not the the sentence that the court imposed is not

unconstitutional release at age 57 is not an unconstitutional

sentence um and well when when would it be

unconstitutional 67 77 87 i wish i would never

i wouldn't you i wish you wouldn't use the age 67 your honor

it's striking a little me me me too it's a little close to home

i'm afraid but uh no i mean i think that the court

as i go back to these things i think that the real question is

when the court is looking at an individual and trying to determine

what an appropriate sentence is and that is a matter of discretion

for the court what is a defecto life sentence how is that a matter of

discretion well obviously there is some point

at which a person can't be expected to live

we're not immortal um and i think that that

is something that the court can determine

based on in part the the cdc tables based on the information that's presented

to do you agree or do you agree or disagree that the california and

connecticut jurisprudence is instructive in this case

i think that the contraris case that uh mr uh johnson relied on is is

distinguishable uh it seems to me that uh that

those were sex offenses the the defendants got

50 and 55 years something like that probably i think that most courts have

agreed that a half a century of incarceration probably

crosses the line but we don't have that here we have 40 years

a man who's going to be uh eligible for parole when he's 57

and uh to me that is simply not a life sentence

or a de facto life sentence so if we were to agree with you that it's not a

de facto life sentence should we say that the state agrees that 50 would be

de facto life sentence

um i think that i think that 50 years for a 17 year old

um well again that's putting the person at my age

so i'm not certain that that that that would be

the approach that the court would want to take

um i think that the question here is not so much

what is the outlier but uh it do these sentences fail that test i don't think

that the court has to decide a sentence that isn't in front of it

and what the the analysis that mr johnson is urging is to say well 30

years that's it um you should be eligible

at 47 now bear in mind uh mr dingman's younger brother

was 14 when this offense was committed and the the state and the courts

took that much younger age um into consideration but we're looking at a

situation i can't remember exactly how old mr dingman was but

he wasn't terribly far away from being an adult

um he was 17 he was 17 i think he i think he was fairly close to 18 i haven't i

i tried but our new computer system would not allow me to look up his date of

birth it thwarted me in my effort uh this

morning to do that but uh but i think he was fairly close and i think that

the court that the record will show his age because i think that there are

number of documents that refer to it in uh either

the defendants appendix or what the state has filed

um but but again i don't think that the court needs to try to decide the

outer limit it's what it needs to decide is whether this particular

sentence which will enable mr dingman to apply for parole when he's 57

years old is a life sentence and i simply do not see it that way it is

not a matter of a constitutional question it is a matter of whether the court

exceeded its discretion in imposing the sentence it imposed

or as just as um bassett points out aired as a matter of law in issuing a

unconstitutional sentence and i'm suggesting to you your honor that

that this is not a question of whether the sentence is

constitutional it's a question of whether

a 40-year sentence that allows a person to be released at age 57 is within the

trial court's discretion to impose because i do not see age 57 as being a

life sentence now in the absence of the

legislature stepping forward and saying this is what we think

if you have a juvenile who has been certified as an adult

this is what we think is a fair sentence the the legislature has not

opted to do that and so i but mr mr johnson's saying well i'm not

saying it's unfair or unsustainable exercise of discretion

this particular sentence except to the extent that if something is unconstitutional

it's an unconscious it's an unsustainable exercise of discretion so he's saying

well all these factors might have uh led the court reasonably to that

number but it still exceeds de facto life

sentence and that's a far line i understand his argument i simply

don't agree i think that that if this were a

situation in which the the defendant would be

released at a point in his in his life that would allow him

no possibility of of anything um then i think that that might

qualify as a de facto life sentence but that's simply not the case here

if he is released at age 57 he has a good chunk of his life left

in terms of working and as we discussed in the previous

argument the the options for mr dingman now that he's no longer

under a life sentence in terms of rehabilitation at the prison

are significantly broader so but you you seem to be arguing that this

isn't a constitutional case but i think that is

exactly what it is it's not a unsustainable exercise of discretion

the court sends done fairly it is is this unconstitutional because it's

de facto you're saying uh i think i hope you agree

that we have to make a constitutional decision we just

you just want it to be in favor of the state it's not even close in your view

well i i don't think that i don't think that i'm

on that on principles that i just want you to decide it in favor of the

state i i i think that i have some some degree of

principle i didn't mean to i didn't imply that but

but i i i you're not saying we don't have to decide a

constitutional question that seems to me

it precisely what mr johnson is saying we have to decide

that's correct he's saying because he believes that this

particular sentence is a de facto life sentence

that then it becomes a constitutional question my response to that is

it is it cannot be a de facto life sentence it's not long enough

and therefore the the way that the court should

handle it is to reject that argument and look at what the court did

did the court act within its discretion

so i think that we're we're coming at it from i think mr johnson has been quite

clear that we are coming at it from fundamentally different views

he seems to think that my view was sort of a

a i can't remember what he used in the first argument but it was sort of a

a death march view and that his was a life march view and i

don't really think that that's quite fair

i think that this the particular the sentence in post in this case

was the court acted within its discretion it did not

run afoul of the eighth amendment and the court should

affirm if the court has no further questions i will

yield the webex to mr johnson thank you mrs woodcock mr johnson you've

reserved two minutes thank you your honor i actually think i've

said everything i intended to say unless the court has more questions

just i'm happy to answer um i was going to leave it there

okay well thank you very much once again both of you for your those excellent

presentations i always a pleasure to have you

in this web broadcast and the case is submitted

court stands adjourned thank you
