This is case 2018-0667, state of New Hampshire versus Joseph Campagna.

Shall I proceed?

May it please the court?

My name is Andrew Winters.

I represent the defendant, Joseph Campania.

The problem with this case is there's absolutely no evidence

to support the trial court's conclusion here

that this was not a recovered memory.

And therefore, there was no basis for the trial court

to decline or refuse to engage in any Hungerford analysis whatsoever.

Didn't the victim testify that she told a number of people

over a period of time?

Isn't that evidence countering your theory?

Well, at trial, the Hungerford analysis should be conducted pre-trial.

So my first answer is the trial testimony after the fact should not count

in judging the court's decision because the Hungerford decision

by definition must be conducted pre-trial.

Having said that, I think that the victim's testimony trial was still

equivocal on that point because she did admit that this was essentially

a recovered memory.

She agreed that she had blocked it out, forgot what happened.

The emotional pain was too much for her to bear

and she had raced it the ordeal from her memory.

How does that trigger the Hungerford analysis?

Those are just predictable remarks for someone

who's been through this experience.

Well, I would respectfully disagree.

I mean, I think she said I blocked it out literally.

I don't think that that's predictable.

And she makes it clear in her own written statements

that this wasn't just she wanted to forget.

She wanted to push it out because it was too uncomfortable to think about.

She said it was too horrifying for me to relive.

I completely disassociated myself from the event.

The human brain can be really wild sometimes.

I erased the entire ordeal from my memory.

I think that's different than, of course, a true,

it would be common for victims to not want to think about it.

But here, the plain language which Dr. Pope, the expert who

this court was among the experts this court relied on

in the Hungerford decision itself,

certainly treated this as a repressed memory.

So you would agree that finding that there is a repressed memory

as a prerequisite for having a Hungerford hearing?

Absolutely.

And isn't that a factual finding by the trial court

to which we owe a deference?

You absolutely do.

Even with that deference, there was no evidence presented

to the trial court of any substance

that should counter the plain language of the victim's own

writing, unprompted by any.

This wasn't under questioning.

This was her own voluntary writing

that she did through not informal therapy,

but clearly if you read the journal

through a therapeutic type process

to try to resolve in her own mind why she was having

a eating problem.

And do I understand correctly that the determination

the trial court made that this wasn't a fully or partially

repressed memory was done on the basis of by agreement

offers of proof?

Is that right?

That is correct, Your Honor.

That is correct.

And there was no offer of proof regarding her having told

other people during the interval when you claimed

there was no memory was repressed?

There was an offer of proof during the interval.

So the timeline is just to be clear.

She wrote the journal in 2017.

She first disclosed that this was the defendant

in 2013 and then formally to law enforcement in 2014.

So from that timeline, she recovered the memory in 2013,

which is when she first formally clearly

started naming Mr. Campania.

But there's two references prior to that.

One is a reference to 2004 when she says in high school

she told her mother.

Her mother disputes that and said she was never told about this.

So that was a dispute.

But I would note that in that same interview,

the victim also says that she never told anybody.

So that's a thread when it's a disputed state.

She says she remembers in high school telling her mother.

Her mother says, I never remembered that.

I would have remembered that.

And then the victim herself says, well,

I had never told anybody.

So the victim herself contradicts herself

and the mother disputes it.

Mr. Witters, can you tell me what evidence did your client

want to provide with respect to Dr. Pope's testimony?

Specifically, what did the trial court exclude?

Well, the most important element

that the trial court excluded was Dr. Pope's opinion

regarding Mr. Campania's statement

upon being confronted with these allegations.

And Mr. Campania made what appeared

to be an incriminating statement, like she

won a ride, something like that.

And Dr. Pope said that it's common for defendants

when confronted to make seemingly incriminating remarks

like that.

And a lay person juror could find that remark extremely

incriminating.

But the literature actually demonstrates

that innocent people make those kind of remarks, too,

because they're so shocked by the confrontation

and trying to resolve in their own mind

how they could be accused of such a thing.

So I think that's something that would

be counterintuitive for the average juror

that Dr. Pope established was within his expertise

and would have helped the jury examine

that seemingly incriminating evidence.

Was he going to offer any opinions

about the victim's testimony or her disclosures?

He did.

And those were allowed.

So the trial court did allow those.

So the expert disclosure, she was only

as to the other opinions that were disallowed.

So the cases cited by the state are highly distinguishable.

The Madore case, in there, the victim pretrial

had testified this was not a brand new memory.

And in the Barton case, which is not a published case,

but it was cited by the state,

the victim had remembered the incident from the time it happened.

And Gibson is also that there was continuous memories.

But here, I think the offer of proof issue really,

once the plain language of the victim's own writings

showed that, in our view, just reading their plain language

that she had erased this memory,

that Dr. Pope treated it as a repressed,

later recovered memory, I think that that point,

the state should have been the one

to present evidence otherwise

and not simply rely on these very threadbare offers.

Well, as I understand it, correct me if I'm wrong,

the there was a motion to exclude file, the state objects.

And there's a hearing on offers of proof.

And then there's no ruling until the trial starts.

And then the trial starts and the court denies it

without prejudice to see what happens during the trial.

Do I have that right?

I can't remember if the court said without prejudice,

but in fact it was because the court did consider the issue.

So I think effectively that's true.

So then isn't it appropriate for the court

to have taken into account the trial testimony?

Well, I don't think so.

I think that would be like saying emotion to suppress,

we can see what happens, you know,

what the trial testimony is.

Because I think the problem with that is first of all,

that's not the procedure that Hungerford envisioned.

So that would essentially modify Hungerford.

But importantly, I think that would really risk

tainted evidence because I'm not accusing

any particular witness of lying,

but I think, you know, the witness,

once the witness understands what's happening,

he or she will try to kind of fix the issue,

which is, and even Dr. Pope testified about that,

that that would be a likely scenario

because the victim herself had already believed

that this had happened,

which is the nature of the recovered memory,

and therefore wants to testify consistently with that.

So therefore once the victim sees what sort of the defense is,

the victim could on some unconscious level

alter her testimony.

So it would be important to settle this prior to trial

and get a clear record rather than relying

on the trial testimony itself.

So is it error to rely on the trial testimony itself?

I believe it was.

I think, well, the first error and the most clear error

was made prior to trial

without even conducting a Hungerford analysis.

And then I think that-

That was a denial without prejudice.

Again, I don't know if the court treated that way.

I think the court said something like,

we'll have to see what happens at trial,

but I don't, I think it would be an error

to resolve Hungerford through the trial testimony.

So yes, I do think that's an error.

That would really undermine the Hungerford decision

and essentially modify it into something different.

There wouldn't be any point in raising it pre-trial.

So if the testimony came in at trial,

are we in a position to assess that testimony

as to whether Hungerford would have been satisfied or not?

I don't think you should.

First, I don't think you should

because I think that would essentially

just completely gut Hungerford.

Even if you did, I think that the,

even if you do, the trial court really never,

even after trial, engage in any Hungerford analysis

and the trial testimony itself was equivocal.

She did admit that on cross-examination

that she had essentially erased this memory.

So her testimony was inconsistent during the trial itself.

It was only sort of on after the prosecutor

tried, kind of fixed it, that she changed,

you know, sort of retracted that testimony.

Thank you, thank you.

Good morning and may it please the court.

My name is Sean Locke.

I represent the state of New Hampshire

which asked that this court affirm

the defendant's convictions.

I'll begin where we left off with some of the questions

that Justice Bassett was asking regarding kind of the process

and the trial court's consideration

of the trial testimony in this case.

The procedural posture of how this progressed,

motion was filed pre-trial to request a hungerford hearing

or to exclude the victim's testimony.

The parties proceeded on offers of proof.

The state objected, in its objection it noted

about approximately 10 to 11 instances

where the victim had previously disclosed

the sexual abuse to others,

including five or six instances

that occurred before 2013.

But the trial, the parties proceeded on offers of proof

at the hearing and then the trial court

ruled the day of trial.

The defense counsel raised at the close of the state's case

moved to strike the victim's testimony

because these were repressed memories,

citing the kind of leading question

that the victim agreed to a statement about

and that was later then clarified on cross and redirect.

The trial court denied that motion

looking to that particular,

looking in particular.

The statement being I put it out of my mind

or something to that.

And I can't remember the exact question

but the idea was basically she was fed an answer

and she said yes and then the state clarified

well, what do you mean when you say that?

And she said, I didn't mean necessarily,

literally I never remembered this,

it was when it would come to the fore of my mind

I would try to push it back

so I wouldn't think about these events.

And so the trial court credited that

as a reasonable explanation for what she meant here.

And in addition, for all the reason

that it cited in its earlier order

denying the motion for a hunger for a hearing.

That is what happened at the close of the state's case

and even in the motion on the hunger for a hearing itself

and whether or not to have one.

Defense counsel relies upon four sentences

from a blog post written by a lay witness

or a lay individual,

not an expert in psychology,

not someone who has necessarily,

I mean she is speaking kind of colloquially

and using these terms not for their scientific purposes

but using them as an average person

would speak about events that happened to them.

In addition, the state proceeded

with its offers of proof

that there were multiple disclosures

that had occurred during the intervening years.

And even though, even as the defendant argues

that those were, while they were equivocal

she acknowledged that these disclosures occurred.

And she acknowledged them during the CAC interview.

I mean the way it progresses is.

So what would have been sufficient

to trigger a hunger for a hearing in your mind?

What would have been, I mean there would be,

I think, I mean hunger for gives a good example

of victim has never made previous disclosures

of sexual abuse went through kind of a,

and exact facts are a little hazy on me at the moment

but the idea was she went through

some therapeutic intervention

and then all of a sudden these memories of sexual abuse

then, and there were some, I believe,

suggestivity to that therapeutic intervention

but there was memories of sexual abuse returned to her.

Here, also worth noting in this blog post

that was kind of the focus of the defendant's motion.

There is no statement regarding,

all of a sudden I remembered that I had been abused.

I was going, you know, I was suffering

from all of these, I was suffering from body dysmorphia

and having all of these kind of dark thoughts

and then I remembered that I had been abused

and that is how I came to realize

that these things were all connected.

She never makes that type of statement.

All she says is that she, you know,

in the most kind of cavalier sense,

she erased them from her mind which.

Was there any evidence that she received therapy

from a professional?

Not introduced in the record at all.

Is there any support for the idea

that someone can self-induce a recovered memory?

I cannot recall off the top of my head

in the sense of case law if there's any examples of that.

I know there are some where cases,

I think the two major ones that are kind of hunger-forged

and some of its more immediate successors

dealt with therapeutic intervention.

I can't recall if there are any where the person may have

kind of on their own been trying to trigger a response

or trigger a memory and end up discovering sexual abuse.

But in this case, you know, there certainly isn't,

doesn't seem to be any suggestion

that she was even trying to induce memories

or that she had recovered memories.

It was simply that she tried not to think about

these horrible events that happened to her

and but she started to realize maybe this is what

prompted these kind of other bad things

that went on in my life and these other problems

I've had in my life is that I basically

haven't processed this trauma.

And defense experts indicated that that wouldn't

wouldn't tell jury whether it happened or not.

Right and actually so turning a little bit

to the defense expert here,

in all of the testimony that was excluded

and to be frank, I'm not entirely sure

why Dr. Pope was allowed to testify at all

but that's not the issue here.

The testimony that was excluded,

all of his opinions were inconclusive.

I mean he explicitly states in his expert disclosure

he couldn't, you know, none of the,

nothing that none of the challenged issues

supported or refuted the victim's allegations

and he couldn't make a conclusion based on that.

So it's unclear how that testimony

would assist the jury any more

than the jury could assist it,

could make those credibility determinations on its own

which is its entire province.

So kind of with that acknowledgement

by the defendant's expert,

it's not clear what kind of value

his testimony would have in helping the jury in that case

and that was why the trial court

excluded that particular evidence.

So as we assess whether the trial court

aired and not ordering a hunger for hearing pre-trial,

should we take into account the testimony of trial or not?

I think, so pre-trial I would say

it wouldn't take into account the testimony of trial

except maybe to analyze whether or not

the defendant was prejudiced

because upon hearing further explanation from the victim

it becomes clear and even Dr. Pope in his testimony

acknowledges that with that additional information

his opinion may have changed.

Once she explains why I put the evidence to,

I put the bad memories to the back of my mind

and tried not to think about them

and that's what she meant.

He says well maybe if that were the case

then her memories may not have been repressed

and she was just engaging in what kind of

a normal coping mechanism that people engage in.

And so certainly that raises a question

of whether or not with that information

whether or not the defendant was prejudiced

by the lack of a hunger for hearing

or whether or not the trial court's decision

prejudiced him and I think it can be considered

for that purpose.

What about the notion that the,

do you agree that the trial court

denied the motion originally without prejudice

and then said well let's see how it goes, a trial?

I'm trying to remember, I was trying to remember

exactly how the trial court phrased it

and I think my memory is the same as defense councils

in the sense that the trial court denied the motion

I can't remember if it was with or without prejudice

but then the issue was re-raised by defense council

after the close of the state's case

to strike the victim's testimony

so essentially they renewed the motion to exclude

I don't know exactly what would have happened

if in theory the trial court then said

well maybe we should have had a hunger for hearing

if that leads to a missed trial

so we can evaluate the hunger for,

to perform the hunger for analysis

or if that means the charges would get dismissed.

Yeah so what about this notion of going to trial

and then sort of doing the hunger for analysis

based on trial testimony, that seems kind of problematic.

It certainly seems problematic,

I wouldn't say it's the best practice

but at the same time, you know

not as common in superior court but in the circuit court

trial courts consider motions to suppress

and motions that could be dispositive

or lead to evidence being excluded

that would be dispositive of the case

in the middle of trial consistently.

Granted there's no jury involved

which is why the practice is different in superior court

but it certainly would have been

within the trial court's ability

if it had this hearing or if it took the evidence

let's say there hadn't been a hunger for motion

filed pre-trial, evidence comes out

that suggests in the middle of trial

that the victim had maybe kind of claimed

that she had repressed and recovered her memories

during trial.

Defense counsel certainly would have been,

would like to assume defense counsel would have argued

that this is the product of recovered memory

and even though this wasn't apparent

from earlier testimony, it certainly is now

and so we should have had a hunger for adhering.

I think that could be grounds for a mistrial

if the trial court were to have agreed with that

and there could be argument about whether

or not the state acted inappropriately

in not seeking that evidence beforehand

but certainly there could have been a hunger for analysis

in a new trial that could have occurred.

So given that the initial denial of the request

for a hunger for adhering happened

on the basis of offers of proof

and we normally would apply a deferential standard

to the finding of fact that this was not

a repressed memory, it seems like the reasons

for a deference to a trial court are far less

if it's offers of proof rather than an evidentiary hearing.

Part of that though is it's offers of proof

because the party has agreed

that it should be offers of proof.

From the outset of the hearing, the defendant says

there's no need to hear evidence on this motion.

We can rely upon the blog post

and the state's offers of proof.

So should it change our deference to the trial court

because it wasn't an evidentiary hearing

even though the parties agreed to that?

I think regardless of whether it changes

the deference or not, it doesn't,

the trial court's ruling is sustainable

because the trial court looks to the fact

the victim had made repeated disclosures

in the intervening years to multiple different people

and those disclosures show

that this was a product of consistent memory.

It wasn't something that all of a sudden 2013 comes along

she remembers the abuse and starts telling people

there are instances where there's the claim

that she told her mother

which her mother claims she doesn't remember

that the mother's testimony I think

had a whole host of problems with it

based on kind of the family dynamics.

Is that trial testimony or did that come out during the?

That was trial testimony.

But there were also disclosures to the victim's friends

that she acknowledged both in her CAC interview

and were presented to the court for its consideration

and those also occurred in high school

and shortly after high school

well before the 2013 time period

that the defendant alleged

is one of these repressed memories

would have been recovered.

Thank you, council.

Thank you.

Did you save a minute?

I did not.

I have a 30 second point.

I just want to say the...

You know the predecessor here would not allow this

but I'm going to.

The prior disclosures other than to the mother

all indicated it was some a family friend

with no mention of the...

That's in your brief.

Yeah, okay, thank you.

Thank you very much.

Case submitted.

Court's in recess.

And adjourned.
