Good morning.

Thank you, sir.

This is case 2018-0439 BS Development LLC versus New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services.

May it please the court.

My name is Sean Sullivan.

I represent BS Development, and I have reserved two minutes for rebuttal.

I'm here, Your Honours, I want my trial.

I requested a trial, and summary judgment was granted against my side.

I'm going to go over the issues that I believe that the court missed, and

the facts that the court did not take in the light most favorable to us.

By way of background, this was a DJ action.

My client had requested a dock lease for a certain section of River Road in Tilton, New Hampshire.

He was denied.

The petition was brought in the Superior Court because

the DES told us that the property that I represent was not, quote,

adjacent to the 25 leased lots that the state handles.

For $187 a year, you can have a five year lease in accordance with the state.

We are the first known party to be turned down.

There are half of the lease lots are probably, I don't believe are lease, they are open.

And historically, the leases are granted to people that

live directly adjacent to the lease property.

You could abut the leased property, there's two of those.

There's 23 lots that do not directly connect it.

If it's not 23, if it extended through, I think it's 42A.

Am I correct, it would then touch the leased or potentially leased property,

or it would be adjacent to the water's edge?

I didn't get the numbers that you raised at first, Your Honor.

So there's 44, which I think goes all the way through to the, I'll call it, river bank.

This lot we're talking about, 43, is sort of cut off and

then there's a lot behind it that goes to the river bank.

Yes, at page 30 of my brief is a really nice picture with color codes on it.

And yes, the lot that I represent is shaded in yellow,

all of the blue lots along River Road.

All of us have to cross into the street to get to the lots.

So when we talk about the butters and adjacent, there's only two actual butters.

Everybody else is adjacent.

So do you consider somebody who's across the street to be not on a butter?

Absolutely not, no.

So they're adjacent if they're across the street?

Yes, that is my position.

We filed to be considered adjacent just the same as everyone else that's across the street.

And what the court did that I took issue with was,

when I'm trying to show I'm adjacent and as adjacent as all these other people,

the court says, well, the DES turned you down while,

and although they say you were not adjacent, I think they meant that you were not abutting.

So the court, the problem I have is they changed gears on me.

I know I'm not abutting.

So when we're looking at the facts taken in the most favorable light to me,

I want to, number one, have the battle that I'm just as adjacent as the rest of these people.

The biggest mid-

Back to your map, is 44 then, it's a lot 44, which is next,

which does run all the way to, it looks like, water's edge.

Oh yeah.

Is that abutting or adjacent?

That abuts the water, because it goes down and touches it, and I know because I live there.

Okay, all right.

So that is a fact, yeah, that's definitely abutting.

Okay.

Let me ask you, what are the material issues of fact that are at dispute?

It seems to me this turns on interpretation of a statute,

and all the facts are on these maps that we've got.

We can read them without a trial.

Well, what you have to determine is if the property that I represent has to cross the street,

and all the other properties, the 20-something on River Road have to cross the street, what's the difference?

The court never quite closed the loop on telling us about the other properties.

The state was allowed to interject, well, and it is part of the underlying record,

okay, well, what's the difference?

Everybody else is across the street too, and particularly Labonte,

who's right across the driveway from the property that I'm talking about, and well, he's grandfathered.

So what the court did was accept the argument

that you don't have to touch the water as long as you've been there for forever.

So we have this grandfathered policy that we say shows up.

Isn't that a reasonable condition and restriction under subsection D of the statute 439?

All the reasonable conditions are at page 20 to 27 of my brief.

It's an attachment, and it lists them all out.

It doesn't contain any of those.

And I don't have a problem with a reasonable condition, Your Honor, as long as I know what it is.

We're talking about policies here and grandfathering policies and

that none of them are in writing.

None of them, they just appear out of the ether.

A trial will allow us to develop a proper record on this.

Well, you might be right that grandfathering shouldn't be allowed here,

if you read the terms of the statute, but why does that matter vis-à-vis your client?

It seems to me that's some other issue for some other day.

Whether your client has the right to get this lease space or

not is completely separate from this grandfathering issue.

You do have standing to raise the grandfathering issue?

The court ruled against us in part due to the grandfathered issue.

And I don't have a problem with the reasonable rules, Your Honor, as long as they are applied across the board and

equally to my client as well as similarly to the rest of the people

that live on River Road and have to enter the street also.

That's my baseline and that's the critical issue.

The judge took me out of the mix saying, I'm not going to rule on your adjacency, you're not on a butter.

And that's page 137 of my brief, it's page seven of the decision.

The light most favorable to me is when we're going to have a fight about whether we're adjacent or not.

The judge does not say, well, I'm going to take this in the light most favorable to the state.

What they really meant is you're not on a butter.

So the judge threw a curve ball into here.

Well, how far away can you be under your definition and be adjacent?

Well, the court put a rule in there, it was nearby, close, not touching, not on a butter.

The historical, it was a historical policy and that's in here as well.

Direct to butters would get one and then other nearby Lochmere residents.

So how far, I mean, this property has a line of sight to the least spaces.

So to me, your quarrel might be with the legislature, not with the DES or with the judge.

You ought to go, why isn't the answer, go to the legislature and make all these arguments

that you guys passed a law that doesn't make any sense.

Oh, I'm fine with the law.

I am not fine with applying the law to 20 other similarly situated individuals and not this one.

We all have to cross the street to get in.

We can all see it.

So how far away can you live a quarter mile away?

And if you can just walk down the street, you're adjacent, so you ought to be able to get a lot?

You should be able to apply.

Yeah, and you did apply.

Your client did apply.

We did apply and we want to be judged along with everyone else.

We are within the confines of left, right, north and south.

It's the same geographical area, Your Honor, and we were never considered,

we were never compared with the class.

I want to be part of that class.

That is the point.

I want a determination that we are adjacent.

I didn't even get that.

I got a determination that we're not on the butter.

Well, that doesn't tell us anything.

So what does the trial do for you?

It allows us, allows the court to make a factual determination with actual evidence

in people speaking other than arguing from affidavits as to what is the policy?

What is it?

I don't, it's not stated, Your Honor,

other than in the, an old 1991 letter that's in the record.

Your light's on.

I don't want you to eat into your two minutes.

Oh, I see that.

Okay.

I will step back and reserve two.

You got it.

Good morning, Your Honors.

Assistant Attorney General Gordon Landrigan,

representing Department of Environmental Services.

As this court is aware, real estate transactions can be very complicated,

particularly within the context of this case when you're dealing with leases.

That is, instead of purchasing a property and getting all the rights,

responsibilities and burdens of a new property,

you get into the details where you get qualified rights, conditional rights,

all of which are revocable.

And couple that with 439-D's allowance for in this case,

DES to become a public vendor of many different lots in close proximity.

The issues that can come up are limitless.

And the legislature clearly appreciated that when in Roman numeral six,

they allowed the agency to have some discretion,

because if they were going to do a laundry list of all the hypotheticals that came up,

you could fill an entire volume of an RSA.

Now, there is a-

So this was managed one way for many years.

And then in roughly 2010, policy changed because I gather two reasons,

too many people in the street and sort of unregulated parking.

Too many people not parking or parking in the street, I guess.

So my question is with lot 43, there would be parking on the lot.

So the parking question would not be an issue.

And query, if 43 walked over 44, I mean,

how is the pedestrian traffic from 43,

any different from the pedestrian traffic of all those lots across River Road?

It's light, admittedly, Your Honor.

But the concern is still there.

And really, if we're going to start making individual exceptions,

because somebody can walk through somebody else's property,

then all of a sudden we could hypothetically be required

to give a lot at least to somebody a quarter mile away.

Well, but could that be where these two lots are

related, if you will?

Could that be a condition?

You know, 43 has to go through 44 in order to get to the proposed dot.

I mean, is there a solution here?

Well, if we were to find a solution

and adopt what you had just proposed,

then somebody else in the neighborhood said,

might say, well, DES, let's get creative here.

Let's come up with another solution.

Well, they might have to get agreement from the property owner.

Come again?

They'd have to get agreement from the property owner.

Sure.

And this brings it to a bigger picture, too,

which I know is in Mark Stevens' affidavit.

These leases are $187 a year,

and this consumes a large amount of DES's time.

Do DES increase the cost of the lease?

They could.

They're contractually bound right now.

But DES's charge, their mission,

isn't to be a relator or a rental agency.

This consumes a lot of time.

And this applies to every publicly accessible body

of water in the state, too.

Correct?

No, this only applies to this property,

which I don't know if we're about to ask a question.

No.

When you say this, this statute only applies to this property?

No.

Sorry.

The statute applies to all areas near public waters,

and there's a definition for that.

The 2010 policy only applies to this,

to the Winisquam property,

which was wise exempt from rulemaking.

I'm not sure if the justice has questions

about the rulemaking aspect of this,

but the statute allows DES to get creative here.

There's probably not pedestrian or vehicle concerns

that other DES own.

Can I just ask?

I mean, the policy you talk about

is just about this property,

but the statute also changed in 2010, right?

Correct.

So the whole system got changed statewide,

and then there's this policy as to this particular location.

Both things changed in 2010.

Yes.

So in this requirement for being adjacent,

did that exist before 2010?

That law, did a law say that they

can be leased to adjacent property owners?

The adjacent language was added to the statute in 2010.

In 2010.

In 2010.

So that was absent before,

which is why I'm talking about the non-adjacent properties,

which is why Mr. Mazer, who's from Franklin, New Hampshire,

Mr. Latouche, who's from Laconia,

that's how they came to have these leases in the first place.

Is it your position that a budding equals adjacent,

or do we have to decide that?

Well, there's actually a very simple way

for the court to resolve this case,

and that's by applying the case law

of Johnson and McDonald, McDonald's, a 1961 case,

but admittedly the trial court's interpretation

of adjacent being a broader geographical term

and a budding being a more immediate one,

that conflicts with both of those cases,

and under gun stock and some other cases

that I quoted in my brief,

the court can resolve or address unanswered

or undisputed findings of the law

if it actually resolves the case.

Johnson found that adjacent actually means to contact with,

and in that case they said that somebody can't be adjacent

to another property vis-a-vis,

I think in that case it had to do

with a third-party intervening right-of-way.

It actually has to touch,

and it said that that would be an absurd result

because under the theory that you could be adjacent vis-a-vis

some public right-of-way or easements,

every property in the continental United States

would be adjacent to each other.

Your position is that the trial court did it one way.

That might not be quite right,

but adjacent equals a budding essentially, so you win.

Essentially, Your Honor.

And MacDonald also addresses the intervening row issue

that the appellant brought up,

saying that, well, there's a road in the way

so they're not actually adjacent to each other.

MacDonald says, even regardless

of what's in the individual deeds,

it's presumed that properties on both sides of the road,

they actually contact each other in the middle.

So by applying those two cases,

all the properties on River Road

are adjacent under the contact width standard,

where the BS development property going up-

It's awfully close.

What about it?

Given the triangle, it's awfully close.

Basically, would you answer her question?

Close, but not in contact with.

And so if you apply the Johnson definition of adjacent,

it's not adjacent.

It's close, admittedly,

but again, if we were to give some leeway

and saying close enough,

then maybe BSD's neighbor would say,

well, I'm just as close or just a little farther.

Well, and again, those neighbors on Church Street

would have parking on their own property.

So the only issue you'd be dealing with

is people walking down the shoulder of Church Street.

Sure.

Is that a consideration DES should take into account

when it's interpreting its policy?

Yes.

The purpose of the policy?

Oh, absolutely.

But they also need to apply it uniformly,

or else we'll start going down this road

where somebody say, well, you know,

I can make arrangements or...

And then people are...

That's Mr. Sullivan's point.

He's saying that it's not being applied uniformly.

He's wrong?

He is wrong.

He cites Mazer, Latusche, and Levante as examples.

I think he uses the term, he's similarly situated.

He's not similarly situated

because he is a new applicant in this case.

He is not a renownist.

Right, but those people don't have the parking

benefit that he has right on his property.

I appreciate that, Your Honor.

But again, DES had to strike a balance,

and so they applied the grandfathering principle,

which is admittedly probably

as old as policymaking itself, that concept.

You're striking a balance between not taking the leases away

from people who have had them for decades in some case,

well, at the same time trying to alleviate

or at least stem some of these safety concerns.

So again, I appreciate that it's quite close,

but if we go down this road of saying close enough,

then the policy really has no teeth.

It's subjective.

But health and safety would, frankly,

allow DES to override those grandfathered leases

as another sort of environmental regulation

if safety's really the issue.

Sure.

It's safety and fairness.

Again, I believe Mazer has held the lease since 1998,

always paid on time, no problems.

This isn't really covered in the briefs,

but there are problems people recreating

in front of River Road Resonance Houses,

but they're just trying to strike a balance and be fair there.

And under the statute,

these leases are limited to five years, is that right?

Yes, Your Honor.

So the state could just say,

we're not going to do this anymore

at the end of each of these five-year leases.

This is too big a hassle.

We're just not going to do it.

And actually, that's mentioned in Mark Stevens'

affidavit.

He said that in 2009, 2010,

when people started complaining about these issues,

he conferred with superiors and co-workers

and scrapping the entire lease program was contemplated.

But again, these were good tenants.

They kept it neat.

They didn't abuse it.

They didn't build docks without permits,

anything like that.

They've been playing by the book for,

in some cases, almost 30 years.

Is it only the River Road Frontage?

Or is it also the Frontage

that I guess is north of River Road?

North of the bridge.

I mean, are there leases issued,

I'll say, above the bridge on this map I have?

They're available.

I believe they're currently vacant.

Yes.

And in terms of material fact,

most of the issues raised in the Appellants Brief

aren't material if the court finds

that the legislature actually

granted the discretion to the agency

to come up with this policy.

And I'll note too that the Appellant

at all stages of this litigation,

from the trial court to here,

has yet to even mention the reasonable conditions

or limitations of language.

I'm not sure what the Appellant's position is on that,

but he's proceeding as if that language doesn't even exist.

So under that,

I think the court could also resolve this

by saying the issue,

that the foundation of the court's decision

hasn't been challenged and briefed

or discussed at all.

And so under that,

this is really a gun stock issue

where the core of the trial court's order

hasn't even been challenged.

Thank you, counsel.

Thank you.

Mr. Sullivan?

Thank you.

I can now answer your question.

How far away do you have to be?

According to DES,

what they've actually done,

you can live in Franklin,

like Mazer or Laconia,

like LaTouche, or, yeah, those are the two.

But they're grandfathered, aren't they?

Sure.

And so a new applicant comes in.

I live in Canterbury.

It's only 10 miles away.

How about that?

Right.

Let's talk about that.

I don't know what the grandfathering policy is.

What we need to try out for is,

what is the policy?

I want to hear it out of Mark Stevens' mouth.

I want to hear what is the policy now?

Did you ask for a deposition of Mr. Stevens?

We resolved on summary judgment.

Right.

But did you go to the court and say,

wait a minute, I need discovery

in order to contest what Mr. Stevens says?

We did what we felt was appropriate at a time,

at the time.

So what they have done for all these other ones,

it's never been defined as to what Jason is.

You know, this whole,

we're kind of, we all have to walk into the street.

This driveway is right across from LaBonte.

So he's a new lease, all right?

He's a new lease.

What really changed in 2010 was,

you got to be adjacent.

That was a statute.

Yeah.

So that was 10 years ago.

DS ignored that.

They don't care.

But Tush is not adjacent.

He lives in Laconia.

Well, let me ask you this.

And these are Liz and Franklin.

Mr. Landrigan brought up the point

that you hadn't addressed the section six,

the reasonable conditions and restrictions.

Sure.

In your briefing.

So here's your chance.

All right.

I told this court that all those conditions

are on page 25 to 27 in my brief

and they don't talk about anything of this.

Any reasonable condition,

and I challenge state authority

when there's ad hoc rulemaking.

So if they're going to make a reasonable condition,

you want to promulgate it in some fashion.

And then you should apply it consistently

across the board.

All I want is a trial to develop the record,

fully answer the questions that you justices have for me.

And if we can properly develop a record,

we can see.

No one here, I don't think this court is able to answer.

Why not BS Development

if all the other ones on River Road were granted?

Well, let me just add.

If we hold that adjacent equals abutting, do you lose?

If that's the law, if that's the law.

That may be a cause for a different petition

because they will now in the next five years

the leases will expire and they will be issuing permits

to all the 15 or 20 non-abutting properties

that currently have leases.

Thank you.

So I thank you very much for your time.

Thank you, counsel.

Case submitted.
