Three, two, one, go.

The matter before the court is appeal of Joanne Hoff. It is case number 20190622. The claimant

is represented by attorney Leslie H. Johnson. The respondent is represented by attorney Kevin

W. Sturder. And Ms. Johnson, have you reserved any time for a bottle? You may. All right.

You may also proceed whenever you are ready. Thank you, Your Honor. This is a case with

restrictions on walking and sitting, at which point that page of support came in. It wasn't

carried before, during, and after the FCE. The alternative job offer saw the alternative

duty job. I'm sorry. I'm sorry, Ms. Johnson. Didn't Dr. Martin defer to the FCE? Abilities.

Because she continued to have her out of work in that same office. The examination,

which shows that continued the factor saying that she wasn't able to. And it said, well,

yeah, we could still have this modified it. Didn't Dr. Mason actually approve the job

without qualification? Doesn't he just indicate please allow occasional break or stand stretch

and reposition? She deteriorated her 20 days of the job. Was that out of work as an LPN

as opposed to the job offer? Two 2019, which is at Appendix 104. So when they're taking

her out of work, there's a duty job. Isn't that assertion somewhat ambiguous, though? In

other words, capable of two interpretations that she remains out of work. It doesn't

say what. 18, that's actually out of work. It checks off out of work and that she's

out of work. And as you see in the records and I started to deteriorate. So for the

board, we can get a clear error. How would it have been different if it was clear

at the board hearing that the job was available and modified to her needs, even if

they were deteriorating? But let's assume everything lined up and they were able to

confirm that this job offer was, in fact, appropriate. What's the procedural

distinction? How would we handle that? So you're saying that the job offer wasn't

in writing with the modifications? They came to the deion to the ablation.

The CED throughout their while, you know, she had full sedentary capability and the

FDA did say full sedentary standard on page 20 sedentary means you can see how

it could work like walk like 400 feet and she couldn't sit. And again, I'm

still sorry. I'm still back on this sort of time. Time moves the needle. So

if the board's reviewing facts at an earlier point in time and her condition

deteriorates, is that a new claim or is the board able to take that new

information into account? So your position is that it's problematic not because

it just simply because it wasn't in writing. It's problematic because her

condition has changed in the interim. This is not a real earning capacity.

I mean, being able to do that doesn't establish a capacity is in the open

thing that they're not and she couldn't go out into labor market and say, you know,

I can only set the treating doctors are the Miami doctors are the duty job. It's

the treating doctor and we think it's incredible. We can do that. Here's the

offer. We don't think that shows an earning capacity. Credibility,

credibility is solely the providence of the cabs. That's not our job, right?

It's in their providence, but a whole bunch of things. Your light, your red

light is on. You've reserved two minutes. Thank you, Mr. Stewart. Good morning. My

name is Kevin Stewart at Burnham and Merrill representing EIM Mutual Worker's

Compensation Carrier for Valley Regional Hospital. I'd like to reserve one minute

if I can and I'm happy to take questions at any time. Actually, you

can't. We only allow the appellants to reserve. Okay, thank you. I'm happy to

take questions at any time. This was ready. So Mr. Stewart, how do we how do we

reconcile Dr. Mason keeping us off out of work as of February 2019, six months

after the TAD and well after the DOL? Well, there's a couple issues. One is a

treating doctor, the treating surgeon, Dr. Pikes, who has never indicated the

claimant can't do this job and approved the job. So the treating surgeon

approved this position with the modification of sit stand. The employer

testified that that sit stand was available and at the hearing the

claimant they offered the job at the hearing again. She did not accept it

at the hearing. She did not accept it afterwards. But what this is is a

situation where there's competing medical evidence. This court is said in

gammas that that's the providence of the board to assess the competing

medical evidence. There's an independent exam from Dr. Rudolph that said she

could work, sit down, sedentary work. That's at page 138 of the appendix. Dr.

Rudolph approved this job without any limitations or changes. And this

understand this job is a zero pound lifting job that's in the record. This

was a sit down job. This was offered as a temporal term of duty. But

also the testimony at the hearing was that this is a regular job. This is not

a makeshift position. This is a job that's available on the open market.

They offer it. We have the job description in there because it's

a regular job. And that they may have made these accommodations before for

other employees. That's all. So is there a requirement that the

modifications that the physician suggests need to be in writing in the

alphabet? There is no such requirement in the statute. The job that does

require the job be offered. It was offered. We have that in the record. There

was a telephone call. It was sent in writing. The lab rule 504 also

requires it says that the employer shall offer a position as approved by

the treating physician and the employee shall demonstrate a reasonable

effort to comply. In this case, the claimant made no effort to comply. She

the record supported that she had she was emailing with the employer. She

would speak with them on the telephone and she received this offer

not just in the telephone but also in writing. Then after the modifications

were made, we're going to a hearing. The modifications had been she never

contacted the employer about coming back to work. She never asked after

she found out about the modifications, one of which was to

reposition herself to get up and sit down, which is not really

modification at all. The other one was to stand, which is more

significant, but the employer testified at the hearing that you can

provide that and that she could have accepted the offer right there

at the hearing or really the proof more was afterwards we see a board

had she still hadn't accepted it. If that was the really the

rationale that was a credible position that she would have accepted if

she'd known about it, she would have done it after the hearing. So

the board, our work was to show a change of condition, a work

capacity and an earning capacity. And the CAB found that there was

ample evidence to support it. So we had the independent exam. We

had the treatment surgeon, Dr. Pikes, who approved the job. And

just before Dr. Mason took her out of work, which was just

before a DOL hearing, where we had requested to go to the

CLEP noted this, the timing of this, he said in his office,

there was no change. And he didn't change the work release. And

then we did have the FCE right before the hearing in December.

And that gave her a full time, sedentary work capacity. So

there was been that's all cited by the CAB. The competing

evidence was Dr. Mason. And Dr. Mason did take her out right

before the hearing. But it's notable. And you can see this

in our appendix at pH 16 that opposing counsel wrote to Dr.

Mason. And she responded very ambiguously. She said, if these

applications, you know, if these modifications are made, can she

do the job? Yes or no? She didn't answer yes or no. She

said that she was unable to say and went on and then she said

she can't work. But then she said the work capacities per the FCE.

So that was the competing evidence. The CAB weighed it.

And they found the three that Dr. Pikes, the surgeon, the

IME and the FCE more reliable and more persuasive than Dr.

Mason's competing evidence. The argument that the IME is

irrelevant is a red herring. The lab rule does direct

the employer to send the TAD job to the treating doctor. But it

does not direct the CAB to ignore competing medical evidence. It's

axiomatic that both sides get to present evidence on whether

there is a work capacity. And the CAB is well within their

rights to adopt an IME over a treating doctor.

Is the CAB's credibility determination supported by

the record?

Yes. And they, it's amply supported in the record. And they

found she was not particularly credible. And they noted that one

when she was asked about whether she had any hobbies, she said

phony reading, she asked if she sold cupcakes online, she said

no. But then under cross examination, it was presented

that not her family member was selling the cupcakes, but

she, her own Facebook page, which no one else had access

to, was advertising cupcakes for sale. The evidence, then she

admitted that she had taken her order for the cupcakes. That

that person came not to her family, to somebody else's

house, but to her house, that she handed the cupcakes to the

customer. Now she says she didn't do the baking or in her

daughter-in-law or someone else did the baking. But that was

all things she wouldn't, didn't mention under direct, or

beginning across examination, CAB noted that they didn't find her

testimony credible, also in the evidence, even though she's

saying that her symptoms are getting worse. And she in these

very strong limitations, she drove to Connecticut. That was

more at least 250 miles round trip to the border of

Connecticut. When she's saying she's can't terribly

disabled. She conceded she drove to Springfield. She

didn't, she couldn't remember those trips would be

under, or two hours or under, in one direction. So isn't that

consistent with, you know, sort of the three hours out of eight

sedentary capacity? Means it was CAB able to draw a

distinction in making that determination that she was

incredible based on those facts?

Well, between the cupcakes, when she first denied she had

any hobbies other than reading. Yeah, the she's saying she

could only sit for 30 minutes.

Was there any more evidence than that she served as a

conduit to hand out some cupcakes and take some money

that someone else baked? I mean, again, was there more for

the CAB to rely on than just those incidences? I don't

know that I consider it a hobby if I were just doing a

favor for someone else who was doing something.

So there was so additional evidence. This is the

evidence that they cited there. The fact finders, you know,

they were there when she denied that she had any hobbies

denied that she'd sold cupcakes. And then under the exam, it

turned out she was taking the orders and selling them. As

far as the driving, she said she could only sit for 30

minutes. But under we've put out that she drove to at

least the border of Connecticut, which is at least 250

miles round trip. That would establish that she's a

speeder.

So

or took a lot of breaks along the way.

And I mean, that's possible, but the CAB didn't find

that particularly credible. And that's, you know, what they

determined. And so they had the benefit of seeing the

claimant and hearing her testimony. And the claim is

asking you to step in the shoes and decide the

credibility that's really for the CAB and their and their

providence. And then the I'm not sure regard to earning

capacity. This was amply supported in the record.

There's a job that paid a minimum of $17.08 an hour.

The testimony was that the job would pay more, but that was

the minimum. The evidence was that this was not a makeshift

job. This was a regular job. The job had been was being

advertised and came up and they would be available for her to

go to a full time position. So this was not a situation like

a makeshift job. And this was a regular job at Valley

Regional Hospital has people in many positions. And that's

what was in the evidence. So this does demonstrate a earning

basket on the open market for jobs that are available on the

open market. And so there was ample evidence in the CAB

cited that support that there was both the work in earning

capacity. I'm not sure I don't have any other evidence to

present for you.

You don't have to use all of your time, even if you can't

reserve it. Okay, thank you.

Thank you, Ms. Johnson. You have two minutes.

In writing that she would benefit from start occasional

rehabilitating the reference kick thing you can you can

obviously read as that she thank you. Thank you very much. I

don't think we have any more questions case submitted court

stands adjourned. Thank you.
