This is case 2019-0273, Robert Gormley et al. versus Rough Diamond Development, LLC et

al.

Counsel, when you're ready.

Thank you, Your Honor. May it please the Court. My name is Robert Fouhou, and I represent

the plaintiff, appellants Robert and Lori Gormley. The only issue on appeal is whether

the statute of repose, in this case, bars my client's claims. We contend it does

not at the Superior Court aired in applying it because it isn't constitutional as applied

to my clients. And we're requesting that the court reverse the dismissal of my client's

claims and remand the case for the proceedings.

Part one, Article 14 of our state's constitution provides that every subject of this state

is entitled to a certain remedy. By having recourse to the laws for all injuries he

may receive in his person, property, or character. Courts in other jurisdictions have held that

statute of repose violate similar provisions in their respective state constitutions.

So how is your case different than Lenard's?

Lenard's, Your Honor. Both Lenard's and Linnisquam, which is the other case my

opponent's site and rely on. The issue in Lenard's and Linnisquam was a different

constitutional challenge. Both cases, this court looked at whether the statute of

repose violated equal protection. Equal protection is essentially directed at

similarly situated individuals have to be treated in the same way. In this case,

we're mounting a different challenge. And that is that it violates my client's

constitutional guarantee to a remedy, to access to the courts under the

resolution of the New Hampshire constitutions that I just quoted. The five cases that we

cite in our brief strike down statutes of repose based on that argument. Rhode Island,

Alabama, Wyoming, Florida, and Kentucky, all of those cases held statutes of repose

for them in construction scenarios were unconstitutional based on that argument.

And that's a challenge to the statute itself, not these particular

circumstances or both? Well, we're mounting an as applied challenge. The argument is

that it abolishes a right to a remedy. I do acknowledge that there may be

situations in which a right to remedy may arise and a party has to act

quickly. In this situation, the complaint alleges that my clients were

still investigating their claims and the basis for their claims when the

statute of repose last. You raise a very interesting question, whether

there is a distinction between an equal protection claim and a right to a remedy

claim under Part 1 Article 14. Wouldn't your opponent argue that the Part 1

Article 14 claims are subsumed in the equal protection analysis in those prior

cases? I think that's a very good question. Thank you for raising it. If

you look at the Sailor case, which is Sailor versus Hall, the Kentucky

Supreme Court struck down a statute of repose there for construction

situations. The court in that case addressed that very distinction and made

the distinction. The court held that the application of these statutes in a

manner that destroys a cause of action, finding my wording here. It

recognized that the issue, excuse me, the application of those statutes in

such a manner should destroy a cause of action before it legally exists cannot

be permissible if it accomplishes destruction of a constitutionally

protected right of action. Recovery is not possible until a cause of

action exists. But as he points out, your clients were aware of the mold

damage before the statute of repose expired. Well, the complaint

alleges that they noticed the condition in the floor as a two inch

deflection in the floor approximately six years after the reconstruction of

the addition was substantially completed. They were then investigating how

that came to be. There was a mold issue, but my client was not aware. She

was aware of, they were aware of the mold. She was aware of certain

symptoms that she was experiencing. They were not aware of whether or not

there was a connection. The cause of action had not fully accrued by

that time. The limitations period had lapsed. So returning to the

sailor court, the court went on to reason that, I'm sorry, if this

situation hadn't occurred to your clients for 15 years, and the wife did

not suffer any health problems within 12 years. So it's your

argument that suit could be brought at that point too, regardless of how

long it takes.

Your Honor, do you mind clarifying that question, just repeating it

while I understand that?

So my point is, if it's not eight years, what about 20 years? What if the

damage isn't discovered for 20 years? Is it your claim then that your

clients, because the claim cause of action had not accrued yet, that

they should be entitled to suit?

So under this, the premise of your question is the statute of

repose is still eight years, and they don't discover the situation

of 20 years out. I would argue that based on our argument

that they shouldn't still be permitted to file suit, because

their right to remedy was extinguished before it ever even

fully accrued.

Essentially, they get the benefit of a discovery rule. Is that

what you're saying?

That's correct.

So 20 years out, they figure it out. What do they have three

years then to bring a claim?

That's correct, and if that's a way to carve out an exception

to it, I think that that is not an unreasonable way to

approach this, because then it preserves an individual's

right to a remedy.

The question here is much more direct than an equal protection

challenge. It's much more direct. It's more simple. Does the

statute abolish a constitutional guarantee that we have

an interstate constitution? In this situation, it does. In the

cases that we cite, it does. And that's a distinction that's

being drawn in the sale case. It held that the unique

restriction imposed by our constitutional guarantee, a

variety of access to courts makes it irrelevant that a

statute of repose may be valid under a state or federal

due process protection challenge.

So the discovery rules saves the statute of limitations

generally from your argument that people need to have the

right to a remedy. So I guess I'm just clarifying a discovery

rule in the statute of repose would answer your concerns in

terms of right to a remedy.

Yes, it would.

Have there been any states that have recognized that?

I'm not aware of any one quick point.

The main concern that the statute is supposed to address is

preventing infinite liability for contractors and construction

situations. The overland case, which is the Florida Supreme

Court case we cite explains that that concern should not

isn't so unique. The problem also exists on the other side

of the aisle. Plaintiffs have the burden of proof and have to

preserve evidence and find a way to support their claims. And

they have the same issues that contractors and other design

professionals would have in defending such claims years

after substantial completion of real estate improvement.

And arguably any manufacturer or any product?

The court went on to hold that the situation is also not

unique to the construction industry. It's prevalent in any

other industry. So again, I'm not arguing. This is not a

protection challenge. I'm not arguing that. It's not an

important government objective, but the court in overland was

trying to, I guess, assuage that concern if you will.

So the five out of state cases that you've cited were

decided in the 70s and then 80, 83, 84?

That's correct.

Have any courts grappled with this issue since then and

come to a different conclusion?

I have, in my diligence, in my research on it, I have not

found any other cases. These are the cases I found. This court

has not addressed that issue for whatever reason, even though

the arguments were made in Winisquam and Lenards, the court

focused only on the protection challenge, but no, I have not

found any other cases since these. But as you can see, it's

not a novel challenge. It has been dealt with and resolved

decades ago. So this is nothing new. I mean, this

is, it's an important issue.

So I guess my question restated is, are there cases that go

the other way?

I am not aware of any. And then, and my opponents have not

cited any.

I'll reserve two minutes for rebuttal.

Okay.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Mr. Peroti, my notes indicate that you have two minutes.

Thank you, Your Honor. May it please the court? My name is

Robert Peroti. It's my privilege and honor to be here

representing Rough Diamond today. The bulk of the argument

is going to be given by Attorney Friedman and Rough

Diamond. The argument she's going to make is applicable to and

adopted by Rough Diamond. The plaintiff's claim on appeal is

that 5084B has applied to them, deprives them of equal

protection and a remedy at law. As noted in Huckins versus

McSweeney, a single legal analysis is applied when this

type of claim is raised. The plaintiff's argument is that

they are a class of plaintiffs who are still investigating their

claim when the statute bars their claim, the eight-year

statute. The trial court found in this, in this case, the facts

was that the substantial completion was December 21st,

2009, based on the plaintiff's pleading. Eight years

thereafter would be December 20th, 2017. The plaintiff alleges that

Paragraph 24 of its amended complaint that they discovered the

conditions in the fall of 2015 fewer than three years before

they filed their claim. The claim was filed on, excuse me, I

believe in 2018, 2017, excuse me, 2018. This case is identical in

our position to the Lenard's case. In the Lenard's case, I

was decided under the current intermediate scrutiny standard

for equal protection that this court has adopted. The motion to

dismiss was decided on the proper standards as exists, so we

maintain that the decision should be upheld. Thank you.

Ms. Friedman. May it please the court, Chris Friedman for

State Farm Fire and Casualty. We're here today to ask the court

to affirm the decision of the lower court, and what I'd like

to do is start with a brief discussion of the chronology

of events as set forth in the amended complaint so that the

court can appreciate how similar, if not identical, this

matter is to the Lenard's claim. So in this matter, the plaintiff

alleges that there was substantial completion of the part of the

construction project that State Farm was involved in in the fall

of 2009. At paragraph 24 of the amended complaint, which was

also cited at page three of the plaintiff's brief, the

plaintiffs explained that in the fall of 2015, six years after

substantial completion, the plaintiffs discovered that the floor

joists were significantly rotted, deteriorated, and they

discovered that that was the product of improper ventilation

as part of the construction that State Farm was involved

with that was substantially completed in 2009. So that was

discovered in the fall of 2015, six years after substantial

completion. Their cause of action under this court's prior

ruling in Bean had therefore accrued in November of 2015. They

still had two years to bring their cause of action before

the court, and they would have complied with the statute of

repose. Having failed that, and having brought their action

after that, their action is barred by the construction

statute of repose 508-4-B.

Well, it seems to me the wrinkle in this case is if it were

just an equal protection claim, then I think Lennart's and

Winnisquam take care of it. But we've got this claim under

part one, article 14. Should we think of that any differently?

I would suggest the answer is no. I don't think it's an

appropriate distinction. If you look at Lennart's, the

court ruled there, we conclude that neither the plaintiff's

constitutional right to equal protection nor her right to a

remedy was violated in this case. The court did a unified

analysis, if you will, as an equal protection slash right to

a remedy under part one, article 14, and concluded that

her right to a remedy was not impeded in the same way we

would argue that the plaintiff's right here to a remedy was

not impeded. I think the fact of the matter...

Factually speaking, they had a claim that had accrued within

eight years. They just didn't pursue it. They didn't file it.

Yes.

And if they had discovered that the wife's health issues

created another basis for damages, it could have amended

their complaint.

They could have. I might argue had they amended their

complaint after the statute of repose had expired, I might

have argued that the court not grant that amendment.

You probably lose, but yes.

I might, yes. But I think that if you compare the factual

situation here to Lennart's, it is virtually identical. In

Lennart's, the plaintiff discovered her injury six years

after substantial completion, just like here. She still had

two years to bring her cause of action and she failed

to do that. So I think that Lennart's really hits the

four corners, if you will, of the analysis in this case.

I think if you also look back to Winnisquam, in that case,

to get back to Justice Bassett's question about whether

there's a wrinkle here where the prior cases only addressed

equal protection analysis, if you look at the challenge

that was made in Winnisquam, the plaintiff made both

challenges there. The plaintiff made both an equal

protection and a right to a remedy challenge. And in that

case, just like Lennart's, the court held that the statute

was constitutional. So what I would suggest to this court

is that there is no need to look out of state. I think

that there's reason to discount the decisions from, that

have been cited from out of state because the

constitutional provisions on which they relied were

different than what this case, what this state has.

But I think that if you look at the cases that this

court has already decided, they are, in Lennart's,

they're identical. And in Winnisquam, the result

that it reached was much harsher from the standpoint

of the plaintiff. Because in Winnisquam, the plaintiff's

cause of action did not accrue until after the

Statute of Repose had expired. The plaintiff

argued the right to a remedy in that that created

an inherently unreasonable restriction on her right

to bring a claim, or their right to bring a claim

because it cut the right off before it even accrued.

It's before your time, but most trial judges on the

bench agreed with that.

Before Winnisquam was decided, yes. And I think

that was informed by some of the cases that were

decided in the 80s that struck down the first,

by the way, Yaron, I'm not sure it was before

my time. But there were a series of cases in the

80s where other restrictions on rights of lit

against were overturned. Heath and, I'm sorry,

I'm just drawing a blank on the one, the Clay

Products case that overturned the first Statute

of Repose. But the legislature went back,

particularly wanting to protect the problem of

infinite liability in dealing with the construction

issues, because these buildings last a lot longer

than the automobiles that we drive, or the blenders

that we use, or commercial products.

Sad, but true.

Yes, agreed, Your Honor. But there is a particular

problem of infinite liability in the very narrow

area that we're here to talk about today, which is

the construction industry, because these buildings

last hundreds of years, and plaintiffs can discover

that they have a problem, as a result of that

construction, 10, 20, 30, 50 years later.

And the legislature, and the legislative history

was quoted extensively in the Winisquam case,

the legislature found that that problem is a

public interest problem that needed a resolution.

This court has upheld the legislature's action

in that regard in those cases.

I realize why you might not have dug into

the case law in other states, given your reliance

on Winisquam and Lenard's.

But do you know whether there are cases?

Your opponent has cited these five cases under

that have been decided in the way he suggests

that we should go.

Do you know are there other courts and other

jurisdictions that have rejected that argument?

I don't, Your Honor.

And I did review carefully the cases that the

plaintiff cited, in particular the two that were

referenced today.

In the Overton case, I'm just drawing a blank on

the jurisdiction.

But the Overton case had a much more strict

constitutional provision that it was relying on,

or restrictive, I should say, as did the second one.

I'm sorry, I just drawn a blank on those names.

But I am not aware of any other construction

statute of repose that has been challenged in this

manner.

But in all honesty, I don't want to represent that

I've done an exhaustive search because I do think

that the court's decisions here in Winisquam and

Lenard's are dispositive.

And I don't think it's unique.

I think that there are other cases that this

court has decided in statutes that are not

the construction of statute of repose where the

court has said there are certain restrictions on

the right to remedy that are constitutionally

permissible.

The Nut Brown versus Cranmore case is an example.

That was the ski industry liability case.

And the court upheld on both an equal protection

and due process basis the limitation on a

plaintiff's right to sue a ski industry.

So that there is, I think that also supports

the notion that there is no constitutional guarantee

that every plaintiff may have a remedy.

There are circumstances in which the legislature

has said that that is not permissible and that

this court has endorsed it.

And the Huckins versus McSweeney is the other

example that this court has conducted both

an equal protection and a due process analysis

and has found that in that case the statute,

which was a municipal liability, I believe,

statute where a lit against right to bring a remedy

was deprived and this court found that that was

constitutionally permissible.

So the statute of repose is not a common,

but it's not unique nor is this court's endorsement

of that statute.

So we'd ask that you affirm the lower court's

decision dismissing this matter.

Thank you, Ms. Friedman.

Thank you.

Mr. Fogo, do you need your two minutes?

More than welcome to it.

Thank you.

Just very briefly, on this issue of whether the

court needs to conduct a single analysis when

addressing both an equal protection challenge

and a right to remedy challenge,

we're not making an equal protection challenge.

So the court's prior jurisprudence in which

it conducts a single analysis when both

challenges are made doesn't require it to,

doesn't mean it should apply an equal protection

analysis to this argument.

So do you agree that in those two cases

that a right to remedy challenge was made?

I'm sorry.

Do you agree that in both Winnisquam and Lennart's

right to remedy challenge was made?

That is correct.

A right to remedy challenge was made.

The court however engaged in no analysis concerning

that question.

And if you look at the cases that we cite,

it's a fundamentally different question.

When you look at whether a statute abolishes

a party's right to a remedy and whether

a statute violates equal protection,

that's a different question.

That question is whether or not the statute is substantially

related to an important government objective.

Entirely different, much more simple,

much more direct question is the one that we're asking here.

Thank you.
