Good morning.

Good morning. Thank you, sir.

In this case, 2020-19, 0500, a Kentucky Valley School District at all versus the State of New Hampshire at all.

Let the record reflect that Judge Ken Brown joined us to fill the panel this morning, and thank you for being here, Judge Brown.

Mr. Will, good morning, sir.

Good morning, Your Honor. I may please the court.

Mr. Dan Will, Solicitor General for the State of New Hampshire here for the defendants, the Governor, and the Commissioner of Education and the Department of Education, whom I'll refer to as the State.

I've asked to reserve three minutes of rebuttal time, and I would happily waive my uninterrupted time and take questions at any time.

Sure. So if we don't agree with the primary argument that the trial court applied an improper scheme of review,

is that dispositive? Do you lose?

Well, Your Honor, that's a...

The analytical framework that the trial court applied.

Do we agree with the trial court?

Well, Your Honor, if you agree that the trial court applied the improper framework, there are still some serious errors in what the trial court did, including...

Because at that point, Your Honor, you would be saying that one can divine whether there has been a deprivation of the constitutional right to inadequate education

by looking at a school district's actual costs of the education that they provide.

And if that is what the court determines to do, which, as Your Honor understands, the state disagrees with,

but if that's what the court determines to do, then there would need to be a significant proceeding that would allow the state to understand what those costs are

and make an effort to disaggregate the cost to provide inadequate education from the total cost.

Isn't that the legislature's obligation in the first instance to isolate what the cost of inadequate education is and what the elements are?

Your Honor, I think that conflates two of the four Claremont inquiries.

And by that, I mean that it is certainly the state's obligation to define the adequate education with sufficient specificity that can be disaggregated,

that it can be in any given school district scenario, it can be assessed and evaluated in terms of any of the other Claremont elements.

The state, however, does not have an obligation to disaggregate the cost that it comes up with to fund the adequate education into those various categories that it defines.

And so I think Your Honor is referring perhaps to the London Dairy decision, and that was the issue in London Dairy in the majority.

The majority decision, opinion in London Dairy said that the definition, that case was about the definition of an adequate education,

and said that the statute at the time RSA 193 E2 sufficiently defined the adequate education such that it could be disaggregated from whatever school district.

Keep in mind, as far back as Claremont too, this court has said that while the state has to provide the constitutional minimum,

the constitutional adequacy, school districts are free to include services above and beyond whatever the state's obligation is.

And also that the right itself is not one of horizontal resource replication from school district to school district,

meaning that school districts are going to be able to provide an adequate education even though they have differing types of facilities.

I think the court used the examples of different library facilities, different teaching pedagogy.

Do you disagree that the state's required to fund an adequate education, whatever that might be?

Well, certainly, Your Honor, that is the constitutional right that this court identified in Claremont 1 and carried through, I would say, in Claremont 2.

So, yes, and that is exactly, Your Honor, what RSA 193 E2A has done on the definitional side and what RSA 19840A has done on the costing side.

And so, the state has discharged that obligation to the best of the state's knowledge and to the extent that there is going to be a challenge to the costing side.

Keep in mind, in this case, there's no challenge to the definition.

There is a challenge to RSA 193 E2A in this case.

The challenge is solely to RSA 19848.

Isn't there a reference in the trial court's order that that statute is constitutionally suspect?

What does that mean?

Which statute, Your Honor?

The definitional statute.

I don't believe that that's the case, Your Honor.

I don't believe that the trial court weighted into the sort of definitional adequacy.

It definitely weighted into, as it thought was the right approach, it weighted into the costing adequacy.

The state's argument is that the trial court went at it the wrong way.

Is it the state position that transportation costs are or not part of the cost of inadequate education?

So, Your Honor, they are not as the state has defined it.

So, if you look at RSA 193 E2A, it lays out the categories, the really curricular categories that fall into the definition of adequate, of the constitutional adequate education.

And then, in the Ed Rules 306 series, there are rules that sort of correspond with each of those RSA 193 E2A components.

The statute's very clear that that comprises the state's obligation.

That's what the adequacy obligation is.

So, your position is that Ed 306 does, in part, define inadequate education?

Yes, Your Honor, but only as to, and this is an important point in RSA 193 E2A,

only as to the areas defined that make up the state's adequate education obligation.

But I would also point, Your Honor, that just stepping back, the question of whether transportation costs are included,

or the question of whether school nurse costs are included,

those things, Your Honor, I think we're not the proper focus of the analysis of RSA 198 E4A, the cost number.

This court made clear just as recently as the Lilly case that in order to put the burden on the state to justify a limitation on a constitutional right,

you have to first prove that you've been deprived of it.

And so in a case where a plaintiff wants to say, I can't provide an adequate education on the base adequacy amount that the state has provided,

the inquiry then becomes that the burden remains on that plaintiff then to prove that that plaintiff cannot provide an adequate education

on the base adequacy amount that the state has provided.

Is it the state's position that an adequate education can be provided for the base adequacy amount?

Well, Your Honor, the state's position is that the statute sets forth a base adequacy amount.

To the extent that there's a plaintiff out there, including these plaintiffs who say that they cannot provide an adequate education

based on that amount, they bear the burden of proof that that constitutional right has been deprived,

that that base adequacy amount is too low.

And Your Honor, it hearkens a little bit too, or maybe not hearkens,

but I think Justice Duggan foreshadowed this or forecasted this in his concurrence in London Dairy.

He says, look, you can have a trial over whether the funding is adequate or not.

And particularly now, Your Honor, where the legislature and the State Board of Education

have very specifically defined what the constitutional adequacy requirement is,

you can now take that and you can look at how the school spends the money that it gets from the state

and whether it's possible or not to provide this constitutional adequacy component,

which is a subset of whatever the school district's overall expenditures might be,

you can then assess and prove or not prove whether there's been an actual deprivation of the right.

And then only then do you move to strict scrutiny.

Only then do you move to say to the state, OK, well, if they've proven they can't provide it,

what's your justification state?

The trial court put the cart before the horse in this case, Your Honor,

in that it basically moved to strict scrutiny before ever requiring the plaintiffs to prove

they couldn't provide those adequacy components on the state-based adequacy number.

Well, the school district has to spend $4,000 for people just to fund the building operation

and building maintenance.

And let's assume that we find that that's part of an adequate education

because you need a building in which to educate children.

Isn't that sufficient at that point?

You can't provide the constitutionally adequate education for $3,500

given the fact that it costs $4,000 for people to manage the building?

It's not, Your Honor, it is not adequate, unless this court wades into the definition,

the RSA 193E2A and the corresponding Department of Education rules

and says that that definition is inadequate in some way.

And, Your Honor, that's not the case that was presented to the trial court.

That's not the case that's been presented to this court.

There's no challenge to that definition.

So for purposes of this litigation...

And this court, this trial court did not limit the scrutiny to actual costs.

In fact, in a footnote indicated it's not dealing with that issue.

So arguably, there is other evidence out there,

whether it's virtual learning or charter schools or whatever,

that could bear on this evaluation, if you will,

of what goes into providing the minimally adequate education.

That's correct, Your Honor.

And again, I go back to Justice Duggan and his concurrence in London Dairy.

He lays out that further factual development is necessary to determine

whether there are municipalities that are not able to provide

an adequate education based on the state funding numbers that's provided.

If the plaintiffs want to challenge the definition,

that's a different lawsuit, that's a different case.

What the trial court here did was the trial court said,

okay, well I'm looking at RSA 19848 and that number

and the formula that sets out the base adequacy.

But in order for me to determine whether that's adequate,

I get to look behind it.

I get to look at how the legislature came up.

And that is not to interrupt you,

but that's sort of a reverse of a normal as applied analysis.

Usually an as applied analysis takes the statute and for ordinance

and sees the impact of the wording of the statute on the particular application.

Here, interesting, it's sort of an analysis of the sausage making

that came to the conclusion.

So what do we call that?

I think that's a core question in this case, Your Honor,

that if you look at the trial court's order on the state's motion

for reconsideration, the trial court sort of identifies

this kind of hybrid inquiry that truly bespoke.

It is truly a one-off inquiry.

It's nothing that I have ever seen or recognized.

And it really does kind of look in the wrong direction.

It looks back behind that base adequacy number

instead of looking, as you say, in an as applied context

to how do we know that you can't provide an adequate education

based on this?

You get to prove that.

You get to prove what you can't provide.

You can't provide the affidavits that attested to that?

There were, Your Honor.

And of course, as Your Honor knows, we dispute those affidavits

on immiscibility grounds.

We're putting that aside.

Those affidavits provide a couple of different things

that are really irrelevant to the inquiry.

The first being they provided the school district plaintiffs

total costs in these certain areas.

But total costs, Your Honor, are not what the constitutional adequacy requirement is.

The constitutional adequacy requirement is the costs

to provide what the legislature has defined

as the constitutional adequacy component of an education.

So you can't take someone's total costs.

Let's just say, for example, that transportation was included,

which the state does not see that it is.

It doesn't think that it was.

But let's just say that it was.

What components of transportation relate to adequacy

versus anything else?

And so that's the analysis that the trial court didn't do.

One school district with high transportation costs

could have low building costs.

Exactly, Your Honor.

It factors in.

Exactly.

And so when you're thinking about whether someone has been deprived

of this constitutional right, you really have to look at it

in terms of, here's the money that I, the school district received.

Here's all these expenditures that I have

that are directly associated with the definition of adequacy

that the legislature has and the Department of Education

have fleshed out.

I can't meet that.

I can't pay for that with what the state has given me.

That's the inquiry.

And that's consistent, Your Honor.

We pointed the court to some of the ratemaking cases

in which the court says, look, the methodology

for how the rate is determined

is really constitutionally irrelevant.

The question really is, is that ultimate rate itself,

just in reason?

So is it the state's position that there is not sufficient

evidence in the record to establish that the cost

of an adequate education is in excess of $3,700?

Correct, Your Honor.

That's the state's position.

And that's, again, because that particular question,

whether these school districts can or cannot provide

an adequate education on the base adequacy amount,

that particular question was never part of these proceedings.

And so instead, what the trial court relied on

was actual costs that the school districts purport to bear

in various categories of their educational enterprise.

And basically did not, even if that were the correct inquiry,

which it isn't, but even if it were,

the trial court then didn't ever require

the plaintiffs to aggregate from those categories

what it is that they say would be of constitutional evidence.

Why isn't the disparity between the two numbers

sufficient to draw an inference

that it's not constitutionally adequate?

Well, Your Honor, I think that it's, as we said in our brief,

that sort of like trying to divine the cost of, say,

an engine by looking at the sticker price of a car.

And you can say, boy, there's a big delta there.

But without knowing anything about what the costs are

that relate to the various components of the educational enterprise

that any of the plaintiff school districts provide,

you can't infer that, I mean, I think it's a point,

if the legislature had said in RSA 19840A

that the cost of base adequacy is $5,

I think there's a point where this court could say

that's just, that becomes almost a facial implausibility,

almost a facial sort of a challenge that could survive.

But in this instance, I don't think there's any reasonable way.

Attorney Canyon would tell you that there isn't a single school

just in the state that has that per pupil cost.

That's exactly right, Your Honor.

And what's his evidence of that?

The evidence that he would advance to you is

and same with Amiki, is what are these actual costs

that the districts are incurring?

So, again, there's a real delta here.

The real disparity, if you will, is between actual costs

and between what the adequacy costs are.

Actual does not equal adequacy.

Adequacy is a subset of actual.

And so if you're trying to prove a deprivation

of the constitutional right to an adequate education

by asking everyone to look at your actual costs,

it doesn't really tell you anything.

I can understand your position in regard to the ultimate issue

of proof, but isn't that delta sufficient evidence

to trigger strict scrutiny?

It's not, Your Honor.

Unless this court holds that that disparity by itself

is sufficient to prove the deprivation,

because remember, going back to Lily,

you've got to prove you've been deprived of the constitutional

right before the burden shifts to the state

to justify whatever the conduct is that you say has deprived you.

And so this court would have to say that you'd have to define

somehow a disparity.

You'd have to say that there's a disparity at some level

after which we know that we don't have to look any deeper.

If the state had issues with the information

that was submitted to the court for summary judgment,

it could have undertaken discovery.

Couldn't it have taken depositions or submitted interrogatories?

I don't think that's a realistic argument, Your Honor.

This case happened at warp speed.

Within eight weeks, Your Honor, there was a petition filed.

There was a motion for preliminary injunction

that was filed and objected to.

There was a hearing in that motion.

There was an amended petition.

There was a second amended petition.

There was a motion to dismiss.

There was a motion to strike

that was triggered by the second amended petition.

And then there were motions for summary judgment.

The initial pleading in this case was filed on March 20.

And the briefing on the final dispositive motions

was completed on May 6.

Didn't the state ask for an expedited hearing as well?

We did ask for an expedited hearing, Your Honor.

And at that time, we were looking at the initial petition.

And if you look at the initial petition, paragraph 16 says

that what this case is about is that the state isn't funding

what the ed rules lay out as the minimum requirements

for schools.

In the second amended petition,

that paragraph gets swapped out for paragraph 25,

which now says we can't provide an adequate education

based on what the state is doing.

So yes, an expedited proceeding made sense

when we were dealing with the initial petition,

because it was a much more contained question

of what's included in the definition of what is it.

But at the point in time that the case became one about

whether the dependence could provide an adequate,

the plaintiffs could provide an adequate education

based on state-based adequacy funding.

Those are a completely different case, Your Honor.

As I've been saying,

the proof of why they can't provide that.

Mr. Wilk, your light's on.

Thank you.

But before you conclude your presentation,

can I just ask you to confirm my understanding,

which is unlike the amicus brief filed on behalf

of a number of senators and representatives,

there's no claim that the state's making that

Claremont 1 or Claremont 2 or any of its progeny

were wrongly decided and should be reversed, correct?

Your Honor, my office's job is to defend the statutes

of the state, and that is what we are doing in this case.

So we have not made that argument, Your Honor.

That's correct.

Thank you, counsel.

You still have your three minutes.

Thank you, Your Honors.

Mr. Tierney, take your time.

Good morning, Your Honors.

Good morning.

Michael Tierney for the conval,

Menachoc, Masonic, and Winchester School Districts.

We're here to enforce this court's existing precedents

as we just heard from the state.

There's no challenge those existing precedents.

Those existing precedents include that in this state,

a constitutionally adequate education is a fundamental right,

and this fundamental right is the right to a state-funded

adequate public education.

The state has the exclusive obligation

to fund that obligation,

and the state may not shift any of that responsibility

to local communities.

In addition, this court has previously held

that the judiciary has a responsibility

to ensure that constitutional rights are not hauled out,

and in the lack of action by other branches,

a judicial remedy is not only appropriate,

but is essential.

It's important for the court to remember,

and you heard just here today,

the state is not claiming that the amount of funding

that it's providing is constitutionally adequate.

They never made that argument below.

They didn't make it here.

But they're saying that's just irrelevant.

That's the case for another day.

It had no need to take a position in that either way.

So they're making what is essentially

a civil procedure argument alleging

that there wasn't sufficient evidence for the trial court,

which is frankly wrong.

The Petitioning School District

pled and proved an actual violation

in three different ways.

But did they, so back on this standard

of on the as-applied challenge,

did they prove that the statute

as applied to their operations

was unconstitutional,

or as the trial court,

and what was the evidence of that,

or as the trial court engaged in this analysis

of the statutory development was faulty?

So how do we turn that into an as-applied challenge?

So first, it was undisputed

that these school districts

cannot provide a constitutionally adequate education

with the funding being provided by the state.

But did the school districts focus on

those items that are included

in the definition of adequacy

and show that those items can't be met

as opposed to their total cost?

They did both, Your Honor.

First, we had specific evidence

from superintendents with personal knowledge

that their districts cannot meet

based on the total amount of adequacy.

If I may focus for a second

on the Winchester School District,

the Winchester School District

had put forth that to meet

the constitutional obligations,

it would be a little bit over $10,000.

Now the Winchester School District has

for everything, all included.

Correct.

Meaning lights, heat, food, transportation,

nurses, everything.

That's using the state's own methodology.

But in Winchester,

because it is such a small school district

and it doesn't have the efficiencies of scale,

it can't actually meet base requirements

for less than $15,000 per pupil.

That's why they tuition their students

to the keen high school cost

of $14,053 per pupil

just for base adequacy,

not including others,

because they determined

that to meet the minimum requirements

and have their own very small school,

it would be more than $1,000 more than that.

It would be $15,000.

After that evidence established

that there was an actual deprivation,

it was appropriate for the Superior Court

as strict scrutiny

to look at what the rationales were

for the state

to underfund schools.

It's not the normal case

in which the state submitted

an affidavit with their rationales.

What they submitted was...

Sorry to interrupt, but are you then

arguing that the state

must meet the actual costs

of every school district,

including the SAUs,

the administrative overlay

of the actual cost

of every school district?

We are arguing

that the state

must provide funding

for what it has defined

as a constitutionally adequate education.

And have the clients provided

that yardstick?

Excluding the administrative overlay,

sports, you name it,

have they identified that?

Yes, sure.

And the definition is included

in RSA 193 E2A,

which statutorily incorporates

the minimum standards

of ED 306.

Now, the state

through the statute

incorporates all of ED 306.

The Solicitor General

argued both below and to this court

that there's some sort of

selective incorporation.

There's some of them, but not others.

Didn't the Trial Court

also sign up for that thought

that these were aspirational goals

reflected in the board

regulations, not dictates?

So the aspirational goals

are in Roman 1

that says that they need to teach math,

social studies, so on and so forth.

Once you get further

into the statute, Roman 4,

it specifically incorporates

the minimum standards

for public school approval

which was found in ED 306.

And that's where the specific requirements

come in is in the ED 306 regulations.

So Mr. Will

in response to my question said

transportation is not

properly included

in the cost of an adequate education.

Do you disagree with that?

Absolutely disagree. Why?

Number one, okay,

as was stated by the

Superior Court, the

legislature, the state

through its legislative process

determine that transportation

is part of the cost

of an adequate education.

RSA 19840A2

the statute to issue here

okay, legislatively incorporates

the 2008

Costing Commission, okay,

which indicated that transportation

is a necessary and integral

part of the cost for an adequate education.

The error

is that they just took 33%

off the top

and decided that high school transportation

is something that the state

shouldn't pay for, okay.

We have

an obligation to provide

an education to all

of our students including our high school students

and it was quite frankly irrational

to just take

grades 9 through 12

and decide not to fund it.

So there's a school that has

a high education cost

but a low building cost because of

different property issues

are they allowed to mix

and match and move the funds

to meet the goal?

Yes, Your Honor, so

the way in which we showed

that the

state was not providing

constitutionally adequate education

was first, okay, by

our specific school districts.

I talked about Winchester, we have condominium,

et cetera, okay. The second way

in which we show that is that we applied

the

costing formula

while correcting for

those five mistakes which are identified

in our petition

and the actual

using the state's own methodology

is 9,929

exclusive of transportation

roughly three times what the state is actually

funding and the reason why

it is at such a different number

is because of those five errors.

The teacher-student ratio

that the state determined was

part of the costing methodology

was not the number

that the state actually used

and as the spirit court properly held

okay, just because you have a maximum

classroom size of 30 to 1

doesn't mean

the maximum classroom size

is the equivalent of the teacher-student

ratio that the state

had determined was part

of the costing methodology. The student-teacher

ratio

is a number far below that in

no school district, even the most

efficient school district, it's only

17.5 to 1.

In all of our districts

we have much lower student-teacher

ratios because of the rural nature of our

schools. We're not asking that

the state, okay, necessarily

apply what our actual

costs are.

We're asking that the state apply

a costing formula

that is rational and based

on real facts

so that there can be real funding.

Mr. Tierney, given the fact that

the trial court invalidated

19840A2A

how do we reach your swept

challenges here on appeal?

So the statute

was invalidated, okay,

the swept challenge

is unconstitutional

if there is

disproportionality at all.

Whether it is 675%

disproportionality or

640%

or even 400%

disproportionality

as the court had previously held in

Claremont too, such

disproportional taxes

violate Article 5.

But aren't those disproportionalities

a result of 19840A2A?

Given that

that system of

costing education has changed

such that the state then funds

an adequate education up to say

let's say $10,000 per people

those

tax rates will change, presumably.

So presumably if the state was

funding at $10,000

those tax rates would change

but the state is not funding.

The court, the spirit court properly held

that it is underfunding

and if it is underfunding

then the local communities are

by necessity

of the state's obligation.

How much is what the

spirit court left undetermined is

how much they were underfunding

which would lead to how much it was

disproportional.

But it was disproportional because it was underfunding

whether it was by a dollar

or $6,000.

So how do you suggest we determine

the delta?

So as far as the delta

that is where

the spirit court erred

the spirit court erred in not

thinking that it had

the authority to issue

specific injunctive relief

in order to meet that

delta of the underfunding.

The spirit court

does have that authority

it should have exercised that authority

and on a remand

a confidence spirit court

would exercise that authority

in an equitable way in order to

meet that delta.

So why shouldn't we accept

Justice Duncan's observation

that that kind of determination

finding the demarcation

or the delta requires a trial

requires backfiring.

We need action.

Number one we had four experts

each

for attendance

of their respective school districts

and the facts

asserted in their affidavits

were left unchallenged

by the state.

The argument

that the state needs to conduct

a discovery is an argument

that wasn't made when they

filed for summary judgment

filed for summary judgment

and specifically stated

that a trial was not necessary

and the conclusion to their April 29th

motion for summary judgment

they said a trial was not necessary.

Aren't we just looking at

more rate or budget setting

every biennium

as these costs shift?

So how does one

there's a decision today

but how does one keep up

with changes in

the cost

items. We have COVID people

are doing remote learning. There may be fewer

buildings. I mean things are going to

change and this number will not be

static. So isn't this just a

budget

event that's going to go on every

year?

So if your question is about

what the 2021 or 2022

bienniums budget

would be affected by COVID

that's not part of this case.

When we're talking about this statute

so it gets blown up now

chances are there's going to be a

basis to blow it up next time

regardless of what happens because

I think legislatures

can't possibly always keep up

with the latest trend

data. So because

of the timing. So you have

that's why we have biennial budgets and a lot

of facts go into them and

isn't this at bottom

really a budget function.

So I would disagree

if you're on okay that the

legislature can't keep

up with whatever changes

may be necessary if there are changes

in the future. In this case

and for the past 25 years

they have

substantially underfunded

with promises that they're going to

fix it next year next year next year next year next year.

And

actually the $3,500

in state aid goes

back to the foundation formula

from 1986 at $3,500.

The legislature

is capable

of keeping up with any

changes that may be necessary

but in this particular case

we need to have

a specific remedy to

cure unconstitutional

actions that were

recognized by the superior court

in this case.

What's your position in regard

to swept should

are we in a position to decide that

the constitutionality

of it or is it would it

be remanded?

So

yes and no.

Absolutely you are in a position

to determine the constitutionality of that.

There was a suggestion

by Justice Donovan earlier that the

amount of the

swept disparity

might be something that's better

determined

by the superior court on remand.

But it is

unconstitutional under part 5

in addition to unconstitutional under part

83 is something this court

absolutely can decide right now.

In the injunctive relief

that you say the court aired

and not ordering

what specifically is that?

Is that to involve the governor

and the commissioner

or is it the legislature

exactly would the court be ordering

to do something and what do you want

them to be ordered to do?

So what we ask of the court

is that the court

issue a specific injunction

prohibiting the governor

and the legislature

and the governor and the commissioner

from underfunding

the petitioning school districts

and make sure that they

receive the full 9,929.

As we

discussed at the hearing

on March 29th

the superior court could in its

equitable discretion issue

part of the relief that's being requested.

So for example it could

issue the

transportation relief. Likewise

the superior court could also

instead of issuing

numerical relief issue

textual relief along the

lines of the state shall

not

underfund transportation

by refusing to provide funding

for high school students or that

the state recognizing

that it costs more to provide

transportation in rural areas

shall provide

the rural areas with the

appropriate amount of

transportation funding and not

a one size fits all of $300

that may be sufficient in urban

areas but doesn't meet

places like conval where the buses

have to drive over 3,000 miles

every day.

And why do you say

the court aired in not

addressing the

facial challenge?

So it was undisputed that there's

not a single district

state that can

or does provide

a constitutionally adequate education

at $3,636

provided by the state. Matter of fact

there's not a single school district

that operates under $12,000.

But that's exactly what

Mr. Twill said they do dispute.

I asked him blank whether

that was an issue and he said

that

was not something they conceded.

So they have

not

asserted that

there's a single place

that can

provide

an education for the $3,336

they are providing.

You asked

the solicitor general

whether he agreed to that. He avoided the question.

If you look through

the entire record, not once

does the state identify

a single place

that is able to provide

the minimum standards

of $3,606.

State's argument that everybody's providing

something well beyond an adequate education.

Is that it?

That is the state's argument that everybody's providing

something well beyond.

In Winchester as I mentioned earlier

they can't provide the minimum

for

less than their tuitioning to Keen

which is why their tuitioning to Keen

at a cost of $14,053.

Absolutely

it may cost different amounts

different places.

Rural areas, it's going to cost more

with the transportation.

Rural areas also have

a problem about inefficiency

of class sizes. When you have 32 students

in the eighth grade, you can't

maximize

the efficiency of classroom sizes

because of the way those small numbers work out.

So I see that I just have

one more minute to go

but I don't know if I have

other questions

that the court was interested in.

Can you address?

You've still got me confused.

If you've got your tuition students going to Keen

because they can afford

or because it's cheaper

than them paying for their own education

the number you're using

is the gross number

which would be

as Attorney Willsett suggested

which would be more than

a constitutionally adequate education

and the cost thereof.

Is that correct?

So if you're asking

whether the Keen High School

is providing the Winchester

students with more than a constitutionally

adequate education, that is entirely possible.

What is not possible

is for Winchester to provide

its own students

with a constitutionally adequate education

just barely meeting the base minimum

standards

by doing it on their own

or by finding somewhere else cheaper

to tuition them.

If I understand what you've said correctly

Mr. Will had said

that

well we can't get into strict scrutiny

because nowhere has it been broken out

sufficiently the difference between

the provided education

and the constitutionally

required education.

And that's incorrect.

You're saying no, look to Winchester

and there it's laid out

and they're differentiated

between the extra costs

and the constitutionally

adequate costs.

And in each of the four school districts

we have both the petition

as well as in affidavits from the superintendents

what it would cost

to just meet the constitutionally adequate

education.

And that's the $9,000.

That's the $9,000 exclusive

transportation.

That has to pay

to tuition students.

And there's no district in the state that would accept

Winchester's high school students for $3,700

for people.

Absolutely, you are correct Your Honor.

So I see you're my red light.

Thank you Your Honors.

Thank you Mr. Will.

You have three minutes.

Thank you Your Honor.

It's important to keep in mind

I think here that actual

and adequacy are not one in the same.

The school district is talking about its actual costs.

It is not necessarily

at all talking about its adequacy

costs, the constitutional

adequate costs. Those are two different things.

And it is incorrect

to say that all of

ED 306

is comprising

the definition of adequacy.

If you look at our say 193

E2A

it lays out

the adequacy subject areas

and it says yes.

Those subject areas

as fleshed out by the Department

of Education in its regulations

comprise the adequacy amount.

But it limits

that to the specific

areas that the statute requires.

So there are

so it is incorrect

as a matter of statutory construction

to say that

all of the ED 306

comprise the adequacy obligation.

They do not by statute.

They do not and by statute that hasn't

been challenged. There's been no challenge

to the definition. And the trial court

reinforced that saying 306 is not

the measure either at this stage.

Correct. The trial court as

exactly you're on the trial court went back to the legislative

process. Now

just as I've been accused

of having dodged the question

I just would like to say this

that

Attorney Tierney is absolutely correct.

The state did not

that there's a school district that could provide

an adequate education

on the amount the state provided.

That's not the state's burden.

A plaintiff who wants to lodge a

facial challenge to a statute

bears the burden of proving

that there are no circumstances in which that

statute could result

in constitutional.

And in fact there may be

or accredited online schools

that are now

charter schools that might

be able to meet that but again

that was not before the trial.

Correct. And I think that's why

it was correct of the

Superior Court to

deny a facial challenge to this

statute. I'm not sure that RSA

18840A is susceptible

to a facial challenge because I think it's

a district by district. So now

standing your position is

that contrary to what

opposing counsel said

that there is not information in the

record supplied by his

clients and affidavits that would

support the proposition that

the cost of

inadequate education is more than

$3,700. Is that your position?

That's exactly right, Your Honor.

And the only way that there could be is

this court equates actual costs

adequate with constitutional adequacy.

Didn't the plaintiff submit affidavits

from superintendents who said

we cannot provide a constitutionally

inadequate education at that number?

They did, Your Honor.

And those states by themselves

are not evidentiary facts

and what they purported to back those

states with were these various

categories of items which are

not included in the statutory

definition. Is the state providing the affidavits

saying these superintendents are wrong?

So, Your Honor,

and I'd like to

just come back to a question.

This relates to a question that Justice Bassett

asked me at the end of my presentation

toward the end.

We asked for discovery in this case

and I asked for it.

Look at the preliminary injunction hearing

transcript pages 71 and 72.

At the end of that hearing I said,

jeez, I think we're going to need discovery

into how these schools actually spend their

money if they're going to claim

that they're not getting enough money

to provide a constitutionally adequate

education. Nonetheless,

we did submit an affidavit

of the Department of Education

explaining why

this data was unreliable.

Remember that at summary judgment

a trial court can't weigh the evidence

and so even Attorney

Tierney says, well, their arguments go

to the weight of the evidence and that's exactly right.

At summary judgment

the evidence has to be

the trial court

cannot grant summary judgment if the evidence

is reasonably susceptible

to challenge

and that's in savings in case which

we cite in our final brief

and our answering brief before this court

and so the

sense that this

evidence that they put in is

uncontroverted, it's factually not correct

and it's legally not correct

for the superior court to have assumed

that and granted summary judgment based on it.

Your light is on.

Sadly my red light is on.

Thank you very much.

Thank you counsel both for your excellent presentation.

Thank you.
