This is case 2019-05-07, John Burt et al. versus Speaker of the House of Representatives.

Thank you. May it please the Court, Dan Hines, on behalf of Representative John Burt.

We're here today because the legislature, the House passed a rule amending a prior rule

that completely, essentially completely bans firearms in the House.

And this case can be summarized by one thing.

The legislature may be above the law, but they are certainly not above the Constitution.

This Court's prior cases all have directly said that effect.

We're not going to address the House when the House passes a rule.

That's not a juicable, keep messing up that word, juicable issue.

However, when the issue goes directly to the Constitution, of course this Court is going to step in.

It's not a separation of powers issue like the opposing counsel suggests, but it's a checks and balances issue.

If this Court does not have the authority to decide whether anything done by the legislature is constitutional,

there's no ready for people.

So if we can stay in the France that we're responsible for what happens in our courtroom with respect to bearing arms,

why isn't the legislature responsible for their rules on the same subject?

Well, I would suggest that this Court is also responsible to the Constitution.

If this Court passed some rule that is unconstitutional, I would hope that the Court would not do that.

If it were to be reviewable, I think unfortunately if this Court did it, it would have to go to federal court.

But I think if the lower court passed a rule that was unconstitutional,

we could appeal to this Court to decide whether that was constitutional or not.

In effect, Part 2 Article 5 of the New Hampshire Constitution directly states that the legislature's rules and laws cannot be repugnant to the Constitution.

And that's what we have here.

The opposing counsel points out that, well, this isn't a second amendment issue, and if it is, it wouldn't meet sufficient scrutiny.

That issue has not been addressed at the lower court yet.

We're asking that we have the opportunity to show why it is a constitutional violation.

Are you making a second amendment argument or just under the New Hampshire Constitution?

We are completely under the New Hampshire State Constitution in this case.

We have not addressed the federal Constitution.

So should that matter to our thinking about this case?

Well, I think you should apply the New Hampshire State Constitution to this case.

And I think the New Hampshire State Constitution makes it clear that the legislature does not have authority to pass unconstitutional laws.

So if the rule here were that you could bring handguns into the house but not automatic weapons, would you be making the same argument?

That would still be triggered under Article 2A of the New Hampshire State Constitution.

I think that that facially touches the lower court might have a different evaluation of whether that rule is in fact constitutional.

I would suggest it probably be more likely to be constitutional.

But I think the court should at least address the merits of it.

Why would it be what's the degree of constitutionality?

So I expect the state, I think the case law is unclear whether it's going to be what type of scrutiny is going to be.

If it's going to be considered a fundamental right to get strict scrutiny or whether it's going to get heightened scrutiny.

Certainly a rule that addresses firearms on its face touches upon the right to bear firearms as opposed to if it were, I guess, something tangential to the Constitution.

But I think it's fairly clear that this house rule at least triggers the right to bear firearms under our state constitution.

And the case, the primary case that the house relies on is La France.

I suggest La France is not controlling on this exact issue for numerous reasons.

One La France has since been, I would suggest, either limited or at least clarified by both Bains and Hughes where the court went on to decide that rules.

The court will not, basically the house can do whatever they want law wise and they can break the law if they want and of course not going to get involved.

But when it comes to the Constitution, this court not only should but has a duty to decide whether the house is acting in a constitutional manner.

Second, La France didn't actually address the constitutional issue.

I don't know why that is.

I don't know if it's because the right to bear arms under the state constitution, it seems to be enacted right around that time.

I don't know if it was preserved or what, but it seems like the court in France just stepped over that issue.

And finally in La France, the language consistent with the Constitution is in there.

So I would suggest that even La France states that the house has to act in a constitutional manner.

And when they don't, this court has to step in because they're the only ones who can do so.

And I posed a lot of hypotheticals in my brief of what would happen if this ruling was allowed to stand.

Basically the lower court said, we're never going to get involved with what the legislature house will do.

They can do whatever they want.

I would suggest if the house passed a rule of proceeding, assuming this is a rule proceeding, they could ban women from voting.

They could ban Asian people from voting.

They could hate the First Amendment and say, we're not allowing press.

That would be tough square with the United States Constitution, wouldn't it?

I think they all would be.

And certainly there would be a federal claim, but I think there still would be a state claim.

And I would hope that this court would step in on clearly unconstitutional issues and say, no, of course you can't do that.

Now this issue might not be clearly unconstitutional, but at least triggers a threshold inquiry of whether it can meet constitutional monster.

And the council originally at the lower court basically said, we want a bright line rule that the legislature's authority to establish its own rules of proceeding is that such internal rules are not just dishable.

That bright line rule of the court can never do it.

We're asking for the opposite. We're asking for a bright line rule that whenever it triggers the constitution, the court can and should step in.

Whereas if a rule just triggers some rule of law, again the legislature can break the law as much as they want.

And unfortunately there's going to be no remedy in this course.

Is it your position that we need to make new law here or that Hughes and Baines essentially answers the question?

And even LeFrance, which is their main point, answers this question because LeFrance does say consistent with the constitution.

And to the extent that it doesn't, we would ask that that specific part of LeFrance be overruled.

I don't think the court needs to go that far because it is further clarified in Hughes and Baines.

But we take all three cases in total and look at the totality of them.

It goes on to say the constitutional issue is just dishable.

A rule of law is not.

The House is asking for essentially their standard is due deference

and that a case may arise outside the constitutional authority.

That's an impossible frame.

We can't go on to say well this court or this case it's somewhat constitutional but not enough.

But yeah if the state banned women we wouldn't like that so of course the court could step in.

That's just unworkable.

It's not an objective standard.

It would essentially leave it to judges to decide well is this a super important issue?

Does it really trigger the constitution?

Isn't that what we're doing here?

No I think that we're asking this matter be recent to the lower court

to apply the correct standard of whether the rule does in fact violate the constitution.

So the lower court will have to apply a standard and decide if it does or doesn't.

But I think as a threshold matter I think they always should

and essentially has a duty under our checks and balances to actually decide whether it does violate the constitution.

So how should our analysis be impacted by the fact that we're dealing with a rule

adopted by another brand of our government?

Shouldn't we be sensitive to that?

It depends what the rule is.

If the rule doesn't even trigger any constitutional threats.

Let's say the house said hey everyone has to be naked when they testify.

I think that's an absurd rule but I can't on the surface.

I don't know besides being completely irrational that that necessarily triggers some type of constitutional.

It's a problematic visual too.

Well not everything in the house is always rational.

And we're suggesting this is a slippery slope and that well something absurd like that can never happen.

I would note that I was a state representative two years ago and there's a custom in the state house

that women can be the only ones who make a motion to allow men to remove their jackets.

And one day I made a motion to allow men to remove their jackets.

Thankfully the speaker granted that.

It didn't have to be challenged but I suggest that if that were an actual rule as opposed to a custom

that I would hope the court would step in on that in regards to saying that hey that's sexist.

We are really going to go through the threshold inquiry to see whether the state can meet their burden.

And at the end of the day maybe this issue maybe it doesn't arise to a constitutional issue.

Maybe the state or the house can show that hey we've done enough that it meets muster.

But in this case the rule on this face is incredibly broad.

I would note that while it's essentially banned to bring firearms into this building

and other courthouses in the state there's actually assumptions to that.

Whereas one can apply to the justice or in the lower court to do that.

The house rule has other than police I believe just police having an exception to it.

There's nothing in it such as whether someone has training they can bring it

or whether someone has a concealed carry.

It's just so broad that I think it at least merits a lower court looking into it to decide

whether it is or is not constitutional.

And finally I think there is issue whether this falls into the proceedings or not.

So part two article 22 which gives the house authority to address rules does address proceedings.

I suggest this is akin to a dress code.

So I mean I expect proceedings might be broad but whether it's broad enough to even fall under this

I think is also an additional issue.

If there's no more questions I will reserve my time for a rebuttal.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Mr. Sianzi.

Thank you Your Honor.

May it please the court.

My name is James Sianzi.

House legal counsel on behalf of the Speaker of the House of Representatives.

I'd like to make two points about why the Superior Court properly dismissed this case

as non-justiceable for lack of subject matter jurisdiction.

The first point is that the court recognized the inherent constitutional authority

of co-equal branches of government to establish their own internal rules of conduct

for conduct within their own chambers.

In this case it was the authority of the House of Representatives under part two article 22.

The second point is the court also recognized the respect that the co-equal branch

of government showed to each other for their internal rules of conduct

pursuant to part one article 37, the separation of powers provision.

The court applied this court's longstanding precedent in state versus la France

on both of these points and correctly dismissed the case

and this court should affirm.

Mr. Sianzi.

So I'm troubled by there has to be some limiting proposition here it seems to me

could the House pass a rule that said

no Muslims can be on the House floor.

Is that insulated from constitutional analysis?

No, Your Honor.

And I don't believe that there isn't sort of an absolute or bright line rule in this case.

Essentially this court in both Hughes and Baines did undertake constitutional analysis

of House procedures.

So why shouldn't the trial court here have undertaken a similar analysis?

Because in this case this is sort of an established rule.

It's a rule of conduct within the chamber.

It's not a rule of exclusion.

I think the hypothetically presented, Your Honor, is it has to do with the authority

or the fitness of someone to sit, a duly elected representative to sit

versus the rules which apply to those which are seated in the chamber.

In the same way that House has rules regarding speech and decorum, drafting of bills,

those are the types of internal rules of proceeding, internal rules of conduct

which are non-justiciable and which I think this court's precedent has.

So in Hughes the court said well the 91A claim was non-justiciable

but then it said we're going to undertake a constitutional analysis

under part one article eight.

And it seems to me here if the House were to close all of its proceedings

and say okay we're going to pass a rule, there is no, nobody can come in,

hear what we're doing, see what we're doing.

Is that insulated from constitutional review?

No, Your Honor.

And again because I think in that case in that hypothetical

it's more akin to this court's decision in Baines and in Hughes

in that it goes beyond a rule of proceeding,

it goes beyond a rule of conduct within the chamber

and it has to do, it touches upon the right of others to be there,

it touches upon the passage of legislation

which this court does have a role in reviewing.

It has, opposing counsel raises the point that this court has a duty

to review the constitutionality of legislative acts

and they do within the context of legislation

and I would argue within the context of rules which touch on that area

but when it regards a rule of conduct within the chamber

much like this court has established its own rules of conduct

or the ability of this court to control the conduct within its courtrooms

those are the issues, those are the types of things

where the separation of powers provision

prevents the other branch of government from infringing.

So from your perspective would it impact our analysis

if the rule here were that you could bring hand guns in

but not automatic weapons?

Is that different in any way?

Should we be thinking about it any differently?

I don't know if that distinction would make a difference

only in the sense that this is a long standing rule

that has been in effect since 1971

and I don't know whether a distinction between the types of weapons

that could be brought in would really change the analysis in the case.

I thought that perhaps I misunderstood

I thought this was a recently enacted rule.

The amendment to the rule was

the current rule which provides

that a person cannot carry or have in possession

that was an amendment to the previous rule

but the language of carry and have in possession dates to 1971.

That rule was established

it was in effect until 2011

when the rules changed to possession

to I'm sorry to display

and then that operative phrase has been changed back and forth

depending on which party has been

has been in charge of the House of Representatives.

So as I understand it

you're not advocating for a categorical rule

that we can't look at the constitutionality of House rules.

So what's the line that

what's the rule that you say that we can apply here

that will meet the constitutional requirements

that we have to do our job?

Right and I think it's difficult to try to

enunciate a bright line rule.

If you look at this court's precedent

in Star versus Governor

in Horton versus McLaughlin

in Petition Judicial Conduct Committee

those were cases where this court found

that the Legislature's Acts were non-justiceable

particularly in Horton and in JCC

because it involved the impeachment process

which this court found was

a textually demonstrable commitment to the legislature

and therefore the Judicial Branch could not...

Let me ask a question maybe more for Mr. Hines when he gets up

but as I understand it

your client has rules regarding decorum,

speech and other aspects of behavior

that might very well trigger First Amendment concerns.

If we interfere at this level on the gun issue

might we be opening up the floodgates

to interfering based upon First Amendment grounds

the speech and decorum issues restrictions

that the House places on itself?

Your Honor I believe you're correct.

Really any rule could touch on any part

of the New Hampshire Constitution

whether it's a decorum rule

whether it's a dress code rule

the House last year adopted

a new rule regarding sexual harassment training.

I'm sure there could possibly be

constitutional implications regarding that

and I think were this court to adopt

my opposing counsel's argument

that the Judicial Branch has a duty to review

any House rule or any legislative rule

which touches on the Constitution

then it really opens up any rule

to review by the Judicial Branch.

It really runs counter to the...

Your client is satisfied if we pick and choose.

Well I think not necessarily pick and choose

Your Honor but I believe this issue

has been settled based upon this court's

jurisprudence in LeFrance.

But wasn't LeFrance the exact opposite

of the statute that required

carrying a firearm in courtrooms

so isn't that the mirror image?

Well and this court's decision in that case

said that under separation of powers

the legislature has no authority

through statute to tell the Judicial Branch

who essentially the type of conduct

can occur within courtrooms.

But that wasn't a alleged deprivation

of a right?

Correct.

Correct.

It was the legislative branch

attempting to dictate the terms.

Dictating it.

Correct.

And this court found that that was

impermissible under separation of powers

and said by the very same token

that the Judicial Branch could not tell

the executive branch or the legislative branch

who could wear firearms within their own chambers.

So it seems to me that

exceptionally you agree there has to be a gatekeeper here.

This is not all or nothing.

Is that right?

Correct Your Honor.

So who's going to be the gatekeeper?

I mean why shouldn't and

why mustn't the trial court

be that gatekeeper

because here the court just said categorically

it implicates the right to bear arms.

We're not going to look at it.

So who's going to make that decision?

Well I think obviously the trial court

would have to evaluate that

and I think the trial court did evaluate

that in this case because

it looked at the rule.

It looked at this court's precedent

and determined that it was not

just visible because of the established precedent.

Notwithstanding the language of Banes

that says that it would be

a dereliction of our duty

not to look at the constitutional issues.

Right and I think Banes grows in the context

of the determination whether a bill is a money bill

and I think this court's decision in that case

said that this court had a duty to determine that

because the constitution has certain requirements

for where money bills can originate.

It wasn't a rule of conduct.

It wasn't how that bill was debated

and I suppose if the question was

that the bill there were some irregularities

in how the bill was passed

relating to the money bill aspect

that may be considered not just the statistical.

However in that case Banes was addressing

whether the bill had originated in the house

and whether that violated

the provision of constitution.

But Hughes was different than that.

Hughes had to do with public access

and part one article eight

and there the court weighed into it

and then said but it passed constitutional muster.

Correct.

And why isn't that the analysis that should apply here?

Well in that case the fact pattern was

it was a committee of conference procedure

and in effect it touched upon

the procedure and the passage of legislation.

Right but they got into it.

They didn't just say oh we can't look at that.

Correct and I think this court

jurisprudence is clear that

the court is the final arbiter of the constitution

and we're not alleging otherwise.

I think it's when you

but when you take into account

the separation of powers considerations

and the fact that really any argument

any constitutional argument could be made

regarding any rule

that's why this court jurisprudence

sort of it requires a little bit of caution

and that's why.

Well not any rule can be subject to

constitutional challenge I mean

and pass the straight phase test anyway.

Well but I think it could be made

and then if it's so long as a plaintiff

were to allege that a particular rule

violates the constitution

under that analysis

the trial court would never be able to dismiss the case.

But don't the courts do that all the time?

Some sort of weigh the allegation

the merits of the allegation

well that's really

that doesn't actually implicate the constitution at all

so I'm going to dismiss the case.

I suppose that could be the analysis

but I think that doesn't create

a bright line rule either

I think that leaves it just as open

as sort of the allegations in this case

that there's no bright line rule.

I just think that it runs counter

to sort of separation of powers considerations

in that if there is an allegation

of unconstitutionality

that a trial court is never really going to be able

to dismiss that case it's not just this.

And so I think the other piece of this

and it was unstated in the courts dismissal

of this case

but part of separation of powers

is subject manager jurisdiction

is the political question doctrine

and I alluded to the fact that this was a longstanding rule

that sort of gone back and forth within the last ten years

and I think the court recognized that

there wasn't a sufficient constitutional element in this case

and therefore it was a political question

best left to the legislature to determine this rule

and that in the absence of there being

a second amendment claim and an article 2A claim

that the legislature itself

was best left to determine

the conduct within its own chambers

and although unstated

I think the political question doctrine

certainly is implied

when you talk about the internal conduct

of a branch of government

and I think that was in play here.

The court doesn't have any more questions

I just respectfully request that this court affirm

the lower courts dismissal of this case.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Fine.

Thank you.

In regards to the prior rule

that was from 1971

that was actually before our state constitution

adopted the right to bear arms

so at that point

I mean before 2A was adopted.

Before 2A, yes.

So the court wouldn't be able to step in back then

even applying this framework

and in regard to your question about

whether Muslims could be banned

the House was trying to distinguish that

as a rule of proceeding

I was looking briefly at various House rules of proceeding

one says members speaking

more than once

so if we can amend how people can speak

we can amend who can speak

there's another House rule addressing

persons permitted on the floor

or in the ante room

if in response to your first amendment

concerned opening the floodlates

say someone says

we don't like parenthood

no, Planned Parenthood shirts up there

we love Trump

everyone must wear a Make America Great hack

I would think those things

clearly be a first amendment violations

and I would hope that

we wouldn't have to go to federal court

for a court to step in

I think this court not only

can but should step in in issues like that

so in opening the floodgates

if the House starts passing

clearly unconstitutional rules

I think the court should step in

I don't think that's going to happen

what should the test be

I mean clearly unconstitutional rules

you're not advocating that it has to be

clearly unconstitutional before

the trial court

then undertake a constitutional analysis

I think so as a threshold matter

beyond just basic allegation of it

in this case on its face it violates to a

whether the state can show that it

otherwise meets the heightened scrutiny

that's a question for another day

but if I just said

hey this rule violates

it discriminates on sex

because more men carry the women

assuming that's to be true

I don't think the court would allow that

so as a threshold matter

if it's not on the face

you suggested a laugh test

or straight face

I think any type of rule

to that effect

that would be acceptable

and in this case it would allow the case

to go forward

I don't think there's any rule

in this case that could be

a guideline that could be presented to say

well some cases are important

and they really touch on the first amendment

or whatever it is

and really highly

in this case we don't know

so we're asking for a Breitlein rule

and whether you want to put

that type of exception

of straight face

or threshold inquiry

that's what we're asking you to do

thank you council

case submitted

courts in recess
