All right. Thank you all for being here today. The matter before the court is Teresa A.

Ladoo versus Plafet Health LLC. The plaintiff is represented by attorney Rick Follander,

and the amicus is represented by attorney Israel Piedra. The defendant is represented by Michael

Eaton. The case number is 2019-0354. Mr. Follander, you may begin when you are ready.

I understand you have seven and a half minutes that Mr. Piedro has six and a half,

and then he's reserved one minute for a rebuttal. Yes, Your Honor. Thank you. Thank you.

Good morning, Your Honors. May it please the court? I'm attorney Rick Follander,

and I represent Teresa Ladoo in this matter. We're appealing the ruling of the lower court,

granting the defendant's motion for some re-judgment, allowing the defendant's

exculpatory clause to shield it from liability, the failing to maintain its

premises in a reasonably safe condition, thereby precluding the plaintiff from bringing in action

when she tripped and fell in several injuries while walking on the defendant's premises.

The Hampshire law is generally unfavorable taught exculpatory clauses in those cases

where it has been allowed and has involved activities that are either inherently dangerous

and not of public necessity. And as long as the clause does not violate public policy,

or there is not a special relationship between the parties, or the plaintiff understood

the import of the agreement or a reasonable person in the position would have understood

the import of the agreement. And the plaintiff's claims were within the contemplation of the parties

when they executed the contract. The question in this case is whether planted fitness should be

required to exercise reasonable care under all circumstances and the maintenance and operation

of its property, or can it avoid that duty and shield itself from liability through the use

of an exculpatory clause because it considers itself not open to the public. My argument is

threefold. Essentially, public policy applies here. There's a special relationship between

the parties and public fitness is open to the public. Public policy is found in our case

law statutes and municipal regulations supporting the plaintiff's position that requiring the

business such as planted fitness to maintain its premises in a reasonably safe condition

is of great service to the public and it promotes the public's welfare and secures the public's

safety. New Hampshire's current premise liability law started taking shape in the 1970s.

And at first, Judge Kenneson writing for the court and Sears robot versus Phillips held that

those who own or operate business premises are in the best position to protect

against the risk of personal injury to others on their premises. The next year,

Judge Kenneson again wrote in a landlord tenant suit where a tenant brought a suit for

injuries that she suffered on the rental property. He who owns or is in a position of

control or is responsible for things or persons has a duty to prevent harming others.

Mr. Fallender, would you be making the same argument and would it have equal force if

your client had fallen while on the treadmill? No, because I think that the case law in this state

has allowed for certain activities to be guided by an exculpatory clause. So if she had injured

herself while exercising as it says in the contract between the parties, then I would not

be making the same argument. But here, I mean it wasn't completely unrelated to the exercise

as I understand it from her deposition and her affidavit. She was walking from the exercise

machine with a towel to dispose of it. So it was not disconnected from the exercise as it

would have been had she tripped in the parking lot. I believe that once she steps off that exercise

machine, your honor, she's no longer exercising then she becomes a pedestrian. She's walking

and she's walking through the premises and it's through the inability as alleged that the

defendant, the fitness could maintain maintain its premises in a safe condition that she felt.

I'd like to follow up on just a question. It seems to me that part of the regimen

at Planet Fitness would be to use a machine, clean off the machine with a sanitizing paper towel

or whatever, and then dispose of that towel and proceed on to another machine. So why

isn't that in the course of exercising? Well, we don't know where she was going after she

got off the exercise machine. For one thing, your honor, she might have been finished

exercising and was about to leave. So she wasn't going to continue exercising. We just don't know.

But I think that gets away from the issue that the public policy tries to maintain in the

situation that premises should be in a safe condition that we have the laws such as RSA

155 and 155A with respect to bylaws. Sorry for the interruption, but were she entering

the premises and hadn't even been done yet and tripped over an uneven floor that'd be just

like walking into a grocery store? What's the difference? If I understand your question correctly,

your honor, once again, she's a pedestrian. And I refer the court back to the cases I cited from

Arkansas and New Jersey saying that to allow this type of exculpatory clause would give

any business carte blanche to rid themselves of the common law responsibility of maintaining

their premises in a reasonably safe condition. And as the New Jersey case in Walters held,

that, you know, this is a garden variety, slip and fall, trip and fall. And so it could happen

anywhere and allowing this type of clause to be effective in the situation would mean that

businesses throughout the state of New Hampshire would jump on the bandwagon and try to

structure their business model in such a way that they could impose this type of immunity on

themselves in order to avoid any responsibility for maintaining their premises in a safe

condition. And the case law in our state, which has always been in existence since I've

been a lawyer, you know, this with roulette and blanchard that it's a duty to exercise reasonable

care under all circumstances and to maintenance and operation of their property. But counsel,

not all businesses in New Hampshire have memberships which and require people to sign

a contract before entering the facility. So aren't you isn't a little bit hyperbole

suggesting that all business in New Hampshire will take advantage of this? Well, I think

of a business like Costco, which is one of those big wholesale, sale warehouse businesses,

and it requires a membership to get in. And all members of the public like for planet fitness

are invited to join. And so once you join in their contract, they could have an exculpatory

clause that says when you come into our warehouse, which is basically a multifaceted

department store that sells clothes, food, pharmaceutical products, automotive products.

It's a bookstore as well. It just goes on and on and on a grocery store that

they're going to impose or have this type of clause in their agreements in order to reduce

their exposure and their risk as well as their liability. So why wouldn't other businesses

in the state of New Hampshire follow suit and create some sort of legal fiction in the modern

day world where, you know, you can touch screen a tablet and have a contract appear before somebody

in which they sign up for a bonus program or rewards program and a membership program.

And, you know, people sign these things unknowingly and they waive various rights that

should not be allowed to be waived on other law that's been in existence for a long, long time.

Thank you. Thank you. May I please decor? Attorney Israel Piedra for the Amicus New

Hampshire Association for Justice. Your Honors, I think your questions went to the heart of this

matter, which is why should this case be treated from a public policy perspective differently

than whether it's exercising or snowboarding or riding a go-kart? And I think the answer there

goes to the duty that's being violated. And it's such a fundamental duty. It's when we

think of premises liability or we think of a business owner's liability, the most

fundamental thing that we think of is their responsibility to keep their premises safe,

to keep their walking surfaces safe. So to go back to Justice Hicks' question about

does it matter that she was walking from the treadmill, I don't think it does because

at the bottom, the duty and the risk that's being created has nothing to do with exercise.

Yes, it's related in that it happened in the building, but any injury that happened

in that building would have been somewhat related to exercise. But it's no different than Justice

Hans-Marconi's example of walking into a grocery store from a duty perspective or from a fundamental

risk perspective. It's nothing unique to that activity. And I think that goes back to what

the court made as a balance in the Dean case, the Barnes case, and the McGrath case,

which are the only three cases in which this court has enforced liability releases

in the consumer business context. You have someone hit by a race car when they're crossing

a racetrack. You have someone colliding with a go-kart when they're go-kart racing,

someone in a collision when they're snowboarding. These are all risks that are unique or

relatively unique to those activities. They're not generic risks that a business patron

encounters when they walk into any business. So I think that's relevant and the court has

made a determination that in those contexts, public policy does permit businesses to limit

their liability. And why? Well, I think that's clear. There's A, the fact that those

activities have increased risk of injury. They're dangerous and people encounter them knowingly.

And second, that along with increased claims that the injuries themselves can be more severe

because they're highly high-speed, traumatic, et cetera. And the court has said...

Let me just ask you this. It seems the argument you're making would apply

squarely with if Ms. Ladoo had fallen while in the parking lot or walking into the building.

But here, she had just finished exercising. She had towels off the machine.

She was going to dispose of the towel. And it seems to me that we don't have to cross the

bridge, as it were, about premises liability and whether if you're in the parking lot or

on the sidewalk, there would be... The Exculpatory Clause would be valid. We can decide

this case very narrowly within the context of somebody who's within moments of completing

an exercise and doing something that is commonly associated with exercise, which is towel...

Especially in this era, toweling off the machine and throwing away the paper towel.

So, respectfully, I think that applies more to the scope of the release argument rather than

the public policy argument. And I don't see a distinction from a public policy perspective

between those two examples. I don't see how, from a public policy perspective, the business

should have less responsibility if someone is walking from a machine than walking to a machine.

I think that... Again, for example, if a cleaning service came in, I mean,

insurance issues aside and tripped over the same uneven floor, you wouldn't have the

argument that it was part of exercise. Correct. It's completely incidental. It's

completely fortuitous that in this particular situation, the person who was injured came from

exercising. So, I think from a public policy perspective, that distinction needs to be drawn

because otherwise it does open up. A cleaning service wouldn't have signed this

Exculpatory Clause for members of the club, presumably.

Right. But again, I don't see how... If we use the example of a movie patron who buys a ticket

online and then goes into the theater and trips and falls, how is that different than

the exercise example? Just because they were coming from a machine. From a public policy

perspective, there's no distinction there. You can't make a principal distinction unless

you look at the duty that's being violated, not whether it's sequentially related to some

sort of activity. If it's during the activity, then it makes sense during a high-risk activity.

It makes sense that a business might have less of a responsibility to protect against risk.

And that's why courts have... Is there any distinction given the fact that

she's a member of a club that's not open to the public? I don't think so, because the only

way that these liability releases are going to come into play is if someone has signed

a contract. So I don't really see that as a distinction. In any liability release case,

it involves someone who purportedly agreed to something and was voluntarily there.

That doesn't remove the court's long-standing policy of wanting to enforce tort liability

as a deterrent to negligent conduct, especially when we're talking about a business that is

making a profit that has a large size disparity, that we're talking about a form contract,

that's an adhesion contract. And I think courts would be right to say...

Well, and again, and I'm going to interrupt here, but let's assume she's walking and the

lighting fixture falls off the ceiling on her because it wasn't secured properly.

That's not related at all to exercise, although under a reading of this agreement,

it could be considered protected by the Exculpatory Clause.

Yes, and I'll just respond fully if the court is okay with that, even though I see my time is up.

I think that's a...

If you have an advantage over me, my clock disappeared. So why don't you

throw an answer to that question and then we'll give you your minute upon the conclusion of the

defendant's argument. Thank you, Justice Hicks. Yes, so I think that that's exactly right,

Justice Hans Marconi. If we look at the release, it's so broadly worded that

I think that the defendant would argue that it could apply to any premises liability issues.

And when we start talking about a trip and fall on a floor from a defectively maintained floor,

what would be the distinction from a public policy perspective between that and a negligently

maintained ceiling? And that just perfectly exemplifies how let's just use common sense here

and look at the responsibilities of a business owner when we're looking at these

exculpatory contracts. Very much. You still have one minute. Mr. Eaton.

Thank you, Your Honor. May it please the court. My name is Mike Eaton. I represent the Apollee

Poffit, all referred to him as Planet Fitness in this case. I just want to start with this idea

that the duty owed by a premises owner somehow overrides the party's freedom to contract.

And actually the court has already addressed this conflict that amicus and appellant

have relied on. And that is this idea that there is a conflict between, yes, the duty

that someone has to exercise reasonable care and the liability associated with that,

and then the right of parties to contract freely. And this was in the Barnes case and

there was a few paragraphs on this. And the court, I see, just hang on. I needed to unmute.

Is this type of contract of adhesion, if you will, or fine print? Is that really a freedom

to contract issue? It is, yeah. Because all of these cases that this court has upheld

exculpatory contracts, and we're talking about the same types of contracts. In fact,

some of these cases, these exculpatory clauses are buried in packets of paper.

This clause was right on the front page. It was bolded capital letters

right directly below this clause actually was the area for the plaintiff to sign.

So to the extent that that is an issue, this is certainly a case where the clause is more

clearly set forth than some of the other cases in which this court has upheld those clauses.

So, Mr. Eaton, I think it's your position in response to Justice Hans Marconi's hypothetical

that if the chandelier falls down or if the ceiling collapses while somebody's walking

into the building to go exercise but they haven't even gotten in the building yet,

the exculpatory clause would prevent suit and public policy would not in any way override that

contractual. Well, you know, that's an interesting hypothetical. And I think

certainly the facts are different than those in this case. But I think there are,

you know, well, first I should say that in the Dean case, this court did say that

it's not going to analyze the outer bounds or, you know, what falls outside the range

of the exculpatory contract that when the plaintiffs claim so clearly fit within

the exculpatory clause, then there's no need to go that far. But

so, you know, that that would be another example where we would need to, you know,

look at the scope of the contract. Does, you know, for instance, the term facility does that

incorporate the parking lot, but that's not an issue in this case. And there's no need,

you know, to address that in the Dean case, this court explicitly refused to address that.

You know, what is clear, though, is that this court has consistently applied

a structured principled analysis time and time again over the course of decades.

Since the Barnes case, you know, involving the go-kart accident, this court has applied

the special relationship in disparity and bargaining power to pronged analysis. Now,

of course, we're not talking about intentional conduct. So that's not at issue here. But

that test is... Do we look to, I think it's a Houston generous in looking at the list of terms

and do we interpret that narrowly or broadly, where it says, including injuries, including,

but not limited to exercise equipment, tanning, massage beds, do we limit that?

Or do we interpret it in a very broad way?

Well, I think there are two answers or two parts to the answer to that. The first is,

you know, that clause begins with risk of injury or loss arising out of or related to

my or my guest's use of the facility. So again, you know, with the term facilities,

we're talking about clearly a physical space. We're not talking about, you know,

equipment or anything in particular. So I think those examples, you know,

certainly are a non-exclusive list of what, you know, what could be contained within the facility.

But the facility itself is a physical space, which would include the walkways. It would

include everything within the facility. And, you know... Even though walkways do not fit

within the category of tanning beds, the more specific exercise equipment, tanning,

massage beds, chairs, other exercise program services equipment, walkways don't really fit

in that it's evaluated narrowly. If construed, you know, limited to those

precise examples, you know, no, you know, walkways aren't included amongst

equipment or anything like that. But walkways are clearly, you know, the flooring is clearly part of

what a facility is. And the other thing I would add on top of that is, you know,

right after that sentence, it begins, I further agree. So now we're moving on to

an additional part of the contract, which may or may not, you know, include some of those

things. But what's clear about that clause is what matters. Because as this court said in

Barnes, as long as the contract clearly and specifically indicates an intent

for the defendant to be released from its own negligence, then, you know, the

exculpatory clause is that he can cover that. And that's what this clause does. It says that

I further agree that such entities will not be liable for any injury, including without limitation,

you know, personal bodily, et cetera, resulting from the negligent conduct or omission

of planet fitness, whether related to exercise or not. That is intended to include a broad array

of injuries, exercise related, non-exercise related, and this in the Barnes court, or

the this court in Barnes made clear that it is okay for clauses such as this to cover a broad scope

of injuries. So, you know, and again, I would just go back to with regards to

that specific clause, the language arising out of or related to. So even if we just take

equipment, for example, and I think this point was made, but, you know, clearly what is related to

use of the equipment is walking to and from it. You know, you can't use the equipment without

walking to and from it. What public policies are served by interpreting the contract that

broadly? How does that serve public policy? Well, it's the freedom to contract, Your Honor.

And, you know, in terms of the public policy analysis, as it applies to exculpatory contracts,

you know, there's not necessarily a need to show that it satisfies a particular public policy.

There's just a need to show that it does not violate public policy. And as this court

said in Barnes, what that means is that there exists a special relationship or a disparity in

bargaining power. And that's that same language that's used over the course of, you know, I think,

35 years now, since the Barnes case. So if I'm a member of a country club and I am walking

through the clubhouse to go play golf and I slip and fall over a not secured rug,

that's all going to be related to my playing golf.

If it has a similar exculpatory clause in my club membership.

I think, yeah, it would, it would depend on the language of the clause because I think what's

important to remember is, you know, this court in McGrath, which was the snowboarding case

said specifically that for the public policy analysis, the court does not examine, you know,

what's associated with the activity. That's left for the scope of the clause analysis.

So if the clause does cover something like that, then yes. And, you know, getting back to kind

of the justification for this, you know, and, you know, again, tying it back into the freedom

to contract. If the plaintiff had walked in there and she had seen this public or this

walkway she had seen the fence and she thought that it was too much of a risk,

you know, the right to terminate that contract, which is within her rights within the contract,

you know, exists. So if she walks in, sees that she is, you know, after knowing she assumed

the risk expressly, sees that, you know, maybe this is a risk she doesn't want to take on,

she can leave and terminate the contract. But, you know, I'd like to get back to

kind of where I started, which was this rule that is being proposed by amicus and by appellant that,

you know, I guess ordinary premises liability should not be able to be released.

Again, I discussed how Barnes already resolved that conflict in favor of exculpatory contracts.

But I'd also note that that rule, if adopted by this court, you know, would be directly

contrary to these cases that we're talking about. So Barnes, for instance, Barnes involved an ordinary

premises hazard, a disabled go-kart that was allegedly left on the track and that the defendant

allegedly failed to warn about. That's a premises defect. It's a hazard, it's a hidden hazard.

And, you know, this court still upheld that contract. And in the Dean case as well, you

know, talking about being in the midst of the activity or if it's related enough to the activity,

the plaintiff in Dean was crossing the track. He had signed up to work in the infield pit area.

He wasn't working in the infield pit area when he was injured. He was merely, you know, as amicus

friends, that merely walk it across the track. This is bastard. I think you're on mute. Sorry.

We prefer him that way. Thank you.

So Mr. Eden, if I understand your argument correctly, you're saying we don't

need to decide the broader premises liability issue as a public policy issue in the broadest

sense because here there's a much narrower factual basis in that this person was walking

to and from the equipment, had a towel was going to throw it away. And there may be a

different answer to another question as to whether this would violate public policy

if she had, if there'd been a faulty step while entering the building. Is that your position?

That's right. Yeah, that's exactly right. And that comes from the Dean cases as well.

This court doesn't need to examine those outer bounds. This is a claim,

but plaintiff was injured steps away from the treadmill that she had just finished using. And

as you indicated, I think earlier, you go to the gym, you have a whole exercise routine.

And you were in the exercise area. That's where the plaintiff was injured. That's clearly within

the scope of the contract. If she was walking into the building, we might have a different

analysis, but that's not the case here. We don't need to examine those outer bounds.

I'd also just like to point out too that this proposed rule of trying to make

trying to make these distinctions between premises or ordinary premises liability and

recreational injury, whether or not the plaintiff is in the midst of the injury.

This presents a very unworkable rule. Well, it's not that hard if someone's run over by

a race car at the track. That's not your normal premises liability, nor is a disabled go-kart

something that someone would run into. So why would it be so difficult to distinguish

regular premises responsibilities or duties from those particular activities called out in the form?

This woman was not hit by some rubber band being used for exercise. So why would that

be so difficult a framework? Well, I think the Barnes case gets at that. So the disabled go-kart

could just as easily have been a hole in the track. The point is, it wasn't caused by cars racing

and colliding with each other. Neither was the injury in the McGrath case. I mean, a snowboarding

injury, what you would expect from an ordinary snowboarding injury would be running into a

tree or crashing into another skier or snowboarder, not getting hit by a snowmobile.

And it's that those distinctions that this court in the McGrath case explicitly refused to engage in

as far as public policy goes. Now, that might be a fair distinction to make in the scope of the

contract analysis. But these aren't issues to be examined in the public policy analysis.

And that goes back to how this court has examined public policy again and again. And that is,

does there exist a special relationship? And is there a disparity in bargaining power?

Should it matter to us at all that this is a membership contract, whereas you say it's set

forth in large type on the front page as opposed to, say, a ski ticket where it's in micro text

on the back of the ticket and you stand in line and you get the ticket and you put it on your parka

and you go skiing? Is that a difference that matters either as a matter of contractual analysis

or public policy? Of course, yeah. And if we're talking about adhesion contracts,

or contracts that you might not know they're entering into, that is a significant difference.

This was right on the front page. It's clearly part of the text, clearly part of the contract.

It's not on the back of the ticket. And just one last point on that too, in terms of this

recreational issue versus other issues, exercise is recreational. And importantly,

fitness clubs are not essential services. Even if exercise might be in some way essential for

some people, you know, certainly using a fitness center isn't. And the plaintiff herself,

and she's included it in her appendix, admits that, you know, when she went to Planet Fitness,

it was to walk. But she walks. All right. Thank you very much. Thank you very much. Mr.

Pietra, you have one minute. Can I ask whether if we find in favor of the plaintiff, wouldn't

we be going against the majority of jurisdictions in the country? I would not agree with that

respectfully, Your Honor. I think that they're in the gym patron context. The cases which

Your Honor is referring to are very different. There are injuries that were incurred while

someone was exercising, while someone was partaking in a high risk activity in which the duty of

the business owner is not as fundamental to protect the patron from harm. And the risk of injury

is increased. And it makes sense from a public policy perspective to allow waiver.

The cases in which someone is just walking around and is injured, and there's a liability

release are few. And we've cited several reported cases that tip in our favor. So I would

disagree with that premise. And

No problem, Your Honor. I just want to make sure that the court recognizes my objection to the

relevance of the nearness to the exercise machine, to this inquiry. I think that

from a public policy perspective, you can't draw a distinction between that and walking into

a country club or walking into a movie theater. So I urge the court to reverse this decision in

favor of the plaintiff. Thank you. Thank you very much. They submitted. Before I let you go,

let me thank you for your fine presentations. It's always a pleasure to have prepared

articulate lawyers in front of us. And this was certainly an example of that.
