Thank you, Claire. The matter before the court is State of New Hampshire versus Joshua

Heredia. Case number two zero one nine zero seven three six. State of New Hampshire is represented

by Attorney Laura Lombardi. The defendant is represented by Attorney Stephanie Hausman.

Ms. Hausman, have you reserved any time? I have. I reserved one minute of my time.

Then you may proceed whenever you wish. Thank you. May it please the court? Stephanie Hausman

on behalf of Joshua Heredia. As the court mentioned, I have reserved one minute of my time.

I want to focus on the first issue. This case is very similar to town. While the nature of the

jurors bias is different than in town, Beale's bias towards the police here was just as palpable.

He had a family friend and a lot of family members who are police officers. He also reported

working with a ton of Manchester police officers. Despite these connections, he had not answered

the trial court's question about relationships with law enforcement officers. When asked if,

despite these many connections, he could still be impartial. Beale said he would try not

to let his connections interfere, but that he was sympathetic to police because of what he,

Beale, did for work. Then he said, I'm not going to lie and say I wouldn't indiscernible,

but I would try to be unbiased. Isn't that word, that indiscernible word,

very important to our analysis? I think whatever word or words were spoken in place of that

indiscernible, the only rational possibilities are words that convey his tendency to favor the

police. At the end of the court's inquiry, all Beale could say was he would try to be

unbiased to the best of his ability. When looking at the entirety of Beale's voir-deer,

the holding of town compels a finding that he should have been disqualified.

So let me ask you a quick question. You initially said he didn't answer the court's

question with respect to relationships with law enforcement. Are you referring to the general

voir-deer at the beginning? Yes. And when he approached, he didn't inform

the court that that was one of his concerns? That's correct. But presumably he did put

that information in his questionnaire. Yes, it was in his questionnaire, and that's how

one of the parties was alerted to the issue. This court's opinion in town focused on the juror's

language. Whatever her demeanor, it did not override the clear import of her words.

To say you'll try to be impartial, despite your clear sympathies, is simply not enough to

satisfy the constitutional guarantee of a jury as impartial as the lot of humanity will allow.

But it was more than that, Ms. Hausmann. She also said something to the effect that

I think I need to do this or I need to do this. Those were the damning words,

at least to the author of the opinion. In her initial statements, she did say something like

I need to do this. And from that, I think the trial court and this court inferred that she

had a sort of personal investment in this kind of case, although it could also have just

been referring to a sort of general fear that this is my civic duty and I need to be seated on a jury.

And those words properly prompted the trial court to further inquire. But it was that further

inquiry that did not clarify the matter. And so the final words that that juror gave was,

I would try, I will try to be unbiased. And that is similar to the case that we have here.

That BL indicated that he had sympathies towards the police that he would try. But he had some

reservations about that. The court properly inquired further, but only elicited from BL that he would

try. And that did not satisfy the constitutional guarantee. So are you looking for a bright line

rule that whenever a prospective juror says I will try? And without further inquiry,

that juror can't say? I'm not asking for a bright line rule. I think that there could be a juror who

was sort of extraordinarily self aware, maybe learned in the in the issue of implicit bias

and would say, I don't believe anyone can actually set aside their previous experiences.

But given that you're asking me to, I will try. That juror is sort of expressing the limitations

of the human condition, which are recognized in our constitutional guarantee, but is not saying,

I will try to set aside a specific area of concern. But I think that in general,

when there is a specific area of concern, and the juror only says I try, I will try,

I'll do my best, words to that effect. I think that that necessarily triggers the court

to follow up on that. And if the trial court can't, as the court did in Tbilisi, get a commitment

from the juror that they will do what the court is asking. And the status only remains that the

juror says that they will try. I think that that is clear undertone that that requires

that juror to be struck. But isn't that parsing the language pretty,

pretty closely and discounting the trial judge's ability to assess the credibility? Because maybe

the prospective juror would say, yeah, I'll do that. But then the trial court could still not

believe that, right? And dismiss the juror for cause? That's true that after an inquiry,

the trial court, the juror might say, I will do that. But the trial court might still have

reservations about the sincerity of that statement or the juror's ability to set aside

whatever the issue is. And so that would be a credibility determination.

It seems like here we're, we're talking like between the 45 yard lines and the outcome,

it seems, should it really depend on precise wordsmithing when you've got a prospective juror

who probably in their life has never talked to a judge or been up on talking at the bench with

lawyers and a judge? Aren't we hanging an awful lot on precise word choice when that really

isn't what's going on? I think what hinges on the precise word choice is the obligation

of the trial court to further inquire. And if that further inquiry reveals that that's just

sort of the nature of the way this juror expresses themselves, that they this juror would never say,

I will do this, but always says, yeah, I'll try to do that. Yep, I'll try to do that.

Then that sort of clarifies the word choice. But I think that there are certain

commonly used and well understood words and phrases that must trigger a further inquiry.

And if that further inquiry reveals that what the juror is actually saying is I can't

commit to doing what you're asking me to do, but I will try, then that is insufficient under town.

Is our review limited to the voir dire testimony or can we look outside

that proceeding? And maybe consider the fact that here we have a case where

these officers are testifying directly contrary to civilian witnesses. So is

it more important in this case? I think that it is appropriate for the court to look at the

kind of case that it is, the nature of the evidence that is admitted, maybe even the outcome

of the trial to determine how harmful it could be to have a jury, a juror with this sort of bias

on the jury. And in this particular case, as the court notes, the police officer testimony

was critical to the state's case. Yes, there was a video. The court has the video. It's from

quite a distance. And it does not show all of what the testimony referred to. And the testimony was

critical on issues of what Mr. Heredia justified in his actions against the first officer and

that sort of thing. Issues where bias towards police would have been very harmful to the defendant's case.

The trial court's ruling here was not based on BL's demeanor. So no differences do in that regard.

Rather, the trial court just disagreed with the premise of town and found that the juror

had sufficiently established his impartiality. How do we know that the trial court's

decision wasn't based on the juror's credibility? Because the trial court said nothing about

BL's demeanor, behavior, nothing about whether this was a credibility determination and whether

the judge's decision was based on his belief about the juror's abilities and partiality.

That doesn't mean it didn't happen. That just means that the judge was not protecting

the part of their anatomy. I think that the trial court in its ruling makes clear that what it is

basing its ruling on is a general sense that or a general feeling that all of juror can do. The

best a juror can do as the state argued is to say that they'll try. And that it is that argument

to which the trial court references in its ruling not striking BL. We're all

peremptory exhausted on both sides at the point of this review of this juror.

I believe that in this jury selection method, 20 or so jurors were sat and then peremptories were

used. So all peremptories were used by both sides. Each side had three and so six

peremptories were used. But that was at the conclusion of ceding however many jurors were

sat. So the challenge for the defense was to place those peremptories on three others if it was

three or on others and this one sort of didn't make the cut. Did the cut. That's a problem.

Yes the defense did not cut the cut for a peremptory. Right. The defense did not use a

peremptory on BL and then BL was not chosen as one of the alternates. That's another example

of which to Justice Donovan's point that the court can consider what happens later.

If the juror ends up being an alternate, I think that that shoots the argument in its foot.

But this court has said in Addison that a jury challenge isn't preserved if a peremptory is

used on the challenged juror. It would not make sense for this court to also say a jury

challenge isn't preserved by not using a peremptory on that juror. To just touch on the second

issue in this case the state had to prove to prove riot that Mr. Heredia simultaneously with

two or more other people engaged in tumultuous or violent behavior. In order to prove the felony

level variant of riot they had to prove that Mr. Heredia's tumultuous or violent behavior

resulted in injury to any person. In this case, Officer Stewart was punched three to five times

by the brother before Mr. Heredia's violent or tumultuous behavior. Officer Stewart was then

punched one more time and at the end of the evening she was diagnosed with a concussion.

Under Casteen the state has to exclude the possibility that the concussion was caused

by these assaults because of the timing of Mr. Heredia's violent or tumultuous behavior.

And there was no testimony that medically that this assault was the one that caused the

concussion and there was no lay test. Does there have to be? No I don't think there

has to be but there was not even any lay testimony that Officer Stewart's behavior

changed as a result of this one punch. And so in this situation because the circumstantial evidence

was insufficient the felony level riot charge should have been dismissed. But in Belkner we

just ruled that the state disagrees that the conduct started that late the tumultuous conduct

started that late but rather there were earlier instances that contributed. Mr. Heredia was

acting arguably tumultuously at the very beginning of the encounter when he was outside with a bouncer

but at that point he was with only one other person so that was not the riotous behavior.

Once the group came out of the bar there was testimony that the group was loud the group

wasn't leaving the group was in the street but there was no testimony about Mr. Heredia

specifically engaging in tumultuous or violent behavior. The first mention specifically of Mr.

Heredia is when Officer Harrington is trying to arrest the brother feel some contact from somebody

that person sort of flees back into the crowd he gets up and his attention is drawn to Mr. Heredia.

As the defense video expert testified there was no evidence that Mr. Heredia was the one who

made contact with Officer Harrington so he is not engaging in tumultuous or violent behavior until

he first punched Officer Roscoe. Thank you. Thank you. You still have one minute.

Ms. Lombardi? Ms. Lombardi may be on mute. Yeah. To borrow a phrase from Justice Gasset she looks

like she's a 45-yard field goal. I will talk to them before the afternoon argument.

I apologize. Good morning may it please the court and Laura Lombardi representing the

state of New Hampshire. I would be happy to take questions at any time. The trial court's finding

that BL was qualified to sit on the jury was a sustainable exercise of discretion. The determination

of impartiality is entitled to special deference because the court is able to observe the

jurors demeanor and assess his credibility. Here BL asked to be excused based on financial hardship.

He did not raise any concerns regarding his ability to be impartial. He didn't even mention any

connections with law enforcement until he was prompted by defense counsel on that issue.

Doesn't that influence the court's decision on his credibility if he wasn't willing to disclose

that information? I think if anything it lends in favor of the court's decision because in this case

if you look at the entire voir dire it was clear that BL did not want to serve on the jury. Earlier

in the day he had already avoided serving in an earlier jury pool based on an experience of

his daughters and in this jury pool he tried to get out of it by saying he had a financial

hardship. So I think he would have grasped at any idea that would have helped him get off this

jury. In fact he almost debated with the judge for a period of time about his financial hardship

and tried to encourage the judge to let him off the jury. Wasn't the relationship disclosed in

the questionnaire? Yes and so I believe it was a question he answered yes to in the questionnaire

that he knew police officers. If he believed that he would have been at all impartial due to that

I think he clearly with his desire to get off the jury I think he clearly would have raised

that to the judge and said you know when the judge said no about the financial hardship

you would expect, one would expect that someone who does not want to serve on the jury

if they felt that they would be somehow impartial due to knowing police officers they

would raise that and say well judge I also you know I know a lot of police officers so I'm

concerned about my ability to be fair in this case. Does the record support the fact that he had

an opportunity to do that? My sense was that the defense counsel began questioning him about his

relationship with law enforcement immediately after the judge wouldn't let him off the jury

because of his financial hardship. The defense counsel did start asked about that question

however before that there was discussion about the judge had asked you know weren't you

called on an earlier jury and you didn't mention financial hardship and he said well

as I mentioned the situation with my daughter in that case so one would think when the judge said no

you know we're I'm not going to let you out of this case due to financial hardship

that he would have mentioned if he had concerns about his ability to be impartial he wouldn't

but even once once it was raised by defense counsel and BL jumped on that and said oh yeah

I know lots of police he didn't identify a close friend he said there's a family friend

he didn't say who these family members were he made a very vague statement of you know I work with

a lot of police a lot of family members are he didn't say that my father my brother someone

close to him was and the the court properly questioned him along these lines for a period

of time and looked into this issue after he mentioned that he might be sympathetic to

police the trial court properly um continued the questioning and I think it's important to

look at the entire voir dear here to determine whether or not the trial court's decision is

supportable given that we're talking about a constitutional right here well why shouldn't we

rather than uh reading tea leaves and trying to figure out all these subtleties

where one can argue either way why isn't it better going forward or maybe applying it in

this case that there be a bright line that when when you're close when you're between the 40 yard

lines the court just should affirmatively ask if the juror can commit to deciding the case

impartially why why play around with well I'll try I'll do my best but why don't we establish that as

the as the bright line if there was a close case and I think you look to town and so in a situation

like that where you have someone who was a victim of a of a of a similar crime um and you have a

clear indication that there's concerns about impartiality by the juror herself um that she

she said that she was unsure whether she could be impartial um then I think it it it can come down

closer to the actual words but I think here I think it's important to look at what is the

specific area of concern so the area of current concern in town was this is a person who's a

victim of a crime who wants to serve on the jury because she feels like she needs to do that

here um the area of concern was just a general he knows police officers um in town in town we asked

we we ruled that there needed to be an unequivocal affirmation of impartiality do we have that here

I don't think you need to have that in every case I think that was required in town because of

the facts of town and the circumstances of the juror in town I think this juror is very

similar to many jurors and I think the trial court in this case properly recognized kind of the flaw

in in the question about balancing two people's testimony and I think a lot of jurors might use

the word try because that is the best that they can do is to try to be impartial but they're

clearly when they're watching two people testify they're going to make judgments there's that

personal um just observation that's going to come into into play and the juror here said he

would try to the best of his ability and I think that's the answer you would get from a lot of

prospective jurors and I think the important thing to look at is the the concern the specific

concern in the case so in town the concern was a victim of a similar crime and in this case the

concern was a general he knows some police officers you're going to find lots of jurors who

might know police officers um so I I think in in this case I don't think you can draw a

bright line rule that if a juror says they're going to try to be impartial they should be disqualified

I think that runs the risk of disqualifying a number of of jurors and I think here again you

have to give deference to the trial court the trial court was able to observe BL throughout the

voir dire assess his credibility and make a decision of whether the court felt he was

qualified and I think that decision by the the trial court is entitled to to deference

should we consider the fact that this juror BL said that he's sympathetic to police officers

in a case in which police officers were victims of an assault and they were testifying

directly contrary to what the defense theory would have been that did raise concerns with

the trial court in terms of the trial court then followed that up with the questions

the more specific questions of you're going to hear testimony from some police officers

and from some non-officers and will you be able to look at that fairly so I think I think the trial

court properly addressed the concern with the word sympathy in the follow up voir dire and the

trial court was able to observe BL in answering those questions and make a determination of

whether he believed that BL could be impartial as for the second issue I would argue that the

trial court also properly denied the motion for a directed verdict the the facts need to be looked at

is the light most favorable to the state in the jury based on that could have found that the

defendant was engaging in riotous behavior throughout the incident that led to officer

Stewart's injuries he yelled at the bouncer outside of the bar and he postured as if ready

to fight but more importantly after that his friends came out he disobeyed a number of direct

police orders to leave the area he was part of a group that refused to leave and the reason

they were being asked asked to leave was because of his earlier behavior in the bar

it was the defendant that was being told to leave and he would not leave and his friends

joined him and as a group they crowded around the officers whether or not he actually touched

officer Harrington before drawing officer Harrington's attention away from the arrest

of his brother doesn't matter the fact is that he was hovering close by the arrest while his

brother was resisting arrest he was encroaching on the areas that the officers were trying to

arrest his brother and on the video he was encroaching close by and this caused one of

the officers to draw his attention away from the arrest and it was due to that that officer

Stewart was left alone with the brother and suffered suffered from the significant assault

that she was if a citizen citizen journalist had been walking by and decided to stop and

hover and film the proceedings could that person be considered to have contributed to the riot

probably not if they would have to have been engaged in some kind of tumultuous or violent

behavior so here there's numerous instances of tumultuous or violent behavior by the

defendant there's a yelling at the at the the bouncer tumultuous behavior just simply

leaving a direct order he personally was directed to leave the journalist coming by

wasn't part of that order by the police to leave the area so if the if the journalist

is ordered to leave and doesn't because it's his first amendment right to report on what's

going on does that make a difference that's not the case here but potentially if the journalist

was part of this riotous crowd the defendant here was wasn't just part of the crowd he was

getting very close while this arrest was going on and his attention was on his brother on the

arrest of his brother he was hovering in that area the group as a whole was crowding in on them

pushing them shoving them which drew two of the officers away from the arrest

can i go back to the first issue this gentleman said this juror said that he

knew lots of police officers was he ever any more specific than that did he name any did he

say what police departments or anything of the like he did not name anyone or

he might have mentioned i'm not he might have mentioned Manchester police but i do not recall

i believe he was a physical therapist and so he worked with police officers in his in his work

and he did also say that he had i think it was many family members but he didn't

identify anyone by name and he the judge did ask if he knew any of the witnesses in the case and

he did not but he did say yeah i think he indicated that he worked with a lot of Manchester police

officers that that could be correct yeah um and so going going back to um the second issue

finally um this isn't a case of solely circumstantial evidence um there was evidence

about um direct evidence on each element of the crime um and if there are no further questions

the state would ask that you affirm the convictions thank you thank you miss houseman

the only thing i want to point out is in response to some of the arguments made by the state on

issue two the state has a crime called disorderly conduct it has many variants and it can have

an elevating element that if an injury is caused um by as a result of disorderly conduct that could

elevate it to a felony that's not the language that the legislature used in the riot statute what

they used was tumultuous or violent behavior which must have an a meaning enhanced from what

is the actus reis of the variants of disorderly conduct and for that reason the evidence in

this case did not establish that mr heredia engaged in violent or tumultuous conduct until he

punched officer roscoe thank you thank you thank you as always for your excellent presentations

case submitted courts and recess
