It is case number 201906, and I've blocked out the next letter. Can someone number, can

someone help me? 0680, thank you. And the state of New Hampshire is represented by Attorney

Woodcock. Mr. Hinckley is represented by Attorney Barnard. And Ms. Woodcock has reserved two

minutes for rebuttal. Ms. Woodcock, you may begin at your convenience.

There we go. Good afternoon, your honors. Elizabeth Woodcock for the state of New

Hampshire. As the court noted, I've reserved two minutes for rebuttal. The issue here is

that the trial court simply applied the wrong test. It created a test in which immunity

can be granted for an element of the offense. And that simply is not the law. When the

police officer was talking to the defendant and he said, you won't be in any trouble for

doing what was not an unlawful act. That's not a grant of immunity. And the trial court

took that statement and then carried it forward so that it wound up being a statement

that consensual sex with a person who was of the right age granted immunity for forcible

rape. And it simply can't be that that test. But we have to infer from that statement that

he was talking about consensual sex because the officer didn't refer to sexual consensual

sex when he made that statement. That's correct, your honor. He didn't use the

word consensual sex, but the context of the statement is important here because

the defendant had said, well, I wouldn't have had sex with her because I was 18 and she

was 17. And he indicated to the police officer that he thought that that would be

against the law. So the police officer's response is the age of consent is 16. Then

that the conversation sort of goes back and forth and the defendant says, oh,

well, then, you know, kind of if that's the case, yeah, I did have sexual

relations with her. And then the conversation went on. And after that point when

the police officer said to him, did you did you ever she is saying that you that

she resisted you when she she did not want to have sex with you. And she made

it clear to you physically that she didn't want to have sex with you. The

defendant's response is that didn't happen. And so it's clear from

conversation about her resisting happened after he admitted having sex with

her.

That's correct. But the admission that he had sex with her was the trial

court's error is in concluding that by saying this particular act is not

illegal, that that by saying that particular thing, the police

officer then gave immunity for what would be an illegal act.

Well, what he said was what the police officer said was you won't be in

trouble if you had sex with her. It didn't really limit it to consensual

as justice Donovan pointed out. He said you won't be in trouble.

He didn't use that phrase. But that's why the court has to look at the

context of the conversation. What they were discussing at that point was

whether it was illegal for the defendant to have sex with someone

who was under the age of 16. And the trial court took that and said,

Well, sexual intercourse is an element of the offense. Now, setting

aside the fact that they could have proven that he had sexual

intercourse without his admission, because as is reflected in my

brief, the guardian of the victim walked in on. So there was

evidence, which is unusual, certainly in a sexual assault case.

Was that incident one of the non consensual or consensual episodes?

I don't think that the record is clear on that point, Your Honor.

But if the only issue was the state has to prove that there

was sexual intercourse, and that's an element of the

offense, the state had proved that could prove it without any

admissions by the defendant. So the idea what the court did was

it took this element of the offense, and then it strung it

out to be a grant of immunity. And that doesn't

mean the test works. Does an admission have to cover all

specifically cover all elements of the offense? No, I have to

admit to every single element. No, that's why I think that

the court's analysis is wrong. Because at one point, I think in

his brief, Mr. Barnard points out that a police officer might

say that, well, if you were present at the scene of a

particular crime, you will be in a trouble. Well, if that might

be a grant of immunity under certain circumstances, even

though presence isn't an element of the offense, if there's a

homicide, for example, and you're charged with homicide, then I

mean, it's assumed that you're present. But but charging

presence is not a part of that charge.

Let me ask you, Ms. Woodcock, let me ask you just two

questions. And then I promise I'll be quiet. Do you agree

that the review of the trial court's decision involves a

totality of the circumstances?

I think that that's the test the trial court should have

applied.

Do you think that do you agree that the burden is on the

state to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the

statements were voluntary?

Under these circumstances, no, not at this point, Your

Honor, I think that the I think that the question before

the court is not whether the statements are voluntary

because the trial court never made that decision. It decided

that there was a grant of immunity, and that therefore

the confession was per se involuntary. So there was no

analysis of the resident factors or any of the other

factors that go towards a voluntary confession absent a

grant of immunity.

But the trial court's decision is we review it

deferentially. Do we not?

You would review fact finding differentially, Your

Honor, but since it's the state's contention that that he

applied the wrong test, that it's just a wrong

application of a law, and that you would review

de novo. So if the test that he applied that you can

grant immunity for an element of the offense, which

is essentially what he said, if that is wrong as a

matter of law, then I think that what this court would

have to do is say you've applied the wrong test. This

needs to go back to the trial court. And the trial

court needs to look at it applying the appropriate

test being the totality of the circumstances. Correct?

I think under that circumstance, it would be and

then you would look at whether the defendant

understood why he was at the police station, which he

clearly did, whether he was given his Miranda rights,

he was, whether his particular characteristics and

there was testimony on it, what his what his mental

challenges were, whether those would have affected

the voluntariness of his confession, all of those

kinds of things then come into play. But if you're

saying he was given immunity, then that is going to

affect the voluntariness of the confession per

cent. And I think that you can't grant immunity for

an element of an offense. You just it doesn't make

any sense. Almost all of the crimes in New

Hampshire have elements that are not by themselves

crimes.

So what what element was he grant giving immunity

for? Was it penetration or consensual

penetration?

He was given immunity for having sexual

intercourse, not not non consensual intercourse,

not anything of that sort. The court said that

because you had to prove sexual intercourse as

part of the charge, that by saying you would

not be in trouble if you had sex with somebody

who was over the age of 16, that that gave the

defendant immunity for the entire ball of wax.

And that simply cannot be the case.

What is the distinction? In your brief, you

argue that the officer was promising leniency

as opposed to immunity. Is there a distinction

we should be addressing?

Well, I think I think that that's kind of the

way that I interpreted what the police officer

had done, although I think that the trial court

would have to go back and look and decide

whether that was actually a promise of

leniency. But yes, there is a distinction.

If if if I and this happens frequently

with police officers, if you tell me what you

know about this particular offense, I'll be

sure to let the district attorney or the

county attorney or the prosecutor know

about that. Well, that's sort of an implied

promise of leniency or certainly a suggestion

that there would be leniency involved.

That's different from saying, you know, you

tell me what happened and you walk out the

door clean slate, no prosecution, which

is essentially what immunity is. And I think

even even reading the the transcript in the

most careful fashion, the police officer

never says that to him. I have a quick

question. But given the fact that we have

to track the transcript of the interview,

what what extent should we defer to the

trial courts? Well, you always ask me

these questions and it gets harder and

harder. The more technology appellate

courts have, I think, frankly, because

there is a tendency to say, well, we

can second guess. I don't think that the

court can second guess factual findings

unless they're clearly erroneous. But

that's not what I'm asking this court to

do. I'm asking this court to say that

the the legal standard that the trial

court applied was incorrect as a matter

of law. If the court has no further

questions, my yellow light is on. I'm

sure that Mr. Barnard would like to

hop right on. I'm sure that he would

and with apologies to both counsel. I

neglected to inform you that Justice

Bassett will participate in this case.

He will listen to the oral arguments.

He simply can't be here this afternoon.

And having said that, I'm thank you

and you still have your two minutes.

Mr. Barnard. Thank you, your honor.

May it please the court Thomas Barnard

on behalf of Seth Hinkley. The trial

courts finding here that Marsh

promised Hinkley immunity was not

against the manifest weight of the

evidence. In Parker, state versus

Parker 2010 case, this court made

clear that while context is a factor,

context cannot override the plain

meaning of a police officer's

statement. And here the plain

language of Marsh's statement was

that it was a promise of immunity.

Marsh said, quote, you're not going

to be in trouble for me if you told

me that you had sex with her.

Now, the state argues that this

wasn't a promise of immunity, but

merely an assertion that consensual

sex with a 16 year old is not

against the law. But there are three

problems with that argument. First,

Marsh never used the word consensual.

In fact, the word consensual doesn't

appear anywhere in the transcript of

the interview. And secondly, Marsh

didn't say it's not illegal to

or you can't get in trouble for

the type of language that he would

have used if he was describing the

law. Instead, he said, you're not

going to be in trouble. And third,

Marsh's promise was expressly made

contingent, not on a past act, but

on Hinkley making a specific

admission. Marsh said, you're not

going to be in trouble if you told

me that you had sex with her.

But the preceding sentence in

that conversation had to do with

the fact that the defendant said

she was too young, right, and

that he was concerned about

having sex with somebody who was

underage.

Right. So Hinkley said, you know,

she was too young, I didn't want

to. And then Marsh says, well,

would that have been illegal? And

Hinkley said, I'm not sure. I

don't know. And and and that's

when Marsh embarked on this

monologue. And I agree, if

Marsh had said only consensual

sex with a 16 year old is not

against the law, then we

wouldn't be here. There would be

no argument that that was a

promise of immunity. But the

trial court sustainably found

that Marsh's additional

statements, particularly his

what I call his third statement

went far beyond merely

asserting that consensual sex

with a 16 year old was not

against the law. Marsh plainly

told Hinkley, you're not

going to be in trouble if you

told me that you had sex

with her. Well, what he

actually says is you're not

in trouble if you had sex

with her. Okay, it's your

girlfriend. She's over the age

of 16. That's the age of

consent. Isn't that the proper

context? Well, then there's a

statement later, where he

where he reiterates he

rephrases it. And he says,

you're not going to be in

trouble from me if you told

me that you had sex with her.

And I think that's the

that's the strongest

statement in terms of a

promise of immunity. And this

is very typical. It's a police

officer saying, I will give

you immunity for X if you

admit to why? And the the

flaw in the state's argument

is that the state assumes

that X and Y must be the

same. But that's not the

case. A police officer can

offer immunity and promise

broad immunity in exchange

for a very narrow statement.

And that's what happened

here. Marsh offered promised

immunity and that immunity was

brought as the trial court

found. The fact it was well,

the immunity that Marsh

promised was contingent upon

Hinckley making a statement.

And that statement was more

narrow, just you had sex

with her. But the fact that

Marsh requested that Hinckley

make a narrow admission

doesn't affect the scope of

the immunity that he

promised or its status as a

promise of immunity. How do

you respond to the state's

argument that the court used

the wrong legal framework

and that found that Marsh

was offering immunity only

with respect to one element

of an offense? No, well,

that's I mean, that's

the essentially the point

that I just made. The

problem here was wasn't

that Marsh was offering

immunity for an element.

Marsh was offering immunity

for an offense for a broad

offense, any offense based

on having sex with F T. That

was the scope of the

immunity. Now what Hinckley

had to do to that. That's

not what the trial court

described. He said at least

one of the elements, which is

tantamount to promising

immunity for the offenses

themselves. Yeah. So do we

follow the trial court's

description? Or my second

question, can we look at

beyond what Marsh said about

not being in trouble? Can we

look at the totality of his

exchange with your client?

Well, I think that the test

is not totality of the

circumstances because the

trial court here found that

there was a promise of

immunity. So if that's

true, if there was a promise

of immunity, then the trial

court was correct in not

reaching the totality of the

circumstances. In terms of

deference, there is

deference for the trial

court's findings. There are

courts that will review an

ultimate voluntariness

finding on federal courts, in

particular, de novo without

deference. But in state

versus Ford, it's 144

New Hampshire 57. This court

expressly rejected that

approach and said the

ultimate voluntariness

finding is reviewed with

deference. Did the trial

court listen to the tape of

the interview was recorded?

Correct? It did. It did. The

trial court made clear in

its order that it had

reviewed the videotape, the

video recording of the

interrogation, that it was

relying on that was

referring to the

transcript solely for

reference. And we don't

have the video here in

the record on appeal.

That's correct. The state

has not provided the

video recording. So there

goes. And that's an example

why deference should be

granted to the trial court.

It is, it is, you know, the

state, we haven't talked

about it yet today, but the

state makes arguments about,

you know, why it was that

Hinkley stated that he had

sex with FT despite her

physical resistance. And the

video recording can shed

light on that. Especially the

timing that statements were

made. A lot of times

people speak over each

other. So it's not clear

that the transcript makes it

look like Hinkley made a

statement and said, um, hum,

before Marsh asked him why

FT would lie about that. But

in fact, if they were just

speaking over each other, and

it's possible that Marsh

didn't hear that statement

when he asked that

question. And do you agree

that your client's

capacity doesn't come into

issue in our analysis at

this stage? I don't agree

with that. I think in

general, you know,

voluntariness considers the

the subjective characteristics

of the defendant. It's not a

totality of the circumstances

test. But I do think it is

relevant that that Hinkley

had an IQ of 76, which was

in the fifth percentile. I

think that even a person of

average intelligence or above

average intelligence would have

taken Marsh Marsh's

statement at face value

would have assumed that he

meant what he said. And

that's that, you know, if I

as a suspect admit to having

sex with FT, then I won't

be in trouble. But

definitely, you know,

somebody like Hinkley with

below average intelligence is

going to be much more

likely to take Marsh's

statement at face value to

take it literally, not to

question it and to say,

look, I've got this

officer telling me, if I

admit to X, I won't be in

trouble. So I'm going to

admit tax. And that was a

sustainable finding by the

trial court, not against

the manifest way of the

evidence as viewed in the

light most favorable, most

favorable to Hinkley, that

Marsh's statement

constituted a promise of

immunity. I don't have

any other comments unless

the court has further

questions, we would ask

that the court affirm the

trial court's ruling.

Thank you. I see no

further questions coming

from my colleagues. So, Ms.

Woodcock, would you please

use your two minutes?

Thank you, Your Honor.

What you just heard from

Mr. Barnard is an urging

that the court apply a

totality of the circumstances

test without doing it,

because now we're supposed

to take into consideration

the characteristics of the

defendant, which is part

of the resident test.

That's not part of the

test for granting immunity.

You don't do it. It's either

you've been granted immunity

or you haven't. You don't

consider the totality

of the circumstances.

And that's why I think it's

so important that this

court tell the trial court

that it applied the wrong

standard. This is what

the Mr. Barnard keeps

saying it's not, he

didn't, the court didn't

recognize broad immunity

or the court recognized

broad immunity. That's not

what the court says

in its order. The court says

in its order where you

granted immunity for an

element of the offense.

And therefore I am going

to extrapolate from then.

And I will find that

this immunity was broader

than anything the police

officer could have intended

or the defendant could

have expected. I think

the best thing for this

court to do is to return

this case to the trial

court telling it to apply

the risk factors. And

if the defendants of

mental abilities are one

of those things that the

trial court should consider,

go ahead, make that

conclusion. But don't try

to stretch what the police

officer said into a grant

of really all encompassing

immunity. It just is not

correct. If there's

Thank you, council.

Thank you, your honor.

Thank you, council. Case

submitted. Court stands in

recess.
