Jared Bedrick and the State of New Hampshire is represented by Elizabeth Woodcock. Mr. Bedrick,

I understand you have reserved two minutes of rebuttal.

I have, Your Honor.

Whenever you are ready, please proceed.

Good morning, Justice Six, and may it please the Court. My name is Jared Bedrick and I

represent Mr. Trout. Mr. Trout is seeking to get a new trial, or more specifically

at this stage, seeking to get a hearing in the Motion Court in front of the Grafton

Superior Court in order to have a discovery process to find out if his constitutional rights

were violated when a prosecutor or the prosecutor made its closing argument using false material

statements about the credibility of key witnesses. I'll take questions at any time or I could

just go through it.

Why isn't this claim stale?

Stale, I guess if I could ask you to clarify whether stale in the sense of RSA 526 or, okay,

so our argument is that 526 doesn't apply for two reasons. One, if there is a new

trial remedy, it's not necessarily limited by 526. 526 just says that a defendant may bring

a certain kind of claim for a new trial, and that's usually for facts that they discover.

It's usually for something that's not involving constitutional rights or implicating state

conduct, but five years down the line you learn that some witness had done something

prior to the trial that implicated their credibility or something and that you want to come back

and say that the trial was unfair for some reason. This is a separate kind of claim where

essentially invoking the court's equity jurisdiction, which is allowed with the writ of quorum

nobis, saying that this is a constitutional error, not an error of fact necessarily,

but a constitutional error because the trial was tainted by the representations that the prosecution

made. It's that he was deprived of a fair trial. It's not that the evidence used against

him was problematic in some way.

But this was filed as a motion for a new trial under 526, so if it is a quorum nobis

proceeding shouldn't it have been filed that way, or can't it still be filed that

way?

Well, first of all, I don't believe that it was ever filed as a motion for a new trial

under RSA 526, unless I'm not remembering it.

But it was captioned as a motion for a new trial.

But it was captioned as a motion for a new trial because that's the relief that we're

seeking. There are multiple vehicles by which you can get that same relief. 526 would

have been one of them that we didn't invoke. Rit of quorum nobis would have been

another one that the court could have interpreted this as a writ of quorum nobis. I guess

it's just, you know, when I filed it, I wanted the court to be clear what we're

seeking, so I put that in a caption.

So you would like to proceed under a quorum nobis theory?

We would like to proceed under a quorum nobis theory.

That's a Hail Mary, right?

Well, it's all a Hail Mary at this point. I mean, we're 12 years post-sentencing,

but my client was throwing a Hail Mary when he went into federal court and found

that there was a disciplinary proceeding that was sustained against the key

witness in his case, and, you know, he didn't know about it prior.

Not only was this a case where that evidence wasn't turned over, because if

that were the case that this was the only issue, that it wasn't turned

over, we might not have a claim.

What makes this a constitutional problem that I believe warrants relief

for my client is that the prosecutor closed by saying, we've got witnesses

over here, we've got witnesses over here, believe ours because they don't

have a disciplinary record.

Your affidavit references one of those officers as having a discipline

history, correct?

Correct.

Could we know which one?

Well, as far as we know, as far as we can tell from now, I think that

one officer who's been identified in the affidavit, or shouldn't say

he's been identified, but because we don't know which one it is, right?

We don't know the identity.

We know that one of the officers has the issue.

Does it matter?

I don't think it does matter at this stage, because at this stage all

we need to do is show that there is some evidence, right, that we can use

the discovery process to find something exculpatory.

What if it's the officer upon whom the jury acquitted your client?

Would that make a difference?

No, only because the officers both testified about the events.

In this case, the acquitted charge was the one charging officer Roberts.

Officer Smolenski was the one where Mr. Trout was convicted.

It was the other way around.

Oh, I'm sorry, you're right.

It is the other way around.

But my point is that the officers Smolenski's observations would have

been of or would have stated observations of Mr.

Officer Roberts' issues.

Right, and Officer Roberts testified as well to the same client, correct?

So each one of them is testifying about what happened to the other,

and therefore their testimony is relevant as to the case on the other.

So I think if we find an issue, relates to one of them, it's going

to either implicate the credibility of the testimony to what happened

to them or the testimony that they say happened to the other officer.

Now this remark by the prosecutor, did the defense trial,

the trial lawyer object to it?

No, it doesn't appear that the trial lawyer objected to it.

I think it's easily explained that the trial lawyer wouldn't

have objected because trial counsel was unaware that what

the prosecutor was saying was untrue.

Now it seems to be a fair rebuttal to the defense attorneys

claim that these were renegade or rogue officers,

that there's no evidence of misdeeds or something

in their past.

But it's one thing for that to be a fair argument

if it were true, but had the defense attorney

known that it was false, not just false by his own supposition

or by my client's supposition, but by the actual finding

of the police department.

Now the state takes issue with the fact

that you didn't provide us with the unredacted version

of that affidavit.

Do you have an unredacted version of that affidavit?

We do not, Your Honor.

And that's one of the things that if this claim we're

able to proceed past the preliminary lawy showing,

we would be asking the court to review that in camera

or subpoenaing it and having litigation over and creating

a record over the relevance of that.

So I think being able to proceed at this stage

doesn't mean that this court has to go and reopen the case

and give Mr. Trout the new trial.

It just has to give us the opportunity

to have some discovery and create some record.

Who, besides the two officers testified at trial?

I'm sorry?

Who, in addition to the two officers testified at trial?

There was another officer, Officer Gaspard.

And there was my client, Mr. Trout, my client's wife.

And I believe that was it.

Thank you.

What is the explanation for the six-year delay

between getting these documents and filing the motion?

So in 2013, my client discovers the issue.

He plays that out in the federal court at that time.

And then once his summary judgment has been issued,

I think it was shortly after.

Or maybe it would be into 2014, summary judgment issued

in his civil rights case in federal court.

He started seeking lawyers who would be able to take this

and figure out how to use it in revisiting

his prior conviction.

He was unsuccessful doing that.

He tried in 2017 to have counsel appointed to him.

But that was denied.

And then he finally found, I guess,

the one guy that would do it in 2019.

And then, of course, it took me some time

to put the case together.

And there was some time negotiating with the prosecution.

I think if we were given the opportunity to explain,

well, if the court believes that that

was the critical moment, because we still

believe that because it hasn't been disclosed

that this is an ongoing violation and no clock has

started to run.

But if the court believes that the clock started to run,

back at that time, we would be able to explain

how my client diligently pursued the claim

and ultimately ended up in the court.

And he would have always been late under their theory,

I suppose, just because of the amount of time

between then and his sentencing in 2009.

So I can't remember exactly the legal standard

we set forth a couple of years ago for Quorum Nobis.

But it, too, includes a timeliness component

and some sort of explanation as to whether the movement has

been sitting on his or her hands.

Right, good cause for delay.

And it invokes principles of equity,

which requires a balancing test.

I don't believe the court is only going

to look at how much time and try to create some line

in its head about how much time is good

and how much time is bad.

But it's going to take the amount of time

and balance it against other opportunities

that he would have had to present it, whatever prejudice

the state might have incurred by the delay,

things like that.

But we don't have it.

So if we were to affirm this decision,

then is it your position that you've

played your Quorum Nobis hand or that you could then

file a writ of Quorum Nobis?

We would certainly try to file a separate writ of Quorum

Nobis.

It depends on how you affirmed it.

If you affirmed it and stated

that we were denied relief because we sought it under 526,

then we would certainly try Quorum Nobis.

But I think the better course would just

be to remand it with instructions for the court

to interpret it as Quorum Nobis so that we can play out

the discovery and create a record.

If there are no more questions, I'd

see my yellow light is on.

It is, but you have two minutes reserved after Ms. Woodcock

is finished.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you, Mr. Better.

May it please the court, Elizabeth Woodcock,

for the State of New Hampshire?

I guess I really don't understand why this case has

turned out the way that it has, because it seems to me

that once the litigation was filed in federal court,

they could have filed some motion

to require the city to provide unredacted copies.

And the federal court had unredacted copies.

Nobody seemed to think that they could request

the federal court to provide the unredacted copies.

So you have Judge LaPlante looking up the things

and saying, well, this doesn't seem to me

to be exculpatory in any way.

And it's not a federal violation.

Then the next step that you, I suppose, could have taken

is one that I did recently in the reverse, which

was I had a case in which this court and the Superior Court

had looked at confidential counseling records.

And some of them were disclosed to the defense,

and some of them were not.

And the claim over in federal court

was that these records that were not disclosed

were somehow exculpatory.

So what I did was I went to the federal court,

and I said, can you issue an order requesting

these documents to be disclosed?

Once I had that order, I went to the Superior Court,

and I said, Judge DeClarico would

like to look at these records.

Can you turn them over directly to the court?

And that worked.

The Superior Court said, sure.

They sent them to Judge DeClarico.

Judge DeClarico dismissed the petition

for writ of habeas corpus the day before yesterday.

So you raised good arguments about delay,

and why didn't this avenue get explored?

But it seems to me that there was never really

an opportunity for the defendant here to explain

himself there was no hearing, there was no opportunity

to say, well, yeah, that was six years ago,

but these are all the reasons why it didn't happen,

so we really ought to be able to proceed here.

Fair enough, but this defendant

showed no lack of interest, at least in the early going,

of filing his own pleadings.

Those were pretty constant.

And so when these records are actually

disclosed to the, created in April of 2013

and provided to the federal court,

you then wait for six years and do nothing,

and then you turn around and you say,

well, I should have a new trial.

I'm filing a motion for a new trial.

It would be one thing if he had filed another petition

for writ of habeas corpus, although that

might have been considered successive

by the superior court, we don't know that,

but there's no statute of limitations

on a petition for writ of habeas corpus.

And what he's doing is he's saying,

I want a new trial based on newly discovered evidence

that is now six years old.

The defendant isn't in jail now, is he?

No.

So it would be a quorum nobus,

but essentially a similar analysis.

That's correct.

So if we were to affirm the trial court's decision here,

would Mr. Trout be free to file writ of quorum nobus?

He could certainly try.

And I suspect that he will, if the case is however

wide the case is decided.

But it seems to me that if you're going in

and you're saying, I have newly discovered evidence that

is only six years old, that doesn't make any sense.

If newly discovered evidence can be that old,

then it really isn't newly discovered.

And I think that the defendant showed no reluctance

to pursue parallel proceedings.

I mean, when he got these documents,

he could have filed something in the superior court.

And he'd done that kind of thing pro se on other occasions.

What about Mr. Trout's argument that the timeliness argument

isn't preserved?

Well, it may not be.

I think that the court adopted essentially the state's

argument that it was.

How do we know whether the court did,

other than it's one line order for the reason

state's objection?

We really don't really know which argument the court adopted.

Do we?

Well, I don't think that you need to decide

that there was one issue or one argument or another

that it adopted.

The state said that it thought that the motion for a new

trial was not timely.

Did it flesh it out the way that I did in my brief?

No.

Of course not, Your Honor.

I wouldn't try to persuade the court of that.

But if the trial court says I adopt the arguments made

by the state, then that's at least one pitch

that the state made to the trial court.

But even if you decide that it's not preserved,

you can still say that this is not timely based on the fact

that it's a discovery that was made six years earlier.

And the logic of the criminal law is that at some point

there's an end to something other than for a homicide.

At some point, the state has to give up.

The defense has to give up.

All these statutes, with the exception of homicide,

have some kind of statute of limitations.

And it seems to me that if you look

at the statute on the motion for a new trial

and it says three years, bearing in mind

that three years when he discovered this information,

it would have been within three years of the last appearance,

the final decision that this court had made

in the discretionary appeal.

That decision was made in 2012.

So if you reset the clock then

and said you have three years from then,

or three years from the discovery of the new evidence,

it just seems to me that six years is kind of an outlier.

What if we decide to treat this

as a due process challenge under Laurie?

Does that change the outcome?

I'm not sure how you could decide

that it is a due process issue based on the record

that you have before you.

Because what you have are these redacted affidavits

that don't seem, there's no smoking gun.

Whatever the disciplinary issue was,

the officer admitted that he made the mistake

and they found that he was being truthful.

It's not, it doesn't seem to me

that you have a real Laurie issue.

And the fact that Judge LaPlante found

and I realized that you're not bound by the federal court,

but you've had one set of eyes looking at this

and saying this is not a sculpatory evidence.

So all you have are these redacted documents

that a court looked at them said,

I don't see anything here.

In the court that said they don't see anything here,

Judge LaPlante had the unredacted as well, right?

He did, he did.

And so that's why, I mean, when I look at this,

I think it's sort of the request

that is being made is for the court,

this court to make assumptions about documents

that are redacted and say,

because the prosecutor made a remark

that these people had no disciplinary actions

on their record or no, there's nothing

that would cause a problem in one sentence

of his closing argument, that therefore you should assume

that these redacted documents would have then changed

the outcome of the trial, a trial in which both

the defendant and his wife testified

and apparently the jury found them unconvincing.

The trial court refers to many motions

for new trial that were filed were there.

I'm sure it's in the materials that we have

but can you refresh my memory?

Were some of those motions filed after 2013

when these documents surfaced?

No, what happened in 2013 is that he was in federal court.

Right.

The last, this court, there were a series of motions

that were filed after the verdict.

So there was a motion filed to set aside the verdict

in 2008 and then there were a series of pro se motions

in December of 2008 and then there was a motion

for a new trial while the direct appeal was pending

and that was filed in 2009.

So you go on and on and then the litigation

in the state courts ends when this court

takes the discretionary appeal

and affirms it in May of 2012.

Then during that time, the defendant has filed

in federal court and he also files a petition

for a writ of habeas corpus in federal court

and both of those are denied in July of 2013.

So you have this hiatus in the state court

and then until the motion for a new trial

was filed in the state court in 2019.

It is a complicated procedural history.

The council has represented to us and perhaps below

that there was this sequence of events

that Mr. Trout looked for a lawyer

and diligently pursued getting a lawyer for many years

until he could actually find one.

Should that matter in our analysis?

Well, of course, there wasn't a hearing in the trial court

so all we have is that representation

although I have no reason to believe

that Mr. Bedrick would mislead the court

in any way, shape or form.

I don't think it should figure into the analysis

because he'd shown that he could proceed

pro se over and over again.

When you look at that length of history

from 2008 to 2012, he's filing motions

and he certainly could have filed for some relief

in the superior court and he elected not to do it.

I don't know why that was.

I mean, maybe he was looking for a lawyer

who would take his case.

So should there be a hearing in the trial court

to figure out all of those reasons

or the proffered justifications?

No, because I think not because the problem is

that he had this information in April of 2013

and he didn't act on it.

He didn't do anything and granted,

you can say, well, he couldn't find a lawyer

who would take his case.

Well, maybe the reason that the lawyers

didn't wanna take his case was because they didn't see

a good legal basis for proceeding

but waiting for that length of time

ought to count against him.

If he were so certain that this was a miscarriage of justice

he should have acted on it and he didn't.

And having received the negative results

in the federal court, that should have been

if he felt that he had any state claim,

that should have triggered some kind of response immediately.

And it didn't.

If the court has no further questions

I will yield to Mr. Bedrick.

Thank you, Ms. Woodcock.

Mr. Bedrick, thank you.

The discussion about whether the evidence

would affect the outcome of the trial is premature.

We're supposed to be talking right now

about whether the evidence is either admissible,

would likely lead to the discovery of admissible evidence,

or would have assisted trial counsel

in the preparation of their case.

That's all we need to get the hearing.

At the final hearing, we're not able to show

that the outcome of the trial could have been affected.

That's one thing, but just to get in the door,

Laurie says that all we need to show

is make that initial showing

that it's either admissible evidence,

likely to lead to some admissible evidence,

or would have helped defense counsel

in the preparation of their case.

Now the Laurie question wasn't reached

by the federal court.

In page 75 of the state's brief and appendix,

Judge LaPlante says explicitly,

I'm not reaching the Laurie question here.

What Judge LaPlante was deciding

was whether a protective order should be issued

because a civil claimant, a private civil claimant

had requested a protective order

for their employee or employment records,

which has nothing to do with the state of New Hampshire,

who would be the ones requesting

that unredacted affidavits just step all over the rights

of a civil claimant or civil defendant

in the federal district court,

and send over unredacted documents

that ultimately would be exploited

by someone other than the civil defendant.

So the state has pointed to no authority

that that's even a possibility.

I'm sorry, but you're a questioner.

In our timeliness analysis,

why should it matter that your client,

assuming it to be so,

your client was out shopping the case around

unsuccessfully for a number of years?

Because the three years has passed.

The state has said that throughout this time

could have proceeded pro se

and he expressed a willingness to proceed pro se,

but I think that actually cuts against them.

He proceeded pro se a number of times

and lost, lost, lost, and lost.

And so his desire to take this shot with an attorney

is, first of all, welcomed by the bar,

and second of all, encouraged

so that he would not be in a position

where he'd have to represent himself and lose again.

So although he had proceeded pro se,

it's very possible, and I can't tell you

that I've had this discussion with my client,

but very possible that someone who loses so much pro se

would want to have an assistance from an attorney

so that they don't prejudice the ability

for them to exploit this issue.

Your light is on, but I'll allow you to sum up.

I just want to make sure this court understands

that this case is about evidence

that is yet to be discovered.

We've spoken a lot about evidence

that was discovered in 2013,

but as the state makes an issue in their brief,

this evidence is not the end.

There's more evidence that should be discovered

and the state continues to withhold it.

So we should be able to have the discovery proceeding below.

I appreciate it.

Thank you, Your Honor.

Thank you, Council.

Case submitted.

Court's adjourned.
